APONTOPOLOGION, OR THE DIAL OF PRINCES: CONTAINING THE GOLDEN AND FAMOVS
BOOK OF MARCUS AURELIUS, Sometime Emperor of Rome.

DECLARING What Excellency consists in a Prince that is a good Christian: And
what evils attend on him that is a cruel Tirant.

WRITTEN By the Reverend Father in God, DON ANTONIO of Gueuara, Lord Bishop of
Guadix; Preacher and Chronicler to the late mighty Emperor CHARLES the fifth.

First translated out of French by THOMAS NORTH, Son to Sir EDWARD NORTH,
Lord NORTH of Kirthling: And lately reperused, and corrected from many gross
imperfections.

With addition of a Fourth Book, styled by the Name of The favored Courtier.

LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop, dwelling by Saint Annes Church near
Aldersgate, 1619.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR HENRY MOVNTAGVE, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
the Pleas, Holden before his most Royal Majesty, etc
THe Emperor Traiane (Right Honorable) writing a Letter to the Senate of
Rome, concerning the weighty and careful condition of Princes; among many
other matters, used these words of himself. I do freely confess unto you,
that, since I tasted the cares and travels attending on this Imperial
dignity: I have repented a thousand times, that ever I did undertake it,
because, if it be accounted Honor to enjoy an Empire, there consists far
greater pain and labor, to order and govern it as it ought to be. But
beside, what envy does he expose himself to, and multitude of mislikes, that
has the charge of governing others? If he be just, he is branded with
cruelry: if merciful, he is contemned: if beautiful, termed lavish and
prodigal: if he hoorde up money, then basely covetous: if inclined to peace,
then he is a coward: If full of courage, proudly anbitious: if discreetly
grave, surly and scornful: if affably courteous, silly and simple: if
affecting solitude a dissembling hypocrite: if addicted to mirth and pleasure,
then wantonly dissolute. In the end of all, te worthy Emperor thus concluded.
Although willingly, I accepted this high office at the first: yet sorrow has
(since) made me shrink under so brdensom a charge: For, the Sea and dignity
are things pleasing to look ^n, but very perilous to meddle withal.

I have alleged his example (worthy Lord) because present unto your gracious
acceptance, his ancient and famous Book, called The Dial of Princes, wherein
is at lige, and amply set down, what care and respect awayteth on the lives of
Prin^^s and great persons: for if they cannot run into the smallest error,
but redoundeth to the hurt of many, nor neglect their duty, without other men's
userie: Then said the Philosopher well. A Prince should not appropriate the
Commonwealth to himself, but shape himself wholly to the Common wealth. And so
much the rather, because he standing accountable to no man in this Life, ought
to remember a far stricter account, before him that makes no respect of
Princes, save only in this, that they shall find the Judge the more severe
against them, by how much they have abused their place of eminency, as also
their power and princely authority.

In the learned Discourses following, set down by that good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, the honorable Argument of all this work; are three especial duties
and actions observed, necessarily required in an absolute and perfect Prince,
as namely; In Ruling, Judging, and Defending: To rule by just laws, and good
Example; To Judge by Wisdom, Providence, and Justice; And Defend by valor,
care, and vigilance. And this is that which the Spirit of God so often
intimates by the Prophet Jeremy, ^ap. 22. verse 3. To execute Judgment and
righteousness: To deliver the oppressed from the hands ^^ the oppressor, Not
to vex the Stanger, fatherless, or Widow: Neither to do violence, or shed
the innocent blood.

Into infinite other famous presidents for Princes I could enter, and set them
down expressly; but that I know, they are so frequent to your Honor, both in
reading and memory, that it were as lost labor, as to hold a burning Taper in
the bright Sun at Noonday, and therefore these few shall suffice, Nor do I
dedicate this unto your grave and learned judgment, as a new labor of mine
own, or as a work never seen before; because it has already past diverse
impressions: albeit not in so exact a manner, nor with the like pains, as has
now bin bestowed upon it, from many absurd, and gross imperfections, and yet
not so cleanely purged, as I could wish it were, nor as it shall be, if ever
it come to the Press again. Wherefore I humbly entreat your Honor, to
accept it as it is, and as an oblation of my love unfeignedly to you, which
gladly would show it self by any possible means, as time hereafter may better
enable me. Til when, I remain ready at your Honors service, to the very utmost
of my best ability.

Your Honors in all duty. A. M.

A GENER ALL PROLOGVE UPON THE BOOK. ENTITVLED THE DYALL OF PRINCES: WITH THE
FAmous Book of MARCUS AURELIUS, Compyled by the Reverend Father in GOD, the
Lord ANTONY of GVEVARA, Bishop of Guadix: Confessor and Chronicler to Charles
the fifth, Emperor of Rome: unto whom, (and to all other Princes, and
Noble-personages) this work was directed.
APolonius Thianeus disputing with the scholars of Hiareas, said: that among
all the affections of nature, nothing is more natural, then the desire that
all have to preserve life.

Omitting the dispute of these great Philosophers herein, we our selves hereof
have daily proof: that to live, men do travel: to live, byrds do fly: fishes
do swim: and to live, beasts do hide themselves for fear of death. Finally,
(I say) there is no living creature so brutish, that has not a natural desire
to live.

If many of the ancient Paynims so little regard life, that of their own
free wills, they offered themselves death, they did it not for that they
despised The heathen may teach Christians how to live.
life, but because they thought that for their little regarding life, we would
more highly esteem their fame For, we see men of hauty courages, seek rather
to win a long-during-Fame, then to save a short lasting-life. How loath men
are to die, is easily seen by the great pains they take to live. For it is a
natural thing to all mortal men, to leave their lives with sorrow and take
their deaths with fear.

Admit that all do taste this corporal death, and that generally both good
and evil do die: yet is there great difference between the death of the one,
and the death of the other.

If the good desire to live, it is only for the greater desire they have to do
more good: but if the evil desire to live, it is for that they would abuse the
world longer. For the children of vanity call no time good, but only that
wherein they live, according to their own desires. I let you understand that
are at this present, and you also that shall come hereafter: that I direct my
writings unto those which embrace virtue, and not unto such as are borne away
with vice.

GOD does not weigh us, as we are, but as we desire to be. And let no man
say, I would, and cannot be good: for as we have the audacitie to commit a
fault, so (if we list) we may enforce our selves to work amends. All our
undoing proceeds of this, that we outwardly make a show of virtue, but
inwardly in the deed we employ our whole power to vice: which is an abuse,
wherewith all the world is corrupted and deceived. For Heaven is not furnished
but with good deeds, and hell is not replenished but with Euill-desires. I
grant that neither man nor beast desires to die, but all travel, to the end
they may live: But I ask now this question.

What does it avail a man to desire his life to be prolonged, if the same be
wicked, ungodly, and defamed? The man that is high-minded, proud, unconstant,
cruel, disdainful envious, full of hatred, angry, malicious, full of wrath,
covetous, a Liar, a Gluton, a Blasphemer, (...).
and in all his doings disordred: Why will we suffer him in the world?

The life of a poor man that for need steals a gown, or any other small
trifle is forthwith taken away: Why then is he that disturbeth the whole
Commonwealth left alive?

Oh would to GOD there were no greater thieves in the world the^ those which
rob the temporal goods of the Rich, and that we did not wink continually
at them, which take away the good renown, as well of the Rich, as of the
Poor. But we chastise the one, and dissemble with the other, which is
evidently seen, how the thief that steals my neighbors gown is hanged
forthwith, but he that robs me of my good-name, walks still before my
door.

The divine Plato in the first book of laws, said: We ordain and command,
that he which uses not himself honestly, and has not his house
well-reformed, his Riches well governed, A worthy sentence of Plato.
his family well instructed, and lives not in peace with his neighbors, that
unto him be assigned Tutours, which shall govern him as a Fool, and as a
vacabonde shall he be expulsed from the people, to the intent the commonwealth
be not through him infected. For there never rises contention or strife in a
commonwealth, but by such men as are always out of order.

Truly, the divine Plato had great reason in his sayings, for the man that is
vicious in his person, and does not travel in things touching his House, nor
keeps his Family in good order, nor lives quietly in the Commonwealth,
deserves to be banished, and driven out of the country.

Truly we see in diverse places mad men tied and bound fast, which if they were
at liberty would not do so much harm, as those do that daily walk the
streets at their own wills and sensuality. There is not at this day so
great or noble a Lord, nor Lady so delicate, but had rather suffer a blow on
the head with a stone, then a blot in their good-Name, with an euilltongue. For
the wound of the head in a month or two may well be healed: but the blemish of
their good-name during life will never be removed.

Laertius says in his book of the lives of Philosophers, that Dyogenes being
asked of one of his neighbors, what they were that ordained their Laws?
Answered in this wise.

Thou shall understand, my friend, that the earnest whole desire of our
Forefathers, and all the intentions of the philosophers, was only to instruct
A pretty sentence.
them in their Commonwealth, how they ought to speak, how to be occupied, how
to eat, how to sleep, how to treat, how to apparel, how to travel, and how
to rest: And in this consists all the wealth of worldly wisdom.

In deed this Philosopher in his answer touched an excellent point: For the
Law was made to none other end, but only to bridle him that lives without
Reason or Law.

To men that will live in rest, and without trouble in this life, it is
requisite and necessary that they choose to themselves some kind and manner of
Living, whereby they may maintain their house in good-order, and conform
their lives unto the same.

That estate ought not to be as the folly of the person does desire, nor as may
be most pleasant to the delights of the body: but as reason teaches them,
and God commands them, for the surer salvation of their souls. For, the
Children of vanity embrace that only, which the sensual appetite desires:
and reject that which Reason commands.

Since the time that Trees were created, they always (remaining in their first
nature until this present day) do bear the same leaf and fruit: which
things are plainly seen in this: that the Palm bears Dates, the Fig Tree
figs, the Nut-tree Nuttes, the Peare-tree Pears, the Apple Tree Apples, the
Chestnut-tree chest-nuts, the Oak Acornes: and to conclude, I say, all things
have kept their first nature, save only the Sinnefull-Man, which has fallen
by malice.

The Planettes, the Stars, the Heavens, the Water, the Earth, the Air, and
the Fire: the brute beasts, and the The trees of the earth shows the malice
of man.
Fishes, all continue in the same estate wherein they were first created: not
complaining nor envying the one the other. Man complains continually, he is
never satisfied, and always coueteth to change his estate. For the shepherd
would be a Husbandman, the husbandman a Sqiure, the Squire a Knight, the Knight
a King, the King an Emperor, etc. Therefore I say, that few is the number of
them that seek amendment of life: but infinite are they that travel to better
their estate, and to increase their goods.

The decay of the Commonwealth (at this present) through all the world is,
that the dry and withered Oaks, which have been nourished upon the sharp
mountains, would now seem to be dainty. Date-trees cherished in the pleasant
gardains. I mean, that those which yesterday could have bin pleasant with dry
Acornes in a poor cottage at home: at this day will not eat but of delicate
Dishes in other men's houses abroad.

What estate men ought to take upon them, to keep their conscience A good
lesson for all persons to follow.
pure, and to have more rest in their life, a man cannot easily describe. For
there is no state in the Church of God, but men may therein (if they will) serve
God, and profit themselves. For, there is no kind of life in the world, but
the wicked (if they persevere and continue therein) may slander their persons,
and also lose their souls.

Pliny in an Epistle that he wrote to Fabatus his friend, says: There is
nothing among mortal men more common and dangerous, then to give place to
vain imaginations, whereby a man believes the estate of one to be much better
then the estate of another. And hereof it proceeds, that the World does
blind men so, that they will rather seek that which is an other man's by
travel and danger, then to enjoy their own with quiet and rest.

I say the state of Princes is good, if they abuse it not. I say the state of
the people is good: if they behave themselves obediently. I say the state of
the rich is good, if they will Godly use it. I say the estate of the Religious
is good, if they be able to profit others. I say the estate of the communaltie
is good, if they will content themselves: I say the estate of the poor is
good, if they have patience. For it is no merit to suffer troubles, if we
have not patience therein.

During the time of this our miserable life we cannot deny, but in every
estate there is both trouble and danger. For then only our estate shall be
perfect, when we shall come gloriously in soul and body without the fear of
death: and also when we shall rejoice without dangers in life.

Returning again to our purpose, (Mighty Prince) although we all be of value
little, we all have little, we all can attain little, we all know little, we
all are able to do little, we all love but little: yet in all this little, the
state of Princes seems some great and high thing. For that worldly men say,
There is no such felicity in this life, as to have authority to command
many, and to be bound to obey none. But if either subjects knew how dear
Princes by their power to command, or if princes knew how sweet a thing it is
to live in quiet, doubtless the subjects would pity their rulers, and the
rulers would not envy their subjects. For, full few are the pleasures which
Princes enjoy, in respect of the troubles that they endure.

Since then, the estates of Princes is greater then all, that he may do more
then all, is of more value then all, vpholdeth more then all: And finally, that
from thence proceeds the government of all, it is more needful that the
House, the Person, and the life of a Prince, be better governed and ordered
then all the rest. For, even as by the meate-yard the Merchant measures all
his wares: So by the life whole of the Prince is measured the whole
commonweal.

Many sorrows endures the woman in nourishing a way-ward child: great travel
takes a Schoolmaster in A comparison necessiry to be respected.
teaching an untoward scholar: much pains takes an Officer in governing a
multitude ouer-great. How great then is the pain and peril, whereunto I offer
my self, in taking upon me to order the life of such an one, upon whose life
depends all the good estate of a Commonweal?

For, Noble Princes and great Lords ought of us to be served, and not
offended: we ought to exhort them, not to vex them: we ought to encreate
them, not to rebuke them: we ought to advise them, and not to defame them.
Finally (I say) the right simple, reckon I that Surgion, which with the same
plasters he laid to a hard heel, seeks to cure the tender Eyes: I mean
by this comparison, that my purpose is not to tell Princes and Noblemen in
this book what they be, but to warn them what they ought to be: not to tell
them what they do, but to advise them what they ought to do. For, that
Nobleman which will not amend his life for remorse of his own conscience:
Iidoe think he will do it for the writing of my pen.

Paulus Dyaconus the first Hystoriographer, in the second book of his
Commentaryes, shows an antiquity, right worthy to remember, and also
pleasant to read: Although indeed to the hinderaunce of my self I shall
rehearse it.

It is, as of the Hen, who by long scraping on the Dunghill, discovers the
knife, that shall cut her own throat. Thus was the case, Hanniball the most A
Sentence of Paulus Dyaconus:
renowned Prince and captain of Carthage (after he was vanquished by the
aduenturous Scipio) fled into Asia, to king Antiochus, a prince then living of
great virtue, who received him into his realm, took him into his protection,
and right honorably intertayned him in his house. And truly king Antiochus did
herein, as a pittyfull prince: For what can more beautify the honor of a
Prince, then to succor Nobility in their needful estate?

These two Noble Princes used diverse exercises to spend the time honorably:
and thus they divided their time. Sometime to hunt in the mountains,
otherwhiles to disporre them in the fields, often to view their Armeys: But
chiefly, they resorted to the Schools, to hear the Philosophers. And truly
they did like wise and skillful men. For there is no hour in a day otherwise
so well employed, as in hearing a wise pleasant tongued man. There was at a
time in Ephesus a famous Philosopher called Phormio, which openly and publicly
read and taught the people of the realm. And one day as these two Princes came
into the School, the Philosopher Phormio changed the matter whereupon he
read, and of a sudden began to talk of the means and ways that Princes ought
to use in war, and of the order to be kept in giving battle: Such, so
strange, and high phrased was the matter which he talked of, that not only
they marvelled which never before saw him: but even those also that of long
time had daily heard him. For herein curious and flourishing wits show their
excellency, in that they never want fresh matter to entreat upon.

Greatly gloried the King Antiochus, that this Philosopher (in presence of this
strange Prince) had so excellently spoken, so that strangers might understand
he had his realm stored with wise men: For courageous and noble Princes esteem
nothing so precious, as to have men valiant to defend their Frontiers, and also
wise to govern their commonweals.

The Lecture read, King Antiochus demanded of the Prince Hannibal, how he
liked the talk of the Philosopher Formio? to whom Hanibal stoutly answered,
and in his answer showed himself to be of that stoutnesse he was the same
day, when he wan the great battle at Cannas: for although noble hearted and
courageous Princes lose all their estates and realms: yet they will never
confess their hearts to be overthrown nor vanquished: And these were the words
that at that time Hannibal said. Thou shall understand K. Antiochus that I
have seen diverse doting old men, yet I never saw a more dotard fool the^
Phormio, whom thou call such a great Philosopher: For the greatest kind of
folly is, when a man that has but a little vain science, presumes to teach
not those which have only science, also such as have most certain experience.

Tell me King Antiochus, what heart can brook with patience, or what tongue can
suffer with silence, to see a silly man (as this Philosopher is) nourished all
his life time in a corner of Greece, studying Philosophy, to presume, as he
has done, to talk before the prince Hannibal of the affairs of war, as
though he had been either Lord of Affrique, or Captain of Rome? Certes, he
either full little knows himself, or else but little esteems us: For it
appears by his vain words, he would seem to know more in matters of
war, by that he has read in books, then does Hanniball by the sundry and
great battles which he has fought in the fields.

Oh King Antiothus, how far and how great is the difference, between the
estate of Philosophers, and the state of Captains: between the skyll to read
in Schools, and the knowledge to rule an Armey: between the science that wise
men have in books, and the experience that the others have in war: between
their skill to write with the pen, and ours to fight with the Sword: between
one that for his pastime is set round with deskes of books, and an other in
peril of life, encompassed with troops of Enemies. For, many there are which
with great eloquence, in blazing deeds don in wars, can use their tongues:
but few are those that at the brunte have hearts to adventure their lives.

This Philosopher never saw man of war in the field, neeer saw one Armey of men
discomfited by an other, never heard the terrible Trumpet sound to the horrible
and cruel slaughter of men, never saw the Treasons of some, nor understood the
cowardnes of others, never saw how few they be that fight, nor how many there
are that run away. Finally (I say) as it is seemly for a Philosopher and a
learned man, to praise the profit of peace: Even so it is in his mouth a thing
uncomely, to prate of the perills' of war.

If this Philosopher has seen no one thing with his Eyes that he has
spoken, but only read them in sundry books, let him recount them to such as
have neither seen nor read them: For, warlike feats are better learned in the
bloody fields of Affricke, then in the beautiful schools of Greece.

Thou know right well (king Antiochus) that for the space of thirty and six
years, I had continual and dangerous wars, as well in Italy as in Spain:
In which Fortune did not favor me (as is always her manner to use those,
which by great stoutnesse and manhood, enterprise things high, and of much
difficulty:) a witness whereof thou see me here, who before my beard
began to grow was served: and now it is hoare, I my self begin to serve.

I swear unto thee by the God Mars (king Antiochus) that if any man did ask
me, how he should use and behave himself in war: I would not answer him
one word. For they are things which are learned by Experience of deeds, and
not by prating in words. Although Princes begin wars by justice, and
follow them The end of war both fickle and unconstant.
with wisdom, yet the end stands upon fickle Fortune, and not of force,
nor policy.

Diverse and sundry other things Hannibal said unto king Antiochus: who so
be desirous to see, let him read in the Apothegmes of Plutarche: This example
(Noble Prince) tends rather to this end, to condemn my boldness, and not to
commend my enterprise, saying that the affairs of the common wealth be as
unknown to me, as the dangers of the wars were to Phormio. Your Majesty
may justly say unto me, that I being a poor simple man (brought up a great
while in a rude Country) do greatly presume to describe, how so puissant a
Prince as your Highness ought to govern himself and his Realm: For of truth,
the more ignorant a man is of the troubles and alterations of the world, the
better he shall be counted in the sight of God.

The estate of Princes is to have great trains about them, and the estate of
religious men is to be solitary: for the servant of God ought to be always
void from vain thoughts, and to be ever accompanied with holy meditations. The
estate of Princes is always unquiet: but the state of the religious is to be
enclosed: For otherwise he above all others may be called an Apostata, That
has his body in the Cell, and his heart in the market place.

To Princes it is necessary to commune and speak with all men, but for the
religious it is not decent to be co^uersant with the world: For solitary men
(if they do as they ought) should occupy their hands in travel, their bodies in
fasting, their tongue in prayer, and their heart in contemplation. The estate
of Princes for the most part is employed to war, but the estate of religious is
to desire and procure peace: For if the Prince would study to pass his bounds,
and by battle to shed the blood of his enemies: the religious ought to shed
tears, and pray to God for his sins. O that it pleased Almighty God, as I
know what my bounden duty is in my heart, so that he would give me grace to
accomplish the same in my deeds.

Alas, when I ponder with my self the weightines of my matter, my Pen (through
sloth and negligence is ready to fall out of my hand) and I half minded to
leave off mine enterprise. My intent is to speak against my self in this
case. For, albeit men may know the affairs of Princes by experience: yet they
shall not know how to speak nor write them but by science.

Those which ought to counsel princes, those which ought to reform the life
of princes, and that ought to instruct them, ought to have a clear judgment,
an upright mind, their words advisedly considered, their doctrine wholesome,
and their life without suspicion.

For, who so will speak of high things, having no experience of them: is like
unto a blind man, that would lead and teach him the way, which sees better
then he himself. This is the sentence of Xenophon the great, which says.
There is nothing harder in this life, then to know a wise man. And the A speech
of Xenophon.
reason which he gave was this.

That a wise man cannot be known, but by another wise man: we may gather by
this which Xenophon says: That as one wise man cannot be known but by
another wise man: so likewise it is requisite that he should be, or have bin a
Prince, which should write of the life of a Prince. For, he that has bin a
mariner, and has sailed but one year on the Sea: shall be able to give
better counsel and advise, then he that has dwelled ten years in the haven.

Xenophon wrote a book touching the institution of princes, and brings in
Cambyses the king, how he taught, and spoke unto king Cyrus his son. And he
wrote an other book likewise of the Art of Chiualry, and brought in king
Philip, how he ought to teach his son Alexander to fight. For the
philosophers thought that writing of no authority, that was not entitled and
set forth under the Names of those Princes, who had experience of that they
wrote.

Oh if an aged Prince would with his pen (if not with word of mouth) declare,
what misfortunes have happened since the first time he began to reign: how
disobedient his subjects have bin unto him, what griefs his servants have
wroght against him, what unkindness his Friends have showed him: what wiles
his enemies have used toward him, what danger his person has escaped: what
jarres has bin in his Palace; what faults they have laid against him, how
many times they have deceived strangers: Finally, what griefs he has had
by day, and what sorrowful sighs he has fetched in the night: Truly I think
(and in my thought I am nothing deceived) that if a prince would declare unto
us his whole life, and that he would particularly show us every thing, we
would both wonder at that body which had so much suffered: and also we would
be offended with that heart which had so greatly dissembled.

It is a troublesome thing, a dangerous thing, and an insolent and proud
enterprise, for a man to take upon him with a pen to govern the
Commonwealth, and with a Prince to reason of his life. For in deed men are not
persuaded to live well by fair words, but by virtuous deeds. And therefore
not How dangerous a thing it is to meddle with Princes affairs.
without cause I say, that he is not wise, but very arrogant, that dare
presume unasked to give a Prince counsel. For princes in many things have
their minds occupied, and haughtely bent, and some of them also are
affectionate, and whereas we (peradventure) think to have them merciful, we
find them more angry and heavy against us.

For, counsel does more harm then profit, if the giver thereof be not very
wise, and he also which receives it very pacient. I have not bin a Prince,
for to know the travels of Princes, nor am as president to counsel Princes:
and yet I was so bold to compile this Book: it was not upon presumption to
counsel a Prince, so much as by an humble sort to give mine advise. For to
give counsel, I confess I have no credit: but to give them advise, it
suffices me to be a subject.

What the order is in that I have taken in this Book: how profitable it is to
all men, and how unpleasant to no man: how wholesome and profound doctrine in it
is contained, and how the Historyes be herein applied: I will not that my pen
do write, but they themselves shall judge, which shall read this work.

We see it often come to pass that diverse Books do loose their estimation: not
for that they are not very good and excellent: but because the Author has
been too presumptuous and vainglorious. For, in mine opinion, for a man to
praise his own wrytings much, is nothing else but to give men occasion to
speak evil both of him, and of his works.

Now, let no man think that I have written this which is written without great
aduisement and examination. I do confess, before the Redeemer of the whole
world, that I have consumed so many years to seek what I should The pains
that the Author took in this book.
write, that these two years, one day has scarcely escaped me, wherein my Pen
has not done his duty, to write or correct in this work. I confess that I
took great pains in writing it, for of truth it has been written twice with
mine own hand, and thrice with another man's hand. I confess I have read and
searched, in diverse and sundry parts, many good and strange books, to the
end I might find good and pleasant doctrine: and besides that, I traveled
much to set and apply the Hystories to the purpose. For, it is an unseemly
thing to apply an history without a purpose, I had great respect, in that I
was not so brief in my wrytings, that a man might note me to be obscure: nor
yet in any thing so long, that any man should slander me with too much talk.

For, all the excellency of Writing consists, where many and goodly
Sentences are declared in fewest and aptest words. For, often times the long
style is loathsome and tedious both to the Hearers and Readers.

Nero the Emperor was in love with a Lady in Rome named Pompeia, the which in
beauty (to his fantasy,) exceeded all others. In the end partly with
entreaty, partly with Money The inordinate love between Nero and Pompeia.
and presents, he obtained of her that he desired. For, in this case of love,
where prayers and importunities be patiently heard, resistance does lack.

The inordinate love that Nero bare to Pompeia, proceeded of the yealow hairs
she had: which were of the color of Amber, and in praise of her he compiled
diverse, and sundry songs in Heroicall-Meeter: and with an instrument sang them
himself in her presence.

Nero was a sage Prince, wise, and excellently well learned in the Latin
tongue, and also a good Musician: yet Plutarch in his book of the jests of
noble women (to declare the vanity and lightness of Nero) recites this
history: and describing Pompeia, that her body was small, her fingers long,
her mouth proper, her eyelids thin, her nose somewhat sharp, her teeth small,
her lips red, her neck white, her forehead broad, and finally, her eyes
great, and rolling, her breast large and well proportioned: What think you would
Nero have done, if he had so affectionately set his fantasy upon al other her
beautiful properties, since that for the love only of her yellow locks, he was
deprived both of his wisdom, and also senses. For vain and light men love
commonly not that which reason commands but that which their appetite
desires.

The love of the Emperor increased with folly so much, that not only he
counted severally all the hairs that The folly of the Emperor Nero described.
his lover Pompeia had on her head, but also gave to every hair a proper name,
and in praise of every one of them made a song, insomuch that this effeminate
Prince spent more time in banqueting and playing with his lover Pompeia, then
he did to reform and amend the faults of the common wealth: yea, his folly so
much surmou^ted all reason, that he commanded a comb of gold to be made,
and therewith he himself combed her yellow locks. And if it chanced that any
one hair in combing fell off, he by and by caused it to be set in gold,
offered it up in the Temple to the Goddess Juno: For it was an ancient custom
among the Romans, that the things which they entirely loved (whether it were
good or evil) should be offered up to their gods. And when it was once known
that Nero was so in love with those hairs of Pompeia which were of the color
of amber, all the Ladies endeavored themselves, not only to make artificially
their hair of that color, but also to wear their garments and other attires
of the same color, in so much that both men and women did use collers of amber,
brooches, and ringes set with amber, and all their other jewels were of amber.
For always it has been seen, and ever shall be, that those things whereunto
the Prince is most addicted, the people follow, and above all other covet the
same.

Before this Emperor Nero played this light part in Rome, the amber stones was
had in little estimation, and after that he set so much by it, there was no
precious stone in Rome, so much esteemed: Yea, and furthermore, the Merchant
gained nothing so much (whether it were in gold or silk) as he did in the
amber stones, nor brought any kind of merchandise to Rome more precious, or
more vendible then that was. I do marvel at this vanity, foras-much as the
children of the world do love, desire, and labor, more to follow the strange
folly of another: then to furnish and supply their own proper necessity.

Therefore returning again to my purpose, (most excellent Prince,) by this
example you may conjecture what I would say, that is, that if this writing were
accepted unto Princes, I am assured it would be refused of no man: And if any
man would slanderously talk of it, he durst not, remembering that your Majesty
has received it: For those things which Princes take to their custody, we are
bound to defend, and it is not lawful for us to diminish their credit.

Suppose that this my work were not so profound as it might be of this matter,
nor with such eloquence set out as many other books are: yet I dare be bold
to say, that the Prince shall take more profit by reading of this work, then
Nero did by his love Pompeia: For in the end by reading and studying good
books, men turn and become sage and wise, and by keeping ill company, they are
counted fools and vicious.

My meaning is not, nor I am not so importunate and unreasonable, to persuade
Princes that they should so favor my doctrine, that it should be in like
estimation now in these parts, ^a the amber was there in Rome. But that only
which I require and demand is, that the time which Nero spent in singing and
telling the hayres of his love Pompeia: should now be employed to redress the
wrongs and faults of the common wealth. For the noble and worthy Prince ought
to employ the least part of the day in the recreation of his person: After he
has given audience to his Counselors, to the Ambassadors, to the great
Lords and Prelates, to the rich and poor, to his own country men and
strangers, and after that he be com into his Privy Chamber, then my desire is,
that he would read this Treatise, or some other better then this: for in
Princes chambers oftentimes those of the Privy Chamber, and other their
familiars lose great time in reciting vain and trifling matters, and of small
profit, the which might better be spent in reading some good good book.

In all worldly affairs that we do, and in all our books which we compile,
it is a great matter to be fortunate: For to a man that fortune does not
favor, diligence without doubt can little avail. Admit that fortune were
against me, in that this my work should be acceptable unto your Majesty,
without comparison it should be a great grief and dishonor unto me to tell
you what should be good to read for your pastime, if on the other part you
would not profit by my counsel and advise: For my mind was not only to make
this book, to the end Princes should read it for a pastime, but to that end
(in recreating themselves) sometimes they might thereby also take profit.

Aulus Gelius in the 12. Chapter of his third book entitled De nocte attica,
said that amongst all the Scholars which the divine Plato had, one A
commendation of Demosthenes the Philosopher.
was named Demostenes, a man among the Greeks most highly esteemed, and of the
Romans greatly desired. Because he was in his living severe, and in his
tongue and doctrine a very Satyr. If Demosthenes had come in the time of
Phalaris the tyrant, when Grecia was peopled with tirants, and that he had not
been in Platoes time, when it was replenished with Philosophers, truly
Demosthenes had been as clear a lantern in Asia, as Cicero the great was in
Europe.

Great good hap has a notable man to be born in one age, more then in
another. How happy a thing it is to live under a virtuous prince.
I mean, that if a valiant Knight come in the time of a courageous and stout
Prince such a one truly shall be esteemed and set in great authority. But if
he come in the time of an other effeminate and covetous Prince, be shall not
be regarded at all: For he will rather esteem one that well augment his
treasure at home, then him that can vanquish his enemies abroad.

So likewise it chances to wise and virtuous men, which if they come in the
time of virtuous and learned princes, are esteemed and honored: but if they
come in time of vain and vicious Princes, they make small account of them. For
it is an ancient custom among vanities children, not to honor him which to
the Common wealth is most profitable: but him which to the Prince is most
acceptable.

The end why this is spoken (Most puissant Prince) is because the two renowned
Philosophers were in Greece both at one time: and because the divine
Philosopher Plato was so much esteemed and made of, they did not greatly
esteem the Philosopher Demosthenes: For the eminent and high renown of one
alone, diminishes the fame and estimation (among the people) of many. Although
Demosthenes was such a one indeed as we have said, that is to wit, eloquent
of tongue, ready of memory, sharp and quick of wit, in living severe, sure
and profitable in giving of counsel, in renown excellent, in years very
ancient, and in Philosophy a man right well learned: yet he refused not to
go to the Schools of Plato to hear moral Philosophy. He that shall read
this thing or hear it, ought not to marvel, but to follow it, and to profit
likewise in the same, that is to understand, that one Philosopher learned of
another, and one wise man suffered himself to be taught of another: For
knowledge is of such a quality, that the more a man knows, daily there
increases in him a desire to know more. All things of this life (after they
have been tasted and possessed) cloyeth a man, wearieth and troubles him,
true science only excepted, which never does cloy, weary, nor trouble them.
And if it happen we weary any, it is but the eyes, which are wearied with
looking and reading: and not the spirit with seeling and tasting.

Many Lords, and my familiar friends do ask me how it is possible I should
live with so much study? And I also demand of them, how it is possible they
should live in such continual idleness? For considering the provocation and
assaults of the flesh, the dangers of the world, the temptations of the devil,
the treasons of enemies, and importunity of friends: what heart can suffer so
great and continual travel, but only in reading and comforting himself in
books? Truly a man ought to have more compassion of a simple ignorant man
then of a poor man: For thereis no greater poverty unto a man then for to
lack wisdom, whereby he should know how to govern himself.

Therefore following our matter, the case was such, one day Demosthenes (going
to the school of Plato) saw in the market place of Athens a great assembly of
people, which were hearing a Philosopher newly come unto that place: and he
spoke not this without a cause, that there was a great company of people
assembled. For that naturally the common people are desirous to hear new and
strange things.

Demosthenes asked what Philosopher he was, after whom so many people went?
and when it was answered him that it was Calistratus the Philosopher, a man
which in eloquence was very sweet and pleasant: he determined to stay and
hear him, to the end he would know, whether it were true or vain that the
people told him: For oftentimes it happens that among the people some get
themselves great fame, more by favor, then by good learning.

The difference betwixt the divine (...).
Philosopher Plato and Calistratus was, in that Plato was exceedingly well
learned, and the other very eloquent: and thus it came to pass, that in living
they followed Plato, and in eloquence of speech they did imitate Calistratus.
For, there are diverse men sufficiently well learned, which have profound
doctrine, but they have no way nor means to teach it unto others.

Demosthenes hearing Calistratus but once, was so far in love with his
doctrine, that he never after heard Plato: nor entered into his School, for to
harken to any of his lectures.

At which news diverse of the Sages and Wise men of Grecia marvelled much,
seeing that the tongue of a man was of such power, that it had put all their
doctrine unto silence.

Although I apply not this example, I doubt not but that your Majesty
understands to what end I have declared it.

And moreover I say, that although Princes and great Lords have in their
Chambers Books so well corrected, and men in their Courts so well learned,
that they may worthily keep the estimation which Plato had in his School: yet
in this case it should not displease me that the difference that was between
Plato and Calistratus, should be between Princes and this Book. God forbid,
that by this saying men should think, I mean to dissuade Princes from the
company of the sage men, or from reading of any other book but this; for in so
doing, Plato should be rejected which was divine, and Calistratus embraced
which was more worldly. But my desire is, that sometimes they would use to
read this book a little, for it may chance they shall find some wholesome
counsel therein, which at one time or other may profit them in their
affairs: For the good and virtuous Prince ought to graffe in their memory the
wise sayings which they read, and forget the cankred injuries and wrongs which
are done them.

I do not speak it without a cause, that he that reads this my writing,
shall find in it some profitable counsel: For all that which has bin written
in it, has been every word and sentence with great diligence so well wayed
and corrected, as if therein only consisted the effect of the whole work.

The greatest grief that learned men seele in their writing is, to think that
if there be many that view their doings to take profit thereby, they shall
perceive that there are as many more which occupy their tongues in the
slander and disprayse thereof. In publishing this my work, I have observed
the manner of them that plant a new garden, wherein they set Roses which give a
pleasant savor to the nose, they make fair green plattes to delight the
eyes, they graft fruitful trees to be gathered with the hands; but in the end
as I am a man: so have I written it for men, and consequently as a man I may
have erred: for there is not at this day so perfect a painter, but another will
presume to amend his work.

Those which diligently will endeavor themselves to read this book, shall
find in it very profitable counsels, very lively laws, good reasons, notable
sayings, sentences very profound, worthy examples, and histories very ancient:
For to say the truth, I had a respect in that the doctrine was ancient, and
the Style new. And albeit your Majesty be the greatest Prince of all Princes,
and I the least of all your Subjects, you ought not for my base condition to
disdain to cast your eyes upon this book, nor to think scorn to put that
thing in proof which seems good. For a good letter ought to be nothing the
less esteemed, although it be written with an evil pen.

I have said, and will say, that Princes and great Lords, the stouter, the
richer, and the greater of renown they be, the greater need they have of all
men of good knowledge about them, to counsel them in their affairs, and of
good books which they may read: and this they ought to do as well in
prosperity, as in adversity, to the end that their affairs in time convenient,
may be debated and redressed: For otherwise they should have time to repent,
but no leisure to amend.

Pliny, Marcus Varro, Strabo, and Macrobius, which were Historiographers,
Diverse Historiographers at controversy, what things were most authentike.
no less grave then true, were at great controversy, improouing what things
were most authenticke in a common weal, and at what time they were of all men
accepted.

Seneca in an Epistle he wrote to Lucullus, praised without ceasing the Common
wealth of the Rhodians, in the which (with much ado) they bent themselves
altogether to keep one self thing, and after they had thereupon agreede, they
kept and maintained it inuiolably.

The divine Plato in the sixth book entitled De Legibus ordained and
commanded, that if any Citizen did invent any new thing, which never before
was read, nor heard of, the inuentour thereof should first practice the same
for the space of ten years in his own house, before it was brought into the
Commonwealth, and before it should be published unto the people, to the end,
if the invention were good, it should be profitable unto him: and if it were
naught, that then the danger and hurt thereof should light only on him.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that Lycurgus upon grievous penalties did
prohibit, that none should be so hardy in his Common wealth to go wandering
into strange Countries, nor that he should be so hardy to admit any strangers
to come into his house: and the cause why this law was made, was to the end
strangers should not bring into their houses things strange, and not accustomed
in their Common wealth, and that they traveling through strange countries,
should not learn new Customs.

The presumption of men now adays is so great, and the consideration of the
people so small, that what soever a man can speak, he speaks, what so ever
he can invent he does invent, what he would he does write, and it is no
marvel, for there is no man that will speak against them. Nor the common people
in this case are so light, that amongst them you may daily see new devises, and
whether it hurt or profit the Common wealth they force not.

If there came at this day a vain man amongst the people, which was never
seen nor heard of before, if he be any thing subtle: I ask you but this
question: Shall it not be easy for him to speak, and invent what he
lists, to set forth what he pleases, to persuade that which to him seems
good, and all his sayings to be believed? truly it is a wonderful thing, and
no less slanderous, that one should be sufficient to pervert the senses and
judgments of all, and all not able to repress the lightness and vanity of
one. Things New things and unaccustomed ought not to be used.
that are new, and not accustomed, neither Princes ought to allow, nor yet the
people to use: For a new thing ought no less to be examined and considered,
before it be brought into the common wealth, then the great doubts which arise
in men's minds. Ruffinus in the Prologue of his second Book of his Apology
reprooueth greatly the Egyptians because they were too full of devises, and
blamed much the Grecians, because they were too curious in speaking fine
words: and above all other he greatly prayseth the Romans; for that they
were very hard of belief, and that they scarcely always credited the sayings
of the Greeks, and because they were discreet in admitting the inventions of
the Egyptians.

The Author has reason to praise the one, and disprayse the other. For it
proceeds of a light judgment, to credit all the things that a man hears,
and to do all that he sees.

Returning therefore now to our matter. Marcus Varro said, that there were
five things in the World very hard to bring in, whereof none (after they were
commonly accepted) were ever lost or forgotten, for even as things vainly
begun, are easily left of: so things with great fear accepted, are with
much care and diligence to be kept and observed.

The first thing that chiefly throghout all the World was accepted, was all men
for to live together: that is for to say, that they should make places, Towns,
Villages, Cities and Common wealths. For according to the saying of Plato,
the first and best inuentors of the commonwealth were the Antes, which
(according to to the experience we see) do live together, travel together, do
go together, and also for the winter they make provision together: and
furthermore The providence of the Ants.
none of these Antes do give themselves to any private thing, but all theirs
is brought into their common wealth.

It is a marvelous thing to behold the common wealth of the ants, how nearely
they trim their hills, to behold how they sweep away the grain, when it is
wette, and how they dry it when they feel any moisture, to behold how they
come from their work and how the one does not hurt the other: and to behold
also how they do rejoice the one in the others travel, and that which is to
our greatest confusion is, that if it comes so to pass, 50000. Ants will live
in a little hillocke together, and two men only cannot live in peace and
concord in a common wealth.

Would to God the wisdom of men were so great to keep themselus as the
prudence of the ants is to live: When the world came to a certain age, and
men's wits waxed more fine, then tirants sprang up which oppressed the poor,
thieves that robbed the rich, rebels that robbed the quiet, murderers that slew
the patient, the idle that eat the swet of other men's brows: all the which
things considered by them which were virtuous: they agreed to assemble and live
together, that thereby they might preserve the good, and withstand the wicked.
Macrobius affirms this in the second book of Scipions dream, saying, That
covetousness and avarice was the greatest cause why men invented the
commonwealth. Pliny in the seventh book 56. Chapter says, the first that
made small assemblies were the Athenians; and the first that built great
Cities, were the Egyptians.

The second thing that was accepted throughout all the world, were the letters
which we read, whereby we take profit in writing. According whereunto Marcus
Varro says, the Egyptians praise themselves and say, that they did invent
them, and the Assyrians affirm the contrary, and swear, that they were showed
first of all amongst them.

Pliny in the 7. book says, that in the first age, there was in the alphabet
no more then 16. letters, and that great A description of the Alphabet.
Palamedes at the siege of Troy, ladded other 4. and Aristotle says, that
immediately after the beginning, there were found 18. letters. And that
afterward Palamedes did add but 2. and so there were 20. and that the
Philosopher Epicarmus did add other 2. which were 22. it is no great matter,
whether the Egyptians or the Assyrians first found the letters. But I say and
affirm, that it was a thing necessary for a common wealth, and also for the
increase of man's knowledge: For if we had wanted letters and writings, we
could have had no knowledge of the time past, nor yet our posterity could have
bin advertised what was done in our days.

Plutarch in the second book entitled De viris illustribus, and Pliny in the
seventh book, and 56. Chapter, do greatly praise Pirotas, because he first
found the fire in a flint stone.

They greatly commended Protheus, because he invented barneyes, and they highly
extolled Panthasuea, because she invented the hatchet. They praised Citheus,
because he invented the bow, and the arrows, they greatly praised Phenisius,
because he invented the Crossebow, and the sling.

They highly praised the Lacedaemonians, because they invented the Helmet, the
Spear, and the Sword, and moreover, they commend those of Thessalie, because
they invented the combat on hors-back: and they commend those of Affrike,
because they invented the fight by Sea. But I do praise, and continually will
magnify, not those which found the Art of fighting: and invented weapons to
procure wars, for to kill his neighbor: but those which found Letters, for
to learn Science, and to make peace between two Princes.

What difference there is to wet the Pen with ink and to paint the Spear
with blood: to be environed with books, or to be laden with weapons. To study
how every man ought to live, or else to go privily and rob in the Wars,
and to kill his Neighbor. There is none of so vain a judgment, but will
praise more the Speculation of the Sciences, then the practice of the wars.
Because that in the end, he that learneth sciences, learneth naught else but
how he and others ought to live. And he that learneth warlike feats, learneth
none other thing, then how to slay his Neighbor, and to destroy others.

The third thing, that equally of all was accepted, were laws. For admit that
all men now lived together in common, if they would not be subject one to
another, there would contention arise amongst them, for that according to the
saying of Plato, That there is no greater token of the destruction of a A
worthy sentence of Plato:
Commonweal, then when many rulers are chosen therein.

Pliny in his seventh book, 56. chap: says, that a Queen called Ceres, was
the first that taught them to sow in the fields, to grind in Milles, to paste
and bake in Ouens, and also she was the first that taught the people to live
according to the Law. And by the means of these things our Forefathers called
her a Goddess.

Since the time we never have seen heard, nor read of any realm, or other
nation (as well strange as barbarous) whatsoever they were, but have had Laws,
whereby the good were favored: and also institutions of grievous pains,
wherewith the wicked were punished.

Although truly I had rather, and it were better, that the good should love
reason: then fear the law. I speak of those which leave to do evil works,
for fear only of falling into the punishments appointed for evil doers. For,
although men approve that which they do for the present, yet God condemaeth
that which they desire.

Seneca in an epistle he wrote unto his friend Lucille, said these words,
Thou writest, unto me Lucille, that those of Scicile, have carried a great
quantity of Corn into Spain, and into Affrike, the which was forbidden by a
Roman law, and therefore they have deserved most grievous punishment.

Now because thou art virtuous, Thou may teach me to do well: and I that
am old, will teach thee to say well: and this is, because that amongst wise
and virtuous men it is enough to say, that the Law commands, appoynteth, and
suffers this thing, but in as much as it is agreeing with reason. For, the
crown of the good, is reason, and the scourge of the wicked, is the law.

The fourth thing that commonly through the world amongst all men was
accepted, was the Barbers. And let no man take this thing in mockery. For, if
they do read Pliny, in the 59. chapter, and the seventh book, there they
shall find for a Truth, that in those former times, the Romans were in Rome
454. years, without either powling or shauing the h^ires off the bearde of
any man.

Marcus Varro said, that Publius (...) was the first that brought the barbers
from Scicilie to Rome: But admit it were so or otherwise: yet notwithstanding,
there was a great contention among the Romans. For, they said, they thought
it a rash thing for a man to commit his life unto the courtesy of another.

Dyonisius the Syracusian never trusted his Beard with any barbor, but when his
Daughters were very little, they clipped his beard with sisers: but after they
became great, he would not put his trust in them, to trim his beard, but he
himself did burn it with the shales of nuttes.

This Dyonisius Syracusan, was demanded why he would not trust any Barbours
with his beard? He answered, Because I know that there be some which will
give more to the Barbor to take away my life, then I will give to trim my
beard.

Pliny in the seventh book says, that the great Scipio called Affrican, and
the Emperor Augustus, were the first that caused them in Rome to shave their
beards. And I think the end why Pliny spoke these things, was to exalt these
two Princes, which had as great courage to suffer the rasours to touch their
throats: as the one for to fight against Hanniball in Affricke, and the other,
against Sextus Pompeius in Scicilie.

The fifte thing which commonly through the world was accepted, were the Dyalls
and clockes which the Romans wanted a long time. For as Pliny and Marcus
Varro say, the Romans were without clockes in Rome, for the space of 595.
years.

The curious Hystoriographers declare (...).
three manner of dyalls that were in old time: that is to say, Dyalls of the
hours, Dyalls of the Sun, and Dyalls of the Water. The dyall of the Sun
Aneximenides Millesius invented: who was great Animandraes scholar. The dyall
of the water Scipio Nasica invented, and the dyall of hours, one of the
Scholars of Thales the philosopher invented.

Now of all these Antiquities, which were brought into Rome, none of them were
so acceptable to the Romans, as the Dyalls were, whereby they measured the
day by the hour. For, before they could not say, we will rise at seven of the
clock, we will dine at ten, we will see one the other at twelve: at one we
will do that we ought to do.

But before they said, after the Sun is up we will do such a thing, and
before it go down, we will do that we ought to do.

The occasion of declaring unto you these five antiquities in this preamble,
was to no other intent, but to call my Book the Dial of Princes. The name of
the Book being new (as it is) may make the learning that is therein greatly to
be esteemed. God forbid that I should be so bold to say, they have been so
long time in Spain without days of learning, as they were in Rome without the
Dial of the Sun, the water, and of the hours: For that in Spain have been
always Spain commended for learned me^, and expert in the wars.
men well learned in Sciences, and very expert in the wars. By great reason,
and of greater occasion, the Princes ought to be commended, the knights, the
people, their wits, and the fertility of their Country: but yet to all these
goodness, I have seen many unlearned books in Spain, which as broken Dials
deserve to be cast into the fire to be forged anew. I do not speak it
without a cause, that many books deserve to be broken and burnt: For there
are so many that without shame and honesty do set forth books of love of the
world, at this day as boldly, as if they taught them to despise and speak
evil of the world.

It is pity to see how many days and nights be consumed in reading vain
books (that is to say) Orson and Valentine, the Court of Venus, and the four
sons of Amon, and diverse other vain books, by whose doctrine I dare boldly
say, they pass not the time but in perdition: for they learn not how they
ought to fly vice, but rather what way they may with more pleasure embrace it.

This Dial of Princes is not of sand, nor of the Sun, nor of the hours, nor
of the water, but it is the Dial of Life. For the other Dials serve to know
what hour it is in the night, and what hour it is of the day: but this
shows and teaches us, how we ought to occupy our minds, and how to order
our life.

The property of other Dials is, to order things public, but the Nature The
property of this ^ooke of the Dyall of Princes.
of this dyal of Princes is, to teach us how to occupy our selves every
hour, and how to amend our life every moment.

It little avails to keep the dyalls well, and to see thy Subjects
dissolutely without any order, to range in routes, and daily raise debate and
contention among themselves.

The End of the general Prologue.
THE AUTHORS PROLOGVE SPEAKS PARTICVLARLIE of the Book, called MARCUS
AURELIUS which he translated, and dedicated to the Emperor CHARLES the fifth.
THe greatest vanity that I find in the world is, that vain men are not only
content to be vain in their life, but also procure to leave a memory of their
vanity after their death. For it is so thought good unto vain and light men
which serve the world in vain works: that at the hour of death when they
perceive they can do no more, and that they can no longer prevail, they offer
themselves unto death, which now they see approach upon them. Many of the World
are so fleshed in the World, that although it forsakes them in deeds, yet
they will not forsake it in their desires. And I durst swear, that if the
World could grant them perpetual life, they would promise it always to
remain in their customable folly.

O what a number of vain men are alive, which have neither remembrance of God
to serve him, nor of his glory to obey him, nor of their conscience to make it
clean: but like bruit beasts fellow and run after their voluptuous
pleasures. The bruit beast is angry if a man keep him too much in awe: if he
be weary he takes his rest, he sleeps when he lifts, he eats and
drinks when he comes unto it, and unless he be compelled he does
nothing: he takes no care for the commonwealth, for he neither knows how
to follow reason, nor yet how to resist sensuality. Therefore if a man at all
times should eat when he desires, revenge himself when he is moved, commit
adultery when he is tempted, drink when he is thirsty, and sleep when he is
drousie, we might more properly call such a one a beast nourished in the
mountains, then a man brought up in the commonwealth: For him properly we
may call a man that governs himself like a man; that is to say, conformable
unto such things as reason wills, and not where sensuality leads.

Let us leave these vain men which are alive, and talk of them that be dead,
against whom we dare say, that whiles they were in the world, they followed
the world, and lived according to the same. It is not to be marvelled at, that
since they were living in the world, they were noted of some world point. But
seeing their unhappy and wicked life is ended: why will they then smell of the
vanities of the World in their graves? It is a great shame and dishonor for
men of noble and stout hearts, to see in one moment the end of our life, and
never to see the end of our solly.

We neither read, hear nor see any thing more common, then such men as be
most unprofitable in the Common wealth, and of life most reprobate, to take
upon them most honor whiles they live, and to leave behind them the greatest
memory at their death.

What vanity can be greater in the world, then to esteem the world, which
esteems no man, and to make no account of God who so greatly regards all
men? What greater folly can there be in man, then by much travel to increase
his goods, and with vain pleasures to loose his soul? It is an old plague in
man's nature, that many (or the most part of men) leave the amendment of their
life far behind: to set their honor the more before.

Suetonius Tranquillus in the first book of the Emperors says, that A
notable sentence. Julius Caesar.
Julius Caesar (no further then in Spain in the City of Cales, now called
Calis) saw in the Temple the triumphs of Alexander the great painted, the
which when he had well viewed, he sighed marvelous sore, and being asked why
he did so, he answered: What a woeful case am I in, that am now of the age of
thirty years, and Alexander at the same years had subdued the whole world,
and rested him in Babylon. And I (being as I am) a Roman, never did yet thing
worthy of praise in my life, nor shall leave any renown of me after my death.

Dion the Grecian in the second book De audacia says, that the noble
Drusius, the Almaine, used to visit the graves and tombs of the famous and
renowned which were buried in Italy, and did this always, especially at his
going to warfare: And it was asked why he did so? He answered. I visit the
sepulchers of Scipio, and of diverse others which are dead, before whom all the
Earth trembled, when they were alive: For, in beholding their prosperous
success, I did recover both strength and stoutnesse.

He says furthermore, that it encourages a man to fight against his enemies,
remembering he shall leave of him a memory in time to come.

Cicero says in his Rhethorike, and also Plynie makes mention of the same in
an Epistle: that there came from Thebes (in Egypt) a knight to Rome, for no
other purpose, but only to see whether it were true or no, that was reported of
the notable things of Rome. Whom Moecenas demanded, what he perceived of the
Romans, and what he thought of Rome?

He answered: The memory of the absent does more content me, then the glory A
worthy sentence of
of the present does satisfy me. And the reason of this is. The desire which
men have to extol the living, and to be equal unto the dead: makes things so
strange in their life, that they deserve immortal fame after their death. The
Romans rejoiced not a little, to hear such words of a strangers mouth,
whereby he praised them which were departed, and exalted them which yet lived.

Oh what a thing it is to consider the ancient heathens, which neither feared
Hell, nor hoped for Heaven: and yet by remembrance of weakness, they took unto
them strength, by cowardnes they were boldened: through fear, they became
hardy: of dangers they took encouragement: of enemies, they made friends: of
poverty, they took patience: of malice, they learned experience. Finally (I
say,) they denied their own wills, and followed the'opinions of others, only
to leave behind them a memory with the dead: and to have a little honor with
the dead.

Oh how many are they that trust the vnconstantnesse of Fortune, only to leave
some notable memory behind them. Let us call to mind some worthy examples,
whereby they may see that to be true, which I have spoken.

What made king Ninus to invent such wars? Queen Semiramis, to make such
buildings? Ulysses the Grecian to sulke so many Seas? king Alexander, to
conquer so many Lands? Hercules the Thebane, to set up his Pillars where he
did? Caius Casar the Roman, to give 52. battles at his pleasure? Cyrus King
of Persia, to overcome both the Asiaes? Hanniball the Carthaginian, to make so
cruel wars against the Romans? Pyrrhus king of the Epirotes, to come down
into Italy? Attila, King of the Hunnes, to defy all Europe? Truly they would
not have What was the occasion the ancients adventured their lives.
taken upon them such dangerous enterprises, only upon the words of them
which were in those days present? but because we should so esteem them that
should come after.

Seeing then that we be men, and the children of men, it is not a little to
be marvelled at, to see the diversity between the one and the other: and
what cowardnes there is in the hearts of some, and contrariwise what courage in
the stomachs of others. For, we see commonly now-adayes, that if there be
ten of stout courages, which are desirous with honor to dye, there are ten
thousands cowards, which through shameful pleasures seek to prolong their
life.

The man that is ambitious, thinking him most happy, who with much estimation
can keep his renowm, and with little care regard his life. And on the other
side, he that will set by his life, shall have but in small estimation his
renown.

The Syrians, Assyrians, the Thebanes, the Chaldees, the Greeks, the
Macedonians, the Rhodians, the Romans, the Hunnes, the Germains, and the
Frenchmen, if such Noblemen (as amongst these were most famous) had not
adventured their lives, by such dangerous Enterprises, they had never got such
immortal fame as they had done to leave to their posterity.

Sextus Cheronensis in his third book, of the valiant deeds of the Romans
says, that the famous captain Marcus Marcellus (which was the first of all
men that saw the back of Hannibal in the field) was demanded of one how he
durst enter into battle with such a renowned captain as Hanniball was? To
whom he answered: Friend, I am a Roman borne, and a Captain of Rome, and I
must daily put my life in hazard for my Countries sake: for, so I shall make
perpetual my renown. He was demanded again, why he stroke his enemies with
such fiercenes, and why he did so pitifully lament those which were overcome,
after the victory gotten in battle? He answered, the Captain which is a
Roman, and is not judged to be a tyrant, ought with his own hand to shed the
blood of his enemies, and also to shed the tears of his eyes. A captain
Roman ought more to advance him of his clemency, then of his bloody victory.

And Marcus Aurelius says further, when a Roman captain shall be in the
field, he has an eye to his enemies, with hope to vanquish the^: but after
they be vanquished: he ought to remember they are men, and that he might have
been overcome: For fortune shows her self in nothing so common, as in the
successes of war.

Certainly, these were words well beseeming such a man, and surely we may
boldly say, that all those which shall hear, or read such things, will
commend the words which that Roman spoke: but few are they that indeed would
have done the feats that he did. For, there be many that are ready to praise
in their words that which is good: but there are few that in their works
desire to follow the same.

Such hearts are unquiet, and much altered by sight and envy, that they bare
toward their Ancients which through manfulnes attained unto great triumphs
and glory, let them remember, what dangers and trauells they passed through,
before they came thereto. For, there was never Captain that ever triumphed in
Rome, unless he had first adventured his life a thousand times in the field,
I think I am not deceived, in this that I will say. That is to say, all are
desirous to taste of the marrow of Fame-present: but none will break the bone,
for fear of How difficult and hard a matter it is to attain to true honor.
peril ensuing. If Honor could be bought with desire only, I dare boldly
say, it would be more esteemed in these days of the poor page, then it was
in times past, of the valiant Roman Scipio. For, there is not at this day so
poor a man, but would desire honor above all things.

What a doleful case is this to see, many gentlemen, and young Knights, become
evil disposed vagabonds, and loyterers: the which hearing tell of any famous
battle fought: and that many of their estate and profession have don valiant
seats in the same; immediately therewith be styrred, and set on fire through
Enuyes heat: So that in the same fury, they change their robes into armor:
and with all speed prepare themselves to war, to exercise the feats of
arms. And finally, (like young men without experience) make importunate suite,
and obtain license and money of their Friends to go unto the wars. But after
that they are once out of their Countries, and see themselves in a strange
place, their days evil and their nights worse: At one time they are
commanded to Skyrmishe, and at an other time, to watch: when they have
victuals, they want lodging: and when the pay day comes, that pay and the
next also is eaten and spent.

With these and other like troubles and discommodities, the poor young men are
so astonyed: especially when they call to mind the goodly wide Hawles, so well
hanged and trimmed, wherein they greatly delighted, to pass the time in
Summer-season.

When they remember their great chimneys at home, whereby they comforted their
old limbs and how they used to sit quietly upon the Sunnie banks in winter.
For the remembrance of pleasures past, greatly augmenteth the pains present.
Notwithstanding their Parents and friends, had admonished them thereof before.
And now being beaten with their own folly, and feeling these discommodities
which they thought not of before: they determine to forsake the wars, and
each one to return home unto his own again.

But where as they asked license but once to go forth, now they were enforced
to ask it ten times before they could come home. And the worst is, they went
forth laden with money, and return home laden with vices. But the end why
these things are spoken, is, that sage and virtuous men should mark, by what
trade the evil disposed, seek to gain, which is not gotten by gasing on the
windows, but by keeping the frontiers against their enemies: not with playing
at Tables in the Tauernes, but with fighting in the fields, not trimmed with
cloth of gold or silks, but laden with armor and weapons: not praunsing
their palfreyes, but discovering the ambushment: not sleeping until noon, but
watching all night: not by advancing him of his apparel and handsomnesse, but
for his stout couragiousnes: not banqueting his friends but assaulting his
enemies: though a knight do these things, yet he ought to consider, that it is
vanity and foolishness.

But seeing the world has placed honor in such a vain thing, and that they
can attain to it by none other was, the young aduenturous Gentlemen ought to
employ thereunto their strength with stout courage, to atchieue to some great
acts, worthy of renown: For in the end when the war is justly begun, and
that in defense of their Country, they ought to rejoice more of him that dies
in the hands of his enemies, then of him which lives accompanied with vices.

It is a great shame and dishonor to men of Arms, and young Gentelmen being
at home, to hear the praise of them which be in the wars, for the young
Gentlemen ought not to think it honor for him to hear or declare the news
of others: but that others should declare the virtuous deeds of him.

Oh how many are they in the world this day puffed up with pride: and not very
wise which still prate of great renown, and yet pass their life with small
honesty: For our predecessors fought in the field with their lances, but young
men now a days fight at the table with their tongues. Admit that all vain men
desire and procure to leave a memory of their vanity: yet they ought to
enterprise such things in their life, whereby they might win a famous renown
(and not a perpetual shame) after their death: For there are many departed
which have left such memory of their works as moves us rather to pity their
folly, then to envy their virtue.

I ask of those that read, or hear this thing; if they will be in love with
Nembroth the first Tyrant? with Semiramis, which sinned with her own son:
with Antenor, that betrayed The cruelty of Tyrants heee described, and laid
open.
Troy his country: with Medea, that slew her children: with Tarquine that
enforced Lucretia: with Brutus that slew Caesar: with Sylla, that shed so much
blood: with Catilina, that played the Tyrant in his country: with Iugurtha,
that strangled his brethren: with Caligula, that committed incest with his
sisters: with Nero that killed his mother: with Heliogabalus, that robbed the
Temples: with Domitian, that in nothing delighted so much, as by strange
hands to put men to death, and to drive away flies with his own hands?

Small is the number of those that I have spoken, in respect of those which I
could recite: of whom I dare say and affirm, that if I had been as they, I
cannot tell what I would have done, or what I should have desired: but this I
know, it would have been more pains to me, to have won that infamy which
they have won, then to have lost the life which they have lost.

It profits him little, to have his Ponds full of fish, and his parkes full
of Dear, which knows neither how to hunt, nor how to fish. I mean to show
by this, that it profits a man little to be in great authority, if he be
not esteemed, nor honored in the same. For to attain to honor, wisdom is
requisite: and to keep it, patience is necessary. With great considerations
wise men ought to enterprise dangerous things. For I assure them they shall
never win honor, but where they use to recover slander.

Returning therefore to our matter (puissant Prince,) I swear and durst
undertake, that you rather desire perpetual renown through death, then any
idle rest in this life.

And hereof I do not marvel, for there are some that shall always declare
the prowesses of good Princes, and others which will not spare to open the
vices of evil tyrants. For although your Imperial estate is much, and your
Catholic person deserves more; yet I believe with my heart, and see with
these eyes, that your thoughts are so highly bent unto aduenturous deeds, and
your heart so courageous to set upon them, that your Majesty little esteems
the inheritance of your predecessors, in respect of that you hope to gain to
leave to your successors.

A Captain asked Julius Caesar (as he declares in his Commentaries) why he
traveled in the Winter in so hard frost, and in the summer in such extreme
heat. He answered, I will do what lies in me to do, and afterward let
the fatal destinies do what they can: For the valiant knight that gives in
battle the onset, ought more to be esteemed then fickle fortune whereby the
victory is obtained, since fortune gives the one, and aduentur guides the
other.

These words are spoken like a stout and valiant Captain of Rome: Of how many
Princes do we read, whom truly I much lament to see, what flatteries they
have heard with their ears being alive: and to read what slanders they have
sustained after their death.

Princes and great Lords should have more regard to that which is spoken in
their absence, then to that which is done in their presence: not to that which
they hear, but to that which they would not hear: not to that which they tell
them, but to that which they would not be told of: not to that which is
written unto them being alive, but to that which is written of them after
their death: not to those that tell them lies: but to those which (if they
durst) would tell them truth: For men many times refrain not their tongues,
for that Subjects be not credited: but because the Prince in his authority is
suspected.

The Noble and virtuous Prince A man's own conscience a judge between truth
and lies:
should not flitte from the truth whereof he is certified, neither with
flatteries and lies should he suffer himself to be deceived: but to examine
himself, and see whether they serve him with truth, or deceive him with lies.
For there is no better witness and judge of truth, and lies, then is a man's own
conscience.

I have spoken all this, to the intent your Majesty might know, that I will not
serve you with that you should not be served. That is, for to show my self in
my Writing a flatterer: For it were neither meet nor honest, that flatteries
into the ears of such a noble Prince should enter: neither that out of my
mouth (which teach the truth) such vain tales should issue. I say, I had
rather be dispraysed for true speaking, then to be honored for flattery and
lying.

For of truth, in your Highness it should be much lightness for to hear
them, and in my baseness great wickedness to invent them.

Now again, following our purpose I say, the Histories greatly do commend
Lycurgus, that gave laws to the Lacedaemonians. Numa Pompilius, that honored
and addorned the Churches. Marcus Marcellus, that had pity and compassion on
those which were overcome. Julius Caesar, that forgave his enemies. Octautus
that was so well-beloved of the people.

Alexander that gave rewards and gifts to all men. Hector the Trojan, became
he was so valiant in wars. Hercules the Thebane, because he employed his
strength so well. Ulysses the Grecian, because he adventured himself in so
many dangers. Pyrrhus king of Epirotes, because he invented so many engines.
Catullns Regulus because he suffered so many torments. Titus the Emperor,
because he was father to the Orphans. Traianus, because he edified sumptuous
and goodly buildings. The good Marcus Aurelius, because he knew more then al
they. I do not say, that it is requisite for one Prince in these days, to have
in him all those qualities, but I dare be bold for to affirm this, that even
as it is impossible for one Prince to follow all: so likewise it is a great
slander for him to follow none.

We do not require Princes to do all that they can, but for to apply
themselves to do some thing that they ought.

And I speak not without a cause that which I have said before. For if
Princes did occupy themselves as they ought to do, they should have no time
to be vicious. Pliny says in an Epistle, that the great Cato, called Censor,
did wear a Ring upon his finger, wherein was written these words; Esto amicus
vnius, and inimicus nullius: A poesy which Cato the Censor had engraven in his
Ring.
which is, be friend to one, and enemy to none.

He that would deeply consider these few words, shall find therein many grave
sentences. And to apply this to my purpose, I say the Prince that would well
govern his common weal, show to all equal justice, desire to possess a
quiet life, to get among all a good fame: and that coueteth to leave of
himself a perpetual memory, ought to embrace the virtues of one, and to
reject the vices of all: I allow it very well that Princes should be equal,
yea and surmount and surpass many: but yet I do advise the^ not to employ
their force, but to follow one: For often times it chances that many which
suppose themselves in their life to excel all when they are dead, are
scarcely found equal unto any.

Though man has done much, and blazed what he can: yet in the end he is but
one, one mind, one power, one birth, one life, and one death. Then sithence he
is but one, let no man presume to know more then one. Of all these good Princes
which I have named in the roll of justice, the last was Marcus Aurelius, to
the intent that he should weaue his web: For suppose we read of many Princes
that have compiled notable things, the which are to be read and known: but
all that Marcus Aurelius said, or did is worthy for to be known, and
necessary to be followed. I do not mean this Prince in his Heathen law, but
in his virtuous deeds.

Let us not stay at his belief: but let us embrace the good that he did: For
compare many Christians with some of the Heathen, and look how far we leave
them behind in faith: so far they excel us in good and virtuous works. All
the old Princes in times past, had some Philosophers to their familiars, as
Alexander Aristotle, King Darius, Herodorus: Augustus Pisto, Pompeius, Plauto,
Titus, Pliny, Adrian, Secundus, Traion, Plutarchus, Anthonius, Apolonius,
Theodotius, Claudinus, Seuerus, Fabatus.

Finally I say, that Philosophers then had such authority in Princes
palaces: that children acknowledged them for Fathers, and Fathers reverenced
them as masters.

These Wise and Sage men were alive in the company of Princes: but the good and
virtuous Marcus Aurelius (whose doctrine is before your Majesty) is not alive,
but dead: Yet therefore that is no cause why his Doctrine should not be
admitted: For it may be (peradventure) that this shall profit us more, which
he wrote with his hands, then that which others spoke with their to^gus.

Plutarch says, in the time of Alexander the great, Aristotle was alive, and
Homer was dead. But let us see how he loved the one, and reverenced the other:
for of truth he slept always with Homers book in his How much Homer was held
in account.
hands, and waking he read the same with his eyes, and always kept the
doctrine thereof in his memory, and laid (when he rested) the book under his
head. The which privilege Aristotle had not: who at all times could not be
heard, and much less at all seasons be believed: so that Alexander had Homer
for his friend, and Aristotle for a master.

Other of these Philosophers were but simple men: but our Marcus Aurelius was
both a wise Philosopher, and a very valiant Prince: and therefore reason would
he should be credited before others: For as a prince he will declare the
troubles, and as a Philosopher he will redress them. Take you therefore
(Puisaunt Prince) this wise Philosopher and Noble Emperor, for a Teacher in
your youth, for a Father in your government, for a Captain general in your
Wars: for a guide in your iourneyes, for a friend in your affairs, for an
example in your virtues, for a Master in your sciences, for a pure white in
your desires, and for equal match in your deeds.

I will declare unto you the Life of an other being a Heathen, and not the
life of an other being a Christian: For look how much glory this Heathen
Prince had in this world being good and virtuous: so much pains your Majesty
shall have in the other, if you shall be wicked and vicious.

Behold, behold, most Noble, and illustrious Prince, the Life of this
Emperor, and you shall plainly see and perceive, how clear he was in his
judgment, how upright he was in his justice, how circumspect in the course of
his life, how loving to his friends, how patient in his troubles and
adversities: how he dissembled with his enemies, how severe against Tirants,
how quiet among the quiet, how great a friend unto the Sage, and lover of the
simple: how aduenturous in his wars, and amiable in peace, and chiefly, and
above all things, how high in words, and prosound in sentences.

Many and sundry times I have been in doubt with my self, whether the
heavenly and eternal Majesty (which gives unto you Princes the Temporal
Majesty, for to rule above all other in power, and authority) did exempt you
that are earthly Princes, more from humane fraylety, then he did us that be
but Subjects, and at the last I know he did not.

For I see even as you are children of the World, so you do live according to
the World. I see even as you travel in the World: so you can know nothing but
things of the world. I see because you live in the Flesh, that you are subject
to the miseries of the flesh. I see though for a time you do prolong your
life: yet at the last you are brought unto your grave, I see your travel is
great and that within your Gates there dwells no rest. I see you are cold in
the winter, and hot in the Summer. I see that hunger feels you, and thirst
troubles you, I see your friends forsake you, and your enemies assault you.

I say that you are sad and do lack joy, I see that you are sick, and be
not well served. I see you have much and yet that which you lack is more.

What will you see more, seeing that Princes dye: O noble Princes, and great
Lords, since you must dye, and become worms meat, why do you not in your
life time search for good counsel? If the Princes and noble men commit an
error, no man dare chastise them, wherefore they stand in greater need of
advise and counsel: For the traveler who is out of his way, the more he goes
forward, the more he erreth. If the people do amiss, they ought to be
punished: but if the Prince err, he should be admonished. And as the Prince
will, the people should at his hands have punishment: so it is reason that he
at their hands should receive counsel.

For as the wealth of the one depends on the wealth of the other: so truly if
the Prince be vicious, the people cannot be virtuous. If your Majesty will
punish your people with words, command them to print this present work in
their hearts. And if your people would serve your Highness with their advise:
let them likewise beseech you to read over this book: For therein the Subjects
shall find how they may amend, and you Lords shall see all that you ought to
do, whether this present Work be profitable or no, I will not that my pen
shall declare: but they which do read it shall judge.

For we Authors take pains to make and translate, and others for us to give
judgment and sentence: From my tender years until this present time, I have
lived in the World, occupying my self in reading and studying humane and
divine Books: and although I confess my debility to be such, that I have not
read so much as I might, nor studied so much as I ought: yet notwithstanding
all that I have read, has not caused me to muse so much as the doctrine of
Marcus Aurelius The commendation of the (...) of Marcus Aurelius.
has, since that in the mouth of an heathen, God has put such a great treasure.

The greatest part of all his works were in Greek: yet he wrote also many in
Latin. I have drawn this out of Greek through the help of my friends, and
afterward out of latin into our vulgar tongue by the travel of my hands.

Let all men judge what I have suffered in drawing it out of Greek into
Latin, out of the Latin into the vulgar, and out of a plain vulgar into a
sweet and pleasant Style: For that banquet is not counted sumptuous, unless
there be both pleasant meats and sauoury sauces.

To call sentences to mind, to place the words, to examine languages, to
correct sillables: What swet I have suffered in the hot summer, what bitter
cold in the sharp winter, what abstinence from meats when I desired for to
eat, what watching in the night when I would have slept: What cares I have
suffered in stead of rest that I might have enjoyed: Let other prove, if me
they will not credit.

The intention of my painful travels, I offer unto the divine Majesty upon my
knees, and to your Highness (most Noble Prince) I present this my work, and
do most humbly beseech the omnipotent and eternal GOD, that the Doctrine of
this Book may be as profitable unto you, and to the common wealth in your
Life, as it has been unto me tedious, and hinderance to my health: I have
thought it very good to offer to your Majesty, the effect of my labors,
though you peradventure will little regard my pains: for the requiring of my
travel, and reward of my good will. I require naught else of your Highness,
but that the rudeness of my understanding, the baseness of my Style, the
smalnesse of my eloquence, the evil order of my sentences, the vanity of my
words, be no occasion why so excellent and goodly work should be little
regarded: For it is not reason, that a good Horse should be the less
esteemed, for that the Rider knows not how to make him run his carrere.

I have done what I could do; do you now that you ought to do, in giving to
this present work gravity, and to me the Interpretor thereof authority.

I say no more, but humbly do beseech God to maintain your estimation and
power in earth: and that you may afterward enjoy the fruition of his Divine
presence in Heaven.

The End of the Authors Prologue.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK CALled THE DIAL OF PRINCES. Wherein the Author
declares, his Intention and manner of proceeding.
ARchimenedes, the great and famous Philosopher, (to whom Marcus Marcellus for
his knowledge sake granted life, and after using Nigromancy deserved death,
being demanded what time was, said, That Time was the inuentor of all nouelies
and a Register The definition of time according to Archimenedes.
certain of Antiquities, which sees of it self, the beginning, the midst,
and the ending of all things.

And finally, time is he that ends all. No man can deny but the definition of
this Philosopher is true: for if Time could speak, he would certify us of
sundry things wherein we doubt, and declare them as a witness of sight. Admit all
things perish, and have an end; yet one thing is exempted, and never has end,
which is truth, that amongst all things is privileged in such wise, that she
triumphs of time, and not time of her: For according to the divine saying, It
shall be more easy to see heaven and earth fall, then once truth to perish.

There is nothing so entier, but may be diminished, nothing so healthful but
may be diseased, nothing so strong but may be broken, neither any thing so
well kept, but may be corrupted And finally, I say, There is nothing but by time
is ruled and governed, save only truth, which is subject to none.

The fruits of the Spring time have no force to give sustenance, nor perfect
sweetness to give any favor, but after that the Summer is past, and harvest
comes, they ripe: and then all that we e ate nourishes more, and gives a
better taste: I mean by this when the world began to have wise men, the more
Philosophers were esteemed for their good manners, the more they deserved to
be reproved for their evil understanding, Plato in his second book of the
Commonwealth said, That the ancient Philosophers, as well Greeks as
Egyptians, The saying ^o Plato.
and Caldees, which first began to behold the stars of heaven, and ascended
to the top of the mount Olimpus to view the influences, and motions of the
Planets of the earth, deserved rather pardon of their ignorance, then praise
for their knowledge.

Plato said further, that the Philosophers which were before us, were the
first that gave themselus to search out the truth of the Elements in the
Heaven, and the first which sowed errors in things natural of the earth.

Homer in his Ilyades, agreeing with Plato, says: I condemn all that the
ancient philosophers knew, but I greatly commend them for that they desired
to know. Certes Homer said well, and Plato said not amiss: for, if amongst
the first Philosophers, this ignorance had not reigned, there had not been
such contrary Sects in every School.

He that has read, not the books, which are lost, but the opinions which the
ancient Philosophers had, will grant me, though the knowledge were one, yet
their sects were diverse: that is to say, Cinici, Stoyci, Academici, Platonici,
and Epicurei: which were as variable, the one from the other in their opinions,
as they were repugnant in their conditions.

I will not, neither reason requires, that my Pen should be so dismeasured,
as to reprove those which are dead, for to give the glory all only to them
that are alive: For, the one of them knew not all, neither were the other
ignorant of all.

If he deserve thanks that shows me the way, whereby I ought to go, no
less then meriteth he, which warns me of that place wherein we may err.
The ignorance of our Forefathers, was but a guide to keep us from erring:
for, the error of them showed us the Truth, to their much praise, and to our
great shame. Therefore I dare boldly say, If we that are now, had been then,
we had known less then they knew. And if those were now, which were then,
they would have known more then we know. And that this is true it appears
well: for that the ancient Philosophers, through the great desire they had to
know the Truth, of small and large ways, the which we now will not see, nor
yet walk therein. Wherefore we have not so much cause to be wayle their
ignorance, as they had reason to complain The opinion of Aulus Gellius
concerning time.
of our negligence. For, truth which is, (as Aulus Gellius says) the daughter
of Time, has revealed unto us the errors which we ought to eschew: and the
true doctrines, which we ought to follow.

What is there to see, but has bin seen? what to discover, but has bin
discovered? what is there to read, but has bin read? what to write, but has
bin written? what is there to know, but has bin known? Now-adayes, human
malice is so expert, men so well able, and our wits so subtle, that we
want nothing to understand, neither good, nor evil. And we undo ourselves by
seeking that vain knowledge, which is not necessary for our life. No man under
the pretense of ignorance can excuse his fault, since all men know, all men
read, and all men learn, that which is evident ^n this case, as it shall
appear.

Suppose the Plough-man, and the Learned-man, do go to the Law, and you shall
perceive the Labourer (under that simple garment) to forge to his Counselor
half a dozen of malicious tricks to delude his adversary as finely as the
other that is learned, shall be able to expound two or three Chapters of this
book. If men would employ their knowledge to honesty, wisdom, patience and
mercy, it were well: but I am sorry they know so much, only for that they
subtly deceive, and by usury abuse their neighbors, and keep that they have
unjustly gotten, and daily getting more, inuenting new trades: Finally, I say,
if they have any knowledge, it is not to amend their life, but rather to
increase their goods. If the devil could sleep, as me^ do, he might safely
sleep: for whereas he waketh to deceive us, we wake to undo our selves: Well,
suppose that all this heretofore I have said is true. Let us now leave aside
craft, and take in hand knowledge. The knowledge which we attain to is small,
and that which we should attain to so great, that all that we know, is the
least part of that we are ignorant: Even as in things natural, the Elements
have their operations, according to the variety of time: so moral Doctrines
(as the aged have succeeded) and sciences were discovered. Truly all fruits
come not together, but when one fails, another comes in season.

I mean, that neither all the Doctors among the Christians, nor all the
Philosophers among the Gentiles were concurrant at one time; but after the
death of one good, there came another better. The chief wisdom which measured
all things by justice, and dispearseth them according to his bounty, will not
that at one time they should be all Wisemen, and at another time all simple:
For it had not been reason that one should have had the fruit, and the other
the leaves.

The old world that ran in Saturnes days (otherwise called the golden world)
was of a truth much esteemed of them that saw it, and greatly commended of
them that wrote of it: That is to say, it was not guided by the Sages which did
guild it: but because there was no evil men, which did vnguilde it: For as the
experience of the mean estate and Nobility teaches us, of one only person
depends as well the fame and renown, as the infamy of a whole house and
parentage.

That age was called golden, that is to say, of gold: and this our age is
called iron, that is to say of iron. This difference was not, for that gold
then was found, and now iron: nor for The reason why this is called the
Iron-age.
that in this our age there is want of them that be sage: but because the
number of them surmounreth that be at this day malicious. I confess one thing,
and suppose many will favor me in the same.

Phauorin the Philosopher (which was master to Aulus Gelius, and his especial
friend) said oft-times, that the Philosophers in old time, were holden in
reputation: Because there were few teachers, and many learners: We now-adayes
see the contrary: For infinite are they which presume to be Masters: but
few are they which humble themselves to be Scholars. A man may know how
little Wisemen are esteemed at this hour, by the great veneration that the
Philosophers had, in the old time.

What a matter is it to see Homer amongst the Grecians, Solomon amongst the
Hebrews, Lycurgus amongst the Lacedaemonians: Phoromeus also amongst the
Greeks, Ptolomeus amongst the Egiptians, Liuius amongst the Romans: and
Cicero likewise amongst the Latins: Appolonius amongst the Indyans, and
Secundus, amongst the Assyrians?

How happy were those Philosophers, (to be as they were, in those days) when
the world was so full of simple persons, and so destitute of Sage men: that
there flocked great numbers out of diverse countries, and strange Nations, not
only to hear their doctrine: but also to see their persons.

The glorious Saint Hierome, in the prologue, to the Bible, says: When Rome
was in her prosperity, then wrote Titus Lyuius his deeds: yet
notwithstanding, men came to Rome, more to speak with Titus Linius, then to
see Rome, or the high capitol thereof. Marcus Aurelius writing to his friend
Pulio, said these words: Thou shall understand (my Friend,) I was not chosen
Emperor for the Noble blood of my predecessors: nor, for the favor I had
amongst them now present: For there were in Rome, of greater blood, and Riches
then I, but the (Emperor Adrian my Master) set his eyes upon me: and the
Emperor Anthony my Father in law, chose me for his Son in law: for none
other For what cause Marcus Aurelius was chosen Emperor.
cause, but for that they saw me a friend of the Sages, and an enemy of the
ignorant.

Happy was Rome to choose so wise an Emperor, and no less happy was he to
attain unto so great an Empire. Not for that he was heir to his
predecessors, but for that he gave his mind to study. Truly, if that Age
were then happy to enjoy his person: no less happy shall ours be now at
this present, to enjoy his doctrine. Salust says, they deserved great glory,
which did worthy feats: and no lesser merited they, which wrote them in high
style.

What had Alexander the great bin, if Quintus-Curtius had not written of him?
what of Ulysses, if Homer had not bin borne? what had Alcybiades bin, if
Zenophon had not exalted him? what of Cyrus, if the philosopher Chilo had not
put his acts in memory? what had been of Pyrrus king of the Epyrotes, if
Hermicles chronicles were not? what had bin of Scipio the great Affricane, if
it had not bin for the Decades of Titus Liuius? what had been of Traian, if the
renowned Plutarch had not bin his friend? what of Nerua, and Anthonius the
meek, if Phocion the Greek had not made mention of them? How should we have
known the stout courage of Caesar, and the great prowess of Pompeius, if
Lucanus had not written them? what of the twelve Caesar's, if Suetonius
Tranquillus had not compyled a book of their lives? And how should we have
known the antiquities of the Hebrews if the upright Joseph had not been?

Who could have known the coming of the Lombardes, into Italy, if Paulus
Dyaconus had not writ it? How could we have known the coming in, and the
going out of the Goths in Spain if the curious Roderious had not showed it
unto us?

By these things we have spoken of before, the Readers may perceive what is due
unto the Hystoriographers: who in my opinion, have left as great memory of
them, for that they wrote with their pens: as the Princes have done, for that
they did with their swords. I confess I deserve nor to be named amongst the
Sages, neither for that I have written and Translated, nor yet for that I have
composed.

Therefore (the Sacred and divine letters set aside) there is nothing in the
world so curiously written, but needs correction: and as I say of the one, so
will I say of the other, and that is: as I with my will do renounce the glory,
which the good for my learning would give me: so in like manner evil men
shall not want, that against my will seek to defame it.

We other writers, smally esteem that labor and pains we have to write,
although indeed we are not ignorant of a thousaund envious tongues, that will
backbite it.

Many now adays are so evil taught, or to say better, so envious, that when
the Author laboreth in his study, they play in the streets: when he awaketh,
they sleep, when he fasteth, they eat: when he sits turning the leaves of
the book: they go hunting after vices abroad: yet for all that, they will
presume to judge, deprave, and condemn an other man's doctrine, as if they had
the authority that Plato had in Greece, or the eloquence that Cicero had in
Rome.

When I find a man in the Latin tongue well seen, his vulgar tongue well
p^lished, in hystories well grounded, in Greeke-letters very expert, and
desirous to spend his time with good books: this so Heroical and noble a
personage, I would desire him to put my doctrine under his feet. For it is no
shame, for a virtuous and wise man, to be corrected of an other wise man. Yet I
would gladly know what patience can suffer, or heart can dissemble, when two or
three be assembled together at meat, and after (at the table or otherwise)
one of them takes a book at adventure in his hands against that which
another will say it is The diversity of men's opinions.
too long, and another will say, it speaks not to the purpose: another, it is
very obscure: and another, the words are not well couched: another will say,
all that is spoken is feigned; One will say, he speaks nothing of profit:
another, he is too curious, and the other, he is too malicious. So that in
speaking thus, the doctrine remains suspicious, and the Author scapeth not
scot-free.

Suppose them to be therefore such that speak it (as I have spoken of) and
that at the Table do find such faults, sure, they deserve pardon: for they
speak not according to the Books which they have read, but according to the
cups of wine which they have drunk: For that, He that takes not in jest
which is spoken at the Table, knows not what jesting means.

It is an old custom to murmr at virtuous deeds, and into this rule enters
not only those that make them, but also those which writethem afterward.

Which thing seems to be true, for that Socrates was reproved of Plato, Plato
of Aristotle, Aristotle of Auerois, Sicilius of Vulpitius, Lelius of Varro,
Marinus of Ptolomeus, Ennius of Horace, Seneca of Aulus Gelius, Crastonestes of
Strabo, Thessale of Gellian, Hermagoras of Cicero, Cicero of Salust, Origines
of Saint Hierome, Hierome of Rufinus, Rufinus of Donatus. Donatus of Prosper,
and Prosper of Lupus.

Then since that in these men, and in their works has been such need of
correction, which were men of great knowledge, and Lanternes of the World: It
is no marvel at all that I have such fortune, since I know so little as I do.
He may worthily One ought not rashly to condemn another man's writing.
be counted vain and light, which at the first sight, as for only once
reading, will rashly judge that which a wise man with much diligence and study
has written.

The Authors and Writers are often times reproved, not of them which can
translate, and compile works: but of those which cannot read, and yet less
understand them, to the intent simple folks should count them wise, and take
their parts in condemning this work, and esteem him for a great wise man. I
take God to witness who can judge, whether my intention were good or ill, to
compile this work, and also I lay this my doctrine at the feet of wise and
virtuous men, to the end they may be protectors, and defendours of the same:
For I trust in God, though some would come to blame (as diverse do) the simple
words which I spoke: yet others would not fail to relate the good intention
that I meant.

And to declare further I say, that diverse have written of the time of the
said Marcus Aurelius, as Herodian wrote little, Eutropius less, Lampridius
not so much, and Julius Capitolinus somewhat more.

Likewise ye ought to know, that the Masters which taught Marcus Aurelius
sciences, were Iunius Rusticus, Cinna Catullus, Sextus Cheronensis, which was
nephew to the great Plutarke.

These three were those, that principally, as witnesses of sight, wrote the
most part of his life and doctrine. Many may marvel to hear tell of the
doctrine of Marcus Aurelius, saying it has been kept hid and secret a great
while, and that of mine own head I have invented it. And that there never was
any Marcus Aurelius in the world. I know not what to say now unto them; for it
is evident to all those which have read any thing that Marcus Aurelius was
husband to Faustine, father to Comodus, brother to Anntus Verus, and son in
Law to Antoninus Pius, the seventh (of Rome) Emperor

Those which say, I only have made this doctrine, truly I thank them for so
saying, but not for their so meaning: For truly the Romans would have set my
Image in Rome for perpetual renown, if so grave sentences should have
proceeded from my head. We see that in our time which was never seen before,
and hear that we never heard before. We practice not in a new world, and yet
we marvel that there is at this present a new book.

Not for that I was curious to discover Marcus Aurelius, or studious to
translate him. For, truly it is worthy he be noted of wise persons, and not
accused of envious tongues. For, it chances oftentimes in Hunting, that the
most simplest man kills the Dear.

The last thing which the Romans conquered in Spain, was Cantabria, which
was a city in Navarre, over against La-grogne, and situated in a high
Country, where there is now a vain of Vines. And the Emperor Augustus which
destroyed it, made ten books, De Bello Cantabrico: wherein are many things
worthy of noting, and no less pleasant in reading, which happened unto him,
in the same conquest.

As Marcus Aurelius was brought me from Florence, so was this other book, Of
the wars of Cantabria, brought me from Colleyne. If perhaps I took pains
to Translate this book, as few have done which have seen it, they would
speak the like of it, that they did of Marcus Aurclius. Because men are so
long in speaking, and so brief in studying, that without any let or shame,
they will auowe no Book to be in the world this day, but that they have either
read, or seen it.

I have as much profited in this writing, which is humane: as other Doctors
have done in matters, which are divine. It is not translated word for word, but
sentence for sentence. For we other Enterpreters, are not bound to give words
by measure: but it suffices us to give Sentences by weight.

I began to study this work in the year, a thousand, five hundred, and
eyghteene: and until the year The time when the Author began to translate the
book of Marcus Aurelius.
a thousand five hundred, twenty and sour, I could neither understand, nor
know wherein I was occupied: and albeit I (kept it as secret as I could) for
the space of six years, yet it was known abroad: whereupon the Emperor his
Majesty, being with the Fever diseased, sent to me for it, to pass the time
away. And I (according to his commandment) showed him Marcus Aurelius that
then was uncorrected, and humbly beseeching him said: That for recompense of
all my trau^l^, I desired no other reward, but that no man in his Chamber
might copy the Book.

And in the mean time proceeded to accomplish the work, because I did not
mean in such manner to publish it: for otherwise, I said his Majesty should
be evil served, and I also of my purpose prevented: but my sins caused that
the Book was coppyed, The book of Marcus Aurelius, at the first imprinted,
without the knowledge of the Author.
and conveyed from one to another: and by the hands of Pages sunday times
written, so that there increased daily in it errors, and faults.

And since there was but one original copy, they brought it unto me to
correct: which if it could have spoken, would have complained it self, more of
them that did write it, then of those that did steal it.

And thus when I had finished the work, and thought to have published it: I
perceived that Marcus Aurelius was now imprinted at Seuill: And in this case, I
take the Readers to be judges, between me and the imprinters, because they may
see, whether it may stand with Law, and justice, that a Book which was to his
Imperial Majesty dedicated: the author thereof being but an jnfant, and the
book so imperfect and uncorrected, without my consent or knowledge should be
published.

Notwithstanding, they ceased not, but printed it again in Portugal, and also
in the Kingdom of Navarre: And if the first impression was faulty, truly the
second and the third were no less. So that which was written for the wealth
and good of all men generally, each man did apply to the profit of himself
particularly.

There chanced another thing of this book, called The golden book of Marcus
Aurelius, which I am ashamed to speak; but greater shame they should have,
that so dishonestly have done. That is: some made themselus to be authors of
the whole work: Others say, that part of it was made, and compyled of their
own heads: the which appears in a book in priut, wherein the author did
like a man void of all honesty, and in another book, one used likewise the
words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to Faustine, when she asked him the key of
his Study.

After these Thieves came to my knowledge, judge you whether it were enough to
prove my patience? For, I had rather they had robbed me of my goods, then
taken away my renown.

By this all men may see, that Marcus Aurelius was not then corrected, nor in
any place perfect, whereby they might perceive, that it was not my mind to
Translate Marcus Aurelius, but to make a Dyall for Princes: whereby all
Christian people may be governed and ruled. And as the doctrine is showed for
the use of many: so I would profit my self, with that which the wise men had
spoken and written. And in this sort proceeds the work, wherein I put one or
two chapters of mine, and after I put some Epistles of Marcus Aurelius, and
other doctrine of some Ancient men.

Let not the Reader be deceived, to think hat the one, and the other is of
the Author. For, although the phrase of the Language be mine, yet I confess
the greatest part that I knew, was of another man's, although the
Historiographers and Doctors, (with whom I was helped) were many: yet the
doctrine which I wrote, was but one.

I will not deny, but I have left out some things which were superfluous: in
whose stead I have placed things more sweet and profitable. So that it
needs good wits, to make which seems in one language to be gross, in
another to give it the appearance of gold.

I have divided into three books this present Dyall of Princes. The first
treats, that the Prince ought to be a good Christian.

The second, how he ought for to govern his wife and children.

The third teaches, how he should govern his person, and his Common wealth. I
had begun another book, wherein was contained, how a Prince should behave
himself in his Court and Palace, but the importunity of my friends, caused
me to withdraw my pen, to the end I might bring this work to light.

The end of the Argument.
A COMPENDIOUS TABLE OF ALL THE SEVERAL ARGVMENTS, contained in these distinct
Books of MARCUS AURELIUS. *
The first Book.
OF the Birth and Lineage of the vise Philosopher and Emperor, Marcus Aurelius.
Also of three several Chapters in the beginning of this book, concerning a
discourse of his life: for, by his Epistles and doctrine the whole course of
the present work is approved. Chap. 1. Fol. 1. Of a Letter sent by Marcus
Aurelius to his friend Pulio, wherein he declares the order of his whole
life. And (among other things) he makes mention of a thing which happened to
a Roman Censor, with his Host of Compagnia. chap. 2. fol. 5. The Letter
concluded by Marcus Aurelius, declaring at large what Science he had learned,
and all the Masters he had. Beside, he recites five notable things, in
observance whereof, the Romans were curious. chap. 3. fol. 8. Of the
excellency of Christian Religion, which manyfesteth the true God and disproueth
the vanity of the Ancients, in having so many gods. And that in the old times,
when enemies were reconciled in their houses, they caused also, that their gods
should embrace each other in their Temples. chap 4. fol. 13. How the
Philosopher Bruxelius was greatly esteemed among the Ancients for his life. And
of the words which he spoke to the Romans at the hour of his death. chap. 5.
fol. 15. chap. 6. fol. 16. How the Gentiles thought that one God could not
defend them from their enemies. And how the Romans sent throughout all the
Empire to borrow gods, when they fought against the Goths. chap. 7. fol. 17 Of
a Letter sent from the Senate of Rome to all the Subjects of the Empire. chap.
8. fol. 18. Of the true and living God. And of the maruailes wrought in the old
Law, to manifest his divine power. And of the superstition of the false and
feigned gods. chap 9. fol. 20. How there is but one true God: and how happy
those Realms are which have a good Christian to be their King. How the
Gentiles affirmed, that good Princes (after their death) were changed into
gods, and the wicked into Devils, which the Author proves by sundry examples.
chap. 10. fol. 23. Of sundry gods which the Ancients worshipped. Of the offices
of those gods: How they were revenged of such as displeased them. And of the
twenty elected gods. chap. 11. fol. 26. How Tiberius was chosen Governor of
the Empire, and afterward created Emperor, only for being a good Christian.
And how God deprived Justinian the younger, both of his Empire and senses,
because he was a perfidious heretic. chap. 12. fol. 29 Of other more natural
and peculier gods, which the ancient people had and adored. chap. 13. fol. 32
What words the Empress Sophia spoke to Tiberius Constantinus, then being
Governor of the Empire, reproving him for lauishly consuming the Treasure of
the Empire, gotten by her chap. 14. fol. 36 The answer of Tiberius to the
Empress Sophia Augusta, declaring that Noble Princes need not hoord up
treasures. And of the hidden treasure which this good Emperor foundeby
revelation, in the Palace where he remained. chap. 15. fol. 38 How the Captain
Narsetes overcame many Battles, only by reposing his whole confidence in
God. And what happened to him by the Empress Sophia Augusta; relating the
unthankfulness of Princes toward their servants. chap. 16. fol 41 Of a letter
which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to the King of Scicille, remembering the
travels they had endured together in their youth, and reprooning him for his
small reverence to the Temples ch, 17, fo. 46 The Emperors prosecution in his
Letter, admonishing Princes to be fearful of their Gods. And of the sentence
which the Senate gave upon the King for pulling down the church. chapter 18 f. 49
How the Gentiles honored those that were devout in the service of their gods,
chap. 19 fol: 52 Of five causes why Princes ought to be better christians then
their subjects. chapter 20 fol. 55 What the Philosopher Bias was: Of his constancy
when he had lost all his goods. And of the ten laws he gave, deserving to be
had in perpetual memory, chap 21 59 Questions demanded of the Philosopher
Bias. fol. 61 The laws which Bias gave to the Prienenses, 62 How God from the
beginning punished men by his justice, and especially those Princes that
despised his church: and how all wicked Christians are Parishioners of hell, chapter
22 63 Of twelve examples why Princes are sharply punished, when they usurp
boldly upon churches, and violate their temples, chapter 23 65 Why the children of
Aaron were punished. eodem The cause why the Azotes were punished, eodem The
cause why Prince Oza was punished, 66. Why King Balthazar was punished, 67 Why
King Ahab was punished, 69 Why King Manasses was punished, cod. Why Julius,
Pompey, Xerxes, Cateline, Germanicus and Brennus were punished, 70 How
Valentine the Emp. because he was an evil Christian, in one day lost both the
Empire and his life, chapter 24 72 Of the Emp. Valentinian and Gratian, his son,
which reigned in the time of S. Ambrose, and because they were good Christians,
were always fortunate, and how God gives victory to Princes, more by the
tears of them that pray, then through the weapons of the^ that fight, chapter 25 76
Of the goodly Oration which the Em Gratian made to his Soldiers before he
gave the battle, chapter 26 78 Of the Captain Theodosius who was father to the
great Emp. Theodosius, died a good Christian. Of the K. Hismarus, and the
Bishop Siluanus, and the laws which they made and established, chapter 27 60 What
a happy thing it is to have but one Prince to rule the public weal: for there
is no greater enemy to the Commonweal, then he which procures many to
command therein, chapter 28 84 That in a public weal, there is no greater
destruction, then where Princes daily consent to new orders, and make an
alteration of ancient customs, chapter 29 f. 88 When Tirants began to reign, and
upon what occasion commanding and obeying first began, and how the authority
which a Prince has, is by the ordinance of God, chap. 30 91 Of the golden age
in times past: and worldly misery at this present, chapter 31 94 How K. Alexander
the Great, after he had overcome K. Darius in Asia, went to conquer the great
India, and of that which happened to him with the Garamantes, and that purity of
life has more power then force of war, chapter 32 96 Of an Oration which one of
the Sages of Garamantia made unto K. Alexander, a good lesson for ambitious
me^, chapter 33. 98 A continuation of the sage Garamants Oration, and among other
notable matters he makes mention of seven laws which they observed, chap. 34
101 That Princes ought to consider for what cause they were made Princes: What
Thales the Philosopher was, and of 12 questions demanded of him, and his
answer. c. 35. 104 What Plutarch the Philosopher was, Of the wise words he
spoke to the Emperor Traiane: and how a good Prince is the head of the
publique-weale. chap. 36. fo: 108 As there are two Senses in the Head, Smelling
and Hearing: So likewise, a Prince, who is the head of the Commonweal, ought
to hear the complaints of all his subjects, and should know them all, to
recompense their services, ch: 37. fol. 111 Of the great Feast which the
Romans celebrated to the God Ianus the first day of January. And of the
bounty and liberality of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius the same day, chap. 38
114 Of the answer which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius made to the Senator
Fuluius before all the Senate; being reproved by him, for the familiarity he
used to all men, contrary to the majesty and authority of the Roman Emperor,
wherein he painteth envious men, chapter 39 fol. 118 Of a Letter which the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Pulio; declaring the opinion of
certain Philosophers concerning the felicity of man. chap. 40. 124 Of the
Philosopher Epicurus, fol. 129 Of the Philosopher Eschilus. 131 Of the
Philosopher Pindarus, 132 Of the Philosopher Zeno, 133 Of the Philosopher
Anacharsis, 134 Of the Sarmates, 135 Of the Philosopher Chilo, 137 Of the
Philosophers Crates, Stylphas, Simonides, Gorgias, Architas, Chrysippus,
Antistenes, Sophocles, Euripides, Palemon, Themistocles, Aristides, and
Heraclius. 138. 139 That Princes and great Lords ought not to esteem
themselves for being fair, and well proportioned, chap. 41 140 Of a letter
written by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius to his Nephew, worthy to be noted of
all young Gentlemen, chap. 42 146 How Princes and great Lords in old time were
lovers of men that were wise and learned. chap. 43 153 How the Emperor
Theodosius provided wise men at the hour of his death for the education of his
two noble sons, Archadius and Honorius, chap. 44 158 How Cresus King of Lidia
was a great friend and lover of Wise men. Of a letter which the same Cresus
wrote to the Philosopher Anacharsis, and an other letter of the Philosophers
answer to him, chap. 45 162 Of the wisdom and sentences of Phalaris the
tyrant: And how he put an artezan to death for devising new torments chap. 46
166 The letter of Phalaris the tirant, which was sent to Popharco the
Philosopher. 169 Of several great and powerful Kings who were all of them
true friends and lovers of the Sages, chap. 47. 170 The letter of King Philip
to Aristotle the Philosopher: 172
The second Book.
Of what excellency marriage is, and whereas common people marry of freewill,
Princes and noble men ought to marry upon necessity and vrgencie. chap. 1 177
How the Author prosecuting his purpose of marriage, declares that by means
thereof many mortal enemies have been made good and perfect friends. c. 2. f.
180 Of diverse and sundry laws which the Ancients had in contracting matrimony,
not only in the choice of women, but also in the manner of celebrating
marriage. chap. 3 183 How princesses and great Ladies ought to love their
husbands: and that love ought not to be procured by coniurations and
enchantments, but by wisdom honesty, and virtue desired, chapter 4. 187 Of the
revenge which a woman of Greece took on him that had killed her husband, as
hoping to enjoy her in marriage, chap. 5. 189 That Princesses and great Ladies
ought to be obedient to their husbands: and how great shame it is to the
husband that his wife should command him. chapter 6. 194 That women (especially
princesses and great Ladies) should be very circumspect in going abroad out of
their houses: and that they should not deserve to be ill spoken of by such as
resort to their houses: chap. 4 198 Of the commodities and discommodities which
follow princes and great Ladies that go abroad to visit, or abide in their
houses, chap. 8 200 That women great with child (especially princesses and
great Ladies ought to be circumspect for the danger of creatures, wherein is
shown many misfortunes happening to women with child in old time, chap. 9 202
Of other inconveniences, and unlucky mischances which have happened to women
with child, chap. 10 207 That women great with child (especially princesses and
great Ladies) ought to be gently used of their husbands c. 11. 209 What the
philosopher Pisto was: and of the rules he gave concerning women with child,
chap. 12 212 Of three counsels which Lucius Seneca gave unto a Secretary his
friend who served the Emperor Nero; And how the Emp. M. Aurelius spent the
hours of the day. chap. 13 214 The importunity of the Empress Faustine to the
Emperor, concerning the keye of his closet, chap. 14 219 The answer of the
Emperor to Faustine, concerning her demand for the key of his study, chap. 15
223 Of great dangers ensuing to men, by excessive haunting the company of women
And of certain rules for married men, which if they observe, may cause them to
live in peace with their wives, chap. 16 228 A more particular answer of the
Emperor to Faustine, concerning the key of his study, chap. 17 235 That
Princesses and noble women ought not to be ashamed to give their children suck
with their own breasts, chap. 18 239 A further continued persuasion of the
Author, that women should give their own children suck. chap. 19 242 That
Princesses and great Ladies ought to be very circumspect in choice of their
Nurses: and of seven especial properties which a good Nurse should have. cha.
20 249 Of three other especial conditions, which a good Nurse ought to have,
that gives suck. chap. 21 254 Of the disputations before Alexander the Great,
concerning the time of the sucking of babes, chap. 22 259 Of sundry kinds of
Sorceries, charms, and witchcrafts which they (in old time) used, in giving
their children suck, which in Christians ought to be avoided. chapter 23. fol. 260
Of a letter which Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Dedalus, inueighing
against such women, as use to cure children by sorceries, charms, and
enchantments, chapter 24 264 How excellent a thing it is for gentlemen to have an
eloquent tongue, chapter 25 270 Of a letter which the Athenians sent to the
Lacedaemonians, chap. 26 273 That Nurses which give suck to the children of
Princes ought to be discreet and sage women, chap. 27 275 That women may be
no less wise then men, and though they be not, it is not through the defect of
nature, but rather for want of good bringing up, chap. 28. 279 Of a letter
which Pythagoras sent to his sister Theoclea, he being in Rhodes, and she in
Samcthrace, both studying Philosophy, chap. 29 281 A further persuasion of the
Author, to Princesses and other great Ladies, to endeavor themselves to be
wise, like as the women in elder times were, c. 30. 282 Of the worthiness of the
Lady Cornelia, and of a notable Epistle which she wrote to her two sons,
serving in the wars, Tiberius and Caius, dissuading them from the pleasurs of
Rome, and exhorting them to endure the travels of war. chap. 31. 288 The Letter
of Cornelia to her two sons, Tiberius and Caius 289 Of the education and
doctrine of children while they are young, with a declaration of many notable
histories, c. 32. 294 Princes ought to take heed that their children be not
brought up in pleasures and vain delights: because oftentimes they are so
wicked, that the fathers would not only have them with sharp discipline
corrected, but also with bitter tears buried, chap. 33, 302 How Princes and
great Lords ought to be careful, in seeking wise men to bring up their
children: Of ten conditions which good Schoolmasters ought to have, chap. 34.
309 Of the two children of Marcus Aurelius the best whereof dyed, And of the
masters he provided for the other, chap. 35. 317 Of the words which Marcus
Aurelius spoke to 5. of the 14. masters, which he had chosen for the education
of his son: And how he dismissed them from his palace, because they behaved
the^selus lightly at the feast of their god Genius, c. 36. 322 That Princes and
noble men ought to ouersee the tutors of their children, least they should
conceal the secret faults of their scholar, chap. 37. 326 Of the
determination of the Emperor when he committed his child to the tutors, chap.
38 331 Tutors of Princes and noble men's children ought to be very circumspect
that their scholars do not accustom themselus in vices while they be young, but
especially to be kept from 4. vices. chap. 39, 343 Of two other vices,
perilous in youth, which their masters ought to keep them from, chap. 40 348
The third Book.
How Princes and great Lords ought to travel in administering justice to all
men equally, chap. 1 353 The way that Princes ought to use, for choice of
Judges and Officers, in their Countries. chap. 2 fol: 357 A villain argues
(in an Oration) against the Romans, who (without cause or reason) had
conquered his Country: Approouing mainifestly, that through offending the
Gods, they had thus prevailed. And the Oration is divided into chapt: 3. fol.
362. ch: 4. fol: 366. And ch: 5. f: 366 That Princes and Noblemen ought to be
very circumspect, in choice of their Judges and Officers: because therein
consists the benefit of the weal public. chapt: 6. fol: 373 Of a Letter
which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his friend Antigonus, answering an
other, which he sent him out of Scicile, concerning the cruelty, exercised by
the Roman Judges. The letter is divided in chap: 7. fol 379. cha: 8. fol.
381. chap: 9. fol. 385 chapt: 10. fo. 387 cha: 11. fol. 391 An exhortation of
the Author, unto great Princes and Noblemen to embrace peace, and to avoid
all occasions of war. chap: 12 fol. 394 Of the commodities which ensue by
peace: declaring that diverse Princes (upon light occasions) have made cruel
wars, chap: 13 fol. 397 The Emperor Marcus Aurelius writes to his friend
Cornelius; wherein he describes the discomodities which come by wars, and
the vanity of Triumphs, Chap: 14 fol. 406 Marcus Aurelius proceeds on
further in his letter, declaring the order which the Romans used in setting
forth their men of war. And of the outrageous villainyes which Captains and
Soldiers use in war. chap: 15 fo. 408 The Emperors further pursuit in the
same letter, showing what great damages have ensued, by war begun with
strange and foreign Realms. ch: 16 fo. 409 Ad admonition of the Author, to
Princes and great Lords, to the intent that the more they grow in years, the
more they stand bound to refrain from vices, ch: 17. 415 That Princes when they
are aged, should be temperate in eating, sober in drinking, modest in apparel
(and above al things else) true in their communication: ch: 18. fo. 418 Of a
letter written by the Emperor M. Aurelius, to Claudius and Claudinus,
reproving them (being old men) because they lived over youthfully, chap: 19,
fo. 423 A prosecution of the Emperors letter, persuading Claudius and
Claudinus (being now aged) to give no more credit to the world: nor to any of
his deceiptfull flatteries. chap: 20. fol: 430 A further continuation of the
Emperor in the same Letter, approouing by good reasons, that in regard aged
persons will be served and honored of younger people: they ought therefore to
be more virtuous and honest, then they of younger degree. chap: 21. fol: 433
The Emperors conclusion of his Letter, showing what perils those old men
live in, that dissolutely (like young Children) spend their days: And he
gives wholesome council unto them, for better means and remedy thereof: ch:
22. 438 How Princes ought to take heed, that they be not noted guilty of
Avarice, because the Covetous man is hated, both of God and man. ch: 24 441
Great reasons to discommend the vices of covetous men. ch: 24 444 Of a letter
which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his friend Cincinnatus, who being a
Roman Knight, became a Merchant of Capua, reproouing such Gentlemen, as take
upon them the trade of Marchaundise, contrary to their own vocation;
declaring what virtuous men ought to use, and the vices which they ought to
shun: instructing also, how to despise the vanities of the world; And
although a man be never so wise, yet he shall have need of another man's
council. ch: 25. fol: 447. c. 26. fo. 449. c. 27. 451. A persuasion to Princes
and great Lords to shun covetousness, and to become liberal and bountiful:
which virtue should always appertain to a Royal personage. chap: 28 fol. 454
A persuasion to Gentlemen, and such as follow Arms, not to abase themselves
for gaynes-sake, in taking upon them any vile office or function. chapter 29 458 Of
a Letter which the Emperor wrote to his Neighbor Mercurius, a Merchant of
Samia: instructing men in those dangers, which ensue by traffic on the Seas,
and the covetousness of them that Travel by Land. chap: 30 461 The conclusion
of the Emperors Letter, reproving Mercurius, because he took thought for the
loss of his goods: Showing him the nature of Fortune, and conditions of
covetous men. ch: 31 fol: 464 That Princes and Noblemen ought to consider the
misery of man's nature: And that brute Beasts are in some points (reason
excepted) to be preferred with men: chapt. 32. fol. 466 A further comparison
of the miseryes of men, with the liberty of beasts, ch: 33. 469 A letter of the
Emperor M. Aurelius, to Domitius, a citizen of Capua, comforting him in his
Exile: being banished for a quarrel between him and an other, about the
running of a Horse. Comfortable for such as have bin in great favor, and
afterward fallen into disgrace. chapter 34 fo. 474 That princes and Noble men ought
to be advocates for widows, fathers of Orphans, and helps to the
comfortless, chap. 35 479 That the troubles, sorrows and griefs of widows
are much greater then those of Widdowers: wherefore Princes and Noble men ought
to have more compassion upon such women then men, chapter 36 fol. 462 Of a letter
which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to a Roman Lady, named Lauinia,
comforting her in her husbands death, chapter 37 486 A persuasion to widows to
depend only upon Gods will, and exhorting them to live honestly. chap. 38 489
That Princes and Noble men ought to despise the world, because there is nothing
in it but plain deceit. chapter 39: 493 A vehement inuectiue against the deceites
of the world, with a further proof by strong and weighty reasons, persuading
all men that live in the world not to trust it, or any thing therein, verefied
by a letter of the Emperor to his friend Torquatus, chap. 40. 41. 42. fol.
498. 501. 504 Princes and Nobles ought not to bear with Iuglers, Iesters,
parasites and common players, nor with any such kind of rascals, and loyterers:
And of the Laws which the Romans made especially on that behalf, chap. 43
507 How some Iesters were punished by our grave Ancients: and of the Iesters
and loyterers in our time, chap 44. 510 Of a letter which the Emperor wrote to
Lambartus his friend then Governor of Hellespont, certifying him that he had
banished from Rome all fools and loy terieg players: a notable lesson for them
that keep counterfeit fools in their houses, chap. 45 514 Marcus Aurelius
proceeds on in his letter, declaring how he found the Sepulchers in
Hellespont of many learned philosophers whereunto he sent all those loiterers,
chap. 46 517 The Letters conclusion, relating the cause and time, why and when
Iuglers and Iesters were admitted into Rome. chapter 47. 520 How Princes and Noble
men ought to remember that they are mortal, and must die, with notable
consolations against the fear of death, chap. 48. 522 Of the death of the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius and how there are few friends that dare speak the
truth to sick men, chap. 40 527 Of the comfortable words which the Secretary
Panutius spoke to the Emperor at the hour of his death, chapter 50 531 A
continuation of the Secretaries speeches; admonishing all men to embrace death
willingly, and utterly to forsake the world, and his alluring vanities c. 51.
534 The answer of the Emperor Marcus to his Secretary Panutiu, declaring that
he took no thought to forsake the world: But all his sorrow was, to leave
behind him an unhappy son to enherite the Empire, chap. 52 588 The Emperors
conclusion of the matter in question, showing that sundry young Princes, by
being vicious, have undone themselves, and impouerished their Realms, chap. 53
541 Of the words which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius spoke to his son
Commodus at the hour of his death, very necessary for all young Gentlemen to
understand, chap. 54 545 Other wholesome counsels given by the Emperor to his
son, and (above all) to keep wise and learned men about him to assist him
with advise in all his affairs, chap. 55 550 The Emperors prosecution still
in the same Argument, with particular exhortations to his son; well deserving
to be engraven in the heart of men; chapter 56 554 The good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, concludes both his purpose and life. And of the last words he spoke
to his son Commodus, and the Table of Counsel he gave him. chap. 57 557
The fourth Book.
The Prologue of the work, declaring what one true friend ought to do for
another, 563 A few precepts and counsels meet to be remembered by all such as
are Princes familiars, and affected Courtiers. 572 The Argument of the Book
entitled, The Favored Courtier, declaring the intent of the whole work, 575
How it is more necessary for the Courtier (abiding in Court) to be of lively
spirit and audacitie; then it is for the Soldier that goes to serve in the
wars, c. 1. 592 Of Courtiers brawles and quarrels with Harbingers for their
ill lodgings, c. 2. 592 How the Courtier should entreat his Host, or master of
the house where he lodges, chap. 3 589 What Courtier^ must do to win their
Princes favor, chap. 4. 601 What manners and gestures do best become a
Courtier when he speaks to his Prince, chapter 5. 607 How a Courtier should
behave himself, both to know, and to visit Noblemen and Gentlemen that are
great with the Prince, and continuing still in Court, Chap. 6 612 What
countenance and modesty becomes a Courtier for his behavior at the Princes
or Noble man's table, during the time of his meal, chapter 7 617 What company the
Courtier should keep, and how he ought to apparel him self, chap. 8: 624 In
what manner the Courtier should serve and honor Ladies and Gentlewomen: also
how to satisfy and please the Vshers and Porters of the Kings house, chap. 9,
631 Of the great pains and travels which the Courtier has, being toiled in
suites of law, And how he is to suffer, and carry himself with Judges, chap.
10 637 Of them that are affected in Court, admonishing them to be pacient in
their troubles, and that they be not partial in the affairs of the common
wealth, chap. 11 644 That Officers, and such as are affected in Court, should
be very diligent and careful in dispatching the Princes affairs, and
Commonwealth: Also, that in correcting, and reforming of Servants, they ought
to be as circumspect and advised, Chap. 12 fol: 649 That affected and esteemed
Courtyers ought to be wary, of being proud, and high-minded: for lightly
they never fall, but only by means of that detestable vice. Chap: 13 fol. 659
That it is not fit for Courtyers to be ouer-couetous, if they mean to keep
themselves out of many troubles and dangers: chap: 14 fol. 670 That favored
Courtyers should not trust overmuch to their favor and credit in Court, nor
to the prosperity of their lives. chap: 15 fo. 677 An admonition to such as
are highly in favor with Princes, to take heed of the worlds deceyts:
learning both to live and dye honorably; and to leave the Court, before Age
over take them, chapter 16. fol. 684 What continency ought to be in favored
courtyers, always shunning the company of dishonest women: also to be careful
in the speedy dispatch of suitors suing unto them. chap: 17 fol. 691 That
Nobles, and affected of Princes, should not exceed in superfluous fare, nor
be ouer-sumptuous in their Diet. chapt. 18. fol. 698 That courtiers favored of
Princes, ought not to be dishonest of their Tongues, nor envious in their
words. chap. 19 fo. 709 A comendation of Truth, which professed courtyers
ought to embrace: And (in no respect) to be found defective, in the contrary,
reporting one thing for an other. chap. 20. fo. 718
Certain other Letters, written by M. Aurelius.
Of the huge Monster, seen in Scicile, in the time of M. Aurelius; and of the
letters he wrote with blood upon a gate. ch: 1. 727 Of that which chanced unto
Antigonus a citizen of Rome, in the time of Marcus Aurelius: chap: 2 fol: 729
How M. Aurelius sought the wealth of his people, and how they loved him. c. 3.
730 How at the intercession of many, sent by the Empress, the Emperor
granted his daughter Lucilla license, to sport herself at the Feasts. chap: 4
fo. 732 Of the sharp words which M. Aurelius spoke to his wife, and his
daughter. c 5. 734 A letter sent by the Emperor M. Aurelius, to Catullus
Censorius, concerning the news then in Rome. cha: 6 740 M. Aurelius his
letter, written to the amourous Ladies of Rome, chapter 7 747 A letter sent by M.
Aurelius, to his love Boemia, because she desired to go with him to the
wars, chap. 8 752 The answer of Boemia, to the Emperor M. Aurelius,
expressing the great malice, and little patience in an evil woman. c. 9 755 A
letter of M. Aurelius, to the Roman Lady Macrine, of whom (beholding her at a
window) he became enamoured: declaring what force the beauty of a fair Woman
has in a weak man, chapter 10 760 An other letter, sent by him, to the same
Macrina, expressing the fiery flames, which soonest consume gentle hearts. ch:
11. 761 A letter sent by him to the lady Lauinia; reproving Love to be
natural: And affirming that the most part of Philosophers and wisemen, have
been overcome by Love, chap: 12 fol: 763.
The end of the Table.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE DIAL OF PRINCES, WITH the famous Book of Marcus
Aurelius, wherein he entreats what excellency is in a Prince that is a good
Christian: and contrariwise, what evils do follow him that is a cruel Tyrant.
CHAP. I. Here the Author speaks of the birth and lynage of the wise
Philosopher and Emperor Marcus Aurelius. And he puts also at the beginning
of this Book three Chapterss, wherein he entreats of the discourse of his
life: for by his Epistles and Doctrine, the whole course of this present work
is approved.
AFter the death of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, in the 695. years from the
foundation of Rome, and in the 173. Olimpiade: Fuluius Cato, and Cneus
Patroclus, then being Consuls: the fourth day of October, in the high Capitol
of Rome, at the suit of the whole Roman people, and with the assent of the
sacred Senate, Marcus Aurelius Antonius was proclaimed Emperor universal of
the whole Roman Monarchy.

This noble Prince was naturally Marcus Aurelius a Roman born.
of Rome borne, in the mount Celio, on the sixth day before the Calends of May,
which (after the Latins account) is the 26. day of April. His Grandfather was
called Annius Verus, and was chosen Senator in the time of the Emperors Titos
and Vespasian. His great Grandfather was named Annius Verus, which was borne in
Spain, in the free town of Gububa, when the wars were most cruel between
Caesar and Pompeius: at what time many Spaniards fled to Rome, and many
Romans ran into Spain. By this means this Emperor had a great
Grandfather, a Roman, and a great Grandmother, a Spaniard. His Father was
named Annius Verus after his Grandfather, and Great Grandfather, by reason
whereof the ancient Historiographers call him Marcus Antonius Verus.

And true it is, that the Emperor Adrian called him Marcus Verissimus, for
that he never forged lie, nor swarued at any time from the truth. These Annti
Very were a kindred in Rome (as Julius Capitolinus reports) which vaunted
themselves to come of Numa Pompelius, and Quintus Curtius the famous Roman:
which (to work the Roman people safety and his own person everlasting
memory) willingly threw himself into the Gulf, A (...) to ^l Rome.
which afterward was called Curtius, which as then was seen in Rome. This
Emperors mother was called Domitta Camilla, as recounteth Cinna in the books
that he wrote of the Roman pedigrees. That stock of Camilli, was in those
days highly honored in Rome: for that they conuayed their descent from that
Camillus, which was the renowned and valiant Roman Captain, who delivered
Rome when the Gauls had taken it, and besieged the Capitol. The men that
sprang of this lineage, bare the name of Camilli, for remembrance of this
Camillus. And the woman that came of the same stock kept the name of Camilla,
in memory of a daughter of the said Camillus. This Camilla refused marriage, and
chose to live among the vastall virgins: and there long space remained,
enduring a sharp and hard life. And she was so virtuous a Roman, and precise
in her life, that in the time of Seuerus Emperor of Rome, her Tomb was
honored as a Relic, whereon was engraued this Epitaph.

Camillus lo, does here engraued rest,
That only was Camillus daughter dear: The Epitaph on the grave of Camilla,

Twice twenty years and six she has possessed
A covert life, untouched of any feere.
The King of Trinacry could not her move
To taste the sweet delight of Wedlocks band:
Nor train by suit her sacred mind to love.
Inclosd^ in breast so deep did chastnesse stand,
But oh, great wrong the crawling worms below,
To gnaw on that unspotted senseless corse
That rage of youth spent undefiled so
With sober life in spite of Cupids force,
And this was written in Heroycall verse in the Greek tongue, with a
marvelous haughty style. But to our matter, ye shall understand, that the
Romans kept a certain Law in the 12. Tables, the words whereof were these:

We ordain and command, that all the Romans shall for ever have special A
worthy law among the Romans.
privilege in every such place, where their ancestors have done to the Roman
people any notable service. For it is reason that where the Citizen aduentureth
his life, there the City should do him some honor after his death. By virtue
of this law all the family of Camilli ever enjoyed the keeping of the high
Capitol, for that (by his force and policy) he chased the French men from the
siege. Truly, it is not unknown, that this noble Knight and valiant Captain
Camillus did other things as great, and greater then this; but because it was
done within the circuit of Rome, it was esteemed above all his other acts and
prowess. And herein the Romans swarued not far from reason, for that, amongst
all princely virtues, is esteemed to be the chiefest and worthiest, which is
employed to the profit of the commonwealth. The Roman Chronaclers with tears
cease not to lament the ruin of their Country, seeing that variety of time, the
multitude of Tyrants, the cruelty of civil wars, were occasion that the
ancient state of the Roman government, came to utter destruction, and in
stead thereof a new and evil trade of life to be placed. And hereof no man
ought to Chaunges of rulers breed flor^ of vices.
marvel, for it chances throughout all Realms and Nations, by often changing
governors, that among the people daily springs new vices.

Pulto says, That for no alteration which befell to the common weal, for no
calamity that ever Rome suffered, that privilege was taken away from the
lineage of Camilli, (I mean the government of the high Capitol) except it were
in the time of Silla the Consul, when this family was sore persecuted, for
none other cause but for that they favored the Consul Marius. This cruel
Silla being dead, and the pitiful Julius Caesar preuayling, all the banished
men from Rome returned home again to the commonwealth.

As touching the Ancestors of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, what has been
their trade of life, estate, poverty, or riches, standing in favor or
displeasure, what prosperity or adversity they have had or suffered, we find
not in writings, though with great diligence they have been searched for. And
the cause hereof was, for that the ancient writers of the Roman Histories,
touched the lives of Concerning the Father of Marcus Aurelius.
the Emperors fathers (specially when they were made Princes) more for the good
merits that were in the children, then for the great estimation that came from
the Fathers; Julius Capitolinus says, That Annius Verus (father of Marcus
Aurelius) was praetor of the Rhodian Armies, and also warden in other Frontiers
in the time of Trayan the good, Adrian the wise, and Anthony the merciful.
Which Emperors trusted none with their Armies, but discreet and valiant men.
For good Princes chose always such Captains, as can with wisdom guide the
Army, and with valiantnes give the battle. Though the Romans had sundry wars
in diverse places, yet chiefly they kept great Garrisons always in four parts
of the world. That is to say, in Bizantium (which now is Constantinople) to
resist the Parthiens: in Gades, (which now is called Galizia) to withstand the
Portugales: in the river of Rein to defend The Romans four Garrisons.
themselves from the Germans: and at Colossus (which now is called the I Will of
Rhodes) for to subdue the Barbarians.

In the month of January, when the Senate distributed their offices,
Distribution of offices.
the Dictator being appointed for six months, and the two Consuls chosen for
one year: incontinently in the third place, they chose four of the most
renowned persons to desend the said four dangerous Frontiers. For the Romans
neither feared the pains of hell nor trusted for reward in heaven: but sought
by all occasions possible in their life time to leave some notable memory of
them after their death. And the Roman was counted most valiant, and of the
Senate best favored, to whom they committed the charge of the most cruel and
dangerous wars. For their strife was not to bear rule, and to be in office,
or to get money: but to be in the Frontiers, to overcome their enemies.

In what estimation these four Frontiers were, we may easily perceive,
Honorable Armies of the Romans
by that we see the most noble Romans have passed some part of their youth in
those places as Captains, until such time that (for more weighty affairs)
they were appointed from thence to some other places. For at that time there was
no word so grievous and injurious to a Citizen, as to say, Go thou have never
been brought up in the wars: and to prove the same by examples. The great
Pompey passed the Winter season in Constantinople: The aduenturous Scipio in
Colonges, the courageous Caesar in Gades, and the renowned Marius in Rhodes.
And these four were not only in the Frontiers aforesaid in their youth, but
there they did such valiant acts, that the memory of them remains evermore
after their death. These things I have spoken to prove, since we find that
Marcus Aurelius father was Captain of one of these 4. Frontiers: it follows,
that he was a man of singular wisdom and prowess. For as Scipio said to his
friend Masinissa in Affrike, It is not possible for a Roman Captain to want
either wisdom or courage, for thereunto they were predestined at their birth.
We have no authenticke authorities, that shows us from whence, when, or how,
in what countries, Gb^^uation among the Roman Antiquaries
and with what persons this captain passed his youth. And the cause is, for
that the Roman Chroniclers were not accustomed to write the things done by
their Princes, before they were created, but only the acts of young men, which
from their youth had their hearts stoutly bent to great adventures: and in my
opinion it was well done. For it is greater honor to obtain an Empire by
policy and wisdom, then to have it by descent, so that there be no tyranny.
Suetonius Tranquillus in his first book of Emperors, counts at large the
aduenturous enterprises taken in hand by Julius Caesar in his young age, and how
far unlikely they were from thought, that he should ever obtain the Roman
Empire; writing this to show unto Princes, how earnestly Julius Caesar's heart
was bent to win the Roman Monarchy, and likewise how wisdom failed him in
behauing himself therein.

A Philosopher of Rome, wrote to Phalaris the Tirant, which was in Cicilia, The
answer of Phalaris to a Roman Philosopher
asking him, Why he possessed the realm so long by tyranny? Phalaris answered
him again in another Epistle in these few words. Thou call me tyrant,
because I have taken this realm, and kept it 32. years. I grant then, (quoth
he) that I was a tyrant in usurping it: For no man occupyeth another man's
right, but by reason he is a tyrant: But yet I will not agree to be called a
Tyrant, since it is now xxxii. years since I have possessed it. And though I
have achieved it by tyranny, yet I have governed it by wisdom. And I let thee
to understand, that to take another man's goods, it is an easy thing to
conquer, but a hard thing to keep an easy thing: for to keep them, I ensure
thee it is very hard. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius married the daughter of
Antoninus Pius, the 16. Emperor of Rome, and she was named Faustina, who as
sole Heir had the Empire, and so through marriage Marcus Aurelius came to be
Emperor. This Faustine was not so honest and chaste, as she was fair and
beautiful. She had by him two sons, Commodus and Verissimus.

Marcus Aurelius triumphed twice, The triumphs of Marcus Aurelius.
once when he overcame the Parthians, and another time when he conquered the
Argonants. He was a man very well learned, and of a deep understanding. He
was as excellent both in the Greek and Latin, as he was in his mothers
tongue. He was very temperate in eating and drinking, he wrote many things
full of good learning and sweet sentences. He dyed in conquering the realm of
Pannonia, which is now called Hungary. His death was as much bewailed, as his
life was desired. And he was loved so dear and entirely in the City of Rome,
that every Roman had a statue of him in his house, to the end the memory of
him (among them) should never decay. The which was never read that they ever
did for any other King or Emperor of Rome, no not for Augustus Caesar, who was
best beloved of all other Emperors of Rome.

He governed the Empire for the space of eighteen year with upright justice,
and died at the age of 63 years with much honor, in the year Climatericke,
which is in the 63. years wherein the life of man runs in great peril. For
then are accomplished the nine seuens, or the seven nines. Aulus Gelius writes
a Chapter The Climateriall years of man's life.
of this matter, in the book De noctibus Atticis. Marcus Aurelius was a
Prince, of life most pure, of doctrine most profound, and of fortune most happy
of all other Princes in the world, save only for Faustine his wife, and
Commodus his son. And to the end we may see what Marcus Aurelius was from his
infancy, I have put here an Epistle of his, which is this.

CHAP. II. Of a letter which Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Pulio, wherein
he declares the order of his whole life: and amongst other things, he makes
mention of a thing that happened to a Roman Censor, with his Host of Campagnia.
MAreus Aurelius, only Emperor of Rome, greeteth thee his old friend Pulio,
wishes health to thy person, and peace to the commonwealth. As I was in the
Temple of the Vestall Virgins, a letter of thine was presented unto me, which
was written long before, and greatly desired of me: but the best thereof is,
that thou writing unto me briefly, desire that I should write unto thee at
large: which is indecent for the authority of him that is chief of the Empire,
in especial, if such one be covetous: for to a Prince there is no greater
infamy then to be lavish of words, and scant of rewards. Thou writest to me of
the grief in thy leg, and that thy wound is great: and truly the pain thereof
troubles me at my heart, and I am right sorry that thou want that which is
necessary for thy health, and that good that I do wish thee. For in the end,
all the travels of this life may be endured, so that the body with diseases be
not troubled.

Thou let me understand by thy letters, that thou art arrived at Rhodes and
requirest me to write unto thee, how I lived in that place when I was young,
what time I gave my mind to study, and likewise what the discourse of my life
was, until the time of my being Emperor of Rome. In this case truly I marvel
at thee not a little, that thou should ask me such a question, and so much
the more, that thou did not consider, that I cannot with out great trouble
and pain answer thy demand. For the doings of youth in a young man were never
so upright and honest, but it were more honest to The imperfections of young
men deserve no publication
amend them, then to declare them. Annius Verus my father, showing unto me his
fatherly love (not accomplishing yet fully 13. years) drew me from the vices of
Rome, and sent me to Rhodes to learn science, howbeit better accompanied with
books, then laden with money, where I used such diligence, and fortune so
favored me that at the age of 26. years, I read openly natural and moral
Philosophy, and also Rhetoric: and there was nothing gave me such occasion
to study, and read books, as the want of money; For poverty causes good men's
children to be virtuous, so that they attain to that by virtue, which others
com unto by riches. Truly friend Pulio, I found great want of the pleasures of
Rome, especially at my first coming into the Isle; but after I had read
Philosophy x. years at Rhodes, I took my self as one born in the country.
And I think my conversation among them caused it seem no less. For it is a
rule that never fails, That virtue makes a stranger grow natural in a
strange country, and vice makes the natural a stranger in his own country,
Thou know well, how my Father A most wise and worthy observation.
Annius Verus was 15. years a Captain in the Frontiers against the barbarous by
the commandment of Adrian my Lord and Master, and Antoninus Pius my Father in
Law, both of them Princes of famous memory: which recommended me there to
their old friends, who with fatherly counsel exhorted me, to forgette the
vices of Rome, and to accustom my self to the virtues of Rhodes. And truly,
it was but needful for me: For the natural love of the country often times,
brings damage to him that is borne therein, leading his desire still to
return home.

Thou shall understand, that the Rhodians are men of much courtesy, and
requiting benenolences, which chances in few Isles: because that naturally
they are persons deceitful, subtle, unthankful, and full of suspicion. I
speak this, because my Fathers friends always succored me with counsel and
money: which 2 things were so necessary, that I could not tell which of them I
had most need of. For the stranger makes his profit with money, to withstand
disdainefull poverty, and profits himself with counsel to forget the sweet
love of his country. I desired then to read Philosophy in Rhodes, so long as
my Father continued there Captain. But that could not be, for Adrian my Lord,
sent for me to return to Rome, which pleased me not a little, albeit (as I have
said) they used me as if I had been borne in that Island, for in the end,
Although the eyes be fed with delight to The heart of a man is seldom
satisfied.
see strange things, yet therefore the heart is not satisfied. And this is all
that touched the Rhodians. I will now tell thee also, how before my going
thither, I was borne and brought up in mount Celio (in Rome) with my father
from mine infancy.

In the common wealth of Rome, there was a law used, and by custom well
observed, that no Citizen which enjoyed any liberty of Rome (after their sons
had accomplished ten years) should be so bold or hardy, to suffer them to
walk the streets A notable custom in Rome.
like vacabonds. For it was a custom in Rome, that the children of the
Senators should suck till two years of age, till four they should live at
their own wills, till six they should read, till eight they should write,
til ten they should study Grammar, and ten years accomplished they should then
take some craft or occupation, or give themselves to study, or go to the
wars: so that throughout Rome, no man was idle.

In one of the laws of the twelve Tables were written these words. We ordain
and command, that every Citizen that dwells within the circuit of Rome, or
Liberties of the same, from ten years upwards, to keep his son well ordered.

And if perchance the child being idle, or that no man teaching him any craft
or science, should thereby peradventure fall to vice, or commit some wicked
offense, that then the Father (no less then the Son) should be punished.
For there is nothing so much breeds vice amongst the people, as when the
Fathers are too negligent, and the children be too bold.

And furthermore, another Law said. We ordain and command, that after ten
years be past, for the first offense that the child shall commit in Rome,
that the Father shall be bound to send him forth some where else, or to be
bound surety for the good demeanor of his Son. For it is not reason, that
the fond love of the Father to the Son, should be an occasion why the
multitude should be slaunred: Because all the wealth of the Empire The
happiness of any Kingdom.
consists, in keeping and maintaining quiet men, and in banishing, and
expelling seditious persons.

I will tell thee one thing (my Pulio) and I am sure thou will marvel at it,
and it is this. When Rome triumphed, and by good wisdom governed all the
world, the inhabitants in the same surmounted the number of two hundred
thousand persons, which was a marvelous matter. Amongst whom (as a man may
judge) there was a hundred thousand children, But they which had the charge of
them kept them in such awe and doctrine, that they banished from Rome one of
the sons of Cato Vticensis, for breaking an earthen pot in a Maidens hands
which went to fetch water. In like manner they banished the son of good
Cinna, only for entering into a garden to gather fruit. And none of these two
were as yet fifteen years old. For at that time they chastised them more for
the offenses done in jest, then they do now for those which are don in good
earnest.

Our Cicero says in his book De Cicero in lib de Legibus.
Legibus, That the Romans never took in any thing more pains, then to
restrain the children (as well old as the young) from idleness. And so long
endured the fear of their Law, and honor of their common wealth, as they
suffered not their children like vagabonds idly to wander the streets, For
that Idleness is the badge of all lewdnes.
country may above all other be counted happy, where each one enjoys his
own labor, and no man lives by the sweat of another.

I let thee know, my Pulio, that when I was a child (although I am not yet very
old) none durst be so hardy to go commonly through Rome without a token about
him of the craft and occupation he exercised, and whereby he lived. And if any
man had been taken contrary, the children did not only cry out of him in the
streets as of a fool; but also the Censour afterward condemned him, to
travel with the captives in common works.

For in Rome they esteemed it not less shame to the child which was idle, then
they did in Greece to the Philosopher which was ignorant. And to the end thou
may see this, I write unto thee to be no new thing, thou ought to know,
that the Emperor caused to be borne before him a burning brand, and the
Council an Axe of Arms, the Priests a Hatte, in manner of a Coyse: The
Senators a Crusible on their Arms: the Judges a little Balance, the Tribunes
Maces, the Governors a Scepter, the Bishops Hattes of flowers: the Orators
a Book, the Cutlers a Sword, the Goldsmith a pot to melt gold: and so forth of
all other offices, strangers excepted, which went al marked after one sort in
Rome: For they would not agree, that a stranger should be apparrelled and
marked according to the children of Rome.

O my friend Pulio, it was such a joy then to behold the Discipline and
prosperity of Rome, as it is now at this present such a grief to see the
calamity thereof, that by the immortal Gods I swear to thee, and so the God
Mars guide my hand in Wars, that the man which now is best ordered, is not
worth so much as the most dissolute person was then. For then (amongst a
thousand) they could not find one man vicious in Rome, and now amongst twenty
thousand they cannot find one virtuous in all Italy.

I know not why the Gods are so The golden and copper days of Rome.
cruel against me, and fortune so contrary, that this forty years I have done
nothing but weep and lament, to see the good men dye, and immediately to be
forgotten: and on the other side, to see wicked men live, and to be always in
prosperity. Universally, the noble heart may endure all the troubles of man's
life, unless it be to see a good man decay, and the wicked to prosper; which
my heart cannot abide, nor yet my tongue dissemble. And touching this matter,
my friend Pulio, I will write unto thee one thing which I found in the book of
the high Capitol, where he treats of the time of Marius and Silla, which
truly is worthy of memory, and that is this.

There was at Rome a custom, and a law inviolable, since the time of Cinna, A
famous Visitation used by the ancient Romans.
that a Censour (expressly commanded by the Senate) should go, and visit the
Provinces which were subject unto it throughout all Italy, and the cause of
those visitations was for three things. The first, to see if any complained of
Justice. The second, to see in what case the Commonweal stood. The third, to
the end, that yearly they should render obedience to Rome. O my friend, Pulio,
how think thou? If they visited Italy at this present, as at that time they
suruaied Rome, how full of errors should they find it? And what decay should
they see therein, think thou? Truly, as thou know, they should see the
common wealth destroyed, Justice not ministered, and moreover Rome not obeyed,
and not without just cause. For, of right ought that commonwealth to be
destroyed, which once of all other has been the flower, and most beautified
with virtues, and after becomes most abominable, and defiled with vices.

The case was such that two years after the wars of Silla and Marius, the
Censour went yearly to Nola (which is a place in the Province of Campania) A
town in the midst of Campania.
to visit the same Country as the custom was. And in those days, the time
and season being very hot, and the Province quiet, not disturbed with wars,
and perceiving that none of the people came to him. The Censour said to the
Host which lodged him: Friend, I am a Judge sent from the Senators of Rome to
visit this land. Therefore go thy ways quickly, and call the good men hither
which be among the people: for I have to say unto them from the sacred Senate.
This Host, (who peradventure was wiser then the Roman Judge, although not so
rich) goes to the graves of the dead, which in that place were buried, and The
folly of a Roman Censour.
spoke unto them with a loud voice saying, O ye good men, come away with me
quickly, for the Roman Censour calls you.

The Judge perceiving they came not, sent him again to call them: and the Host
as he did at the first time, so did he now at the second. For when he was at
the graves, with a loud voice he said, O ye good men, come hither, for the
censour of Rome would talk with you. And likewise they were called the third
time with the self same words. And the Censour seeing no body come, was
marvelous angry, and said to the Host: Since these good men disdain to come at
my commandment, and show their allegiance to the sacred Senate of Rome that
were alive, and not those that are dead: the Host made answer, O thou Roman
Judge, if thou were wise, thou would not marvel at that that I have done.
For I let thee understand, The wisdom of a poor Host of Nolo.
in this our City of Nola, all the good men, (all I say) are now dead, and lie
here buried in these graves. Therefore thou have no cause to marvel) nor yet
to be displeased with my answer: but I rather ought to be offended with thy
demand, willing me to enquire for good men, and thou thy self do offend
with the evil daily, Wherefore I let thee know (if thou be ignorant thereof)
if thou will speak with any good man, thou shall not find him in all the
whole world, unless the dead be revived, or except the Goas will make a new
creation. The Consul Silla was five months our Captain in this our City of
Nola in Campania, sowing the fruit which ye other Romans gathered, that is to
say, he left children without Fathers, Fathers without children, daughters
without Mothers, and Husbands without Wives, Wives without Husbands, Uncles
without Nephews, Subjects without Lords, Lords without Tenants, Gods without
Temples, Temples without Priests, Mountains without Herds, and fields
without fruits. And the worst of all is, that this wicked and cursed Silla
dispeopled this our City of good and virtuous men, and replenished it with
wicked and vicious persons. Ruin and decay never destroyed the Walls so much,
neither the Mothes ever so many garments, nor the Worm rotted so much fruit,
nor yet the Hayle beat down so much corn; as the disorder and vices of Sylla
the Roman Consul did harm, which he brought unto this land of Campania. And
although the mischief and evils that he did here to the men were manifold
great, yet much greater herein was that which he did to their Customs and
Manners.

For in the end the good men which he beheaded, are now at rest with the dead:
but the vices which he left us in this Land, there are none but proud and
arrogant men that delight to command.

In this land there are none other but envious men, that know naught else but
malice. In this land there are idle men, which do nothing but loose their
time. In this land there are none but gluttons, which do nothing but eat. In
this land there are none but thieves, which entend naught else but robberies.
In this land there are none but rebels, that do nothing but stir sedition.
And if thou and all the Romans esteem these men for good, tarry a while, I
will go to call them all to thee. For if we should kill and put into the
shambles all the evil men, and weigh them as we do the flesh of sheep, or
other like be asts: all the neighbors and Inhabitants of Italy should have
meat sufficient for to eat.

Behold Censour, in this land of Campania, they call none good but those which
are quiet, sober, wise, and discreet men. They call none good but the patient,
honest, and virtuous men. Finally I say, that we call none good, but these men
which will do no harm, and will occupy themselves in good works. Without
tears I speak not that which I will say, that is, if we seek for any of
them, we shall find none but in their graves. For the just judgment of God it
was, they should repose themselves in the entrails of the earth, whom the
public weal deserved not to have alive.

Thou come to visit this land, where thou shall immediately be served with
the wicked, and to hide their faults, their desolute life, and their vices,
thou shall not be a little solicited. Believe me, if thou will not undo thy
self, and be deceived. Trust thou rather these rotten bones, then their
deceitful hearts. For in the end, the examples of the dead that were good, do
profit men more to live well, then the counsel of the living that be wicked,
do interre and bury all those that be now living.

CHAP. III. Marcus Aurelius concludes the letter, and declares at large the
sciences he learned, and all the Masters which he had. And in the end, he
recites five not able things, in the observance of which the Romans were very
curious.
I Have recited these things unto thee, my friend Pulio, to The harm ensuing
by evil education of children.
the end thou should know, what an infinite number there is of the wicked
sort in the world, and how small and scant a number there is in Italy of the
good; and this proceeds of none other thing, but because the Fathers do not
bring up their children as our Ancesters did. It is impossible a young child
should be vicious, if with due correction he had been instructed in virtues.
Annius Verus my Father, in this case deserves as much praise, as I do
reproach. For whiles I was young, he never suffered me to sleep in bed, to sit
in chair, to eat with him at his Table; neither durst I lift up mine eyes to
look him in the face. And oftentimes he said unto me; Marcus, my son, I
had rather thou should be an honest Roman, then a dissolute Philosopher.
Thou desire me to write unto thee, how many Masters I had, and what sciences
I learned in my youth. Know thou, that I had many good Masters, though I am
become an evil Scholar. I learned also diverse sciences, though presently I
know little; not for that I forgot them, but because the affairs of the Empire
of Rome, excluded me from them, and caused me to forsake them. For it is a
general rule; That Science in that place is never permanent, where the person
is not at liberty.

I studied Grammar with a Master called Euphermon, who said he was a Spaniard
borne, and his head was hoare for age. In speech he was very temperate, in
correction somewhat severe, and in life exceeding honest. For there was a law
in Rome, that the childrens Masters should be very old: So that if the
Disciple were ten years of age, the Master should be above fifty. I studied a
long time Rethoricke, and the Law, under a Greek called Alexander, borne in
Lycaonya, which was so excellent an Orator, that if he had had as A Country
of the lesser Asia, near Phrygia.
great a grace in writing with his pen, as he had eloquence in speaking with
his tongue: truly he had been no less renowned among the Grecians, then
Cicero was honored among the Romans. After the death of this my Master (at
Naples) I went to Rhodes, and heard Rhetoric again of Orosus of Pharanton,
and of Pulio, which truly were men expert, and excellent in the art of
Oratorie, and especially in making Comedies, Tragedies, and Enterludes, they
were very fine, and had a goodly grace. Commodus Calcedon was my first Master
in natural Philosophy. He was a grave man, and in great credit with Adrian,
he translated Homer out of Greek into Latin. After this man was dead, I took
Sextus Cheronensis for my Master, who was Nephew to Plutarch the great, which
Plutarch was Traianus Master. I knew this Sextus Cheronensis at 35. years of
age, at what time I doubt, whether there has been any Philosopher that ever
was so well esteemed throughout the Roman Empire as he. I have him here with
me, and although he be fourscore years old, yet continually he vvriteth the
Histories and gests done of my time.

I let thee know my friend Pulio, that I studied the law two years, and the
seeking of the laws of many nations, was occasion that I knew many
Antiquities: and in this science Volucius Mecianus was my master, a man which
could read it well, and also dispute of it better. So that on a time he
demanded of me merrily, and said. Tell me Mark, do thou Conference betwixt
Marcus and his Master.
think there is any Law in the World that I know not? and I answered him;
Tell me Master, is there any Law in the World that thou obseruest.

The sift year that I was at Rhodes there came a marnellous pestilence,
which was the occasion of the dissolution of our School, which was in a
narrovv and little place, and being there a certain Painter, painting a rich
and excellent Work for the realm of Palestine, I then (for a truth) learned
there to dravv and paint, and my Master was named Diogenetus, who in those
days was a famous Painter. He painted in Rome six worthy Princes in one
Table, and 6. other tirannous Emperors in an other. And amongst those evil,
Nero the cruel was painted so lively that he seemed alive to all those that
savv him, and that Table wherein Nero was so lively drawn, was by decrees
of the sacred Senate commanded to be burnt. For they said, That a man of so
wicked a life deserved not to be represented in so goodly a Table. Others
said, that it was so natural and perfect, that he made all men afraid that
beheld him, and if he had been left there a few days, that he would have
spoken as if he had been alive. I studied the art of Necromancy a while, with
all the kinds of Gyromancy and Chiromancie. In this science I had no
particular Master, but that sometimes I went to hear Apolonius Lecture. After
I was married to Faustine, I learned Cosmography in the City of Argelata, which
is the chiefest town of Illyrta, and my Masters were Iunius Rusticus, and Cyna
Catudus, Chroniclers and Councillors to Adrian my Master, and Antoninus my
Father in Law. And becaused I would not be ignorant in any of these things,
that man's ability might attain to, being at the wars of Dalia, I gave my
self to Music, and was apt to take it, and my Master was named Geminus
Comodus, a man of a quick hand to play, and of as pleasant a voice to sing, as
ever I heard Roman tongue prompt to speak.

This was the order of my life, and the time that I spent in learning. And (of
good reason) a man so occupied cannot choose but be virtuous. But I swear and
confess to thee, that I did not so much give my self to study, but that
every day I lost time enough. For Youth and the tender flesh desires liberty,
and although a man accustom it with travels, yet he finds vacant time in it
also for his pleasures. Although all the ancient Romans were (in diverse
things) very studious; yet notwithstanding, amongst all over, and besides
these, there were five things whereunto they had ever a great respect: and to
those that therein offended, neither requests auayled, rewards profited, nor
law (old nor new) dispensed, Truly their good wills are to be commended, and
their diligence to be exalted. For the Princes that govern great Realms ought
to employ their hearts to make good laws, and to occupy their eyes to see them
duly excuted throughout the commonwealth. These five ^eings were these.

1 The first, they ordained, that Five especial respects among the Romans.
the Priests should not be dishonest. For in that Realm where Priests are
dishonest, it is a token that the Gods against the people are angry.

2 The second, it was not suffered in Rome, that the Virgins Vestals should at
their pleasure stay abroad. For it is but reason, that she which of her own
free will has heretofore promised openly to be good, should now (if she
change her mind) be compelled in secret to be chaste.

3 The third, they decreede that the Judges should be just and upright. For
there is nothing that decays a common wealth more then a Judge who has not
for all men one balance indifferent.

4 The fourth was, that the Captains that should go to the wars, should not
be Cowards: for there is no like danger to the Commonwealth, nor no like
slander to the Prince, as to commit the charge of men to him in the Field, who
will be first to command, and last to fight.

The fifth was, that they which had charge of bringing up of children, should
not be vicious. For there is nothing more monstrous and more slanderous, then
he that is a Master of children, should be subject and servant to vices.

How think thou, my friend Pulio, when all these things were observed in
Rome: Think thou that the youth was so dissolute, as at this present?
Think thou indeed, that it is the same Rome, wherein (in times past) were so
notable, good and ancient men? Beleeuest thou that it is that Rome, wherein
(in the golden age) the old men were so honest, and the children so well taught,
the Armies well ordered, and the Judges and Senators so upright and just? I
call God to witness, and swear to thee, that it is not Rome, neither has it
any likeness of Rome, nor yet any grace to be Rome, and he that would say
that this Rome was the old Rome, knows little of Rome. The matter was this,
that the ancient and virtuous Where the Gods are displeased, all goodness
decays.
Romans being dead, it seems to the Gods, that we are not yet worthy to enjoy
their houses. So that either this is not Rome, or else we be not the Romans
of Rome. For considering the prowess and virtuous deeds of the ancient
Romans, and weighing also our dissolute lives, it were a very great infamy for
them to call us their Successors. I desired my friend Pulio, to write unto thee
al these things, to the end thou may see what we were, and what we are. For
great things have need of great power, and require a long time before they can
grow, and come to their perfection, and then afterward at one moment, and with
one blow, they fall down to the ground.

I have been more tedious in my letter then I thought to have been, and now I
have told thee that, which with diligence (by reason of my great affairs) in
three or four times, I have written of that that wants in thine, and is too
much in mine. We shall make a reasodable letter, and since I pardon thee for
being too brief, pardon thou me also for being too long. I saw thee once
enquire for Unicorns horn in Alexandry, wherefore now I send thee a good
piece, and likewise I send thee a horse which in my judgment is good.
Advertise me if thy daughter Drusilla be alive, with whom I was wont to
laugh, and I will help her to a marriage. The immortal Gods keep me, O my
Pulio, thy wife, thy stepmother, and thy daughter, and salute them all from me,
and Faustine. Mark of Mount Celio, Emperor of Rome, with his own hand
writes unto thee.

CHAP. IIII. Of the excellency of Christian religion, which manifests the
true God, and disproueth the vanity of the Ancients having so many Gods. And
that in the old time, when the enemies were reconciled in their houses, they
caused also, that the Gods should embrace each other in the Temples.
HE that is the only divine Word begotten of the Father, Lord perpetual of
the Hierarchies, more ancient A most divine and Christian Confession.
then the Heavens, Prince of all Holiness, chief head from whom all had their
beginning, the greatest of all Gods, and Creator of all creatures, in the
profoundnesse of his eternal sapience, accords all the Harmony and
composition of Christian Religion. This is such a manner of sure matter, and so
well laid, that neither the miseries, which spring of the infections of
naughty Christians can trouble, nor yet the boisterous winds of the
Heretics are able to move. For it were more likely that Heaven and Earth
should both perish, then it should suspend for one day, and that there should
be no Christian Religion. The ancient Gods which were inuentors of worldly
things, as the foundation of their reproved sects was but a flying sand, and an
unstable ground, full of dangerous and erroneous abuses, so some of those
poor wretches, looking perhaps like a ship running upon a rock, suspecting
nothing, were drowned, Other like ruined buildings were shaken in sunder, and
sell down dead, Finally, these Gods which only bare the name of Gods, shall be
for evermore forgotten. But he only shall be perpetual, which in God by
God, and through God has his beginning.

Many and sundry were the multitude of the Nations which have been in times
past. That is to wit, the Sirians, the Assyrians, Persians, Medians,
Macedonians, Grecians, Cythians, Arginians, Diversity of Nations.
Corinthians, Caldeans, Indians, Athenians, Lacedaemonians, Africans, Vandales
Sweuians, Allaines, Hungarians, Germaignes, Britons, Hebrews, Palestines,
Gentiles, Iberthalides, Maurians, Lucitanians, Goths and Spaniards. And truly,
in all these look how great the difference amongst them in their customs and
manners was, so much diversity was of the Ceremonies which they used, and their
Gods which they honored. For the Gentiles had this error, that they said, one
alone was not of power sufficient to create such a multitude as were created.
If I were before all the Sages that ever were, they would not say the contrary,
but without comparison the gods whom they worshipped and invented were greater
in multitude then the Realms and Provinces which they conquered and possessed.
For by that folly the ancient Poets durst affirm in their writings, that the
Gods of one Nation and Country were mortal enemies unto the Gods of another
Province. So that the Gods of Troy envied the Gods of Greece more then the
Prince of Greece envied the Prince of Troy.

What a strange thing was it to see the Assyrians in what reverence they
worshipped the God Belus. The Egyptians the God Apis. The Caldeans the God
Assas The Babilonians the devouring Dragon. The Pharaones the statue of gold.
The Palestines Beelzebub. The Romans honored the God Jupiter. The Affricans the
God Mars The Corinthians the God Apollo. The Arabians God Astaroth. The
Arginians the Sun. Those of Acaia the Moon. The Cidonians Belphegorn. The
Amonites Balim. The Indians Baccus. The Lacedaemonians, Osiges. The Macedonians
did sacrifice to Mercury. The Ephesians to their goddess Diana. The Greeks
to Juno. The Armenians to Liber. The Trojans to Vesta. The Latins to Februa.
The Tarentines to Ceres. The Rhodians, (as says Apolonius Thianeus) worshipped
the God Ianus, and above all things, we ought to marvel at this, That they
striued oftentimes amongst themselves, not so much upon the possessions and
seignories of Realms, as upon a certain obstinacy they had to maintain the
Gods of the one, to be of greater power then the others: for they thought if
their gods were not esteemed, that the people should be empouerished,
unfortunate, and persecuted.

Pulio in his second book De dissolatione regionum Orientarum, declares that
the first Province that rebelled against the Emperor Helius Adrianus (which
was the fifteenth Emperor of Rome) was the land of Palestine, against which,
was sent a Captain, named Julius Seuerus, a man of great courage, and very
fortunate, and aduenturous in Arms. This Captain did not only finish the
wars, but he wrought such an outrageous destruction in that land, that he
besieged 52. Cities, and razed them to the ground, and burned 680. Villages,
and slew so many in battle skirmish, and by Justice, that amounted to the
number of 5000. persons. For unto the proud and cruel Captains victory can
never be glorious, unless they water the ground with the blood of their
enemies.

And furthermore, in the Cities and Towns besieged, the children, old men and
women, which dyed through hunger and pestilence, were more in number, then
those which were slain in the wars. For in wars the sword of the enemies
lights not upon all, but pestilence, and famine, has no respect to any.

After this war of the Palestines was ended, immediately after arose a more
crueller betwixt the Alleynes, and Armenians. For there are many The occasion
of the wars between the Alleines ^^ Armenians.
that see the beginning of the troubles and miseries which arise in Realms;
but there are few that consider the end, and seek to remedy the same. The
occasion of this war was, as they came to the feast of the Mount Olimpus,
they fell in disputations, whether of their Gods were better, and which of them
ought to be preferred before other. Whereof there sprang such contradictions,
and such mortal hatred, that on every part they were furiously moved to
wars, and so under a color to maintain the gods which they honored, both
the common wealths were brought into great poverty, and the people also into
great misery.

The Emperor Helius Adrianus, seeing such cruel wars to arise upon so light
occasion, sent thither the Captain above named, Julius Seuerus, to pacify the
Allaines and Armenians, and commanded him that he should persecute those with
wars, which would not be ruled by his arbitreme^t and sentence. For those
justly deserve the sword, which with no reasonable conditions will condescend
unto peace. But Julius Seuerus used such policy that he made the^ good friends,
and never touched them, nor came near them. Which thing was no less
acceptable to the Emperor, then profitable to the Realms. For the Captain
which subdueth the Country by entreatie, deserves more honor then he which
overcomes it by battle. The agreement of the peace was made upon such
condition, that the Allaines should take for their Gods the Armenian Gods, and
the Armenians on the contrary, the Gods of the Allaines. And further, when the
people should embrace and reconcile themselves to the Senate, that then the
Gods should kiss the one the other, and to be reconciled to the temple. The
vanity of the Ancients was such, and the blindness of mortal men so great,
and so subject were they to devilish devises, that as easily as the eternal
wisdom creates a true man now a days: so easily then a vain man might have
invented a false God. For the Lacedaemonians had this opinion, that men had no
less power to invent gods, then the gods had to create men.

CHAP. V. How the Philosopher Bruxellus was greatly esteemed amongst the
Ancients for his life, and the words which he spoke unto the Romans at the
hour of his death.
PHarasmaco in his 20 book De liberate Deorum (whereof Cicero makes mention
Cicero de natura Deorum.
in his book, De natura Deorum) says, that when the Goths took Rome, and
besieged the high Capitol: there came amongst them a Philosopher called
Bruxellus, the which (after the Goths were repulsed out of Italy) remained
with Camillus at Rome. And because at that time Rome wanted Philosophers, this
Bruxellus was had in great veneration amongst all the Romans, so that he was
the first stranger of whom (being alive) a statue was ever made in the Senate:
the Romans used to make a statue of the Romans being alive, but not to
strangers till after their death, The age of this Bruxellus was 113. whereof
65. he had been an inhabitant of Rome. And among other things they recite 7.
notable things of his life.

1 The first, that in 60. years, no man ever saw him issue out of the walls of
Rome. For in the old time the Sages were little esteemed, if in their
behauiours they were not just and upright.

2 The second, that in 60. years no man heard him speak an idle ^ Notable
sentences of Bruxellus.
word: For the words that are superfluous do greatly deface the authority of
the person.

3 The third, that in all his time they never saw him lose one hour of time.
For in a wise man there is no greater folly, then to see him spend a moment of
an hour idely.

4 The fourth, that in all his time, he was never detected of any vice. And
let no man think this to be a small matter. For few are they of so long life,
which are not noted of some infamy after their death.

The fifth, that in all the 60. years he never made quarrel, nor striued with
any man; and this thing ought to be no less esteemed then the other. For truly
he that lives a long time without offering wrong to another, may be called a
monster in nature.

6 The sixth, that in 3. or 4. years he never issued out of the temple, and in
this case this philosopher showed him self to be a good man. For the virtuous
man ought not to content himself only to be void of vices: but he ought also
to withdraw himself from the vicious.

7 The seventh and last, that he spoke more often with the Gods then with men.

This Philosopher now drawing near to the hour of death, all the grave
Senators came to visit him, and to thank him for that he had lived so long
amongst them in so good conversation, and that so willingly he cared and
watched for the wealth of Rome. And likewise all the people of Rome were right
sorry for his sickness, and that they should loose the company of so excellent
and virtuous a man. The good Philosopher in the presence of them al spoke these
words unto the Senate.

CHAP. VI. Of that the sage Philosopher Bruxellus spoke to the Senate of Rome,
at the hour of his death.
SInce you are wise (O worthy Senators) The speech of Bruxellus at his death.
me thinks you should not lament my death, since I my self so joyfully
do receive it. For we ought not to lament the death weo take, but the wicked
life we lead. The man is very simple that dreadeth death, for fear to lose
the pleasures of life. For death ought not to be feared for loss of life, but
because it is a sharp scourge of the wicked life. I dye (noble Senators) in
joy and pleasure. First, because I do not remember that ever I did any evil
in all my life, or displeasure to any of the Commonwealth. And I am certain
that the man which did no evil to men in his life, the Gods will do him no
harm at the hour of his death. Secondarily, I dye joyfully, to see all Rome
lament the loss of my life. For that man is very wicked and unhappy whose life
the people lament, and at whose death they do rejoice. Thirdly, I dye
joyfully, only to remember that the threescore years which I have been in
Rome, always I have traveled for the common wealth. For the just Gods told
me, that there is no death with pain, but where life is without profit.
Fourthly, I dye joyfully, not so much for the profit I have done to men, as for
the service I have done to the Gods. For regarding to how many profitable
things we employ our life, we may say, we live only the time which is
employed to the service of God.

Ceasing to speak further of my person, I will (worthy Senators) disclose
unto you a highsecret which touches your Common wealth, and this it is. That
our Father Romulus founded Rome, Numa Pompilius erected the high Capitol,
Aeneus Marcius enclosed it with walls, Brutus delivered it from Tyrants, the
good Camillus drove out the Frenchmen, Quintus Scicinnatus augmented her power:
but I leave it peopled with gods, which shall defend Rome better then walls or
men. For in the end, the fear of one god is more worth the the strength of all
men. When I came to Rome it was a confusion to see how it was peopled with men,
and unfurnished of Gods. For there was but five Gods, that is to say, Jupiter,
Mars, Ianus, Berecinthia, and the Gods Vesta. But now it is not so. For there
remains for every one a private god. Me thinks it an unjust thing that
Treasuries should be full of gold, and the Temples void of Gods. As there is
28000. households, so you may account your selves happy, that I leave you 28000
Gods: by the virtue of the which I conjure you O Romans, that each of you be
contented with the God of his house, and have no care to apply to himself the
Gods of the Common wealth. For he that emproprieth to himself that which ought
to be common to al, is to be blamed of God, and hated of men. This shall be
therefore the order that you shall keep and have toward the Gods, if you will
not err in their service. That is to understand, that ye shall keep the
mother Berecinthia, to pacify the ire of the Gods: ye shall keep the
Goddess Vesta, to turn from you the wicked destinies. Ye shall keep the God
Jupiter, and shall commit unto him the government of your Commonwealth. And
also ye shall keep him for the God above all gods in heaven and earth. For if
Jupiter did not temper the ire, which the Gods about have against you: there
should be no memory of men here beneath in earth. Of other particular gods
which I leave you, use your particular profit. But yet notwithstanding in the
mean season (Romans) take you heed to your selves, and if at any time
fortune should he contrary, let no man be so hardy to speak evil of the God
which he has in his house. For the Gods tell me, that it was sufficient
enough to dissemble with them which serve them not, and not to pardon those
that offend them. And do not deceive your selves in saying that they are
private Gods, and not able to help themselves. For I let you know, that there
is not so little a God, but is of power sufficient to revenge aniniury. O
Romans, it is reason, that all from henceforth live joyfully, and in peace,
and furthermore, think your selves assured not to he overcome by your enemies,
because now your neighbors of you, and not you of them, shall desire to borrow
Gods, and because ye shall see me no more, ye think I must dye, and I
think because I dye, I shall begin to live. For I go to the Gods, and leave
among you the Gods, because I depart.

CHAP. VII. How the Gentiles thought that one God was not able to defend them
from their enemies, and how the Romans sent throughout all the Empire to
borrow Gods when they fought against the Goths.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome Paul. Oros De Match. Mund. lib. 6
1164. which according to the count of the Latins, was 402. from the
incarnation (as Paulus Orosus in the sixth book, De machina mundi says, and
Paulus Diaconus in the 12. book of the Roman Histories,) The Goths (which as
Spartian says, were called otherwise Gethules, or Messagethes) were driven
out of their Country by the Huns, and came into Italy to seek new habitations,
and became natural and built houses.

At this time there was an Emperor of Rome named Valentine, a man of small
reputation and courage in wars, and endued with few good conditions, for that
he was of Arian his sect. The Kings of these Goths were two renowned men,
whose names were Randagagismus and Alaricus. Of the which two, Randagagismus
was the chiefest and most puissant, and he had a noble mind, and a very good
wit. He led with him at the least 2000000. Goths, the which all with him, and
he with them made an oath, to shed as much blood of the Romans as they
could, and offer it to their Gods. For the barbarous people had a custom, to
anoint the God (which was at that time in the Temple of Venus) with the blood of
their enemies, whom they had slain The news of the coming of this cruel
Tyrant was published throughout all Italy.

Whose determination was not only to raze the walls of Rome down to the earth,
batter towers, dungeons, houses, walls, and buildings: but also he purposed to
abolish, and utterly to bring to naught the name of Rome, and likewise of the
Romans.

Of this thing all the Italians were in very great and marvelous fear and the
most puissant and courageous Knights and Gentlemen, agreede together presently
to retire within the Walls of Rome, and determined to dye in the place to
defend the liberty thereof. Fot amongst the Romans there was an ancient
custom, that when they created a Knight, An ancient custom among the Romans:
they made him to swear to keep 3. things.

1 First, he swear to spend all the days of his life in the wars.

2 Secondarily, he swear that neither for poverty nor riches, nor for any
other things, he should ever take wages but of Rome only.

3 Thirdly, he swear, that he would rather choose to dye in liberty, then to
live in captivity.

After all the Romans (scattered abroad in Italy) were together assembled in
Rome, they agreede to send letters by their Purseuants, not only to their
Subjects, but also to all their confederates. The effect whereof was this.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Letter sent from the Senate of Rome to all the Subjects of
the Empire.
THe sacred Senate, and all the people of Rome, to all their faithful and
loving Subjects, and to their dear friends and confederates, wishes health
and victory against your enemies. The variety of time, the negligence of you
all, and the unhappy success of our adventures. have brought us in process of
time, that whereas Rome conquered realms, and governed so many strange
Seignories, now at this day comes strangers to conquer and destroy Rome; in
such sort, that the barbarous people (whom we were wont to keep for slaves)
swear to become our Lords and Masters. We let you know now, how all the
barbarous nations have conspired against Rome our mother, and they with their
King have made a vow, to offer all the Romans blood to their Gods in the
Temples. And peradventure their pride and fierceness being seen, and our
innocence known, Fortune will dispose another thing. For it is a geuerous
rule, That it is impossible for a A rule deserving observation.
Prince to have the victory of that war which by malice is begun, and by
pride and fierceness pursued. It has seemed good unto us (since their cause
is unjust, and ours righteous) to endeavor our selves by all means how to
resist this barbarous people. For often times that which by justice was gotten,
by negligence is lost. For the remedy of this mischief to come the sacred
Senate has provided these things following, and for the accomplishing thereof
your favor, and aid is necessary.

1 First of all, we have determined to repair with all diligence our ditches,
walls, gates, and bulwarks, Considerations resolved on b^ the Romans for
their own good,
and in these places to arm all our friends. But to accomplish that, and
diverse other for the necessity of warfare, we lack money; for ye know well
enough, That the war cannot be prosperous where enemies abound, and money is
scarce.

2 Secondarily, we have commanded, that all those which be sworn Knights
and soldiers of Rome, repair immediately to Rome, and therefore ye shall
send us all those which are under the age of 50. and above the age of 20. For
in great wars ancient men give counsel, and young men and lusty to execute
the same are required.

3 We have agreede and concluded, that the City be provided of victuals,
munition, and defense at the least for two years. Wherefore we desire ye,
that ye send us from you the tenth part of wine, the fifth part of flesh, and
the third part of your bread: For we have all sworn to die, yet we mean not
to dye for famine, assieged as fearful men: but fighting in plain field, like
valiant Romans.

4 Fourthly, we have provided, (since the unknown barbarous come to fight
with us) that you bring us to Rome strange Gods to help and defend us. For you
know well enough, that since great Constantine, we have been so poor of Gods,
that we have not but one God, whom the Christians do honor. Therefore we
desire you, that you will succor us with your Gods in this our extreme
necessity: For amongst the Gods we know no one alone sufficient, to defend all
the Roman people from their enemies. The walls therefore being well repaired,
and all the young and warlike men in Garrison in the City, the batteries well
furnished, and the Treasure house well replenished with money, and above all,
the Temples well adorned with Gods, we hope in our Gods to have the victory of
our enemies. For in fighting with men, and not against Gods, a man ought
always to have hope of victory: for there are no men of such might, but by God
and other me may be vanquished. Fare ye well, etc.

After this letter was sent through all the dominion of the Romans, not
tarrying for answer of the same, they forthwith openly blasphemed the name of
Christ, and set up idols in the Temples, used the ceremonies of the Gentiles,
and that which was worse then that, they said openly that Rome was never so
oppressed with Tyrants, as it has been since they were Christians.

And further they said, if they called not again all the Gods to Rome, the
City should never be in safeguard, for that they have dishonored and offended
their Gods, and cast them out of Rome, and that those barbarous people were
sent to revenge their injury. But the divine providence which gives no place
to human malice to execute his forces, before the walls were repaired, and
before the messengers brought answer, and before the strange Gods could enter
into Rome, Randagagismus King of the Goths, with 2000000. of barbarous,
(without the effusion of Christian blood) suddenly in the mountains of
Vesulanes, with famine, thirst, and stones which fell from heaven, lost all his
Army, not one left alive but himself, who had his head stricken off in Rome.
And this thing the eternal wisdom brought to pass, to the end the Romans
should see, that Jesus Christ the true God of the Christians, had no need of
strange Gods to defend his servants.

CHAP. IX. Of the true and living God, and of the maruailes wrought in the old
Law, to manifest his divine power, and of the superstition of the false Gods.
O Gross ignorance, and unspeakable obstinacy, O judgments of God
inscrutable. The wilful ignorance, and peruersity of the Gentiles.
What think these Gentiles by the true God? They searched the false Gods to
help them, and had a living God of their own: they sought Gods full of guile
and deceit, and worse then that they thought it necessary, that that God (which
created all things) should be accompanied with their gods, to defend them which
could make nothing. Let now all their gods come forth into the fields on the
one side, and I will go forth alone in godly company, that is to say with the
high God on the other part: And we will compare the deeds and prove the aids
of their false God, against and with the last work of our true God. And they
shall clearly perceive their falsehood and our truth. For the tongue that
speaks of God can never bear with any lie, and that which speaks of Idols,
can never disclose any truth. If they esteem him much for creation of the
world with his might: is it any less to preserve and govern it by his
wisdom? For many things are done in a moment, for the preservation whereof long
times is requisite, and much painful travail necessary. I demand further
what God of the gentiles could do that which our God has done? that is to
know, within one Arc to make quiet the Lion with the Leoperd, the Wolse with
the Lamb, the Bear with the Cow, the Of the great concord and agreement of
Noah's Arc.
the Tigar with the Crocodill, the stoned horse with the Mare, the Dog with
the Catte, the Fox with the Hens, the Hounds with the Hares, and so of other
beasts: whose enmity is greater the one against the other, then that of man is
against men. For the enmity amongst men proceeds of malice, but that of
beasts proceeds of nature.

Also I demand, what God (if it were not the true God so mighty) could slay
and drown (in one hour and moment) so many men, women, and beasts: so that
all those which were in the world (eight only excepted) perished in the deluge
of Noe. The judgment of God by ordinance, and their offenses deserve this so
marvelous a damage. For God never executed any notable punishment, but first
it came through our wicked offenses. And if this be counted for a great thing,
I will that an other thing be had in great estimation: which is, that if God
showed his rigorous justice in this punishment, incontinently he showed his
might and clemency in remedying it, in that of these eight persons (which were
but few) the generation did multiply in so great a number, that they did
replenish many and great Realms: whereon a man ought to marvel, for according
as Aristotle says, Great things are easily put to The saying of Aristotle.
destruction, and brought to naught, but with great difficulty they are
remedied and repaired again.

And further I demand, what god of the Gentiles was so puissant to do this,
which the God of the Hebrews did, in that ancient and opulent Realm of the
Egyptians? That is to wit, when he would, and when it pleased him, he made
the rivers run blood, infected the flesh, darkened the air, dried the seas, and
slew the first begotten, obscured the Sun, and did wonders in Canaan, and
other wonderful things in the red Sea.

Finally, he commanded the Sea to drown the Prince alive with all his
Egyptians, and that he should let the Hebrews pass by. If one of these false
gods had done any one of these things, it had been to be marvelled at: but the
true God doing it, we should not marvel at it. For, according to our little
understanding, it seems a great thing, but in respect of that the divine
power can do it is nothing. For where God puts Weak is the arine of man, to
resist against God.
to his hand, there are no men so mighty no beasts so proud, nor heaven so hie,
nor sea so deep that can resist his power. For as he gave them power, so can
he take it from them at his pleasure.

Further, what God of the Gentiles (although they were assembled together)
could have had the power to have destroyed one man only, as the true God did,
the which The mighty Army of Senacherib overthrown.
(in the time of King Zedechias) made an hundred and fourscore thousand of the
camp of the Assyrians die, the Hebrews being a sleep which were their
mortal enemies. And truly in this case, God showed to Princes, and great
Lords, how little their money and their subtle wits prevail them in feats of
war, when God has determined another thing for their deserts. For in the
end, the first invention of wars proceeds of man's ambition, and worldly
malice, but the victory of them proceeds of the divine pleasure. What God of
the Gentiles could have done that which our true God did? when he brought under
the feet of the renowned Captain Joshua, two and thirty Kings and Realms,
whom he deprived not only from their lands, but also bereft them of their
lives, in tearing them in pieces, and dividing The succes of Joshua over Kings
and Kingdoms.
the miserable Realms into twelve Tribes. Those Realms (which in old time
belonged unto the Hebrews) were more then 2000. years kept of them in tyranny,
wherefore God would, that by the hands of Joshua, they should be restored.

And though God deferred it a long time, it was to give them grievous torments,
and not for that God had forgotten them. And although Princes do forgette many
wrongs and tyrannies, yet notwithstanding, rivers of blood cease not to run
before the face of the divine Justice. If all the ancient Gods had had power,
would not they also have helped their Princes? since the gods lost no less in
losing their temples, then men lost in losing their Realms: for it touched
more the case of the Ancients, to lose one little Temple, then for men to lose
a The God of Troy could not resist the Grecian.
noble Realm. We see that the gods of the Trojans could not resist the
Greeks, but that both men and gods, gods and men came into Carthage, and from
Carthage into Trinacria, and from Trinacria, into Italy, and from Italy into
Laurentum, and from Laurentum into Rome. So they went about flying, declaring
that the gods of Troy, were no less conquered of the Gods of Greece, then the
Dukes and Captains of Greece, were vanquishers of the Captains of Troy, the
which thing is hard to them that presume to be Gods: For the true God does not
only make himself feared, but also beloved and feared both, That we say of
the one, that same we may well say of the other. That is to know, that all the
Gods in the Realms and Temples, wherein they honored and served: but we see
the one destroys the other, as it is declared by the Hebrews, which was in
bondage of the Assyrians: the Assyrians of the Persians, the Persians of the
Macedonians, the Macedonians of the Medes, the Medes of the Greeks, the
Greeks of the Penians, the Penians of the Romans, the Romans of the Goths,
the Goths of the Mores: So that there was no Realm nor Nation, but was
conquered.

Neither the Writers can deny but they would have exalted their Gods and
Ceremonies, that the Gods and their Worshippers should not have end. But in the
end, both Gods and men had all end, except the Christian Religion, which shall
never have end. For it is founded of that which has neither beginning nor
ending. One of the things which comfort my heart most in the Christian
Religion, is to see, that since the time the Churches were founded, the Kings
and Princes most puissant have been always their enemies, and the most feeble
and poor, always greatest helpers, and defenders of the same. O glorious
militant Church, which now is no other then gold amongst The dignity of the
church militant.
the rust, a rose amongst the thorns, come amongst the chafe, mary amongst the
bones, Margarites amongst the peble-stones, a holy soul amongst the rotten
flesh, a Phoenix in the Cage, a ship rocking in the raging Seas, which the
more she is beaten, the faster she sayleth.

And there is no Realm so little, nor no man of so little favor, but when
other do persecute him, he is by his friends, parents, and defendors favored
and succored, so that many times those which think to destroy are destroyed,
and those which seem to take their part, were their chiefest enemies. Does not
that proceed of the great secret of God? For though God suffered the wicked to
be wicked a while, God will not therefore suffer that one evil man procure
another to do evil.

The Palestines and those of Jerusalem, had not for their principal enemies
but the Chaldeans, and the Chaldeans had for their enemies the Idumeans, the
Idumeans the Assyrians, the Assyrians the Persians, the Persians the
Ariginians, the Ariginians, the Athenians, the Athenians had for their
principal enemies the Lacedaemonians, The enmity of nations one against another.
and the Lacedaemonians the Sydonians, the Sidonians the Rhodians, and the
Rhodians the Scythians, the Scythians the Hunnes, the Hunnes had the Alaines,
the Alaines the Sweuians, the Sweuians the Vandales, the Vandales the
Valerians, the Valerians the Sardinians, the Sardinians the Africanes, the
Africanes the Romans, the Romans the Dacians, the Dacians the Goths, the
Goths the Frenchmen, the Frenchmen the Spaniards, and the Spaniards the Mores.

And of all these Realms, the one has persecuted the other. And not all one:
but our holy mother the Church has always been oppressed and persecuted with
those realms, and has been succored of none, but of Jesus Christ only, and
he has ever succored and defended it well: For the things that God takes
charge of although all the world were against the^, in the end it is impossible
for them to perish.

CHAP. X. How there is but one true God, and how happy these Realms are, which
have a good Christian to their King, and how the Gentiles affirm, that good
Princes (after their death) were changed into Gods, and the wicked into Devils,
which the Author proves by sundry examples.
ALthough the common opinion of the simple people was, Variety of opinions
concerning the true God.
that there was many gods, yet notwithstanding, all the Philosophers affirmed,
that there was but one God, (who of some was named Jupiter) the which was
chief above all other Gods

Others called him the first intelligence, for that he had created all the
World. Others called him the first cause, because he was the beginner of all
things. It seems that Aristotle understood this thing, and was of this
opinion, forasmuch as he says in his 12. book of his Metaphysickes. All
superior and inferior things would be well ordered, and many things much
better by the arbitrament Arist. in Metaph lib. 12. Mar. Var. in lib mist.
Theol. Cic. in lib. de not. Deorum.
of one, then by the advice of many. Marcus Varro in his book, De Theologia
mistica, and Cicero in his book De natura Deorum, although these were
Gentiles, and curious enough of the Temples, yet they do mock the Gentiles,
which believed there were many Gods, and that Mars and Mercury, and likewise
Jupiter, and the whole flock of Gods (which the Gentiles set up) were all
mortal men as we are.

But because they knew not, that there were good and bad Angels, nor knew not
that there was any Paradise to reward the good, nor Hell to torment the evil.
They held this opinion, that good men after their death were Gods, and evil
men devils. And not contented with these foolish abuses, the Devil brought
them into such an error, that they thought it consisted in the Senates power
to make some Gods, and other Devils For when there dyed at Rome any Emperor,
if he had been well affected of the Senate, immediately he was honored for a
God: and if he dyed in displeasure of the Senate, he was condemned for a
Devil. And to the end we do not speak by favor, but by writing. Herodian
says, that Faustine was the daughter of Antoninus Pius, and wife of Marcus
Aurelius, which were Emperors, the one after the other. And truly there were
few either of their Predecessors, or of their Successors, which were so good as
they were, and in mine opinion none more better: And therefore was she made a
Goddess, and her father a God.

An Emperor that coueteth perpetual memory, must note 5. things Emperors
made Gods or Devils by decree of the Senate Five things fitting an Emperor.
which he should have in his life. That is to say, pure in life, upright in
justice, aduenturous in feats of Arms, excellent in knowledge, and well-beloved
in his Provinces: which virtues were in these two excellent Emperors. This
Empress Faustine was passing fair; and Writers praise her beauty in such
sort, that they said it was impossible for her to be so beautiful, but that
the Gods had placed some divine matter in her. Yet notwithstanding, this added
thereunto, it is doubtful, whether the beauty of her face was more praised, or
the dishonesty of her life discommended. For her beauty maruelously amassed
those that saw her, and her dishonesty offended them much that knew her. Yet
after the Emperor Marcus Aurelius had triumphed over the Parthians, as he went
visiting the Provinces of Asia, that goodly Faustine in four days dyed at the
mount Taurus, (by occasion of a burning Fever) and so annealed, was carried to
Rome.

And since she was the daughter of so good a Father, and wife of so dearly
Roman (...) goddess.
beloved an Emperor, amongst the Goddesses, she was canonized; but
considering her unconstant, or rather incontinent life, it was never thought
that the Romans would have done her so much honor. Wherefore the Emperor
rejoiced so much, that he never ceased to render thanks unto the Senate. For
truly, a benefit ought to be acceptable to him that receives it especially,
when it comes unlooked for.

The contrary came to the death of Tiberius, third Emperor of Rome, which was
not only killed, and drawn through the streets by the Romans, but also the
Priests of all the temples assembled together, and openly prayed unto the gods,
that they would not receive him to them: and prayed to the Infernal Furies,
that greeuouslie they would torment him, saying: It is justly required, that
the Tyrant which disprayseth the life of the good in this A worthy saying.
Life, should have no place amongst the good after his death.

Leaving the common Opinion of the rude people, which in the old time had no
knowledge of the true GOD, and declaring the opinion of Aristotle, who called
God the first cause: the opinion of the Stoyckes, which called him the first
Intelligence: and the opinion of Cicero, who under the color of Jupiter,
puts none other God but him: I say and confess (according to the religion
of Christian Faith) there is but one only GOD, which is the Creator of Heaven
and Earth: whose excellency and puissant Majesty is little to that our tongue
ca^ speak. For our understanding can not understand, nor our judgment can
determine, neither our memory can comprehend, and much less our tongue can
declare it.

That which Princes and all other Faithful ought to believe of GOD, is, that
they ought to know God to be Almighty, and incomparable, a God immortal,
incorruptible, immovable, great, Omnipotent, a perfect and sempiternall GOD;
For all man's power is nothing, in respect of his divine Majesty.

I say that our LORD GOD is the only High God, that if the creature has any
good, it is but a mean good. For a man comparing well the good which he
possesses, to the misery No goodness but proceeds from God.
and calamity which persecuteth him: without doubt, the evil which follows
after is greater then the good which accompanyeth him.

Also our GOD is immortal, and eternal, which like as he had no beginning, so
shall he never have ending. And the contrary is to the miserable man, which
if some see him borne, other see him die. For the birth of the children, is but
a memory of the grave to the aged. And GOD only is incorruptible, the which in
his Being has no other corruption, nor diminution: but all mortal men suffer
corruption in their souls through Vice, and in their bodies through worms;
for in the end no man is privileged, but that his body is subject to
corruption, and his soul to be saved or damned.

Also GOD is no changeling, and in this case though he changes his work, yet
he changes not his Eternal counsel. But in men it is all contrary: For
they oftentimes begin their business with gravity, and afterward change their
counsel at a better time, and leave it lightly.

I have now showed you that God only is incomprehensible, the Majesty of whom
can not be attained, nor his Wisdom understood, which thing is above man's
intelligence. For there is no man so sage nor profound, but that an other in an
other time is as sage and profound as he.

Also GOD only is Omnipotent: For that he has power not only over the
living, but also over the dead: not only over the good, but also over the evil.
For the man which does not feel his mercy, to give him glory, he will make
him feel his wrath, in giving him pain. Oh ye Princes of this world, truly
it is both just and necessary, that you acknowledge subjection unto the Prince
of Heaven and Earth, which in the end although ye be great, and think your
selves to be All power is in the hand of of God.
much worth, although that you have much, and can do much, yet in respect of
that Supreme Prince, you are nothing worth, neither can you do any thing. For
there is no Prince in the world this day, but can do less then he would, and
would more the^ he has. Since all that we have spoken of before is true, let
Princes and great Lords see how consona^t it is to reason, that since all the
creatures were not created but by one: Why then do they not honor ONE above
all? For as a Prince will not suffer that an other be called King in his
Realm, so likewise GOD will not permit that any other should be honored in
this world but he only.

The Father did a great benefit to us, for to create us without the desire of
any man: and also the Son to redeem and buy us without the help of any man:
and above all the holy Ghost to make us Christians without the deserts of any
man. For all the good deeds and services which we are able to do, are not
sufficient to requite the least benefit that he showed unto us. Princes ought
greatly to esteem such a gift, that God has created the^ men, and not beasts:
and much more they should esteem that they are made Lords and not servants:
but most of all they ought to rejoice that God has made them Christians and
not Gentiles, nor Moors. For it profits them little to have scepters and
Realms to condemn, if they shall not acknowledge the holy Church, without the
which no man may or can be saved.

Oh divine Bounty! how many Paynims had bin better peradventure then I: if
thou had chosen them for the Church? and if thou had made me a Paynime, I
had been worse then they. Thou leauest them which have served thee, and have
chosen me a sinner which offend thee. Oh Lord God thou know what thou do,
and where thou art: but I know not what I do, nor what I speak. For we are
bound to praise the works of God, and have not license to call them back.
Those Emperors and Painim Kings which have been good, (as there has been
many) so much less they have to answer, for that in time of charge they were
not called. And likewise the contrary to the wicked Christian Princes: the
more goodness they have received without measure: so much the more torments
shall be given them in eternal fire. For according to the ingratitude which they
have showed, for the benefits by them received in this world: so shall the
bitterness of their pains be, which they shall receive in Hell.

Princes are much bound to do well, because they were created of God reasonable
Wherefore Princes should obey God.
men; but they are much more bound, because they be Christians, and more then
others bound, because they were made mighty, and placed in so high estate. For
the greatest power is not for a Prince to have and possess much, but to
profit much. They do not require of a little and weak Tree much, but that
he bear his Fruit in due time. For a great and high tree, is bound to give
wood to heat them that be a cold, shadow to refresh the weary trauellours,
and fruit to comfort the needy, and also it ought to defend it self from all
importunate winds. For the virtuous Prince ought to be a shadow and resting
place, where the good may cover themselves being weary.

The Church does move us to do many things, and our conscience wills us to
observe more. But if the Princes will promise me they will do two things
only, (that is to say) that they will be faithful in the law of God, whom they
honor, and that they will not use tyranny against their people, whom they
govern: From henceforth I promise them the glory and felicity which they
desire. For that prince only dies in safeguard, which dies in the love of our
SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST, and has lived in the love of his neighbor.

Princes and great Lords which presume to be good Christians, should watch
greatly that all things might be done to the Service of GOD, begun in God,
followed in God, and ended in God. And if they will watch in this, I let them
know, that as touching the Exaltation of Faith, they should watch so much,
that all should know, that for the defense of the same they are ready to dye.
For if the Prince believe that there is pain for the evil, and reward for
the good in an other life: it is impossible but that he amend his life, and
govern well his Commonwealth.

Think this for a surety, that where the Princes fears not God, neither
themselves nor their Realms can prosper. For the Felicity or misery of
Realms, proceeds not of the pains and trauells that the Kings and people do
take: but of the merits which the Kings and Realms deserve. In great peril
lives that Realm, whose Prince is an evil Christian: Happy and sure is that
commonwealth, whereof the Prince has a good conscience: For the man that is of
a good conscience, will not do any evil thing to the co^monwelth.

CHAP. XI. Of sundry Gods which the ancients worshipped: Of the office of those
Gods, how they were revenged of them when they displeased them, and of the
twenty elect Gods.
THough to men of clear judgment, the works of God are great of themselves,
without any comparison to others: yet that the white may be better known from
the black, I will satisfy somewhat the curious reader, in reckoning up a
flock of false Gods, that by them and their power, men shall see how much the
Princes are bound to the true God.

The ancient Painyms had gods of diverse sorts: howbeit the chief of How much
men are bound to the Almighty God.
all were these, which they called Diis electi. They would have said gods of
heaven: which gods (as they thought) sometime descended from Heaven to earth.
These gods were xx. in number: as Ianus, Saturnus, Jupiter, Genius Mercurius,
Apollo, Mars, Vulcanus, Neptunus, Sol, Orcus, Vibar, Tellus, Ceres, Juno,
Minerna, Luna, Diana, Venus, Vesta.

These viii. last rehearsed were goddesses, and xii. of the first were gods, No
man might take any of those as his own god, but as common and indifferent to
al. Their office was to profit all. I mean al of any one Realm, one Province
singular, or one noble city. And first note, they had one god, who^ they
called Candus, whom they honored much, and offered unto him many sacrifices,
to the end that God might give them wise children. And this if they had
demanded of the True GOD, they should have had reason. For the impostumation of
humane malice, is swelled in such wise, that that man is in great jeopardie,
whom God has not endued with wise judgment.

They had also an other Goddess, whom they named Lucina: to whom they did
commend women, quick, and great with Child, to send them safe delivery. And
without the walls of Rome, in a street called Salaria, she had a great
Church, wherein all the Roman women conceived with child, did sacrifice to
their goddess Lucina: and as Fronten declares, De veneratione Deorum: there
they remained nine days, and nine nights, making their vow.

Numa Pompilius built the church of this Goddess, which was plucked down by
the Consul Rutilius, because a Daughter of his (great with child) made her
vow, and kept her nine vigilles, and upon more devotion was desirous to be
delivered in the said Temple. Such was her mishap, that her deliueric was not
only evil, but her death worse. Whereupon Rutilius in his rage, caused the
temple secretly to be burned. For we read many times, that when the Gentiles
saw they were distressed, and in great necessity, they recommended themselves
to their Gods: and if they did not then succor them in their necessity,
immediately they took from them their sacrifice, beat down their temples, or
changed their Gods.

And further, the Gentiles had another God called Opis, which was called the
God of the Babe-newborne: even as Lucina was Goddess of the Mother, which bare
it.

The custom was, that during all the nine months that the Woman was quick
with child, she carried the image of the God Opis, hanging upon her belly,
tied to her gyrdle, or sowed to her Garments, and at the hour of her
delivery, the Midwife, took in her hands the laid Image: and even in the
very birth before herself laid hands upon it, she first of all touched the
Child with the Idol. If the child were well borne, the parents that day made
great Oblations to the Idol: but if it were evil, or dead borne,
straight-wayes the Parents of the Child did beat the Image of the poor God
Opis to powder, or else burned it, or drowned it in the river.

Also the Gentiles worshipped an other God, called Vaginatus, and unto him they
did great Sacrifice, because their Children should not weep much: and
therefore they carried the image of this god Vaginatus hanged about their
necks, for the Gentiles thought it an evil sign and token, when the Babe wept
much in his infancy, he should have very evil fortune in his Age.

They had also another God called God Guninus: him they honored with
Sacrifices, to the end that he should be their Patron, for the safety of
their Children, in their cradels. And those which were poor, had the God
Guninus, hanged upon the cradels, but the Rich had very sumptuous cradels,
wherein were painted many Gods, Gunini: Herodian, and Pulio, declares in the
life of Seuerus, how that when the Emperor Seuerus was in the war against
the Gauls, his wife (whose name was Iulia) was delivered of a Daughter, which
was his first. And it happened that a Sister of this Iulia, named Mesa, native
of Persia, and of the City of Mesa, sent unto her Sister at Rome, a Cradell,
all of an Unicorns horn, and fine gold, and about the same was painted many
images of the God Cuninus. The cradle was of so great value, that many years
after it was kept in the treasury of Rome. Though indeed the Romans kept
those things, more for the desire of memory, then for the love of riches.

The Romans had likewise an other god, whom they called god Ruminus, which
was as much to say, as god of sucking-babes, and to him, the Matrones of Rome
offered diverse sacrifices, to the end he would keep their breasts from
corruption, and give them milk enough for their little children. And all the
while they gave the child suck, they had the image of this God about their
necks, hanging down to their breasts. And every morning before she gave the
child suck, the mother sent a dishful of milk to offer the god Ruminus: and if
she happened to be in such place where there was no Church dedicated to the
god Ruminus, then she bathed her god Ruminus, which she daily carried with her,
in milk.

They had also another God, whom they called god Stellinus, and him they
impropered to their Children, when they began to go. To this god the matrones
offered many gifts that their children might not be lame, dwarfes, nor impotent,
or decrepite, but that they might be able to go well. For among the Romans,
those that were criples or dwarfs, were had in such contempt, that they could
neither bear office in the Senate, nor be admitted Priests in the Temples.

Hercules in his third Book, De repub: Hercules de repub:
says, that Cornelia, (that worthy woman and Mother of the Gracchi,) had her
two first sons, the one Lame, and the other a Dwarf.

Whereupon supposing the God Stellinus had been wrath with her, she built him
a temple, in the twelfth region, near to the fields Gaditanus, amongst the
Gardens of Detha: and this temple remained till the time of Randagagismus, who
besieging Rome, destroyed the Temples, and brake up their Gardens and buyldings
round about Rome.

They had also an other God, called Adeon, and his charge was, that when the
Child could go well, he should go to his mother, and make much of her. And
albeit Cicero in his book, De natura Deorum, puts this God Cicero de natura
Deorum.
amongst the other Gods, yet I do not remember, that I have ever read that this
god had any temple in Rome, till the time of Mammea, mother of the Emperor
Antoninus. This excellent woman being left a widow, and with two little
children, desiring that they might be well and virtuously brought up, and that
they should increase their love toward her, she built to the god Adeon, a
sumptuous temple in the xii. region Vaticanus, near to the Gardens of
Domicilius, and hard adjoining to that also, she erected one other edifice
called Sacellum Mammae, where she abode solitarilie for a time. For the manner
and custom at that time was, that all widows (which would bring up their
Children in good discipline) should immediately sever themselves far from the
dangerous pleasures of Rome.

The ancients had also an other God called Mentallis, which was in effect god
of wit. That is to wit, he had authority and power to give Children good or
evil sense. And to this god the ancients did great sacrifices, especially the
Greeks, much more then the Romans. For as much as Seneca says, that he does
marvel nothing at all of that the Greeks knew: but that which made him most
to marvel, was of that they knew not, since they had the temple of the God
Mentallis within their schools. All the children whom they sent to learn
Philosophy, were by the laws of Athens bound to serve three years in that
Temple. And to omit that which Seneca spoke of the Greeks, I dare boldly say
and affirm (to many which at these days are living) that if it be true, he
gave sense and understanding to men, that they would to day, rather then to
morrow withdraw themselves to go into those Temples, and there offer their
vows. For nothing in the World happens to men more, then the want of wit and
understanding how to govern themselves, and live in quiet.

They had also another God Volunus, and a Goddess called Voluna, these two had
the charge of affiance in Wedlock, and therefore they were two, because the
one should help the man, and the other should help the woman. The manner was
such, that during the time of their marriage, each of them vvare the Image of
their own God about their necks, and those were of gold or silver. And after
they were married, the Bridegroom gave unto his Spouse, the Goddess Voluna,
and the Bride unto her husband the God Volunus. At such times as the Consuls
were created at Rome, and the Kings banished, and before the coming of the
Emperors, a little before the Cornelians moved civil commotions in Rome, there
was one Consul amongst all these whose name was Balbus. It is said he was the
first that builded the Temple of Volunus and Voluna. It did stand in the ninth
Ward of the City, near unto the gate Corinthia, and was called Scripta Balbi.
And nigh unto it was another building called Theatrum Balbi. All the Consuls,
Senators, noble and renowned Barons were married in the Temple, which Balbus
built. That night that Pompey the Great married Julius Caesar's daughter, there
were some that said that Pompey refused to marry her in the Temple of the Gods
Volunus, and Voluna, whereupon they diuined straight that the marriage would
not endure long betwixt them. As writes Publius Victor in his third book De
nuptiis Antiquorum. The ancient Pub. Vict. De nuptiis Antiq.
Pagans honored a God called Agrestes, as much to say, as the God of fields
and fruits: to him they offered no sacrifice but twice in the year that is to
say, in Seed time, and in harvest.

The Phrygians (that is the Trojans and Cicilians) greatly observed this God
Agrestes, and it was for that in those two Countries, there was gathered such
plenty of corn to make bread, that Phrygia was the great garner of Asia, and
Trinacria (that was Cicilia) was the Corn house of Europe. They had another
God called Belus, which was Patron of men of war. For even as the
Christians, when they come to the point to give battle, make their prayers
unto God: so likewise the Ancients in the same point did kneel down, and
recommend themselves to God Belus.

Liuie declares, that in all other things which were done, and whereof the
Roman Knights were accused in the battle of Cannas against Hannibal, was for
that they did not recommend themselves at all to the God Belus, when they
should give battle, saying the Carthagians remained Conquerours, because they
a little before honored the god Mars, and the Romans were vanquished, for
that they offered no Sacrifice to God Belus. When Pirrus, King of the Epirotes
(that is of Albany) came into Italy, and that the Romans were advertised, he
brought with him many Engines, and subtle inventions for the war, they decreed
to build a Temple for god Belus within the walls Rome, in the ninth ward near
the gate Carmentalle, and it was named Edes Beloe, in the front whereof was a
marvelous sumptuous and stately pillar, wherein was graven the order of
battle.

The Gentiles had another God called the God of Victory, to whom the Romans
(more then any other Nation) did sacrifices, to the end they might obtain
victory of their enemies. Of this God Victoria, there was many magnificent
Temples in Rome, but the chiefest and the greatest was adjoining to the gate
Venia, in the twelfth ward, in the place called Della Victoria. It was built
in the year of the foundation of Rome, four hundredth, threescore and
seventeen. And it was for the occasion of the victory, that Appius Claudius,
and Quintus Fabius had in Sicill, the first time the Roman people fought
against the Africanes, Herones being King. Of this war and victory, rose the
cruel, long, and perilous wars between Rome and Affricke.

There was another God amongst the Gods, whom the Ancients called Honorius,
which had the charge that the Inne-keepers should honor and gently entertain
Pilgrims and strangers: so that they should be well handled through the
Provinces and Realms whereby they passed. And there was a custom in Rome,
that ever when any Roman should go any voyage, his wife immediately should
go to the Temple of God Honorius to do her sacrifices. In the 15. year after
that Hannibal passed into Italy, the Romans knew by a Prophecy, that as soon
as they brought the Image of the Goddess Berecinthia (mother of all the Gods)
into Rome: so soon Hannibal should retire out of Italy. And to bring this to
pass, the Romans sent their Ambassadors into Phrygia, which is one part of
Asia, to the end they should bring the Goddess Berecinthia unto Rome. And
because their Ambassadors should go well and return safe, and that in
coming and going through the Realms, they should entertain them well, and do
them honor: they built a Temple for the God Honorius within the walls of
Rome, in the fourth ward, in a place which they called Forum Transitorium.

CHAP. XII. Of other more natural and peculiar Gods which the ancient people
had.
And because it should not be too tedious a thing to name all Natural and
peculiar Gods.
the gods which the Gentiles worshipped, and semblably, in whose time and
reign they honored the most, and what Realms were more replenished then
others: And furthermore, for what causes so many Temples and buildings were
ordained and erected for them: I will make mention only of these Gods which
were called natural Gods and particular Gods, and declate why the Gentiles
honored them.

And this only moves me to it, because that those which shall see this my
writing, may know what a special grace God has given to them, which are borne
in the time of the Christian Law,

Know you therefore, that the God Esculanus was the God of Mines of gold and
silver. Pecunia was the goddess of mettalles, and they prayed unto her, to
give them treasures and riches. Fessoria was the Goddess of travelers and
Pilgrims, and they prayed to her, that she would not suffer them to be weary
that traveled on foot.

Pelonia was a Goddess, which had the charge to drive the enemies out of the
land.

Esculapius was the God and patron of sick men, and if the malady were
great, they called upon the God Apollo, which was Father to Esculapius.
Spinensis was a God whom the Ancients prayed to keep the corn from thistles
and thorns. Rubigo, was a God which kept the vines from worms, and the corn
from Locusts. Fortuna was the Goddess of good fortune: and to her the ancient
wives of Rome made a Temple in the time of Silla and Marius. Muta was the
Goddess to whom the Ancients prayed, that she would not suffer their enemies
to speak, when they would speak evil of them. Genoria was a Goddess that had
the charge to chase slothfulnes from them, that recommended themselves to her,
and the Greeks honored her, especially the Philosophers, when they entered
into study and Universities. Stimula was a Goddess which hastened the^ of their
business, to the end they should not forget any thing they had to do. And her
Image was at Rome over the gate of the Senate house, for she was taken for an
Advocate of the pleaders.

Murcia was a Goddess, and an Advocate for men and women which desired not to
be lean or weak of their bodies: and to this Goddess, the women of Rome
offered many gifts, to the end they might be fat: For in Rome, maidens and
women are forsaken because they be lean and slender, and not for that they be
foul and fat,

Busina properly was a Goddess of the fields, and to her the Ancients offered
sacrifice, because she should look to the grass that grew in the fields. And
the Scithians were great worshippers of that Goddess, because they had no
houses in towns, but kept the fields even with their flocks, which if they
wanted grass, dyed immediately, and then they were utterly undone.

Iugatiuus was he that was called the Cod of the high Mount, and to him the
Ancients made a lodge and Altars in the top of the highest Mountains,
whereunto they went oftentimes to do sacrifice, especially when it thundered
and lightened.

Vallonia was the Goddess of the valleys, and she had the charge to bridle
the waters that descended from the mountains, to the end they should not
endamage the meadows and milles whereby they passed.

Ceres was a goddess of all Nations honored, for that she was a Goddess of
corn, and of other sovereign seeds: And the Ancients had a custom to offer
her a loaf of all the seeds and corn that they sowed. Her Lodges and Altars
to do sacrifice were in the fields, but besides those, she had a Temple in
Rome in the ninth Ward, in the fields of Mars. hard by the gardens of
Lucullus, and it is said, that out of this Temple came first the fountain of
Scipio.

Segecia was a Goddess that had the charge to make the seeds to grow after
they were sown. I do not remember I have read that she had any Temple in
Rome.

Tutillina was a Goddess, whose office was to entreat Jupiter not to beat
down the corn with haylestones when it was ready for to be reapt. And the
Ancients painted her in such sort, that it seemed Jupiter did cause it to
rain stones, and that this Goddess Tutillina should gather them all. She had
a Temple in Rome in the tenth ward, in the Market place of Apollo, near unto
the house of Romulus. And at every time when it thundered, immediately the
Romans lighted a great number of Candles in the Temple to appease the goddess
that she should keep their corn and seed from hurt.

Flora was the merciful goddess of the Vines, that preserved them from frost.
And those of Capua were great worshippers of this Goddess, for they say that
they were the first that planted vines in Italy.

Matura was a Goddess that had the charge to ripe grapes: and the Ancients
used a custom, to offer the first grapes which were ripe, in the place where
the Goddess was. And for the more part, every man that had Vines, made in the
field a lodge and an Altar to sacrifice unto her.

Ruana was a Goddess and Advocate for them that gathered the corn and other
grains, to the end they should do no hurt in cutting away the ear, nor
should mar the straw and that in cutting, the corn should not shake from the
ear. And therefore the Ancients painted her, holding in her right hand a
handful of straw, and the ears were whole.

Forculus was the God of Lockesmithes, and the Ancients sacrificed to him,
because he should lock fast the doors, and should not suffer them to be
broken open, nor picked, nor adultered keys to be made: The Ancients painted
this God, holding a chain in one hand, and two doors in the other: His Image
was over the Gate of Trigemine, and especially over their doors that had
enemies.

Limentimen, was God of the hammers of the gates. I could not find what the
intention was to invent this God, but as I think (not for that I have found it
written) they prayed this God, that when there should come any enemy of theirs
to the house, that he should cause the^ stumble, and fall before the door, if
perhaps by negligence it were left open.

Fortulus was the God of the gates, and the Ancients did paint him with two
gates in his hands, and did sacrifice to him, because no man should open the
gates to the enemies when they slept: and to him the Romans did sacrifice in
all the gates of Rome, and those which had enemies, would paint him in the
gates of their house.

Cardea was a Goddess of the bars and hinges of the gates, and the cause why
the Ancients did sacrifice to her, was that no man should break the gates,
nor lift up the hinges, and that if they went about to put to their hands,
immediately the hinges should make a noise to awake the Master of the house,
that he might hear it, and know that his enemies were at the gate.

There was another God who was called Siluanus, and was most honored among the
Ancients, especially among all the Romans. This God had the charge to keep
those from peril and misfortune that went for their pleasures and recreation
to the Gardens, as Pliny says in an Epistle he wrote to Rutilius. The first
that Plin. ad Rutil.
built a Temple for the God Siluanus, was Mecenas, which was in the time of
Augustus. And he desired above all other men, to make feasts and banquets in
Gardens. This Temple was in the eleventh Ward, in the field of the Goddess
Venus, near unto the house of Murcea, which was destroyed in the time of the
Emperor Antoninus Pius, through an Earthquake, whereby many buildings and
houses fell in Rome.

Iugatiuus was the God of marriages, who had charge to make the love which
begun in youth, to endure till the old age.

It was wonderful to see how the women newly married went on pilgrimage for
Devotion unto this God, and what gifts and presents they offered in his Temple.
Suetonius Tranquillus says, that there was a Temple of this God, but I find
not in writing by whom it was built, saying that Helius Spartanus says, that
the Emperor Heliogabalus found much riches in the Temple of Iugatibus, the
which he took away to maintain his wars.

Bacchus was the God of drunkards, and the custom in Rome was, that only mad
men and fools celebrated the feast of this God, and if there were found any of
wit and understanding (were it never so little) they thrust him forthwith out
of the Temple, and sought in his stead another drunkard. The Temple of Bacchus
was in the 10. Ward, in the meadows which they call Bacchanales, without the
City, in the way of Salaria, by the Altars of the goddess Februa, and it was
built by the Gauls when they besieged Rome in the time of Camillus. Februa was
a Goddess for the fevers, and they used in Rome when any was taken with the
fever, immediately to send some sacrifice unto her.

This Goddess had no Temple at all, but her Image was in Pantheon, which was a
Temple, wherein all the Gods were, and in this place they sacrificed unto her.

Pauor was the God of fear, who had the charge to take fear from the Romans
hearts, and to give them stout courage against their enemies.

The Temple of this God Pauor was in Rome, in the sixth Ward-, in the place of
Mamuria, near to the old Capitol: and ever when they had any enemies, the
Romans forth with offered in this place sacrifices, and there was in the same
Temple a statue of Scipio the Affricane, all of silver, which he offered
there, when he triumphed over the Carthagenians.

Meretrix was the Goddess of dishonest women, and as Publius Victor says,
There was in Rome, forty streets of common women, In the midst whereof the
Temple of this Meretrix was.

It chanced in the time of Ancus Martius (the fourth King of the seven Roman
Kings) that there was in Rome a Curtezan, Native of Laurento, which was so
fair, that with her body she gained great riches, where of she made all the
Roman people partakers. Wherefore in the memory of her the Romans built there
a temple, and made her Goddess of all the common women in Rome.

Cloatina was Goddess of the stool, and to this Goddess all those commended
themselves which were troubled with the Collycke, to the end she would help
them to purge their bellies.

Quies was the Goddess of rest, and to her the Romans did offer great
Sacrifices, because that she should give them pleasure and rest, especially on
that day, when there was any triumph or solemnity in Rome, they gave in this
Temple many gistes, because she should preserve the glory and joy of the
triumphs.

Numa Pompilius second King of the Romans, built the Temple of this Goddess,
and it was without the City, for to note that during the life of man in this
world, he could neither have pleasure nor rest. Theatrica was a Goddess,
which had the charge to keep the Theaters and Stages, when the Romans
celebrated their Plays: and the occasion of inuenting of this Goddess was,
because when the Romans would set forth their Tragedyes, they made so
solemn Theaters, that there might well stand twenty thousand men above, and
as many underneath, for to behold the spectacle. And sometime it happened, that
for the great weight of them above, the wood of the Theaters and Stages brake,
and killed all those which were underneath: and so after this sort all their
pastime turned into sorrow.

The Romans (which were provided in all things) agreed to do Sacrifice unto
the Goddess Theatrica: to the end she should preserve them, from the dangers
of the Theaters, and built her a Temple in the ninth ward, in the marketplace
of Cornelia: near to the House of Fabij.

Domitian the twelfth Emperor of Rome, destroyed this Temple, because in his
presence one of the Theaters brake, and killed many people. And for that the
Goddess Theatrica had not better preserved them: he made this Temple to be
beaten down.

Peradventure those that have read little, shall find these things now enough:
but let them read Cicero in his book De Natura Deorum: Ihon Bocchas of the
Genealogy of Gods, Cic: de na tu. Deorum.
and Pulio, of the Ancients Gods: And Saint Augustine in the first, the
eleventh, and the eighteenth book of City of God: and they shall find a
great number more, then is here spoken of.

CHAP. XIII. How Tiberius the Knight was chosen Governor of the Empire, and
afterward created Emperor, only for being a good Christian. And how GOD
deprived Justinian the younger, both of his Empire and Senses, for being an
Heretic.
THe fifty Emperor of Rome, was Tiberius Constantinus: who succeeded
Justinian the younger, which was a cruel Emperor. And Paulus Dyaconus says,
That he was an enemy to the poor, a Thief to the Rich, a great lover of
riches, and an enemy to himself in spending them.

For, the property of a covetous man, is to live like a Beggar all the days
of his life, and to be found rich at the hour of his death.

This Justinian was so exceeding covetous, that he commaunced strong coffers
and chests of iron to be made and brought into his Palace, to keep in safety
the euil-gotten treasures that he had robbed. And of this you ought not to
marvel: for Seneca says, That covetous Princes do not only suspect their
Subjects, but also themselves.

In those days the Church was greatly defiled by the heresy of the Pelagians,
and the maintayner of that Sect, was this wicked Prince Justinian: So that for
himself he procured riches, and for the Devil he cheapned souls. For, those
that are once forsaken of the hand of GOD, do not only become Covetousness the
root of all evil.
servant of the Devils, but also labor to bring others to Hell.

Wherefore sithence the sins of men are diverse, and the judgments of GOD
kept secret, and yet the living God is, so merciful, that notwithstanding his
mercy would save the souls, he will also with justice chastise the bodies. And
therefore seeing the obstinacy of this Emperor to be such, that the longer he
lived, the more he augmented his damnation, the wrath of God lighted upon him,
and suddenly without any grudge The just judgment of God.
or token of sickness, this Emperor Justinian was bereued of his senses, and
became a fool, and because the matter was so sudden, it caused in Rome great
fear and admiration, for that the Prince was a fool, and all the Empire
changed. And indeed this Emperor was so stricken, that his life and folly
ended both in one day. For the diseases which God sends to Princes, comes
not through fault of humors, but through the corruption of manners. Also there
is no medicine that can resist it, not yet any other thing that can remedy it.
The people perceiving how the Emperor through his sins was (according to the
divine pleasure) become a fool, agreede (since there was no remedy for his
disease) to choose some good person, to whom the charge of the public weal
might be given: for truly a man needs great patience and wisdom to govern
an other man's, the^ for that which is his own proper. The lot befell to a
Knight, Tiberius so called, a man for truth, both chaste, just, profitable,
sage, virtuous, hardy, merciful, charitable, in feats of arms aduenturous,
and above all a good Christian.

And let not this thing be little regarded, that the Prince be a good
Christian: For there is no state so happy as that which is governed by a Prince
of a good and faithful conscience, and because he wanted no virtues to adorn
a Prince, he was both feared of many, and beloved of all. Which thing ought
not lightly to be esteemed; for it is the chiefest thing that belongs to
Princes, that is to say, for their gentle conversation to be beloved, and for
their upright Justice to be feared. This Emperor Justinian had a wife, whose
name was Sophia Augusta, which was beautiful and sage, and as touching her
person of good renown sufficient. For women must take great respect, lest they
give strangers occasion to speak of them, but Good counsel for women.
notwithstanding all these things, this Dame was noted of covetousness: for
she toyled always to hoarde up money, and delighted to see and tell it, but
to spend or give it, was always her greatest grief: For covetous persons
little regard to shorten their life, so that they may augment their riches.

Tiberius Constantine, as Governor of the Empire (seeing the Empress Sophia
Augusta rich, and desiring more the profit of the Commonwealth, then the
enrichment of himself or of any other) did nothing else but build Monasteries,
repair Hospitals, marry Orphans, and redeem Captives. For speaking according
to the Christian laws, because Difference between a good Prince and a Tyrant.
that a man has more then nenessary, ought to be employed to the use of the
poor, and to works of mercy.

Finally, this virtuous Prince did that which Christian Princes should do, and
not as tyrants do, which made him of great excellency. For the property of a
Tyrant is to heap great treasures of other men's goods, and afterward to spend
and consume them viciously: but Tiberius found them gathered together by one,
and he dispersed them to many. Sophia Augusta, seeing Justinian become a
fool, and not knowing how to get more money of the people, nor how to rob
the rich, and that Tiberius spent her riches without compassion, partly to
satisfy her sorrowful heart, and partly to see, if in time to come, she
could remedy it, called one day Tiberius a part, and spoke unto him these words
in secret.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the words the Empress Sophia spoke unto Tiberius Constantinus
then being governor of the Empire, which only tended to reprove him for that
he lauishly consumed the Treasure of the Empire gotten by her.
THou remembrest well Tiberius, that though The speech of Sophia unto Tiberius.
thou art now after Justinian Governor of the Empire: yet when thou wast in
Alexandrie, thou thoughtest very little to deserve it, and if thou did,
thou thoughtest thou could not attain unto it. For thou art a wise man, and
the sage man (according to the little or much which fortune gives him) does
not reign or slack always the bridle of his thoughts. Those which have a
vain hope, and through power only will enforce fortune to be favorable unto
them, shall live always a troubles me life.

For there is nothing that shortneth more the life of man then vain hope and
idle thoughts. Thou being such a man as thou art, and so well willed and
beloved of Justinian my husband, art demanded of the Roman people, and chosen
by the Senate, received by the Soldiers, and all the Empire rejoice at thy
election.

And thou ought not a little to regard it. For the wills of all do not
always favor one. I let thee to understand Tiberius, that it did not
displease me thou should be Emperor of Rome, since Justinian was deposed,
and if I had perceived that which I do perceive, or had known that which I
do know, I am certain that I had neither said with it, nor against it. For
we women are of so little credit, that it preuayleth us more To approve the
least of that which other say, then it does to speak very well of our selves.
Since Fortune has brought thee to so high an estate, I beseech thee, admonish
thee, and advise thee, that thou know how to keep and govern thy self
therein. For to arise to honor, It suffices the body to sweat water, but to
maintain it, it is necessary that the heart weep blood.

Thou know right well, that to command more, to do more, and to have more
then other (as touching the affairs of Princes) oftentimes is given more
through worldly care, then for the desert of the person. And this God suffers
very often, to the end we may see those descend, and fall through infamy, whom
we saw mount and prosper by pride. Thou art a man, and I a woman: Thou have
wisdom and knowledge, but I have large and long experience, and if thou
know much, I have seen in the world enough, but in faith for that I have
said I tell thee, that men of thy sort are undone in the Palace of Princes, by
two ways. The one, if they think they deserve much, and they can do little.
For haughty minds bring always alteration in the heart, The other is, that one
alone will command the Emperor and the Empire, whereunto if any man come, it
is by great travel, and he shall sustain it with danger, and shall possess
it but a short time. For it is impossible that to a man of much arrogance,
Fortune should be too long faithful.

Though thou be wise and sage, I counsel thee always to profit with another
man's counsel, chiefly in things concerning the government of the estate. For
to know how to obey, and to know how to command, differ much.

For to know how to obey, comes by nature: but to know how to command,
comes by long experience, Take this of me for a general rule, that whereas
thou see thy Prayer to be acceptable, never take upon thee commandment: for
by commandment thou shall be feared, and by prayer thou shall be beloved:
know thou Tiberius, the things that content them worst, which are in the Courts
of Princes: are to do little, to have little, and to be little worth. For the
man that is without favor, in his heart, is half dead. For the contrary, the
thing which most perilleth the Favorites of Princes, and makes them loose
their Friendship, is to be of great power, and great in Authority, and
moreover then this, to profit more of will then knowledge, of authority then
of reason. For a man cannot live long in Friendship, which does what he will,
in the commonwealth.

I have spoken all this, to the end thou should know that I greatly
marvel at thy prudence, and have no less wonder of my patience. To see that
the Treasours which Justinian heaped together by great travel, kept and
preserved with great care, thou wastest without respect what thou do.

Wherefore do not marvel at this; For there is no patience can suffer to see
the proper goods wasted and spent by the hands of an other, which with so
great care has been gathered together.

I let thee to know Tiberius, that now we have neither Money to keep, nor to
give to others: which thing is very perilous for the Palaces of Princes. For
the same to have great store of Treasurs, occasioneth Princes to keep their
enemies in fear.

It is necessary for Princes to be stout and also rich, for by their stoutnes
they may govern their own, and by their riches, they way repress their
enemies. It is not only necessary that the Prince be not poor, but also it
is requisite that his Commonwealth be rich. For where people are poor, of
their Enemies they are nothing regarded. And where the Commonwealth is rich,
the Prince cannot be greatly poor. I will not deny but that it is well done
to help the poor, and succor the needy: But yet I say, that no man ought to
give the Treasour unto any one in particular, which is and has been long kept
in store, for the preservation of all. For oftentimes the Prince which is too
liberal in giving of his own, is afterward (through necessity,) compelled
^o become a Tyrant, and so to take from others.

I let thee know Tyberius, that thou shall find few Princes, but are either
proud, malignant, or vicious. For of a truth, Wantonness, Liberty, Youth, and
Riches, are commonly most cruel enemies to honesty.

Notwithstanding, I will not say that all Princes have been evil, but I will
say (according to the old proverb) that there has been too few good: And that
those which of Gods merciful gift, either are or will be good and virtuous,
ought to be greatly honored. For no time ought to be called happy, but that
wherein virtuous Princes do reign.

And furthermore I say to thee Tiberius, if Princes become Tyrants for want of
Riches, so do they become vicious, through abundance of Treasures: And in
this case vicious Princes are chastened in the same vice. For Avarice has such
power over them, that it suffers them not to taste their own delight.

Again, I let thee know Tiberius, that there are many Princes which are of
good nature, and yet become Tyrants, for nothing else but because they be
oppressed with poverty. For truly the Noble heart resuseth no danger, seeing
himself assaulted with poverty.

Therefore I demand of thee which is better, or otherwise which of these two
evils is least: that the Prince be poor, and with that a Tyrant, or that he
be rich, and therewith vicious.

In mine opinion it were much better to be rich and vicious, then a Tyrant and
poor, for in the end if he do evil by vice, he should be evil unto no man
but to himself: by riches he should profit all the people. And if he be poor
and a Tyrant, he should do great evil to many, and by poverty he could
profit no man. For the poor Prince cannot maintain the rich, and much less
succor the poor, without comparison it is much more profitable to the
Commonwealth, and more tolerable to men, that the Prince be an evil man, and
therewithal a good Prince: then an evil Prince, and therewithal a good man.
For as Plato says, The Athenians would always rather seek a profitable then
a stout Prince: and the Lacedaemonians did err, in willing rather a stout
Prince then profitable.

Therefore see Tiberius, it is more sure and profitable for the Common wealth,
that Princes have Treasures to give liberally among their servants, then that
they should be poor and enforced to oppress the people with taxes and
Subsidies. For Princes often times through poverty take occasion to leuy great
Subsidies in their realms and seigniories.

CHAP. XV. The answer of Tiberius unto the Empress Sophia Augusta, Wherein he
declares that noble Princes need not boarde up great treasures: And of the
hidden treasure this good Emperor found by Revelation, in the Palace where he
remained.
Tiberius heard very patiently the admonition of the Empress, wherefore with
great reverence he answered, and with sweet and gentle words he spoke to her
in this sort.

I have heard and understood what you Tiberius answer.
have told me, most noble Princess Sophia, and always Augusta, and do
receive your, gentle admonitions, most humbly thanking you for your loving
counsel, which principally you give me in so high a style. For oftentimes
sick men abhor not meats, not for that the meats are not good, but because
they are not well dressed. If it were Gods pleasure, I would I knew as well how
to do these things, as you know how to speak them.

And do not marvel, though I make hereof a doubt; for we greatly desire to
praise virtuous works, but to put them in practice, we are very slow.
Speaking therefore with such reverence, (as is due unto so high a Lady) to
every one of these things which your Excellency has told me, I will
answer in one word. For it is reason since you have spoken that which you
perceive of my deeds, that I speak that which I gather of your words. You
tell me that when I was in Alexandrie, I thought not to be Governor of the
Empire after Justinian, and that I thought not my self worthy to deserve it,
nor yet looked to come unto it.

To this I answer, that though by reason I governed my self at that time, yet
I ought not to think to deserve such a dignity, nor to come to so high an
estate. For those which by virtues deserve great Dignities are but few: and
sewer are those which attain unto them, though they deserve them, But if this
matter be judged according to sensuality, I tell you truly (Dame Augusta,)
that I thought not only to deserve it, but also I thought to come unto it. And
hereof marvel not, for it is an infallible rule; Where least desert is,
oftentimes there is most presumption.

You say you esteemed me for a wise man, and that by wisdom I could
overcome any difficult, or disordinate appetite.

To this I answer, that you knew my wisdom, either in mine own business, or
else in other men's affairs. If in other men's affairs, (where it did cost me
naught) I was always a lover of justice, For there is no man in the world so
evil, that does not desire (if it be without his own cost) to be counted
liberal. But if you judge me (Dame Augusta,) on mine own business, give not
too light credit. For I will that you know, there is no man so just, nor of so
clear a judgment, that does not show himself frail The frailty of man.
in matters which touch his own interest.

You say that men which have their thoughts high, and their Fortunes base, live
always a pensive life.

Truly it is as you say, But in mine opinion, as the members of the bodies are
but instruments of the mind, so is it necessary for men to have quick and
sharp wits, if they will not be negligent. For if Alexander, Pyrrhus, Julius
Caesar, Scipio, and Hanniball, had not been high minded, they had never been
(as they were) so Famous, Noble, and stout Princes.

I let you understand, most Noble Princess, that men are not to be esteemed as
lost, for having their thoughts high, nor yet for having their hearts
courageous, neither for being hardy and stout: but they are undone, because
they begin things through folly, pursue them without wisdom, and atchieue
them without discretion.

For, Noblemen enterprising great things, ought not to employ their force as
their noble heart wills, but as wisdom and reason teaches. You say, you
marvel why I waste the Treasures without care, which Justinian and you
gathered together with great pain?

Now to this I answer, you ought not to marvel, if all the Treasours you
heaped together of so long time, were spent and consumed in one day. For there
is an ancient Malediction on riches hidden, and The saying of Epimenides.
Treasours buried, which Epimenides casts out, saying these words: All the
Treasours hoorded up by the Covetous, shall be wasted by the Prodigal.

You say, Through that I wast in few days, you shall have neither to give, to
waste, nor yet to eat at the years end.

To this I answer (most gracious Princess, that if you had been as ready to
relieve the Poor, as you and Justinian were diligent to rob the rich, then
you should justly have complained, and I worthily might well have had just
cause to repent.

Till now we have not seen, but that of the Rich you have made Poor: and
notwithstanding this, yet you have not gotten enough to build an Hospital for
the Poor. You say that Princes, to resist their enemies had need of great
Treasures.

To this I answer, if Princes be proud, greedy, and of strange Realms,
ambicious it is most certain, that they had need of great substances and
Treasours to accomplish and maintain their disordinate appetties. For the enae
of a tyran nous Princ^^s, that he cares not whether by hook or by crook he
make himself rich in his life.

But if the Prince be or will be a man reposed, quiet, vertuou, patient
peaceable, and (...) covetous of the goods of an other man, what need has he
of great treasurs?

For to speak truly, in Princes houses there is more offense in that which
aduaunceth, then in that which wants. I will not waste many words in
answering, since I am much more liberal of deeds then of words: But to
conclude, that there is no Prince which in virtuous deeds wastes so much, but
if he will, he may spend much more. For in the (...).
end, Princes become not poor, for spending their goods and Treasours upon
necessaries: but for making waste upon things superfluous.

And take this word for all, that for this he shall not be the poorer, but
rather the richer. For most certainly, it is a general rule in Christian
Religion, that God will give more to his Servants in one hour, then they will
waste in 20. years: Justinian being Emperor 11, years, who (being a Fool,
and very obstinate in the heresy of the Pelagians) dyed to the great offense
of the Roman people; whose death was as much desired, as his life abhorred.

For the Tyrannous Prince, that makes many weeping eyes in his life, shall
cause many rejoicing bearts at his death.

Justinian being dead, Tiberius was elected Emperor, who governed the Empire,
through so great wisdom and Justice, that no man was able to reprove him, if
the Hystories in his time, did not deceive us. For it seldom happens to a
Prince to be as he was, upright in Justice, pure in life, and clean in
Conscience. For few are those Princes which of some vices are not noted.

Paulus Diaconus in his 18. book of the Roman Gests, declares a thing both
strange and marvelous, which besel unto this Emperor at that time, and very
worthy to recite at this present. And it was, that in the City of
Constantinople, the Roman Emperors had a Palace very sumptuous, and
beseming the authority of the Imperial majesty, which was begun in the time
of Constantine the Great, and afterward, as the succession of good and evil
Emperors was, so were the Buyldings decayed or repaired.

For it is the deed of a virtuous Prince, to abolish vices of the
Commonwealth, and to make great and sumptuous buildings in his country.

This Emperor Tiberius had spent The memorable deeds of Tiberius.
much of his substance and Treasour, for the redeeming of poor captives, to
build Hospitals, to erect Monasteries, to marry and provide for the Orphares,
to sucour poor people, and widows; In this and such like, he was so
prodigal, that it came almost to pass, that he had nothing to eat in his
Palace, And truly this was a blessed necessity. For Catholic Princes ought
to think that well employed, which in the Service of Christ is bestowed. And
hereof this Emperor was not ashamed, but he thought it a great honor, and
that which only grieved him was, to see the Empress rejoice so much at his
misery. For the High and Noble hearts which feel themselnes wounded, do not so
much esteem their own pain, as they do to see their enemies rejoice at their
grief. God never forsook them that for his sake became poor, as appears by
this.

It chanced one day that even as the Emperor Tiberius walked in the midst of
his Palace, he saw at his feet a Marble-stone, which was in form of the
Cross of the Redeemer of the world. And because it had bin too unjust a thing
(as he thought,) to have spurned it with his feet, wherewith we trust from our
enemies to be desended: he caused the stone to be taken up, not thinking any
thing to be there under, and immediately after they found another, wherein
likewise Treasure. found by Tiberius.
was the form of the Cross, and this being taken up, they found an other in
like manner, and when that was plucked up from the bottom. there was found a
Treasure, which contained the sum of two millions of Ducats; for the which
the good Emperor Tiberius gave unto Almighty God most high thanks, and
whereas before he was liberal, yet afterward he was much more bountiful.
For all those treasures he distributed amongst the poor and needy people. Let
therefore mighty Princes and great Lords, see, read, and profit by this
example, and let them think themselves assured, that for giving A good Lesson.
alms to the poor, they need not fear to become poor: for in the end the
vicious man cannot call himself rich, nor the virtuous man cannot count
himself poor.

CHAP. XVI. How the Chiefetaine Narsetes overcame many battles, only for
that his whole confidence was in God. And what happened to him by the Empress
Sophia Augusta: wherein may be noted the unthankfulness of Princes toward
their servants.
IN the year of the Incarnation of Christ, 528. Justinian the Great, being
Emperor, who Paul: Diacon: Lib: 18. de gestis Roman.
was the son of Iustines sister his Predecessor in the Empire) the Histories
say, in especially Paulus Diaconus in the 18. book De gestis Romanorum: that
there was a Knight of Greece in Rome, who from his tender years had been
brought up in Italy. He was a man of mean stature, of a choleric
complexion, and in the law of Christ very devout: which was no small thing. For
at that time not only many knights, but almost all the Bishops of Italy were
Arrians.

This Knights name was Narsetes, and because he was so valiant in arms, and so
aduenturous in wars, he was chosen Chieftaine general of the Roman Empire.
For the Romans had this excellency, that when they had a valiant and stout
Captain (although they might have his weight of gold given them) they would
never depart from his person. He enterprised so great things, he overcame such
mighty Realms, and had such notable victories over his enemies, that the
Romans said, he had in him the strength of Hercules, the hardiness of Hector,
the noblenes of Alexander, the policy of Pyrrhus, and the fortune of Scipio.
For many of the vain Gentiles held opinion, that as the bodies did distribute
their goods in the life, so did the souls part their gifts, after the death.

This Narsetes was a pitiful Captain, and very constant in the Faith of
Christ, liberal to give alms, effectuous to build new Monasteryes, and in
repairing Churches, a man very careful. And truly it was a rare thing: For in
great wars (upon small occasions) Captains use to beat down churches: and that
which was greatest of all was, that he feared God devoutly, visited The false
opinion of the Gentiles.
the Hospitals, said his devotions with penitent tears, and above all, be
resorted very often to the Churches in the night.

And this excellency was no less then the other. For the Captains in such an
hour are readier to kill men in their Camp, then to bewail their sins in
the Church.

Finally, he was a Christian, and (...).
so devour, that God gave him the victories more through the prayers which he
used, then through the weapons wherewith he fought. For there was never man
that saw him shed the blood of his enemies in battle before he had shed the
tears of his eyes in the Temple. And to the end Christian Princes and
Captains may see how much better it is to pacific God by tears and prayers,
then to have their Camp full of soldiers and riches: of many of his doings I
will declare part as here follows.

Justinian the Emperor being in Alexandrie, Totila King of the Goths, did
many mischiefs, and great damages throughout all Italy, so that the Romans
durst not go by the way, nor could be in safeguarde in their houses. For the
Goths in the The outrages of the Goths.
day kept the ways, and in the night robbed and spoiled all the people,
wherefore Justinian the Emperor, not knowing the matter, sent the noble
Narsetes Captain General against the Goths, who being arrived in Italy,
immediately confedered with the Lumbardes, the which at that time had their
mansion in Hungary, and sent his messengers to King Albonius, (at that time
their King) for aid against the Goths and in so doing, he said he should
see how faithful a friend he would be to his friends, and how cruel an
enemy to his enemies.

Albonius hearing the message of Narsetes was very glad, and without delay
armed a great and puissant Army, which by the Adriatical sea came into Italy:
so that the answer and the offer came both at one time with effect, and so
together arrived in one day (for the succor of Narsetes) the two Armies that
is to say, that of the Romans, and of the Lumbardes, the which assembled all
in one, and marched under the banner of their Captain Narsetes. Wherefore
Totila King of the Goths being advertised, (as one that had not proved the
happy fortune of Narsetes, nor the force of the Lumbardes) sent to offer them
the battle, which was given in the fields of Aquileia, and it was of both
parts so fierce and cruel, that infinite were they that dyed: but in the end
Totilla King of the Goths was overcome, and neither he, nor any of his host
escaped alive.

The good Captain Narsetes, after the battle gave many and noble gifts to the
Lumbardes, and so with riches and victory they returned into Hungary toward
their King Albonius. And truly this Narsetes did as he was bound to do, For
the friend A worthy saying approned by Narsetes.
cannot be recompensed by riches, when for his friend he puts his life in
ieopardy.

When the Lumbards were gone, Narsetes caused all the spoil of his Camp to
be divided amongst his soldiers, and that which belonged unto him, he gave it
wholly to the poor Monasteries: so that by this victory Narsetes got triple
renown, that is to say, very bountiful, in that he gave to the Lumbardes,
charitable, in that he gave to the poor, and valiant in that he vanquished so
puissant enemies.

Dagobert King of France beyond the Alps, being a courageous young Prince, and
very desirous of honor, (for no other cause but to leave of him some memory)
determined himself in person to pass into Italy, although he had no just
title thereunto. For the hearts puffed up with pride little pass though they
war of an unjust quarrel. His mishap was such, that the same day he passed the
river of Rubico, where the Romans in old time limited the marches of Italy,
news came to him that his own country was up, and those which were there, one
rebelled against the other, that which was not without the great permission of
God. For it is but reason that that King should lose his own Realm by divine
justice, which will take other men's only through man's folly. The King Dagobert
assembling all the chiefest of his Realm to counsel, it was agreede and
concluded by all, that he alone in person should return into France, and for
his reputation should leave all the Army in Italy. Whereof remained captains,
Buccelinus and Amingus. For itis better for a Prince to defend his Country by
justice, then to conquer another by tyranny. As this Army of Buccelinas was
great, so was he courageous and wrought mapy and great damages in Italy,
especially in the land of Campagnia. And worse then that, all the riches that
he had sacked, and all the captives he had taken, he would neither restore,
nor yet suffer them Buccelinus did many outrages in Italy.
to be ransomed: but so soon as he took them, he sent them unto the King, as
one that showed himself more desirous to rob and spoil, then to fight and
wage battle.

This Captain Buccelinus then being in Campagnia, retired into a place called
Tarentum with all his army because of winter.

Narsetes suddenly came upon him, and gave him battle, that was between them
very cruel, wherein Buccelinus was vanquished, and left dead in the field
amongst the other Captains of Gaul. Which news brought to Amingus ears
being the other Captain of the Gauls, and seeing his companion dead, he
confedered with Auidinus Captain of the Goths, and they together came against
the Romans, which thing was not unknown to Narsetes, to give the battle near
to Caietto, whereas those Captains were conquered, and taken alive. Of whom
Amingus was beheaded by the commandment of Narsetes: and Auidinus was sent by
him prisoner to the Emperor of Constantinople. The Captain Narsetes wan
another battle against Syndual King of Britons, which came into Italy with a
huge multitude of people, to recover the realm of Partinopilis, which now we
call Naples: for he said it appertained unto him of right, as to one of the
lynage of Hercules, who in ancient time was King of that Realm. This King
Sindual within a time became friend unto Narsetes, and behaved himself
outwardly as a friend and confederate: but in secret conspired against the
Romans, and would have been King of the Romans, and reigned alone in Italy,
through the which there sprang between him and Narsetes cruel wars, wherein
Fortune was a long time variable: For there is not The inconstancy of Fortune.
so aduenturous a Captain, to whom in long wars Fortune is always
prosperous.

Finally, the King Sinduall and Narsetes agreed to hazard their men, and also
their lives in one day unto the disctetion of Fortune, so that both the armies
joined together, and fought between Verona and Terento, where King Sindual was
conquered, and taken alive, and the same day with out any delay was hanged
openly, And because that Narsetes was not acustomed to use such cruelty against
those that were overcome, and especially against Kings and worthy Knights, he
commanded his title to be set on the gibbet, whereon the King hanged, which
said this:

A simple cord here stopped King Synduals breath, King Synduals Epitaph.

By faultlesse doom of hie Narsetes hest,
Not that he sought by warlike deeds his death,
But that in peace he did a traytorrest.
Such and many other battles and victories had this aduenturous and good
Captain, not only in the borders of Italy, but also in Asia, where for many
years he had the government of the Country. And as he was a good Christian,
so Almighty God in all his affairs did prosper him.

After all these wars past, Justinian the younger sent him to the kingdom of
Constantinople to be chief Governor of all those Provinces, and although he
did well in warlike affairs: yet he did much better in the administration of
the commonwealth: For men that are accustomed to travel in wars, have a good
learning how to govern the people in peace. For this occasion (amongst all
mortal men) Narsetes was praised and esteemed, that is, for his valiantness
in the battles which he overcame, for his riches through the spoils that he
took, and for the justice he ministered to all men where he ruled. Narsetes
because he was a Grecian borne, was envied of the Romans, and chiefly,
because he daily increased both his honor and riches. For truly, virtue,
honor and riches in a man are but a brand to light envy to all the world. And
this was the occasion.

One day there came many noble Romans to the Emperor Justinian, and to the
Empress Sophia Augusta, Ennie a foe to all virtue.
to complain of Narsetes, and of his behavior and governing, and said these
words unto him. we let you know, most noble Prince, and Sovereign Lady, that
we had rather (of the two) to serve the Goths, then to obey the Greeks: and
we speak this, because that the Eunuch commanded us more to his own
service, then he does to that of yours, and the worst is, that you know it
not, and if you know it, at the least you do not remedy it, Choose therefore
one of these two things, whether you will deliver us from the government of the
Greek, or suffer that we put Rome and our selves into the hands of the
Goths: For it is less grief for the Romans to be subject to a puissant
King, then to an effeminate Eunuch and tyrant.

Narsetes being present, hearing Narsetes reply.
those quarrels (as they say) said thus: O noble Prince, if I have committed
any evil, it is impossible for me to find one that will do me good: but if
I have done well, no man shall be able to do me wrong.

The Empress Sophia of long time before had hated Narsetes: some said it was
because he was an Eunuch, other think it was because he was rich, and some
other judge, because he was in greater authority in the Empire then she.
Wherefore perceiving she had good occasion and opportunity for the same, she
spoke a word much to his reproach: which was this. Since thou art an Eunuch,
Narsetes, and not a man, it is not fit for thee to have a man's office,
therefore The severe sentence of the Empress.
I command thee to work with my handmaides, and there thou shall serve to
spin and weaue clothes.

Narsetes took this word heavily, and truly it was with great spite spoken.
Wherefore he stoutly and courageously spoke unto the Empress Sophia these
words, and said: I had rather most exccellent Princess, thou had chastised
me as a Noble Dame, then to have reproved me with a word, as a simple woman:
but since it is so that you have liberty and authority to command me, know
you also that I have the self same to obey you, and therefore I take my leave,
and now I go to weaue my web, which perhaps your self whilst you live,
shall never untwine.

Narsetes immediately went his way, and came into Itaty, unto the City of
Naples, (chief and head of Campagnia) and from thence he dispatched his
Ambassadors immediately to the King of Hungary, where the Lumbards at that
time had their mantion place, counselling them to forsake that land, so evil
tilled, so barren, cold and little, and that they should come and enhabite
Italy, which was a plain Country, fertile and ample, temperate and very rich,
and that now or never they should conquer it. And Narsetes therewith not
contented, (but to provoke his friends the more, and make them the more
covetous) sent them part of every good thing that was in Italy, that is to say,
light horses, rich armor, sweet, pleasant and dainty fruits, fine metals,
and may kinds of ointments very odoriserous, silks, and Marchandises of many
and diverse sorts.

The Ambassadors arrived in Pannony, which now is called Hungary, were
honorably received, and the Lumbardes seeing that there were such, and so many
goodly things in Italy, determined to leave Pannonia, and go spoil and
conquer Italy, although it belonged to Rome, and were at that season friends
with the Romans: yet notwithstanding they had little respect to this. And
hereat no man ought to marvel, for in that place there is never perfect
friendship, where he that commands is constrained to demand help of others.

The Lumbards determined for to pass into Italy, and at that time there was
seen of the Italians visibly in the air sundry Armies of fire, that one
cruelly killed the other. Which thing greatly feared the hearts of the people.
For by this they knew that Strange sights seen in the air.
within a short space much of their blood and of their enemies also should be
shed: for it is an old ancient custom, that when any great matter does chance
to any Realm, first the Planets and Elements do declare the same by secret
tokens: the ingratitude of the Emperor Justinian against Narsetes his
Captain, and the evil The ingratitude of the Emperor against Narsetes.
words which Sophia spoke unto him, were the occasion that the Lumhards invaded
and destroyed all Italy, which thing valiant Princes ought well to note, to
keep themselves from ingratitude toward their servants, who has done them
great service. For it is a general rule, That the ingratitude of a great
benefit makes the servants despair of recempence, or of a faithful jeruant,
makes him become a A good observation.
cruel and mortal enemy. And let not Princes trust men, because they be
native of their realms, brought up and nourished in their Palaces, and always
have been faithful in their services, that therefore they will not of good
subjects be turned to evil, nor yet of faithful become disloyal. For such
imagination is vain. For the Prince that in his doings is unthankful, cannot
keep nor retain any honest man long in his service. One thing the noble
Iustintan did with Narsetes, whereof all noble and sage Princes ought to
beware, that is to know, he did not only give ear unto his enemies, and
believed them: but also before them he did dishonor him, and shame him to his
power, which thing made him utterly to despair. For there is nothing that
spiteth a man more then to have before his enemies any injury or dishonor done
unto him of his superior.

The Empress Sophia therefore deserved great reproach for speaking such
dishonest words to Narsetes, to send him to thread the needles in that
occupation where the damsels wrought. For it is the duty of a Noble Princess
to mitigate the ire of Princes when they are angry, and not to provoke the^
further to anger. Narsetes then always doubting the Empress Sophia, never
after returned into Naples, where she was, but rather came from Naples to
Rome, a year before the Lambards came into Italy, where he received all the
Sacraments, and like a devout Christian he dyed.

His body was carried to Alexandria (...).
in a cossin of silver, all set with precious stones, and there was buried. And
a man cannot tell whether the displeasure were greater that all Asia had not to
see Narsetes alive, or the pleasure that Sophia had to see him dead. For the
impatient heart, especially of a woman, has no rest, until she see her
enemy dead.

CHAP. XVII. Of a Letter the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to the King of
Sicilie, in which he records the travels they endured together in their
youth, and reproves him of his small reverence toward the Temples.
MArcus Aurelius sole Emperor of Rome Marcus. Aurelius speech to Gorbon.
borne in Mount Celio, called the old Tribune, wishes health and long life to
thee Gorbin, Lord and King of Sicilie. As it is the custom of the Roman
Emperors, the first year of my reign I wrote generally to all the Isle: the
second year I wrote generally unto thy Court and Palace, and at this present
I write more particularly to thy person. And although that Princes have great
Realms, yet they ought not therefore to cease to communicate with their old
friends. Since I took my pen to write unto thee, I stayed my hand a great
while from writing, and it was not for that I was slothful, but because I was
ashamed to see all Rome offended with thee: I let thee to know, most excellent
Prince, that in this I say, I am thy true friend; for in my heart I feel thy
trouble, and so said Euripides, That which with the heart is loved, with the
heart is lamented.

But before I show thee the cause of my writing, I will reduce into thy memory
some things past of our youth, and thereby we shall see what we were then,
and what we are now: for no man does so much rejoice of his prosperity present,
as he which calls to mind his miseries past.

Thou shall call to mind, most excellent Prince, that we two together did
learn to read in Capua, and after we studied a little in Tarentum: and from
thence we went to Rhodes, where I read Rhethorike, and thou heardest
Philosophy. And afterward in the end of ten years, we went to the wars of
Pannonia, where I gave my self to music, for the affections of young men are
so variable, that daily they would know strange Realms and change offices.

And in all those iournies with the force of youth, the sweet company, with
the pleasant communication of Sciences, and with a vain hope we did dissemble
our extreme poverty which was so great, that many times and often we desired
not that which many had, but that little which to few abounded.

Do thou remember, that when Afflictions incident to all men.
we sailed by the gulf Arpin, to go into Hellespont, a long and tempestuous
torment came upon us, wherein we were taken of a Pirate, and for our ransom
he made us row about nine months in a Galley, whereas I cannot tell which was
greater, either the want of bread, or the abundance of stripes which we
always endured? Have thou forgotten also that in the City of Rhodes, when we
were besieged of Bruerdus, puissant King of Epirotes, for the space of
fourteen months, we were ten without eating flesh, save only two cats, the
one which we stole, and the other which we bought? remember that thou and I
(being in Tarent) were desired of our Host to go to the feast of the great
Goddess Dtana, into the which Temple none could enter that day, but those
which were new apparrelled. And to say the truth, we determined not to go
thither, thou because thy garments were torn, and I because my shoes were
broken, and that both the times we were sick in Capua, they never cured us by
diet; for our diseases never proceeded of excess but of extreme hunger. And
oftentimes Retropus the Physician, for his pleasure spoke to us, in the
University and said: Alas children, you dye not through surfeiting and much
eating. And truly he said truth, for the Country was so dear, and our money
so scarce, that The miseries of Marcus Aurelius.
we did never eat until the time we could endure no longer for famine. Do
thou not remember the great famine that was in Capua, for the which cause we
were in the war of Alexandria? wherein my flesh did tremble, remembering the
great perils which we passed in the gulf of Theberinth. What snowes at
winter, what extreme heat all Summer, what general famine in the fields,
what outrageous pestilence amongst the people? and worst of all, what
persecution of strangers, and what evil will we had of ours? remember also
that in the city of Naples, when we made our prayer, the Prophetess Flauia,
she told us what should become of us, after we left our Studies. She told
me that I should be an Emperor, and said that thou should be a King.

To the which answer we gave such credit: that we took it not only for a
mock, but also for a manifest injury. And now I do not marvel, in that then
we both marvelled wonderful much. For envious fortune practiced her power more
in plucking down the rich, then in setting up the poor. Behold (excellent
Princes) the great power of the Goddess, the wheel of fortune, and the
variety of times: who would have thought when I had my hands all rough and
scuruy with rowing in the Galley, that between those hands the Scepter of the
Roman Empire should have been put? Who would have thought, when I was so
sick for lack of meat, that I should ever have surfetted by too much eating?
Who would have thought when I could not be satisfied with cattes flesh, that
I should have then glutted with too much dainty meats? Who would have thought
at that time, when I left going into the Temple, because my shoes were broken,
that another time should come when I should ride triumphing in Chariots, and
upon the shoulders of other men? who would have thought that that which with my
ears I heard of the Prophets in Campagnia, I should see here with my eyes in
Rome. O how many did hope (at the time we were in Asia) to be governors of
Rome, and Lords of Sicille, which not only failed of the honor that they
desired, but also obtained the death, which they never feared: for oftentimes
it chances to ambitious men, that in their greatest ruff, and when they
think their honor spun and wouen, then their estate with the web of their
life in one moment is broken. If at that time one had demanded the Tirant
Laodicius (aspiring to the Kingdom of Sicille) and Ruphus Caluus who looked to
be Emperor of Rome, what they thought of themselves: assuredly, they would
have sworn their hope to have been as certain, as ours was doubtful. For it
is natural to proud men, to delight themselves, and to set their whole mind
upon vain devises. It is a strange thing and worthy of memory, that they
having the honor in their eyes failed of it, and we not thinking thereof in
our hearts should obtain it.

But herein fortune showed her might, that she provided hope for those which
looked for least: and despair for others that hoped for most, which thing
grieved them at the very heart. For no patience can endure to see a man obtain
that without travel, which he could never compass by much labor. I cannot
tell if I should say, like a simple Roman, That those things consist in
fortune: or if I should say, like a good Philosopher, That all the Gods do
ordain them: For in the end, no Fortune nor chance can do any thing without
the Gods assent.

Let the proud and envious travel as much as they will, and the ambitious take
as much care as they can: All is worth nothing without the help of God.
I say and affirm, that little avails humane diligence to attain to great
estates, if the Gods be their enemies. Suppose that evil Fortune do ordain
it, or that the God and Gods do suffer it, I see those which have their
thoughts high, oftentimes are but of base estate: and so in fine, to come to
mischief or extreme poverty, and those that have their thoghts low, are humble
of heart, and for the more part are greatly exalted by fortune. For many
oftentimes dream that they are Lords, and men of great estate, which when they
are awake, find themselves slaves to all men.

The condition of honor is such, as I never read the like: and therefore such
as have to do with her, ought to take good heed: For her conditions are such,
she enquireth for him whom she never saw, and she runs after him that
flies from her, she honors him that esteems her not, and she demands
him which wills her not, she gives to him that requires her not, and she
trusts him whom she knows not.

Finally, Honor has this custom, to forsake him that esteems her: and to
remain with him which little regards her. The curious Travelers ask not
what place this, or that is, but do demand what way they must take to lead
them to the place they go. I mean the Princes and Noble men ought not
directly to cast their eyes upon honor: but in the way of virtue, which
brings them to honor. For daily we see many remain defamed, only for
seeking honor: and others also exalted and esteemed for flying from her.

O miserable World, thou know I know thee well, and that which I The fickle
estate or the world.
know of thee is, That thou art a Sepulcher of the dead, a prison of the
living, a shop of vices, a Hangman of virtues, oblivion of antiquity, an
enemy of things present, a pittefall to the rich, and a burden to the poor, a
house of Pilgrims, and a den of thieves,

Finally O World, Thou art a slaunderer of the good, a rauenour of the wicked,
and a deceyuer and abuser of all, and in thee O world, to speak the truth, It
is almost impossible to live contented, and much less to live in honor.

For if thou will give honor to the good, they think themselves dishonored,
and esteem thy honor as a thing of mockery. And if perchance they be evil
and light, thou suffer them to come often to honor by way of mockery,
meaning infamy and dishonor unto them.

O immortal Gods, I am oftentimes troubled in my thought, whose case I should
more lament, either the evil man advanced without desert, or the good man
overthrown without cause. And truly in this case, the pitiful man will have
compassion on them both. For if the evil live, he is sure to fall, and if the
good fall, we doubt whether ever he shall rise again. If all falls were
alike all would be healed and cured him one salve: but some fall on then feet,
some on their sides, others stumble, and fall not, and other fall down right,
but some do give them a hand. I mean some there are which fall from their
estate, and lose no more but their substance: others fall, and for very sorrow
lose not only their goods, but their lives withal. Other there are who fall,
who neither lose their lives nor goods, but their honor only. So according to
the discretion of Fortune, the more they have, the more still he takes from
thee, and I greatly muse why the Gods do never remedy it: for when Fortune
once begins to overthrow a poor man, she does not only take all that he
has from him, but all those which may and will succor him. So that the poor
man is bound more to lament for another man's evil, then for his own proper.
There is a great difference between the mishappe of the good, and adventures
of the Difference between the good and the evil.
evil. For of the ill we cannot say, that he discendeth, but that he falls,
and of the good, we may only say, that he discendeth and falls not. For in
the end, true honor does not consist in the perfection and dignity that a man
has, but in the good life that he leads, It is a misery for to see the
vain men of this world, when they go about to get any thing, and to compass
any great matter of importance, to mark their early rising in a morning,
their late going to bed at night, and the look which they cast upon other men,
to note how importunate they are to some, and how troublesome they are to
others, and afterward (notwithstanding their long sure and great pain) an
other man which ^ittle thought thereof, comes to that honor, rejoicing and
without travel, which he before by so great pairs, and with so great expenses
of money has sought: so that in seeking honor by travel, he comes to
infamy with shame. For I my self have seen sundry things lost by negligence,
and many more by too much diligence.

CHAP. XVIII. The Emperor proceeds in his letter, to admonish Princes to be
fearful of their Gods, and of the sentence which the Senate gave upon this
King, for pulling down the Church.
AL these things (most excellent Prince) I have told thee, and for none other
cause but to aggrauate this case, and to show the peril thereof. For the good
Physician (to take away the bitterness of the pille) ministers some sweet
sugar to delight the Patient withal. The 20. day of the month of January
(here before the Senate) was presented a long and large information of thee,
and it was sent by the Consul, which went to visit that Isle of Cicilla,
which as thou know is an old order of Rome, from three months to three
months, to visit all the Land and Country subject to the same. For those
Princes are unjust, which have more care to take up their Rentes, then
diligence to know if their people be well ordered by Justice. Of the
information taken of thee and thy person (if my memory deceive me not) this
was the effect: That thou art temperate in eating, moderate in expenses:
pitiful to Widows, Father to Orphans gentle to those that serve thee,
patient with those that offend thee, diligent to keep and maintain peace, and
faithful, to observe league, and thou art accused only to be negligent in
the service of God.

By one little Gate left open, oftentimes a great City besieged is lost: by
one only treason, the infinite services past are not esteemed. I mean (most
excellent Prince) that it little preuayleth to think much of worldly matters,
and to forget all divine services. For the good Prince ought first to shut the
gate against vices, that they enter not into his subjects, before he does
fortify the walls against his enemies.

Let every man be as he will, and say what he list, I for my part, think it
sure, That the man which is The d^^ty of a good Prince.
not a studious seruer of the Gods, all his virtues shall be turned into vices,
and esteemed as slanders.

For it it is a general rule in high Philosophy, That a work is not called
virtuous, because I work it only, but it is virtuous, because it is
acceptable to the Gods,

Oh excellent Prince, do not thou know that there is no man so wise, neither
so sage, but erreth more through ignorance, then he does good by wisdom? And
do not thou know that there is no man so just, but wants much to execute
true justice? And finally (I say,) that there is no virtue so virtuous, but it
wants more then it has, to be perfect. Wherefore all our Justice ought to be
made perfect to the divine Justice: and the virtue which we lack, ought to be
supplied under the great perfection, wherewith the Gods abound.

And therefore amongst us Romans we have this law, (which is the chief of all
the Philosophers) That here amongst mortal men, nor of mortal men, nor with
mortal men, any thing is perfect, unless it be by the Gods confirmed.

Since men are feeble and frail, it can not be chosen but they should commit
many frailtyes. And in such case the sage Princes ought and should bear with
all the fraylties that men commit: Those excepted which are not injurious to
the Gods, whom (if it were possible,) unawares ought to be punished. For the
Prince should not be called a Prince, but a Tyrant, that is desirous to revenge
his own injury, and in chastening those which are against the Gods, shows
himself negligent.

Let them think what they list, and The difference between a good prince and
a Tyrant.
complain what they will, that Prince which will enlarge his dominions, and
give occasion that the service of God be diminished: such a man we will not call
a king that governs, but a tirant:

If we call him a Tyrant that spoyleth the people, sleeth the men, persecuteth
the innocent, dishonors Virgins, and robs Realms.

Tell me (most excellent Prince,) What lacks he of a Tyrant, that plucketh
down Churches, and little esteems the Gods: There is no token more manifest,
that the Prince is a Tyrant, then when he takes upon him any thing which is
distasteful, or any way contrary to the will of the Gods. For he has but
small regard toward men, that so little fear the Gods.

Lycurgus that most famous King of the Lacedaemonians, says in one of his
ancient laws these words. We ordain and command that no Lacedemonian
presume to receive mercy or favor of the Prince, which will not enforce
himself to serve the Gods. For he is not only evil, but of all other most
wicked. O excellent King, O glorious World, O fortunate Realm, wherein those
Ancients would their Prince should be so just, that the gifts were not
esteemed, unless their lives were honest: for they thought that of no value
which by the hands of evil men was given. Thou have done one thing very
dishonest (most noble Prince) the which to write unto thee, I am ashamed, which
is, for to enlarge thy new Palace, thou have plucked down an old Temple, the
which thing thou should neither have done, nor yet have thought: for in the
end, though the stones of the Temple be of small importance, yet the Gods to
whom they were dedicated were of much value. Pardon me (excellent Prince)
though I et thee understand that this fact has been done in such sort, that
thereby I was amassed, and all Rome also offended, the sacred Senate thou have
greatly vexed, and further, all judge thee a dissolute man, and all men procure
that thou may be extremely punished, and hereof marvel not: For in Rome they
believe, that the Prince which dares pluck down He that violateth the
Temple fears not God.
Temples, does little fear the Gods. For that thou art a noble Prince, and an
old friend of mine, I have traveled to bring thee in favor with the Senate,
and because thou have no means to excuse thy error committed, they do not
determine to forgive thee this fault, before they see in thee a token of
amendment. And of truth me thinks they have reason: For there is nothing that
troubles poor men more, then to see that they, and not the rich for their
offenses are chastised and punished: That which the sacred Senate has ordained
is, that forthwith thou begin to build the Temple a new, and that it should be
more large, hie, beutifull, and richer then ever it was. So that thou take as
much of thy Palace to enlarge the Temple, as thou tookest of the Temple to
beautify thy Palace. After thou have performed this, though now thou think
thy self half dishonored, thou will then think thy self very happy. For
not thou of the Gods, but the Gods of thee shall have taken thy house to make
their Temple. I believe well it will be great cost and charges unto thee before
thou have finished the Temple: Wherefore I send thee 40. thousand sexterces to
help thy building, and to the end it should be more secret, I send thee them
by my Secretary Panuntius, to whom, in all, and for all, thou shall give
credit. I send thee likewise a collar of gold, which one brought me from the
river of Nyle, and because it was too narrow for me, I suppose it will be fit
for thee, one has brought me moyles out of Spain, whereof I send thee two.
Panuntius my Secretary brings with him a very good Moyle, the which he
esteems much: so that there is no man that can either buy her, or borrow her.
I delight in her so much that I desire thou cause her either to be bought or
stolen, and sent unto me here in Rome,

My wife Faustine saluteth thee, and to the excellent Queen thy Wife: of her
part and mine, as much as is possible, do our commendations, and these
Popingeyes, Faustine presents unto her. Marcus the Roman Emperor writes to
thee with his own hand.

CHAP. XIX. How the Gentiles honored these which were devout in the service of
the Gods.
THe ancient Roman Historiographers agree, that at the beginning there were
seven Kings, which governed Rome for the space of 24. years. The second
whereof was named Pompilius, who amongst all the other was most highly
esteemed, for none other cause, but for that he was a great worshipper of the
Gods, and a sumptuous builder of the Temples. For the Roman Princes were as
much beloved for serving the Gods, as they were honored for vanquishing their
enemies. This man was of such sort, that he allowed Rome wholly for the Gods,
and made a house for himself without the City. For it was an ancient Law in
Rome that no An ancient (...).
man should be so bold to dwell in any house consecrated for the gods.

The fifth King of the Romans was Tarquinius Priscus. And as Tarquinius
Superbus was vicious and abhorred of the people, so was this virtuous, and
well-beloved of the Gods, and was greatly praised in all his doings, because he
feared God, and continually visited the Temples, and not contented with those
which were finished, but built also in the High Capitol the sacred Temple of
Jupiter: For no Prince could build any house in Rome for himself, unless
first he made a Temple for the Gods of the Commonwealth.

This Temple was had in so great reverence, that as the Romans honored Jupiter
for the God above all other Gods, so was that Temple esteemed above all other
Temples. In the wars between the ^alisques, and the Carpenates, two Roman
Captains were vanquished, or the which. the one named (...) dyed: whereupon
rose such a great (...) among the^, that many flying (...) the wars, came
back again to Rome. For the victorious has always this Privilege, That
though they be few, yet they are always feared of them that be overcome.

This occasion m^ued the Romans to choose new Captains, and truly they did
like wise men. For oftentimes it ha^neth by (...) the Captains of the wars,
fortune likewise changes her doings. And the Captain that was elected for
the wars, was Marcus Purius Camillus, The vow of Marcus Camillus.
who though he were stout and hardy, yet before he went to the wars, he offered
great sacrifices to the Gods, and made a vow that if he returned to Rome
victorious, he would build a solemn Temple. For it was the custom in Rome,
that immediately when the Roman Captain would enterprise to do any notable
thing, he should make a vow to build Temples. Now when Camillus returned
afterward victorious, he did not only build a Temple, but also furnished it
with all manner of implements thereunto belonging, which he got by spoil, and
vanquishing his enemies. And since he was for this reprehended of some, saying
that the Roman Captains should offer their hearts to the Gods, and divide the
Treasures among the Soldiers: he answered these words. I like a man did ask
the Gods but one triumph: and they like Gods did give me many: Therefore
considering this, it is but just, s^th I was (...) in promising, that I should
be large in perso^^ing For even as I did thank them for. that they gave me
double, in respect of that I demanded: so likewise shall they esteem that
which I do give, in respect of that which I promised. At that time when the
cruel war was betwixt Rome, and the City of Neye, the Romans kept it besieged
5. years together, and in the end by policy took it. For it chances
sundry times in war, that that City in short time by policy is won, which
by great strength a long time has been defended.

Marcus Furius, Dictator of Rome, and at that time Captain, commanded a
Proclamation to be had through his Host, that incontinently after the City was
taken, none should be so hardy as to kill any of the Citizens, but those which
were found armed. Which thing the enemies understanding, unarmed themselves,
and so escaped.

And truly this example was worthy of nothing: For as the Captains ought to
show themselves fierce and cruel The duty of every good Captain.
at the beginning: so after the victory had of their enemies, they should show
themselves meek and pitiful.

This Dictator Camillus, for an other thing he did, was much commended above
the residue. That is to say, he did not only not consent to rob the
Temples. nor dishonor the Gods; but he himself with great reverence took
the sacred vessels of the Temples, and the Gods which were therein, (especially
the Goddess Juno) and brought them all to Rome. For amongst the Ancients
there was a Law, that the Gods of them which were vanquished, should not come
by lot to the Captains being Conquerours: therefore he made in the Mount
Auentino a sumptuous Temple, wherein he placed all the Gods together, with all
the holy Relics which he wanne. For the greater Triumph the Romans had over
their enemies, so much the better they handled the Gods of the people
vanquished. Also you ought to know, that the Romans after many victories,
determined to make a crown of gold very great and rich, and to offer it to
the God Apollo: but since the common Treasure was poor, (because there was but
little silver, and less gold to make that crown) The Roman Matrons defaced
their Jewels and ouches of gold and silver, to make the Crown there withal.
For in Rome there never wanted money (if it were demanded) for the service of
Gods to repair Temples, or to redeem Captives. The Senate esteemed the well
willing hearts of these women in such sort, that they granted them three
things: that is say, To wear on their heads Garlands of flowers, to go in
Chariots to the common places, and to go The reward of well doing.
openly to the feasts of the Gods. For the ancient Romans were so honest,
that they never ware gold on their heads, neither went they at any time to the
feasts uncovered.

A man ought not to marvel that the Romans granted such privileges unto the
ancient Matrones of Rome: For they used never to be obliuious of any benefit
received, but rather gentle, with thanks and rewards to recompense the same.

An other notable thing chanced in Rome, which was, that the Romans sent two
Tribunes, the which were called Caulius and Sergius, into the Isle of Delphos
with great presents to offer unto the God Apollo. For as Titus Liuius says,
Rome yearly sent a present unto the God Apollo, and Apollo gave unto the
Romans counsel. And as the Tribunes went out of the way, they fell into the
hands of pirates and rouers on the sea, which took them with their treasures,
and brought them to the City of Liparie. But the citizens understanding that
those presents The (...) into the hands of Pylates.
were consecrated to the God Apollo, did not only deliver them all their
Treasure again: but also gave them much more, and guides therewith to conduct
them safely, (both going and coming) from all peril and danger.

The Romans being advertised of their genltenesse, by the messengers, which
were come safe and alive, did so much rejoice, that they ordained in Rome, that
the Nobles of Liparie should be made Senators of Rome, and all the others
should be confederates and of aliance unto them. And they caused further that
two priests of Liparie should always remain in the Temple of Jupiter, which
privilege was never granted to any other strangers but to them only. For the
Romans had so great zeal, and love to their Gods, that in the services of the
temples, they trusted none, but those The great zeal of the Romans.
which were native and ancient of Rome, and also were both wise and virtuous.

When Quintus Fabius and Publius Decius were in the wars against the Samnites
and Tuscanes, and likewise against the Vmbres, many marvelous and terrible
signs were seen in Rome, which things did not only fear those that saw
them, but also those which heard of them. Upon which occasion the Romans and
the Roman Matrones (both night and day,) offered great sacrifices to the gods.
For they said, if we can pacify the wrath of the Gods in Rome, we shall never
need to fear our enemies in the field.

The thing was this, that as the Roman Matrons went visiting the temples, to
appease the ire of the Gods, many senators wives came to the temple of
chastity, to offer sacrifice. For in the time of the puissant power of the
Romans, the Women did sacrifice in the temples of the Gods.

At that time Virginea, the daughter of Aureus Virgineus, the Consul Plebeian,
the which was forbidden to do sacrifice, for that she was none of the
Senators wives, but a Plebeian; as The difference of women in Rome.
much to say, as a Crafts-woman, and no Gentlemans-Daughter borne. For the
Noblewomen were had in so great veneration, and so highly esteemed, that all
the other seemed (in respect of them) but hand-maydes and slaves.

The noble Roman Virginea, seeing her to be so repulsed and disdained of the
other matrones, made of her own house a temple, to the Goddess of Chastity,
and with much devotion and reverence honored her. The which thing being
published abroad throughout Rome, many other women came thither, to do
Sacrifice likewise. For Fortune is so variable, that oftentimes those which of
pride have forbidden us their houses, come after by humility, to do us
service at ours.

For this cause, this Virginea the Foundresse was so greatly praised, that the
Romans in her life made her Patrice, (that is, a Noble Roman) and after her
death caused her Image and statue to be made and set up in the high Capitol:
and about this Image were engraven certain Greek characters, the effect
whereof was this.

PATRICE the great this Image does present,
That in her life, did give with mind devout
The Gods her house, and therefore to them went
When lively breath, by death was chased out.
Of all these Hystories aboue-named, Titus Liuius, lib: 2. 5. and 9.
Titus Liuius makes mention, in his first Decade: the second, fifth, and ninth
book, and though he declares them more at large, yet this shall suffice for my
purpose, I have sought amongst the Gentiles these few Examples, to reprove
Christian Princes; Only to the end they might see how studious and seruent
our Fathers were in the service of their Idols, and contrariwise how cold and
negligent we are to honor and serve our true and living God.

It is a shame to tell how the ancient Romans with all their hearts, did serve
the Gods without any understanding, and how those which are Difference between
the true God and the false.
Christians (for the most part) serve the true God, not in truth, but with
hypocrisy and dissimulation. For the children of this World will take no
pains, but for to provoke the pleasures of the body.

Many wondered for what occasion God did so much for them, and they did nothing
for God? To this may be answered, that if they had known one true God, all the
sacrifices they had done to their other Gods, they would have done to him
only, and as God is just, so he rewarded them in their temporal
prosperities, Not for that they did well but for that they desired to do well.
For in our divine Law, God does not regard what we are, but what we desire to
he.

Christian Princes marvel much what the occasion should be, that they are not
so fortunate as the Gentiles were. To this may be answered, that either they
be good or evil. If they be good, truly God should do them wrong, if for the
payment of their faithful services, he should recompense them with these
worldly vanities: For without doubt, one only loving countenance of God in the
world to come, is more worth then all the temporal goods of this world
present. But if these such great Lords be evil in their persons, ambitions in
governing their Dominions, not pitiful to widows and father less, not
fearful of God, nor of his threatenings, and moreover, never to have mind to
serve him, but only when they see themselves in some great ieopardy, in such
case God will not hear them, and much less favor them. For without doubt The
service is more acceptable, which of free will proceeds, then that which of
necessity is offered.

CHAP. XX. For five causes Princes ought to be better Christians then their
Subjects.
IN mine opinion, Princes ought, and are bound to be virtuous for five causes.
I say virtuous, Princes ought to excel their Subjects.
in that they should love, and fear God: for he only may be called virtuous,
which in the Catholic Faith of the Church, and in the fear of God has
always remained constant. First Princes should fear, love, serve, and love
one only God whom they worship, for that they acknowledge him only, and none
other to be the head both of heaven and earth. For in the end, there is
nothing so puissant but it is subject to the divine power.

And truly that Prince is in great peril of damnation of his soul, if in his
government he has not always before his eyes the fear and love of the
supreme Prince, to whom we must render of all our doings an account.

For the Prince has great occasion to be vicious, thinking that for the vice
he shall not be chastised. I have read in diverse and sundry writings, and I
never found one ancient Prince to be contented with one only God, but that
they had and served many Gods. Julius Caesar carriedfiue Gods painted in a
Table, and Scipio the great carried seven purtraied in metal.

And furthermore, they were not contented to have many: but yet in sacrifices
and services, they offered unto them all. The Christian Princes which keep and
have but one very true and omnipotent God, are so unthankful, that they
think it much to serve and give acceptable service unto him. And though
peradventure some say, that it is more painful to serve one true God, then
all these false Gods. To this I answer, That to serve them it is both travel
and pain: but to serve our God, it is both joy and felicity. For in serving
those, it is costly, and without profit: and in serving God great What
pleasure it is to serve the living God.
profit ensues. For those Gods require great and rich sacrifices, and our God
demands nothing but pure and clean hearts.

Secondarily, Princes should be better christians then others, because they
have more to loose then al: And he that has more to lose then any other,
ought above all other to serve God: For even as he alone can give him, so
likewise he alone, and none other can take from him. And if a Subject take any
thing from his neighbor, the Prince whom he serves, makes him render it
again: but if the Prince be iniuried with any other Tyrant, he has none to
complain unto, nor to demand help of, but only of his merciful God: For
in the end, one that is of power cannot be hurt, but by an other which is
likewise mighty. Let Princes behold how the man that will make any great
assault, first he comes running a far of as fast as he can. I mean, that
the Prince which will have God merciful unto him, ought to be content with
his only God. For he in vain demands help of him, to whom before he never
did service.

Thirdly, Princes ought to be better Christians then others, and this shall be
seen by that they succor What is required in a good Prince
the poor, provide for those that are unprovided, and visit the Temples,
Hospitals and Churches, and endeanour themselves to hear the Divine Service,
and for all these things they shall not only receive rewards, but also they
shall receive honor. For through their good example, others will do the same.
Princes not fearing God; nor his commandments, cause their Realms and
Subjects to fall into great misery: for if fountains be infected, it is
impossible for the streams (that issue thereof to be pure, We see by
experience that a Bridle mastereth a horse and a stern rules a ship. I
weane, that a Prince (good or bad) will lead after him all the whole Realm.
And if he honor God, all the people do likewise, if he serve God, the people
also serve him, if he praise God, the Subjects also praise him, and if he
blaspheme God, they likewise will do the same. For it is impossible that a
Tree should bring forth other leaus or fruits, then those which are agreeable
to the humor that are in the roots. Princes above all other Creatures have
this pre-eminence, that if they be good christians, they shall not only
receive merit, for their own works, but also Like Prince like people.
for all those which others shall do, because they are occasion that the
people work well. And for the contrary, they shall not only be punished for
the evil which they shall do, but also for the evil which by occasion of
their evil examples others shall commit. O Princes that now live, how do I wish
that ye should speak with some one of those Princes which now are dead,
especially with those that are condemned to eternal flames, the^ ye should see
that the greatest torments which they suffer, are not for the evils that they
did commit, but for the evils which through their occasion were done: for
oftentimes Princes and Prelates sin more, because they dissembled with
others, then for that they do commit themselves. O How circumspect Princes
ought to be.
how circumspect ought Princes and great Lords to be in that they speak, and
how diligently ought they to examine that they do: for they serve not God
only for themselves, but they serve him also generally for their subjects.

And contrariwise Princes are not only punished for their own offenses, but
also for the sins of their people: for the shepherd ought grievously to be
punished, when by negligence the ravening Wolf deuoureth the innocent Lamb.

Fourthly, Princes ought to be better Christians then others because that to
God only they must render account of their estates; for as much God only is
just.
as we are sure that God, to whom we must render account is just, so much the
more we should travel to be in his favor, because whether he find or not
find in our life any fault, yet for love and pity sake he may correct us.

Men one with another make their accounts in this life, because they are men,
and in the end count they well or evil, all passes amongst men: because they
are men: but what shall the unhappy Princes do, which shall render no account
but to God only, who will not be deceived with words, corrupted with gifts,
feared with threatenings, nor answered with excuses.

Princes have their Realms full of cruel Judges, to punish the frailetic of
man: they have their courts full of Advocates to plead against them that have
offended: they have their Palaces (...) and Promoters, that note the offenses
of other men: They have through all their Province, Auditors, that ouersee the
accounts of their routs, and besides all this, they have no remembrance of the
day so strict, wherein they must render an account of their wicked life.

Me thinks (since all that which Princes receive comes from the hands of
God) that the greatest part of the time which they spend, should be in the
service of God, and al their What virtue (...) to be in a good prince
trade in God, and they ought to render no account of their life but unto God:
then since they are Gods in authority which they have over temporal things they
ought to show themselves to resemble God more then others by virtues, For that
Prince is more to be magnified which reformeth two vices among his people, then
he which conquereth ten Realms of his enemies. But we will desire them from
henceforth, They presume not any more to be Gods on the earth, but that they
endeavor themselves to be good Christians in the Commonwealth: For all the
wealth of a Prince is, That he be stout with strangers, and loving to his
own Subjects.

Fifthly, Princes ought to be better Christians then others, For, the
prosperity or adversity that chances unto them, comes directly from the
hands of God only, and none other: I have seen sundry times princes, which
have put their whole trust and confidence in other Princes, to be on a sudden
discomfited: and for the contrary, those which have little hope in men, and
great confidence in God have always prospered, When man is in his chiefest
bravery, and trusts most to men's wisdom, then the secret judgment of God
soonest discomforteth him. I mean, that the consederates and friends of
Princes, might help and succor them, but God will not suffer them to be
helped nor succored, to the end they should see their remedy proceeds not
by man's diligence, but by divine providence. A Prince that has a Realm, does
not suffer any thing to be done therein without his advice: therefore since
God is of no less power in Heaven, then Princes are on the earth: it is reason
that nothing be done without his consent, since he takes account God the
beginner and ender of all things.
of all men's deeds, and as he is the end of all things, so in him, and by him
all things have their beginning.

O Princes, If you knew how small a thing it is to be hated of men, and how
great a comfort to be beloved of GOD, I swear, that you would not speak one
word (although it were in jest) unto men, neither would you cease, night nor
day, to commend your selves unto God: for God is more merciful to succor us,
then we are diligent for to call upon him.

For in conclusion, the favor which men can give you, other men can take from
you: but the favor that God will give you, no man can resist it. All those
that possess much God the giver of all things.
should use the company of them which can do much: and if it be so, I let you
Princes know, that all men cannot think so much together as God is able to do
alone: For the cry of a Lion is more fearful then the howling of a Wolf. I
confess, that Princes and great Lords may sometimes gain, and win of them
selves: but I ask them whose favor they have need of to preserve and keep
them: we see oftentimes that in a short space many come to great authority, the
which neither man's wisdom suffices to govern, nor yet man's force to keep.
For the authority which the Romans in six hundred years gained, fighting
against the Goths, in the space of three years they lost. We see daily by
experience, that a man for the government of his own house only, needs the
counsel of his friends and neighbors: and do Princes and great Lords think
by their own heads only, to rule and govern many realms and dominions.

CHAP. XXI. What the Philosopher Bias was: of his constancy when he lost all
his goods, and of the ten laws he gave, worthy to be had in memory.
AMong all nations, and sorts of men, which auaunt themselves to have had with
them sage men, the Grecians were the chiefest, which had and thought it
necessary to have, not only wise men to read in their schools: but also they
chose them to be Princes in their dominions. For as Plato says, Those which
governed in those dates were Philosophers or else they said, and did like
Philosohers.

And Laertius writes in his second book, De antiquitatibus Graecorum Laert.
de antiq. Graec.
That the Grecians auaunted themselves much in this, that they had of all
Estates persons most notable, that is to say, Seven women very sage, seven
Queens very honest, seven Kings very virtuous, seven Captains very hardy,
seven Cities very notable, seven buildings very sumptuous, and seven
Philosophers, very well Learned, which Philosophers, were these that follow.

The first was Tales Milesius, that invented the Card to sail by.

The second was Solon, that gave the first laws to the Athenians.

The third was Chilo, who was in the Orient for Ambassador of the Athenians.

The fourth was Pittacus Quintilenus, who was not only a Philosopher, but also
Captain of the Mitilenes.

The fifth was Cleobolus, that descended from the ancient lynage of Hercules.

The sixth was Periander, that long time governed the realm of Corinth.

The seventh was Bias Prieneus, that was Prince of the Prieneans.

Therefore as touching Bias, you must understand, that when Romulus reigned at
Rome, and Ezechias in Judea, there was great wars in Grecia between the
Metinences, and the Prieneans: and of these Prieneans, Bias the Philosopher was
Prince and The wisdom of Bias the Philosopher
Captain, who because he was sage, read in the University, and for that he
was hardy, was Chiefetain in the war: and because he was wise, he was made a
Prince, and governed the Commonwealth. And of this no man ought to marvel:
for in those days the Philosopher that had knowledge but in one thing, was
little esteemed in the Commonwealth. After many contentions had between the
Metinenses and Prienenses, a cruel battle was fought, whereof the Philosopher
Bias was Captain, and had the victory, and it was the first battle that ever
any Philosopher gave in Greece. For the which victory Greece was proud to see
their Philosophers so aduenturous in wars, and hardy of their hands, as they
were profound in their doctrine, and eloquent in their tongues.

And by chance one brought him a number of women, and maids to sell, or if he
listed to use them otherwise at his pleasure: but this good Philosopher, did
not defile them nor sell them, but caused them to be apparrelled, and safely
to be conducted to their own native Countries. And let not this liberty that
he did, be had in little estimation to deliver the captives, and not to defloure
the virgins. For many times it chances, that those which are overcome with
the weapons of the Conquerours, are conquered with the delights of them that
are overcome. This deed amongst the Greeks was so highly commended, and
likewise of their enemies so praised, that immediately the Metinences sent
Ambassadors to demand peace of the Prienenses.

And they concluded together a perpetual peace upon condition, that they
should make for Bias an Bias the occasion of peace.
immortal Statue, since by his hands, and also by his virtues, he was the
occasion of the peace, and ending of the wars between them. And truly they
had reason, for he deserves more praise which wins the hearts of the
enemies in his tents by good example: then he which gets the victory in the
field by shedding of blood.

The hearts of men are noble, and we see daily, That oftentimes one shall
sooner overcome many by good, then many overcome one by evil: And also they
say that the Emperor Seuerus spoke these words. By goodness the least slave
in Rome shall lead me tied with a hair whether he will: but by evil the
most puissant man in the world cannot move me out of Italy For my heart had
rather be servant to the good, then Lord to the evil.

Valerius Maximus declares, that when the City of Priene was taken by enemies,
and put to sack the wife of Bias was slain, his children taken prisoners his
goods robbed, the City beaten down, and his house set on fire, but Bias
escaped safe, and went to Athens.

In this pitiful case the good Philosopher Bias was no whit the sadder, but
rather sang as he went by the way, and when he perceived that men marvelled at
his mirth, he spoke unto them these words. Those which speak of me for
wanting my City, my wife, and my children, and loosing all that I had, truly
such know not what Fortune means, nor understand what Philosophy is.

The loss of children and temporal goods, cannot be called loss, if the
life be saved, and the renown remain undefiled. Whether this sentence be
true or no, let us profoundly consider, if the just God suffer that this City
should come into the hands of the cruel Tyrants, then this provision is just:
For, There is nothing more conformable unto Justice, then that those which
receive not the Doctrine of the Sages, should suffer the crueltite of the
Tirants.

Also though my enemies have killed my wife, yet I am sure it was not without
the determination of the Gods, who after they had created her body, immediately
appointed the end of her life.

Therefore why should I bewail her death, since the Gods have lent her life,
until this day? The great estimation that we have of this life, causes that
death seems unto us sudden, and that the life unawares with death is
overtaken: but these are words of the children of vanity, for that by the will
of the Gods, death visits us, and against the wills of men, life for saketh
us. Also my Children be virtuous Philosophers, and albeit they be now in the
hands of tirants, we ought not therefore to call them captives, for a man may
not call him a captive which is laden with yrons, but him which is overwhelmed
with vices. And although the fire have burnt my house, yet I know not why I
ought to be sad: for of truth it was now old, and the wind did blow down,
he tiles, the worms did waste the wood, and the waters that ran down
perished the walls, and it was old and like to fall, and perchance would
have done greater displeasure. For most commonly envy, malice, and old houses
suddenly without any warning or knocking at the door, assaulteth men* Finally,
there came the fire which quited me of many troubles: First, of the trouble
that I should have had in repayring ^: Secondarily, it saved me money in
plucking it down. Thirdly, it saved me and mune heirs from much cost and many
dangers. For ofentimes that which a man consumes in repayring an old house,
would with advantage buy him a new. Also those which say that for the taking
away of my goods, I lack the goods of Fortune; such have no reason so think
or say: for fortune never gives temporal goods for a proper thing, but to
those whom she list, and when she will dispose them: therefore when Fortune
sees that those me whom she has appointed as her distributers, do hoarde up
the same to them, and to their heirs: then she takes it from them, to give
it to another. Therefore by reason I should not complain that I have lost any
thing: for Fortune recommendeth unto any other the temporal goods: but I
carry patience and Philosophy with me, so that they have discharged me from
all other, and have no more charge but for my self alone.

Laertius declares in his fifth book of the sayings of the Gretians: That
this Byas determined to go to the Plays of the Mount Olympus, whereunto Laert
de antiq. Graec.
resorted people of all Nations: and he showed himself in this place of so
high an understanding, that he was counted supreme and chief of all
Philosophers, and won the name of a true Philosopher.

Other Philosophers then being in the same Plays (called Olymp calls,) asked
him many questions, of diverse and sundry matters: where of I will make mention
here only of some of the chiefest.

The Questions demanded of the Philosopher Byas.
THE first Question was this: Tell me who is the unhappiest Certain questions
resolved by Byas.
man in the World? Byas answered; He is most unhappy, that is not patient in
adversity. For, men are not killed with the adversities they have, but with
the impatience which they suffer.

The second was, What is most hardest and most troublesome to judge: He
answered. There is nothing more difficult, then to judge a contention betwixt
two Friends. For to judge between two enemies: the one remains a Friend: but
to judge between two Friends, the one is made an enemy.

The third was, What is most hardest to measure? Whereunto Byas answered; There
is nothing that needs more circumspections, then the measuring of Time: For
the Time should be measured so justly, that no Time should want to do well,
nor any time should abound to do evil.

The fourth was: What thing is that, which needs no excuse in the
accomplishment thereof? Byas answered, The thing that is promised, must of
necessity be performed. For otherwise, he that does loose the credit of his
word, should lose more then he that should lose the promise to him made.

The fifth was, What thing that is, wherein the men (as well good as evil)
should take care? Then Byas answered: Men ought not in any thing to take so
great care, as in seeking counsel, and counselors: For the prosperous Times
cannot be maintained, nor the multitude of enemies resisted, if it be not by
wise men, and grave counsels.

The sixth was, What thing that is wherein men are praised to be negligent? and
that is, in choosing of Friends. He answered. In one thing only men have
license to be negligent.

Slowly ought thy Friends to be chosen, and they never after for any thing
ought to be forsaken.

The seventh was, What is that which the afflicted man does most desire? Byas
answered, It is the chance of Fortune: and the thing which the prosperous man
does most abhor, is, to think that Fortune is somutable. For the unfortunate
man hops for every change of Fortune to be made better, and the wealthy man
fears through every change to be deprived of his bouse.

These were the Questions which the Philosophers demanded of Byas, in the
Plays of the Mount Olympus, in the 60. Olympiade.

The Philosopher Byas lived about 95. years, and as he drew near his death,
the Prienenses (showing themselves to be marvelous sorrowful for the loss of
such a famous man) desired him earnestly to ordain some laws, whereby they
might know how to choose Captains, or some Prince, which after him might guide
and govern the Realm.

The Philosopher Byas (understanding their honest and just requests, he (with
his best counsel and aduisement) gave them certain wholesome Laws, in few
words, which follow.

And of these Laws the divine Plato makes mention in his Book De Legibus,
and likewise Aristotle, in the book of Oecenomices.

The Laws which BIAS gvue to the Prienenses.
We ordain and command, that no Laws made by Byas.
man be chosen to be Prince among the people, unless he be (at least)
forty years of age. For governors ought to be of such age, that neither youth
nor small experience should cause them to err in their affairs, nor
weakness through overmuch age should hinder them from taking pains.

We ordain and command, that none be chosen amongst the Prienenses
Governor, if he be not well learned in the Greek Letters: For there is no
greater plague in the public weal, then for him to lack wisdom which
governs the same.

We ordain and command that there be none amongst the Prienenses chosen
Governor, unless he has been brought up in the wars ten years at the
least: for he alone does know how precious a thing peace is, which by
experience has felt the extreme miseries of war.

We ordain and command, that if any have been noted to be cruel, that he
be not chosen for Governor of the people; for that man which is cruel, is
likely to be a Tyrant.

We ordain and command, that if the Governor of the Prienenses be so hardy,
or dare presume to break the ancient laws of the people, that in such case
he be deprived from the office of the Governor, and likewise exiled from the
people: For there is nothing that destroys sooner a publike-Weale, then to
ordain new and fond laws, to break the good ancient Customs.

We ordain and command that the Governor of the Prienenses do worship and
honor the Gods, and that he be a lover of the sacred Temples. For otherwise
he that honors not God, will never minister equal justice unto men.

We ordain and command that the Prince of Prienenses be contented with the
wars which his Auncesters left him, and that he do not forget new matters
to invade any other strange Countries: and if perchance he would, that no man
in this case be bound neither with money, nor in person to follow or serve
him. For the God Apollo told me, that that man which will take another man's
goods from him by force, shall loose his own Justice.

We ordain and command that the Governor of the Prienenses go to pray and
worship the Gods twice in the week, and likewise to visit them in the
Temples, and if he do the contrary, he shall not only be deprived of the
government, but also after his death he shall not be buried. For the Prince
that honoreth not God in time of his life, deserves not his bones should be
honored with sepnlture after his death.

CHAP, XXII. How God from the beginning punished men by his justice, and
especially those Princes that despise his Church, and how all wicked Christians
are Parishioners of Hell.
WHen the Eternal Creator, (who measures all the things by his Omnipotency,
and weighs them by God the Creator of all things.
his effectual wisdom) created all things as well celestial as terrestrial,
visible as invisible, corporate as incorporate, not only promised to the good
which served him, but also threatened the evil with plagues which offended him:
For the justice and mercy of GOD, go always together, to the intent the one
should encourage the good, and the other threaten the evil.

This thing seems to be true: for that we have but one GOD, which has
created but one World, wherein he made but one Garden, in the which Garden
there was but one Fountain, and near to that Fountain he appointed only one
man, one woman, and one Serpent: near unto which was also one tree only
forbidden, which is a thing marvelous to speak, and no less fearful to
see, how God did put into the terrestrial Paradise (the same day that the
creation of the World was finished) both a sword and a gybet. The gybet was the
tree forbidden, whereof they did eat: Wherefore our Fathers were condemned.
And the sword was the penishment, wherewith we all (as miserable children) at
this day are beheaded: for truly they did eat the bitterness of their fault:
and we do feel the grief of their pain. I mean to show how our God by his
power does raise up that which is beaten down, how with his wisdom he
guides those which are blind, how by his will he dissembleth with the evil
doers; neither will I tell how he through his clemency pardons the offenses,
and through his light lightneth the darkness, nor how through his
righteousness, he amendeth that which is broken, and through his liberality
pays more then we deserve.

But I will here declare at large, how our omnipotent God through his justice
chastises those which walk not in his paths. O Lord God how sure may thy
faithful servants Rewards (...) to the (...) the wicked
be, for their small services to receive great rewards: and contrary, the evil
ought always to live in as great fear, lest for their heinous offenses thou
should give them cruel punishments: for though God of his bounty will not
leave any service unrewarded, nor of his justice will omit any evil
unpunished: yet for all that we ought to know, that above all, and more then
all, he will rigorously chastise those, which maliciously despise the
Catholic faith. For Christ thinks himself as much injured of those which
persecute his Church, as of those that laid hands on his person, to put him to
death.

We read that in times past, God showed sundry grievous and cruel
punishments, to diverse high Lords and Princes, besides other famous and
renowned men. But rigor had never such power in his hand, as it had against
those which honored that infamed Idol, and violated the sacred Temples.

For to God this is the most heinous offense, to forsake the holy Catholic
faith in his life, and to despair in his mercy, at the hour of his death.

Would to God we had so much grace to acknowledge our offenses, as God has
reason to punish our sins.

For if it were so, then we would amend The merciful goodness of God.
in time to come, and God would grant us a general pardon for all that is
past. I see one thing wherein (as I think) I am not deceived, which is this:
that the fraylties and miseryes which we commit, we think them natural, and
in the satisfaction and amendment of the same, we say they are strange. so
that we admit the fault, and condemn the pain which thereby we do deserve.
The secret judgments of God do suffer it, and our offenses do deserve it: I
do not deny, but that the evil may hold and possess this life at their
pleasure: but I swear unto them, when they shall least think of it, they
shall lose their life, to their great displeasure: for the pleasures of this
life, are so unconstant, that we scarce begin to taste them, when they fade
out of our sight.

It is a rule infallible, which both of the good and evil has bin proved:
that all naturally desire, rather to abound then to want: and all that which
greatly is desired with great diligence is searched, and through great travel
is obtained: and that thing which by travel is attained, with love is
possessed, and that which by love is possessed, with much sorrow is lost,
bewailed, and lamented. For in the end we cannot deny, but that the watery eyes
do manifestly show the sorrowful hearts. To the fine wits and stout hearts, this
is a continual torment and endless pain, and a worm that always gnaweth: to
call to mind that he must lose the joyful life, which he so entirely loved:
and taste the fearful death, which so greatly he abhorred. Therefore to prove
this matter which I have spoken of before, it is but reason that Princes know
(if they do not know) that men as the divine Providence exalts them to high
Estates, they not deserving them: So likewise his rigorous justice will bring
the^ to naught, if they be unthankful for his benefits. For the ingratitude
or benefits received, makes that man not worthy to receive any more. The more a
man through benefits is bound, the more grievous punishment (if he How God
punishes ingratitude.
be unthankful) he deserves.

All wise men should find (if they apply their minds thereunto) that in
chastising God calls those offenses first to his mind, which are furthest
from the thoughts of men. For before the Tribunal of God our secret faults are
always casting out blood, to the end he should execute on our person open
justice. And further (I say) that in this case I do not see that the Prince is
exempted more, though he live in great felicity, then the poor labourer, who
lives in extreme misery.

And also we see it eft-soones by experience, that the sudden Lightning,
Tempests, and terrible Thunder, forsakes the small and low Cottages, and
battereth forthwith the great and sumptuous buyldings. Gods will and
determination is, that foras-much as he has exalted them above all others, so
much the more they should acknowledge him for Lord above all others: For GOD
did never create high Estates, because they should work wickedness: but he
placed them in that degree, to the end they should thereby have more occasion
to do him service.

Every Prince that is not a good Christian, a seruent lover of the Catholic
faith, nor will have any respect to the Divine service: let him be assured that
in this world he shall lose his renown, and in the other he shall hazard his
soul. For that all evil Christians are the Parishioners of Hell.

CHAP, XXIII.
The Anthour proves by twelve examples that Princes are sharply punished,
when they usurp boldly upon the Churches, and violate their temples.

Why the children of Aaron were punished.
IT is now time that we leave to persuade with words and reasons, and to
begin to prove that which we have said, by some excellent histories, and
notable examples: For in the end, the hearts of men are stirred more through
some little examples, then with a great multitude of words. In the first book
of Leuiticus Leuit. 10.
the 10. Chapter, is declared, how in the time of Moses, the son in law of
Iethro the Priest, (that was of Media) who was chief Prince of all the lynage
of Seph, with whom the brother of Mary the Leper, had charge of the high
Priesthood. For among all the laws where God at any God the only ruler of all
estates
time put his hands unto; he provided always that some had the government of
civil affairs, and others the administration of the divine mysteries.

This high Priest then had towe children, whose names were Nadab, and Abihu,
which two were young and beautiful, stout and sage, and during their infancy
served their Father, and helped him to do sacrifice. For in the old law they
suffered that Priests should not only have wives and children, but also that
their children should succeed them in their Temples, and inherit their
benefices.

There came a great mischance for the two children being apparrelled in white,
their bodies bound with stolles, their hands naked, in one hand holding a
Torch, and in the other the Sencer, being negligent to light the new fire, and
contrary to that the law had ordained, and taking coals which were prohibited,
a marvelous thing was seen in the sight of the people, which was, that
suddenly these two children fell flat on the earth dead, and all their sacrifice
burned.

Truly the sentence was marvelous, but it was just in ough. For they well
deserved to loose their lives, sithence they durst sacrifice the coals of an
other.

This thing seemed to be true, for these young children saved their The just
judgment of God.
souls, and made satisfaction of the fault with their lives: but other wicked
men God permits to live a short time, because they shall loose their souls
for ever.

The cause why the Azotes were punished.
THe Realm of Palestine being destitute of a King, at that time an honorable
old man governed the realm, which was Father to two Knights, named Albino and
Phinides; for at that time the children of Israel were not governed by Kings
that did molest them by injuries: but by sage men which did maintain them by
justice.

It chanced that the Azotes made war against the Palestines, and were a kind
of the Arabians, stout and warlike, the which fought so courageously, that the
Palestines and Hebrews were constrained to bring their Arc into the midst
of the Battle: which was a Relicke, (as a man should have put the holy
Sacrament) to divide a great multitude of people. But Fortune showed her
countenance unto them so frowningly, that they were not only overcome, but
also were spoiled of the Arc, which was their chief relicke. And besides
that, there were 4000. Palestines slain. The Azotes carried away the Arc,
full of Relickes unto their temple, in the City of Nazote, and set it by
Dagon, their cursed Idol.

The most High and true God (which will not suffer any to be coequall with The
permission of God.
him in comparison, or in any thing that he represents) caused this Idol to
be shaken, thrown down, and broken in pieces, no man touching it. For our God
is of such power, that to execute his Justice he needs not worldly help. God
not contented thus (though the Idol was broken in pieces, but caused those to
be punished likewise which worshipped it: in such sort, that all the people of
Azotes, Ascalon, Geth, Acharon, and of Gaza, which were five ancient and
renowned The plague of God upon Idolaters.
Cities) were plagued, both man and woman inwardly, with the disease of the
Emerodes: So that they could not eat sitting, nor ride by the ways on
horseback.

And to the end that all men might see that their offenses were grievous, (for
the punishment they received by the divine Justice) he replenished their
Houses, Places, Gardens, Seeds, and Fields, full of Rats; And as they had
erred in honoring the false Idol, and forsaken the true God, So he would
chastise them with two Plagues, sending them the Emerodes, to torment their
bodies, and the Rats, to destroy their goods. For to him that willingly gives
his soul to the devil, it is but a small matter, that God (against his will)
deprive him of his goods.

This then being thus, I would now gladly know, whether of them committed most
offense? Either the Azotes, which set the Arc in the Temple, which (as they
thought,) was the most holiest: or the false Christians, which with a
Sacrilegious boldness, dare attempt (without any fear of GOD,) to rob and
pill the Church goods, to their own private commodity in this world.

Truly the Law of the Azotes differed as much from the Christians, as the
offense of the one differs from the other. For the Azotes erred not,
believing that this Arc was the Figure of the True God; but we believe it, and
confess it, and without shame commit against it infinite vices.

By this so rare and severe a sudden punishment, me thinks the Princes and
great Lords, should not only therefore acknowledge the True God, but also
Reverence and honor those things which unto him are dedicated. For man's laws
(speaking of the reverence of a Prince,) do no less condemn him to die, that
robs his house, then him which violently lays hands on his person.

The cause why Prince Oza was punished.
IN the book which the son of Helcana wrote, that is the second book of the
Kings, and the vi. Chapter, he 2. Reg. 6.
says: That the Arc of Israel with his Relikes (which was Manna, the rod,
and two stones) stood in the house of Aminadab, which was the next neighbor to
the city of Gibeah, the son of Esaias, (who at that time was King of the
Israelites) determined to transpose the Relikes into his City and house: For
that it seemed to him a great infamy, that to a mortal Prince, a house should
abound for his pleasures, and to the immortal God there should want a Temple
for his relics.

The day therefore appointed when they should carry the Relic of Gibeah to
Bethlehem, there met thirty thousand Israelites, with a great number of Noble
men which came with the King, besides a greater number of strangers. For in
such a case those are more which come of their own pleasure, then those which
are commanded. Besides all the people they say, that all the Nobility of the
Realm was there to the end the relic should be more honored, and his
person better accompanied. It chanced that as the Lords and people went singing
and the King in person dancing, the wheel of the Chariot began to fall, and go
out of the way, the which prince Oza seeing, by chance set to his hand, and his
shoulder against it, because the Arc where the Relic was should not fall,
nor break: yet notwithstanding that, suddenly and before them all, he fell
down dead.

Therefore let this punishment be noted for truly it was fearful, and ye
ought to think, that since God, (for A good admonition for all Estates.
putting his hand to the Chariot to hold it up) stroke him with death, that a
Prince should not hope (seeking the destruction and decay of the Church) that
God will prolong his life. O Princes, great Lords, and Prelates, since Oza with
such diligence lost his life, what do ye hope or look for, since with such
negligence ye destroy and suffer the Church to fall? Yet once again, I do
return to exclaim upon you. O Princes and great Lords, since Prince Oza
deserved such punishment, because without reverence he advanced himself to
stay the Arc which fell, what punishment ought ye to have, which through
malice, help the Church to fall.

Why King Balthazar was punished,
Darius King of the Perses and Medes besieged the ancient Babylon besieged.
City of Babylon in Chaldea, whereof Balthazar son of Nabuchodonozar the
great was King and Lord: who was so wicked a child, that his father being dead,
he caused him to be cut in 300. pieces, and gave him to 300. hawks to be
eaten, because he should not revive again, to take the goods and riches from
him which he had left him. I know not what father is so foolish, that lets
his Son live in pleasures, and afterward the entralles of the Hawk wherewith
the son hawked, should be the woeful grave of the Father, which so many men
lamented,

This Balthazar then being so besieged, determined one night to make a great
feast and banquet to the Lords of his Realm that came to aid him; and in this
he did like a valiant and stout Prince, to the end the Perses and Medes might
see, that he little esteemed their power.

The noble and high hearts do use when they are environed with many travels, to
seek occasions to invent pleasures; because to their men they may give greater
courage, and to their enemies greater fear. He declares of Pirrus King of the
Epirotes, when he was besieged very straightly in the City of Tharenta, of the
Roman Captain Quintus Dentatus, that then he spoke unto his Captains in
this sort: Lords and friends be ye nothing at all abashed, since I never
here before saw ye afraid, though the Romans have compassed our bodies yet we
have besiged their hearts For I let you to know, that I am of such a
complexion, that the straighter they The stout resolution of Pirius.
keep my body, the more my heart is at large. And further I say, though the
Romans beat down the walls, yet our hearts shall remain invincible. And
though there be no wall between us, yet we will make them know that the
hearts of Greeks are harder to overcome, then the stones of Tarentine are to
be beaten down.

But returning to King Balthazar. The banquet then being ended, and the
greatest part of the night being spent, Belthasar the King being very well
pleased that the banquet was made to his contentation (though he was not the
sobrest in drinking wine) commanded all the cups of gold and silver with the
treasure he had, to be brought and set on the table, because all the bidden
guests should drink therein.

King Balthazar did this, to the end the Princes and Lords, with all his
Captains, should manfully help him to defend the Siege, and also to show that
he had much treasure to pay them for their pains. For to say the truth, there
is nothing that encourages men of war more, then to see their reward before
their eyes: As they were drinking merrily (at the banquet) of these cups which
Nabuchodonozar had robbed from the Temple of Jerusalem, suddenly by the power
of God, and the desert of his offenses, there appeared a hand in the wall
without a body or arm, The reward due to those that contemn God.
which with his fingers wrote these words, Mane, Thetel, Phares, which
signifies: O King Balthazar, God has seen thy life, and finds that thy
malice is now accomplished. He has commanded that thou and thy Realm should
be weighed, and has found that there lacks a great deal of just weight,
wherefore he commands, that thy life for thine offenses be taken from thee,
and that thy Realm be put into the hands of the Persians and Medes, which are
thine enemies.

This vision was not frustrare, for the same night without any longer delay,
the execution of the sentence was put in effect by the enemies. The King
Balthazar dyed, the Realm was lost, the treasures were robbed, the Noble men
taken, and all the Chaldeans captives,

I would now know, since Balthazar was so extremely punished only for giving
his Concubines and friends drink in the sacred cups, what pain deserves
Princes and Prelates then, which rob the Churches for profane things? how
wicked soever Balthazar was, yet he never changed, gave, sold, nor engaged
the treasures of the Synagogue: but what shall we say, and speak of Prelates,
which without any shame, waste, change, sell and spend the Church goods? I take
it to be lesser offense to give drink in a Chalice, as King Balthazar did to
one of his Concubines, then to enter into the Church by Symony, as many do now
a days. A good caneat for Magistrates
This Tyrant was overcome more by folly then by covetousness, but these others
are vanquished with folly, covetousness and Symony

What means this also, that for the offense of Nabuchodonozar in Jerusalem,
his son Balthazar should come and be punished? For this truly me think
not consonant to reason, nor agreeable to man's Law, that the Father should
commit the Theft, and the son should requite it with seven double. To this I
answer, That the good child is bound to restore all the goods that his Father
has left him evil gotten. For he that enjoys the theft, deserves no less
punishment, then he that commits the theft. For in the end both are
thieves, and deserve to be hanged on the gallows of the divine justice.

Why King Ahab was punished.
IN the fifth Book of Malachie, that is to say, in the third book of Kings,
the 8. Chapter. It is declared, that Asa being King of Judea, and prophesying
in Jerusalem, at the time Omri was King of Israel, and after him succeeded Ahab
his son, being of the age of 22, years. This Ahab was not only young of
years, but younger of understanding, and was numbered among the wicked Kings:
not only evil, but too evil: for the Scriptures do use to call them by names
infamed, whose lives deserved no memory. The The wickedness of Ahab.
vices of this King Ahab were sundry and diverse, whereof I will declare some as
hereafter follows. First of all, he followed altogether the life and steps
of the King Jeroboam, who was the first that entised the children of Israel to
commit Idolatry: which thing turned to great reproach and infamy. For the
Prince erreth not imitating the paths of the good; but offends in following
the ways of the evil.

Secondarily, this King Ahab married the daughter of the King of the Idumeans,
whose name was Iezabel, which was of the stock of the Gentiles, and he of the
Hebrews. And for a truth the marriage was unadvisedly considered: for sage
Princes should take wives conformable to their laws and conditions, unless
they will repent themselus afterward. Thirdly, he built again the City of
Hierico, which by the commandment of God was destroyed, and commanded that
upon grievous pains it should not be reedefied again: because the offenses
that were therein committed were so great, that the Inhabitants did not only
deserve to lose their lives, but also that in Hierico there should not one
stone remain upon another.

Fourthly, King Ahab built a sumptuous Temple to the Idol Baal, in the City of
Samaria, and consecrated a wood unto him, which he had very pleasant, and set
in the Temple his Image of fine gold: so that in the reign of this cursed King,
Baal the wicked Idol was so highly esteemed, that not only secretly, but also
openly, they blasphemed the true and living God. The case was such, that one
day Ahab going against the King of Syria, to take him and his City called
Ramoth Gilead, being in battle was shot into the breast with an arrow,
wherewith he not only lost his life, but also the dogs did lap up his blood
that The punishment of Ahab.
fell to the earth. O Princes and great Lords, if you will give credit unto
me you shall have nothing more in recommendation then to be good Christians:
Since ye see that as this Prince in his life, did serve strange Idols: so it
was reason, that after his death, his blood should be buried in the entrals of
ravenous dogs.

why King Manasses was punished.
THe King Manasses was the son of Ezechias, and Father of Amo^, which were
all Kings. And truly they differed so much in manners and conditions, that a
man could scarcely judge, whether the virtues and prowesses of the Father, were
more to be desired: or the vice and wickedness of the children to be abhorred.

This Manasses was a wicked Prince, for as much as he built new Temples to
Baal, and in the Cities made Hermitages for the Idols, and in the mountains
repaired all the Altars that heretofore were consecrated to the Devil. He
consecrated many Forests and Woods to the Idols, he honored the Stars as
the Gods, and did sacrifice to the Planets and Elements: for the man that is
abandoned by the hand of God, there is no wickedness that his obstinate heart
does not enterprise. So that he had in his Palace all manner of false
Prophets, as Southsayers, Prophesiers, Witches, Sorcerers, Enchaunters, and
Coniurers, the which daily he caused to give sacrifice to the Idols: and gave
such credit to Sorcerers and Inchaunters, that his servants were all for the
most part Sorcerers, and in them was his chief delight and pleasure. And
likewise he was skillful in all kind of mischief, and ignorant in all virtues.
He was so cruel, and spilt so much innocent blood, that if it had been water
put together, and the bodies of them that he slew laid on heaps, it would both
have covered their carkases, and also have drowned the living: Yet he not
contented with that I have spoken off, set in the Temple of the Lord What
mischief follows the contemners of God.
an old Idol that stood in the wood: for the punishment of which fact, God
suffered his servants to kill his eldest son. And afterward God would not
suffer these such sundry mischiefs of man's malice, but of his divine justice
caused these words to be proclaimed in Jerusalem. Since the King Manasses has
been so bold to contemn me, and himself alone to commit the offenses of
all, I will chastise him alone with the same correction that he has showed
unto others.

By these words let Princes note here, how the divine vengeance extends no
further, then our offenses deserve, so that if our fault be little, the
punishment which he gives us is very temperate: but if the Prince be
stubborn and obstinate in his wickedness, let him be sure that the punishment
shall be extreme.

Why Julius, Pompeius, Xerxes, Catilina, Germanicus, and Brennus were punished.
WHen Pompeius the Great passed into the Orient, with all the Host of the
Roman people, and after he had subdued all Siria, Mesopotamia, Damasco, and
Arabia: he passed into the Realm of Palestine, which otherwise was called
Judea, where he committed diverse and sundry evils, so that many of the Romans
and Hebrews dyed there.

Finally, by force of Arms he took the puissant City of Jerusalem, which as
Pliny says, was the best of all Asia: And Strabo says of the situation of
the World, that Rome was the chief of all Italy, and of Affricke the
principal was Carthage, of Spain Numantia: of Germany, Argentine: of Caldea,
Babylon: of Egypt, Thebes: of Greece, Athens: of Phenice, Tira: of Cappadocea,
Cesare: of Thrace, Constantinople: and of Palestine, Jerusalem.

Pompeius therefore not contented to kill all the Ancients of that war, to
imprison the youth, to behead the elders, to force the mothers, to defile the
virgins, to tear in pieces the children, to beat down buildings, The cruelty
of Pompeius.
and to rob the Treasure^: but increasing evil upon evil, and putting all all the people to destruction, he made of the Temple a Stable for his horses: which
before God was abominable, that where always heretofore he had been a
Conqueror, and triumphed over twenty two Kings, ever after he was unlucky,
and overcome in battle.

The famous rebel Catilina (as Salust The punishment of sacrilege.
affirms) had never been overcome, as if it had not been for the robbing
and destroying of the Temples, which were consecrated to the Gods.

The noble Marcuus Marcellus (to whom no Roman is to be compared in
virtues) the same day he caused the Temple of the Goddess Februa to be burnt,
was himself slain in battle.

The noble Roman Captain Drusius Germanicus, that was so well willed and
beloved, because he gave a calfe meat to eat (which was the God of the
Chaldeans (being prohibited and forbidden) within a month after dyed, whose
death was greatly lamented in Rome.

Suetonius says, that after Julius Caesar, had robbed the Temple of the
Gawles; the Gods always made him afraid in the night.

And Xerxes, which was the Son of King Darius, when he passed into Italy to
wage battle, before all other things he sent four thousand Horsemen to
Delphos (where the Temple of God Apollo was,) to beat it down: for the pride
of Xerxes was so great, that he would not only subdue men, but also conquer
the Gods:

It chanced, that even as they approached near the Temple to beat it down, a
sudden tempest fell upon The pride of Xerxes euerthrown
them, so that with stones and thunderbolts they were all killed in the fields,
and so dyed.

Brennus was one of the renowned Captains of the Goths, who since he had
conquered and subdued the Greeks, determined also to rob the Treasures of
the Temples, saying that Gods should give unto men, and not men unto Gods, and
that it was great honor to the Gods, that with their goods, men should be
made rich: But as they began to rob the Temple, there fell a multitude of
arrows from heaven, that the Captain Brennus dyed there, and all his The
misrable end of Brennus.
men with him, not one left alive.

After that Sextus Pompeius was vanquished in the battle by sea, near unto
Sicilie, by Octauus Augustus, he retired himself into the Arkes Lacinii,
where there was an ancient Temple consecrated to the Goddess Juno, endowed
with marvelous Treasures.

And it chanced one day, that his Soldiers asking him money, and he being
then without, he commanded them to beat down the Temple of the Goddess Juno,
and to pay themselus with the spoil of her treasure. Vhe Historiographers say,
that within a while after it chanced, Sextus Pompeius to be taken of the
knights of Marcus Antonius, and when he was brought before Titus General of
the Army, he spoke unto him these words I will you know Sextus Pompeius, I do
not condemn thee to dye for the offenses thou have committed against my Lord
Marcus Antonius: But because thou have robbed and beaten down the Temple of
the Goddess Juno.

For thou know, that the good Captains ought to forget the offenses against
men, and to revenge the injuries done. the Gods.

CHAP. XXIIII. How Valente the Emperor because he was an evil Christian,
lost in one day both the Empire and his life, and was burned alive in a
sheepecote.
WHen Julian the Apostate was Emperor of Rome, he sent to conquer Hungary, of
no just title he had to it, more then of ambition to unite it to the Roman
Empire, For tirannous Princes use all their force to usurp other realms by
cruelty, and little regard whether they may do it by justice. And because the
Roman Empire was of great force, this ambitious Emperor Julian, had in that
wars a mighty and puissant Army, which did wonderful much harm through all
the countries they came. For the fruits of wars is, to bereave the enemies
of life, and to spoil the men of their goods.

It chanced one day as five knights went out of the Camp, to make a rode,
they found a youngman that The valor of Gracian.
carried a halter in his hand, and as they would have taken it away from him,
to have tied their horses to let them feed, he was so hardy and so stout,
that he defended himself from them all: so that he had more strength alone
then they five altogether.

The Roman Knights amazed to see this young man defend himself from them all
so stoutely, very instantly desired him to go to the Roman Camp with them,
and they promised him he should have great entertainment: for the Romans
were so diligent, that they should omit no good thing for want of money, so
that it were for the public weal. This young man was called Gracian, and was
borne and brought up in the Country of Pannonia, in a City they called Cibata:
His lynage was not of the lowest sort of people, nor yet of the most esteemed
Citizens, but were men that lived by the sweat of their brows, and in love
of the common people. And truly it is no small benefit that God had made him of
a mean estate, for to be of base lynage, makes men to be despised, and not
regarded: and to come of a noble blood and high lynage, makes men to be proud
and lofty.

This young man being come into What makes a man to be respected in this world.
the Roman Camp, the fame was immediately spread, how that he alone had
vanquished 5. Knights. And his strength and courage was so highly esteemed,
that within a while after he was made Pretour of the Army. For the Romans,
not according to favor, but according to the ability of men, divided the
offices and degrees of honor in wars. Time therefore working his nature, and
many estates being decayed, after this young Gracian was made Pretour of the
Army, and that he was sufficiently tried in the wars, Fortune, which many
times brings that to pass in a day, that man's malice cannot in many years,
raised this Gracian to be Emperor of Rome: For truly one hour of good
success is more worth, then all worldly favor.

This Gracian was not only singular Gracian chosen Emperor.
in strength, courageous in battle, fortunate in all his affairs: but also
he was luckie of children: that is to say, he had two sons, which were
Emperors of Rome, the one was called Valente, the other Valentinian. In this
case the children might glory to have a Father so stout: but the glory of the
Father is greater to have sons of such Nobility: For there is no greater
felicity in this world; then during life, to come to honor and riches: and
after death, to leave good children to enjoy them. The eldest of the two sons
was the Emperor Valente, who ruled in the Orient for the space of four
years, and was the nine and thirtieth Emperor of Rome from Julius Caesar,
though some do begin at the time of Octauian, saying, that he was virtuous,
and that Julius Caesar usurped the Empire like a Tyrant. This Valente was
beautiful of person, but poor of virtues: so that he was more beautiful
then virtuous, more courageous then merciful, more rich then charitable, more
cruel then pitiful. For there are many Princes that are very expert to
devise new orders in a common wealth, but there are few that have stout hearts
to put the same in execution.

In those days the Sect of Arrian the cursed Heretic flourished, and The
heresy of Arian.
the Emperor Valente was greatly blinded therein: insomuch that he did not
only favor the Arrians, but also he persecuted the Christians, which was
showed for so much as he killed, and caused to be killed (for that occasion)
many lay men, and took many Clerks, and banished many Bishops, overthrew many
Churches, robbed the goods of the Christians, and did infinite other mischiefs
in the commonwealth: For the Prince which is infected with heresy, and lives
without fear of the Church, there is neither mischief nor treason but he will
commit.

In the deserts of Egypt in the mountains of Armenia, and in the cities of
Alexandrie, there was a great multitude of Friars and religious men, amongst
whom were many Wisemen, and pure of life, constant in the defense of the
Church, and patient in persecutions. For he is a true religious man, that in
time of peace is charitable to teach the ignorant, and bold in the time of
Schisms to confound the Heretics, The description of a religious man.


The Emperor Valente was not only a friend unto the Arrians, and and an
enemy to the Christians, but also he was a persecuter of the devout and
religious Friars. For he commanded proclamations to be hid through all his
Realms and Domions, that all the religious that were young in years, whole of
their bodies, and sound of their limbs, should immediately cast off their
Cowles and Hoodes, leaving their Monastery, and take Soldiers wages in the
Camp: for he said Monasteries were invented for nothing else but to
maintain those that were deformed, blind, lame and maimed; and upon this
occasion, he showed great tyranny: for many Monasteries were left naked, many
notable constitutions were broken, many hermites were martyred, many Friars
whipped, many notable Barons banished, and many good men robbed of their goods.
For the virtuous men desired rather the bitter life of the Monastery then the
sweet and pleasant liberty of the world.

This wicked Emperor yet not contented with these things, as by chance his
wife commended unto him the beauty of a Roman called The cruelty of Valente.
Iustinia, without any more delay he married her, not forsaking his first
wife, and immediately made a law throughout all his Empire, that without
incurring any danger, each Chrian might have two wives, and marry with them by
the law of Matrimony: for the tyrannous Princes (to cloak their vices) make
and establish the laws of vices. The shame was not little that the Emperor
Valente (against the commandment of the Church) would marry with two women at
one time: but the less shame he had, the greater was his iniquity to put it
in execution, and to cause it to be published through his realm as a Law: for
a particular vice corrupts but one alone, but a general law destroys all.

At that time the puissant Goths were in the parties of the Orient, the which
were in feats of Arms very valiant and courageous: but in things of faith
they were evil brought up, although the greatest part of them were baptized:
for then the Church was very poor of Prelates, howbeit those that they had
were very notable men. After the Goths were baptized, and the fury of the
wars somewhat appeased, they sent Ambassadors to the Emperor Valente,
desiring him that immediately, and forth with he would send them holy
Catholic Bishops, by whose doctrine they might be instructed, and brought to
the Christian faith: for it was supposed that the Emperor of Rome could have
no Bishops in their countries unless they were virtuous: this wicked Emperor,
since he was now entangled with heresy, and that he had perverted the
customs of good Emperors (that is, for having about him evil Bishops) as
he was now environed with all evils and mischiefs, so he sent to the Goths a
Bishop called Eudoxius, the which was a rank Arrian: and brought with him many
Bishops, which were Heretics, by the which the Kings and Princes of the
Goths were Arrians, for the space of two hundred years,

The Catholic Princes ought to take great care to Watch, and in watching to be
wary and circumspect, that they, their Realms, neither The duty of every
good Prince
their Subjects should in their time be defiled with heresy: For the plague
of Heretics and Heresies, is not of light occasion banished the place where
once it has reigned.

We have declared of the small faith that this Emperor had in Jesus Christ,
and of the great mischiefs he did to the Church. Let us now see what was the
end of his miserable life. For the man of wicked life seldom comes to good
end. The matter was this, that as the Goths were driven out of the Realm by
some of the Hunnes, they came immediately to the Realm of Thracia, which then
was subject to the Romans. And the Emperor Valente without any covenant
received them into his land, wherein he committed great folly, and used little
wisdom: for it is a general rule, where The folly and oversight of the
Emperor.
rebels, vagabonds, and strangers come to inhabit, there the Realm and
dominions is destroyed.

The Goths remained certain years among them, without any dissension or
quarrelling against the Romans: but afterward through the covetousness of
Maximus chief Captain of the Romans, who denied the Goths of their
provision, which so long time remained Friends, arose between them so cruel
wars, that it was the occasion of the loss and utter undoing both of Rome
and of all Italy. For truly there is no enmity does so much hurt, as that of
Friends when they fall out at discord,

The Wars now being kindled, the Goths were scattred through the Kingdom of
Thrace, and they left no Forte but they battered down, they came to no Towns,
Villages, nor Cities but they sacked and spoiled: They took no Women but they
forced, and ravished, they entered into no house but they robbed.

Finally, the Goths in short time showed the poison that they had against the
Romans: and let no man marvel that the Goths committed so many cruel and
heinous facts, since we that are Christians do commit daily greater offenses.
For among rebels it is a common error, that that which they rob in the wars,
they say they are not bound to restore in peace. The Emperor Valente was then
in the city of Antioch, and since he had assembled there a great army, and had
great aid out of Italy, he determined himself in person to go into the camp
of the Romans, and to give the onset against the Goths, wherein he showed
himself more bold then wise for a Prince in battael ca^ do no more then one
man, nor fight more then one man, and if he die, he is the occasion of the
death and destruction of them all. When both the hosts of the Romans and the
Goths joined, there was between them a cruel and mortal fight: so that in
the first brunt the Goths showed themselves so valiant, that they put to
flight the Romans horsemen, leaving their footmen alone in great ieopardie,
the which in short space after were discomfited and slain, not one left alive.
For the barbarous swear that that day the Goths should all die, or else
utterly they would destroy the name of the Romans. And in this first charge
the Emperor Valente was mortally wounded, who perceiving he had his deaths
wound, and that the battle was lost, he determined to fly and save himself;
but when fortune begins to persecute any man, she leaves him not until
she see him dead, or beaten down without recovery.

Therefore as this wicked Emperor (thinking to save himself) came into a
sheepecote, the enemies seeing him, in the end set fire on the shepecote, and
burnt him alive. So in one day he loft his person, his life, his honor, and
his Empire.

For it is meet that Princes and great Lords should lift up their eyes to
consider The miserable end of the Emperor Valentinian.
well the History of Valente, that they stray not from the Catholic Faith,
that they dishonor not Gods Ministers and maintain heresies. For as this
accursed Emperor Valente for his wicked doings was condignely punished by the
hands of Almighty God So let them be assured, the self same God will not
pardon their offenses. For it is a rule infallible, That that Prince which is
not a good Christian, shall fall into the hands of his cruel enemies.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Emperor Valentinian and Gracian his Son, which reigned in
the time of Saint Ambrose, which because they were good Christians, were
always fortunate, and that God gives victory unto Princes, more through the
tears of them that pray, then through the weapons of those that fight.
IAlentinian and Valent were brethren, and the eldest of A custom among the
Romans.
them was Valentinian who succeeded in the Empire (after the death of his
Father) to be Praetor of the Armies. For amongst the Romans there was a Law
in ure, that if the Father dyed in the favor of the people, of right the son
without any other demand was heir.

This Valentinian was a lusty young man, of a sanguine complexion, and of his
body well shaped, and above all he was a good Christian, and of all the people
generally well-beloved: For nothing adorneth the noble man more, then to be
counted civil and courteous of behavior.

At that time when the Emperor Julian persecuted most the Christians:
Valentinian was Pretour of the Armies; and when Julian was advertised that
Valentinian was a Christian, he sent unto him, and bad him do sacrifice to
the Idols of the Roman Emperor, or else to forsake the office of his
Pretorship.

Julian would gladly have killed Valentinian but he durst not: for it was a Law
inviolable amongst the Romans, that no Citizen should be put to death without
the decree of the Senate, Valentinian receiving the message of this Emperor
Julian, advertised of his will (which was to renounce his faith, or to leave
his office) he did not only resign his office, but therewithal forgave the
Emperor all the money he ought him for arrerages of his sernice. And because
he would live with a more quiet conscience he went from Rome into a Cloister,
where he banished himself for two years and a half; and for this he was
highly esteemed and commended.

For it is a good sign, That man is The duty of every good Christian.
a good Christian, which of his own free will renounceth worldly goods.
Shortly after it happened that Julian the Emperor went to conquer the Realm
of Persia, where in a battle he was very sore wounded, and fell down dead in
the present place. For to the mishaps of Fortune, the Emperor with all his
estate and pleasures is as much subject, as is the poorest man that lies in
the streets.

When the news came to Rome that Julian was dead, by the consent of all,
Valentinian was created Emperor; so that he being banished for Christ's sake,
was called again, and crowned Prince of the Roman Empire.

Let no man care to loose all that he possesses, let no man weigh to see
himself despised for Christ's sake: For in the end men cannot in a thousand
years so much abase us, as God in one hour can exalt us.

In the same year, which was from the foundation of Rome ^119 in a City called
Atrobata, it rained very fine wool, so that all the City became rich. In the
same year, in the City of Constantinople, it hayled such great stones, that
they killed many men, and left no herds in the fields alive. At that same time
there came an Earthquake throughout Italy, and so likewise in Sicille, that
many houses fell, and slew sundry persons, and above all, the sea rose in such
sort, that it drowned many Cities nigh thereunto. Paulus Diaconus in the 11.
book The description of the Emperor Valentinian
De Legibus Romanorum, says, that the Emperor Valentinian was of a subtle
wit, of grave countenance, eloquenr in speech, yet he spoke little stout in
his affairs, and diligent in his business, in adversities patient, and a
great enemy of the vicious, temperate in eating and drinking, and a friend of
religious persons; so that they said, he resembled the Emperor Aurelius. For
after that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius dyed (with whom the felicity of the
Roman Empire ended) they ever used the^cefoorth in Rome to compare and liken
the young and new come Princes to the ancient Emperors their Anrecessors. That
is to say, if the Prince were courageous, they said he was like Julius
Caesar, if he were virtuous, they said he was an other Octauian: if he were
fortunate, that he was Tiberius, if he were rash, they say de he was
Caligula, if he were cruel, they compared him to Nero, if he were merciful,
they said he was like to Traian, or Antoninus Pius, if he were beaucifull, they
likened him to Titus, if idle they compared him to Domitian, if he were
patient, they called him Vespasius, if he were temperate they likened him to
Adrian, if he were devout to their gods, then he seemed Aurelianus. Finally, he
that was sage and virtuous, they compared him to the good Marcus Aurelius.

This Emperor Valentinian was a good Christian, and in all his affairs
touching the Empire, very wise and circumspect, and yet he was noted for one
thing very much, and that was, that he trusted and favored his servants so
much, and was so led by his Friends, that through their occasion, (they abusing
his love and credit,) there arose many dissentions amongst the people.

Seneca said once unto the Emperor Nero, I will that thou understand (Lord)
that there is no patience, The saying of Seneca.
can suffer, that two or three absolutely command all, not for that they are
most virtuous, but for that they are most in favor with thee.

O ye Noble Princes and great Lords, if you were as I am, I know not what you
would do: but if I were as you be, I would behave my self in such sort to
them of my house, that they should be servants, to serve and obey me: and not
to boast themselves, to be so far in favor as to command me: For that
Prince is not sage, that to content a few gets the hatred of all.

The Emperor Valentinian dyed in the five and fifty year of his birth, and
the eleventh year of his Empire, The death of the Emperor.
languishing of a long sickness, that his veins were so dried up, that they
could not draw one drop of blood out of his body. And at the day of his
Funeralles, where the dead corpse was greatly bewailed. Saint Ambrose made an
excellent Sermon, in commendation of him. For in those days, when any Noble
Prince departed, that loved and succored the Church, all the holy Bishops met
together at his buryall.

The two brethren being Emperors, that is to say, Valentinian and Valent,
through the desire of the Father in law of Gracian, who was father to his wife,
and desirous to have one of his daughters children, chose Valentinia^ to bring
up, who had a son named Gracian, which was created Emperor so young, that as
yet he had no beard. And truly the Senate would not have suffered it, if the
Father had not bin virtuous, and the child sage. But the Senate would have
done this, and more also for Valentinian, because he did deserve it well of
the Roman people. For it is reason in distributing of the Offices, That
Princes have more repsect to the deserts of the Fathers, then to the tender age
of the Children.

This young Gracian began to be so temperate, and was so good a Christian in
favoring the Church, that it The wisdom and discretion of young Gracian.
was much quiet, and great pleasure to the Roman people to have chosen him:
and greater joy to the Father, (being alive) to have begotten him: so that he
left for him after his death, an immortal memory of his life. For the child
that is virtuous, is always the memory of the Father after his death.

In the year of the Foundation of Rome, a thousand, an hundred, thirty and
two, the said Gracian the younger was created sole Heir of the whole Empire,
his uncle Valent and his Father being departed the world. And after Gratian
came to the Empire, many Bishops which were banished in the time of his Uncle
Valent, were restored to the Church again, and bannished all the sect of the
Arrians out of his Region.

Truly he showed himself to be a very religious and Catholic Prince. For
there is no better justice to confound humain malice, then to establish the
good in their estate.

In the first year of the reign of Gracian Emperor, all the Germans and the
Goths rebelled against the Roman Empire, for they would not only not obey
him, but also they prepared an huge Army to invade his Empire: Imagining that
since Gracian was young, he neither had the wit, nor yet the boldness to
resist them: For where the Prince is young, there oftentimes the people
suffered The old Proverb not always true.
much wrong, and the Realm great misery,

News came to Rome, how that the Gauls and Germans were up, the Emperor
Gracian wrote to all the Catholic Bishops, that they should offer in their
Churches great Sacrifices with prayers unto God, and in Rome likewise it was
ordained, that generally processions should be had, to the end Almighty God
should moderate his ire against his people: For good Christians first pacify
God with Prayers before they resist their enemies with weapons. This good
Prince showed himself to be no less warlike in his outward affairs, then a
good Christian in his Religion: for God gives victories unto Princes more
through tears then through weapons.

These things thus finished, and his affairs unto God recommended, the noble
Emperor Gracian determined to march on, and himself in person to give the
battle. And truly as at the first he showed himself to be a good Christian:
so now he declared himself to be a valiant Emperor: For it were a great
infamy and dishonor, that a Prince by negligence or cowardnes should lose that
which his Predecessors by force of arms had gotten. The army of the enemies
exceeded far the Roman army in number, and when they met together in a place
called Argentaria, the Romans being inferior to their enemies in number,
were afraid: For in the wars the great multitude of enemies and their
puissant power, makes ofttimes the desired victory to be doubtful. This thing
seen of the Romans, and by them considered, importunately they besought the
Emperor not to charge the battle, for they said he had not men sufficient:
And herein they had reason: For the sage Prince should not rashly hazard his
person in the war: nor yet should lightly put his life in the hands of
Fortune. The Emperor Gracian not changing countenance, nor stopping in his
words, to all the Knights which were about him, answered in this wise.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the godly Oration which the Emperor Gracian made to his
Soldiers before he gave the battle.
VAliant Knights and Companions in The Oration of the Emperor:
war, most thankefully I accept your service, in that you have sold your
goods, and do offer your lives here to accompany me in the wars, and herein
you show your duties: for of right you ought to loose your goods, and to
venture your lives, for the defense and surety of your Country. But if I give
you some thanks for your company, know you that I give much more for your good
counsel which presently you give me: for in great conflicts seldom is found
together, both good counsel and stout hearts. If I have enterprised this
battle in hope of man's power, then you had had reason that we should not give
the battle seeing the great multitude that they have, and the small number
that we are; for as you say, the weighty affairs of the public weal should
not unadvisedly be committed to the incertainety of Fortune.

I have taken upon me this dangerous and perilous wars: first trusting
that on my part iusticeremaineth, and since God is the same only justice, I
trust assuredly he will give me the victory in this perilous conflict: For
justice avails Princes more that they have, then the men of war do which
they lead. Wherefore since my cause is just, and that I have God the only Judge
thereof on my side, me thinks if for any worldly fear I should cease to give
the battle. I should both show my self to be a Prince of small faith, and
also blaspheme God, saying he were of small justice. For God shows most his
power there, where the frailenesse of man has least hope. Then since I begin
the war, and that by me the war is procured, and for me you are come to
the war, I have determined to enter into the battle, and if I perish
therein, I shall be sure it shall be for the memory of my person, and the
salvation of my Soul: For to dye through justice is not to dye, but to change
death for life. And thus doing, if I lose my life, yet therefore I lose not my
honor, and all this considered I do that which for the Commonwealth I am
bound, For to a Prince it were great infamy and dishonor, that the quarrel
being his own, should by the blood of others be revenged. I will prove this
day in battle whether I was chosen Emperor by the divine will or not: For if
God this day causes my life to be taken from me, it is a manifest token he
has a better in store for me, and if through his mercy I be preserved, it
signifies that for some other better thing he grants me life. For in the end
the sword of the enemy is but the scourge of our offenses. The best that I see
therefore in this matter to be done is, that till three days be passed the
battle be not given, and that we confess our selus this night, and in the
morning prepare our selus to receive our Redeemer, and besides this, that every
man pardon his Christian brother, if he have had any wrong or injury done him:
for often times though the demand of the war be just, yet many mishaps befall
therein, through the offenses of those which pursue and follow the same.

After that three days are past, and each thing according to my sayings before
accomplished in every point as behooves, then let God dispose all things as he
shall see good, for now I am fully determined to adventure my life in battle*
Wherefore my valiant and stout warriors, doubt not at all, for this day I must
either vanquish mine enemies, or else suffer death: and if I dye, I do that
which needs I must. Wherefore I will now cease to exhort you any more,
desiring you to consider that, whereunto your duties leads you, remembering
that you are come as knights, and in the defense of your Country, you wage
battle: for now we are come to that pinch, that deeds must more avail The
duty of every good Soldier.
us then words: for peace ought to be maintained by the tongue, but wars ought
to be achieved by sword. Al these words then ended, and three days past, the
Emperor in person gave the battle, where the conflict and slaughter on both
sides was very terrible: yet in the end the Emperor Gracian had the victory
over his enemies, and there dyed in that conflict 30. thousand Goths and
Almaines, and of the Romans there were not slain but five thousand: For that
Army only is preserved, which to the divine will is conformable. Let all other
Princes take example by this noble Prince: let the^ consider how it behooves
the^ to be good Christians, and that in great wars and conflicts they need
not fear the great number of their enemies: but they ought greatly to see that
the wrath of God be pacified: For the heart is more dismayed with the secret
sins, then it is feared with the open enemies.

CHAP. XXVII. That the Captain Theodosius which was Father of the Great
Emperor Theodosius, dyed a good Christian: And of the King Hismarus, and the
Bishop Siluanus. And of a Council that was celebrated, with the Laws which
they made and established in the same.
THe two brethren being Emperors, that is to say, Valentinian and Valente, in
the coasts of Afric, and the realm of Mauritania, a Tyrant usurped the
place of a King against the Romans, who was named The tyranny of Thyrmus.
Thyrmus, a man hardy in travels, and in dangers stout: For the aduenturous
hearts oftentimes do commit many tyrannies.

This tyrant Thyrmus by much cruelty came possessed of the realm of
Mauritania: and not contented therewith, but also by tyranny possessed a great
part of Affricke, and prepared as (Hannibal did) an huge army to pass into
Italy, to dye in challenging the Empire of Rome.

This was a renowned Tyrant that never took pleasure in any other thing so
much, as to spoil and rob others of their goods.

The Romans that in all their doings were very sage, and of the tyranny of
tyrants, sufficiently monished, immediately prepared a great Army to pass into
Affricke, and to spoil the realm, and to destroy the Tyrant by the
commandment and decree of the Senate, and that for no pact or covenant the
Tyrant should live. And without doubt this commandment was just: For to him
that is a destroier of the Commonwealth, it is not punishment enough to take
away his life.

At that time there was a Knight in Rome, whose name was Theodosius, a man well
stricken in years, and yet better approved in wars, but he was not the
richest: howbeit he vaunted himself (as truth was) to be of the blood of
Traian the great Emperor, upon which occasion, he was greatly honored and
feared in Rome, for the Commons were so noble and gracious toward their
Princes, that all those which from the good and virtuous Emperor descended,
were of the whole Commonwealth greatly esteemed.

This noble Theodosius was of years so ancient, and so honored in his old
age for his gray hayres, so noble of lynage, and so approved in wars, that he
was by the authority of the Emperor Valentinian, by the consent of all the
Senate, and by the good wills of the whole people, chosen to to go to the
conquest of Affricke, and truly their reason was good: For Theodosius desired
much to fight against that Tyrant Thyrmus, and all the people were glad that
such a captain led the Army, So this Theodosius embarked with the Army,
departed from Rome, and in few days arrived at Bona, which was a City greatly
replenished with people, situated in a haven of the Sea in Affricke: And as he
and his Army was landed, the tyrant Thyrmus forthwith encamped his Army in the
field in the face of the Romans, and so all being planted in the plame, the
one to assault, and the other to defend: immediately the two Armies joined, and
the one assaulting the other fiercely, on both sides was great slaughter. So
that those which to day were conquered, to morrow did conquer: and those which
yesterday were Conquerours, afterward remained conquered. For, in long wars
Fortune changes.

In the Province of Mauritania, there was a strong City called Obelista, and
as the captain Theodosius, by his force occupied all the Field, the Tyrant
Thyrmus fortified himself in the City, the which valiantly being assaulted of
the Captain Theodosius, and almost with his men, entering into the same: The
Tyrant Thyrmus, (because he would not commit himself unto the faith of other
men,) slew himself with his proper hands. For the The death of Thyrmus
property of proud and disdainefull hearts, is rather to dye in liberty,
then to live in captivity.

At that time the Emperor Valent, by the art of Nigromancie, wrought
secretly, to know what luck should succeed in the Roman Empire. And by
chance a certain woman, (being an Enchaunteresse,) had answer of the devil,
that that name which with these Letters should be written, should be successor
to the Empire, and the Letters were these, T. E. O D: The Emperor Valent
diligently enquired of all the names, which with these iiij. letters could be
named? and they found that those signified the Theodotes, the Theodores, and
the Theodoses: wherefore Valent forthwith put all those to the sword that were
of that name.

Such was the wickedness of the Emperor Valent, supposing they would have taken
the Empire from him being alive. For the tyrannous Prince lives ever in
jealousy and suspicion.

The excellent Captain Theodosius, (the Tyrant Thyrmus being dead, and having
subdued all Affricke to the Roman The wickedness of Valent.
Empire) was burdened that he was a secret Traitor to the Empire, and that
he compassed to win the same by tyranny. For this cause therefore, the
Emperor Valent gave sentence he should be beheaded. And this was done, he
never hearing of it, and much less culpable thereof: For all Princes that are
wilful in their doings, are very absolute of their sentence. This came to the
ears of Theodosius, and seeing that he was condemned to be beheaded, he sent
incontinent for the Bishop of Carthage, of whom he demanded the water of holy
Baptism, and so being baptized, and in the Faith of Christ instructed, was by
the Hangman put to execurion. Of this so grievous, outrageous, and detestable
Fact, every man judged this Theodosius, to suffer as an innocent, and that the
Emperor Valent had judged evil, and like a Tyrant. For the innocence of the
good, is the great enemy of the evil.

At the same time, when Theodosius demanded Baptism, (according to the saying
of Prosper in his chronicle) he said unto the Bishop, which should Baptize him,
these words; O Bishop The death of Theodosius.
Saint Roger, I do Conjure thee, by the Creator which made us, and do desire
thee for the Passion of IESV CHRIST, who redeemed us, to give me the water of
Baptism: For I have made a vow to become a Christian, if GOD granted me
victory, Wherefore I will accomplish my vows, for those things which
necessity causes us to promise, our own free will, ought to accomplish. I am
sorry with all my heart that being a Christian, I can live no longer, and since
it is so, I offer my life for his sake, and into his merciful hands I commend
my soul, I leave a Son of mine who is called Theodosius, and if the Fatherly
love beguyle me not, I think he will prove a virtuous and stout young man, and
besides that he will be wise, and since by thy hands he has been baptized,
I require thee holy Father, that thou through thy wisdom wilt bring him up in
the true faith: for if he be a good Christian, I trust in God he will be a
great man in the Empire.

This Theodosius was the Father of the great Emperor Theodosius; so that the
father was a Christian, and the son a Christian.

Not long after the Emperor Valent had caused Theodosius (which was father to
the great Emperor Theodosius) to be executed, Valent by the commandment of
God was by the Goths persecuted, and in the end put to death, and truly this
was the just The judgment of God.
judgment of God. For he of right should suffer death himself, which unjustly
procures the death of others Rufinus in the second book of his histories,
says, that after the Tyrant Thirmus was put to death by the captain
Theodosius, and that the Emperor Valent had caused this Theodosius to be put
to death, and that the same Valent was slain of the Goths, the Romans
created a king in Afric, whose name was Hismarus, called for a right
Christian in that time, which was from the building of Rome, 377. There was in
the City of Carthage a holy Bishop called Silunaus, a man in humane and divine
letters excellently well learned, and since the King was so just, and the Bishop
so holy, both the faith increased, and also the affairs of the Common weal
prospered: For commonly the wars begin rather through the pride of the
highest, then through disobedience in the lowest. Therefore this holy Bishop
and good Christian King, being desirous in their time to give good examples to
the subjects, and for the time to come to leave good precepts, they celebrated
in the City of Bona a Council, with all the Bishops of Affrikce, in the which
King Hismarus was in person: For in ancient Councels the Kings were not only
there in persons, but also all the Lords and high Estates of their Realms.

Amongst many excellent things which Rufinus mentions that were ordained in
this place, it seemed good unto me to remember here these few, to the end
Christian Princes now present, may see what devout Christians those Kings were
in times past.

A collection or purport of the Counsel of Hyponense.
THese were the things which in the sacred Council of Hyponense were
ordained, where there was in person the Catholic King Hismarus, and the
religious Bishop Siluanus, and in that which was ordained, the King spoke in
some of them, and does counsel in other some: because in such semblable
affairs, it is both meet and requisite, that the royal pre-eminence be
reverenced, and the authority of the Church not diminished.

We ordain that from two years to two years, all the Bishops, Abbots, and
The laws ordained by the Counsel of Hyponense.
Prelates of our Realm do assemble, and celebrate a Provincial counsel, and
that in this counsel there be no temporal matters spoken of, but of the
disorders and misgouernances of Churches: For the Church is not lost for the
lack or scarsitie of Money, but for the too great abundance of riches.

We ordain, that all Prelates which are now and shall be hereafter, we desire
that when they will call any counsel in our Realms, that before the
celebration of the same they certify us, lest under that color or cloak of a
holy Counsel, there should some suspicious Assembly be had.

We ordain that from henceforth the Princes and great Lords be bound to
repair to the sacred Counsel, with all the company of the holy Bishops. For
it were more meet they should come to destroy false Heretics, in winning
their souls, then to fight against their Enemies, in losing their lives.

We ordain that the Prince which comes not to the counsels through
negligence, that unto him the Sacrament of the Body of Christ be not
ministered, until the next counsel be celebrated. And if perchance he refuse
not to come through negligence, but through malice, we will that they proceed
against him as a suspect person in the Faith of Christ, For the Christian
Prince that of malice only commits an offense is not perfect in the holy
Catholic Faith.

We ordain, that at the first assembly of the Counsel, all the Prelates
together openly, and afterward each one by himself privately shall say the
Creed singing, the which thing finished, the King himself alone shall say the
Creed likewise. For if the Prince be suspected of the holy Catholic Faith, it
is impossible that his people should be good Christians.

We ordain, that in this Counsel the Prelates have liberty and authortie to
say unto the King that that is comely and decent: and the King likewise to say
in the Counsel what he thinks best, so that the Prelates might tell the King
without fear of his little care, he has in destroying the Heretics, and
Heresies of his Realm: and likewise the King might tell the Prelates their
negligence that they use in the charge of their flock. For the end and
intention of Counsels ought not to be any otherwise then a scourge for
offenses past, and a reformation of the evils to come.

We ordain, that all the Princes of Affricke, immediately before they do any
other thing in the morning, do openly and diligently come to Morning prayer.
What is required of every true Christian.
And we will also, that there be present all his Courtiers, and private
Counselors, which with the^ ought to enter into counsel. For that creature
cannot give any good counsel, who has not reconciled himself unto God before

We ordain that the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbottes, continually, during
the time of the counsel, do every day confess themselves to Almighty God,
serving him devoutly: and that one of them do preach unto the people Gods
word. For if every Prelate be bound to give good example alone, then being
all together, they shall give it much better.

We ordain, that Princes (as much as lies in them) do give unto their
subjects good examples, and that on the Sabbath day in especial and other
Feastiualldayes, they repair unto the Cathedral Church, to hear divine
Service: and there reconciling themselves to God, that they do publicly, in
the presence of the congregation, receive the holy Communion and Supper of the
Lord. For it would be a great slander to Princes, which ought to reprehend
others of their faults, that a man should never see them come to the Church,
and be partakers of the holy Sacrament.

We ordain, that al Easter chiefly Princes do go to the church Cathedral,
and that the Metropolitan be there in person, to celebrate the holy
Communion: and the Gospel being said, the Prince himself shall be bound to say
with a loud voice the Creed, confirmed in the sacred counsel of Nicene: For
that good Princes ought not only in their hearts to befaithful unto JESUS
CHRIST, but are also bound openly with their mouths to confess it before the
people.

We ordain, that Princes be not so hardy, to have in their Court above two
Bishops: the one to give him ghostly counsel, and the other to preach unto him
the word of God. And those we will that the Council assign unto him, and that
they be bound to find two persons of the most ancient and virtuous, which
shall remain in the Court no more but two years, and that afterward others
be placed there in their steades: For there is nothing more monstrous, then to
see the Church long without Prelates

CHAP. XXVIII. What a godly thing it is to have but one Prince to rule the
public weal: for there is no greater enemy to the common weal, then he
which procures many to command therein, as by reasons following it shall be
proved,
Often times with my self alone I consider, that since the divine providence,
which does all No respect of persons with God.
things by weight and measure, and that of her, and none other all creatures
are ruled and governed, and that furthermore with God, there is no exception of
persons; for he makes the one rich, and the other poor: the one sage, and
the other simple: the one whole, and the other sick, the one fortunate, and
the other unlucky: the one servant, and the other master: And let no man
marvel though I muse thereat: for the variety of time is the beginner of
dissentions among the people.

In man's judgment it seems, that it were better all were alike in apparel,
all equal in commanding, none greater then others in possessions, all to
content themselves with one kind of meat, and that the names commanding and
obeying were utterly abolished and brought to naught. So that if the miseries
of the one, and prosperities of the other, were put out from that day forward,
I protest there should be no envy in the World.

Laying aside man's opinion (which ought not to be compared to the divine
mystery;) I demand now what reason sufficed to think, that of two brethren
(that is to say, Jacob and Esau, both children of holy and devout persons) the
divine providence would the one should be chosen, and the other despised, that
the one should command and the other obey, the one to be disinherited being
the eldest, and the other to inherit being the youngest? That which chanced
to Jacob with Esau, the same chanced to the children of Jacob and Joseph: who
being partaker and chosen, God provided and ordained that to Joseph being the
youngest, his brethren should serve and obey him.

This thing was repined at of all the eleven brethren, howbeit their intentions
auayled not: for it is impossible for man's malice to disorder that, which the
divine providence has Man may purpose, but God disposes.
appointed: we see daily nothing else but that which man decrees in a long
time God disposes otherwise in one moment. Truly it is not evil done, but
well ordained. For in the end, since man is man, in few things he can be either
certain or assured: and since God is God, it is impossible that in any thing
he should err. It is a great benefit of the Creator, to be willing to
reform and correct the words of the Creatures. For if God would suffer us to
do after our own minds, we should be quite contrary to his pleasure.

God without a great mystery did not ordain, that in one family there should
be but one Father, among one people there should be but one Citizen that
should command, in one Province there should be but one Governor alone, and
also that one King alone should govern a proud Realm, and also that by one
only Captain a puissant Army should be led.

And furthermore and above all, he wills that there be but one Monarchiall
King and Lord of the World: Truly all these things are such, that we with
our eyes do see them, and know them not: we hear them with our ears, and
understand them not: we speak them with our tongues, and know not what we
say. For truly man's understanding is so dull, that without doubt he is
ignorant of more then he knows.

Appolonius Thyaneus compassing the most part of Asia, Affrike, and Europe:
That is to say, from the bridge of Nilus, where Alexander was, unto Gades where
the pillars of Hercules were, he being one day in Ephese, in the Temple of
Diana, the Priests asked him, what thing he wondered at most in all the
world? For it is a general rule, that men which have seen much, always do
note one thing above another.

Although the Philosopher Appolonius greatlyer esteemed the works, then the
speaking of them that demanded the question, yet forthwith he made them this
answer.

I let you know Priests of Diana, that I have bin throughout France, England,
Spain, Germany, through the Laces The speech of Appolonius.
and Lydians, Hebrews and Greeks, Parthes and Medes, Phrygians, and
Corinthia^s, and so with the Persians, and above in all the great Realm of
India: For that alone is more worth then all these Realms together. I will you
understand that all these Realms in many and sundry things do differ, as in
languages, persons, beasts, metals, waters, flesh, customs, Laws, Lands,
buildings, in Apparel, and Forts, and above all, diverse in their Gods and
Temples,

For the Language of the one differs not so much from the language of the
other, as the Gods of Europe, differ from the Gods of Asia, and the Temples and
Gods of Asia and Europe, differ from them of Affricke. Amongst all things which
I have seen, of two only I did marvel, which is, that in all the parts of
the world wherein I have travailed, I have seen quiet men troubled by
seditious persons: the humble, subject to the proud: the just, obedient to the
Tyrant. I have seen the cruel, commanding the merciful: the coward ruling
the hardy, the ignorant teaching the wise: and above all, I saw that the most
Thieues did hang the innocent on the gallows.

The other thing whereat I marvelled, was this, That in all the places and A
wort saving, (...) worthy observation.
where I have been, I know not, neither could I find any man that was
everlasting, but that all are mortal, and in the end both high and low have an
end: For many are laid too night in their grave, which the next Day following
thought to be alive.

Leave aside the divine judgment, in that he spoke, he said highly, and like
a Philosopher: for it seems to be a pleasant thing, to see how men govern
the World.

Therefore now to the matter: It is but reason we know the cause of this so
ancient a novelty, which is, That God wills and ordayneth, that one only
command all, and that all together obey one. For there is nothing that God
does (although the cause thereof be unknown unto us), that wants reason in
his Eternal wisdom.

In this case (speaking like a Christian, I say) that if our Father Adam had
What we lost by the fall of Adam.
obeyed one only Commandment of Almighty GOD, which was forbidden in the
Terrestrial Paradise, we had remained in liberty upon the earth, and should
have bin Lords and masters over all; But since he would not then obey the
LORD, we are now become the abiects and slaves of so many Lords.

Oh wicked sin, accursed be thou, since by thee only the World is brought
into such a bondage: without tears I cannot speak that which I would, that
through our first Fathers, (which submitted themselves to sin) we their
children have lost the Seignoric of the world. For since they were prisoners
unto sin in their souls little avails the liberty of their bodies.

There was great diversity betwixt the opinions of Pythagoras, and the
opinions of Socrates, for so much as those of Socrates school said: That it
were better all things should be common, and all men equal.

The other of Pythagoras schole said The difference of opinions.
the contrary: And that the Commonwealth were better, wherein each one had his
own proper, and all should obey one, so that the one of them did admit and
grant the name of servants, and the others did despise the name of Lords,

As Laertius in his first book of the lise of Philosophers, said: that the
Philosopher Demosthenes was also of the same opinion, that to the end the
people should be well governed, he would two names should be utterly
abolished, and taken away: That is to say, Lords and subjects, Masters and
servants: For, the one desirous to rule by fierceness, and the others not
willing to obey to tyranny, would shed the blood of the innocent, and would be
violent against the poor: They would destroy the renowned, and famous people,
and Tyranny would wax stout, the which things should be taken away, if there
were no seignorie, nor servitude in the world: But notwithstanding these
things, the Philosopher in his first book of his Pollitiques, says: That by
four natural reasons we may prove it to be very necessary, that Princes
do command, and the people obey.

The first reason is, of the parts of the Elements, simple, and mixed. For we
see by experience, that the Elements do suffer, (to the end they would be
joined together) the one to have more power then all: the which is showed by
experience. Forasmuch as the Element of the Fire, the Element of the Air, and
the Element of the Water do obey, the Element of the Earth does command.

For against their nature he brings them all to the Earth. But if all the
noble and chiefest Elements were obedient to the most vile Element, only to
form a body mixed, it is a greater reason, that all obey to one virtuous
person, that the Commonwealth might thereby the better be governed,

The second reason is, of the body and the soul, in the harmony whereof the
Soul is the mistress which commands, The soul mistress of the body.
and the body the servant, which obeys: For the body neither sees,
hears, nor understands without the body.

The sage Philosopher by this infers, that the sage men should naturally be
Lords over others. For in the world there is nothing more monsterous, then that
Fools should command, and wise men obey.

The third reason takes his ground on beasts: For we see by experience, that
diverse beasts by the only knowledge of men are governed: therefore it is but
meet that many men, which are more liker Beasts then the beasts themselves,
do suffer themselves to be governed and ruled by wise men. For the Commonweal
is more profited by a brute beast, then it is by witles men. The 4. reason
proceeds of women: For we see, that they being created to the image of GOD,
God commands and ordains, that they should be subject to man, presupposing
their knowledge not to be so great, as the knowledge of men. Therefore if this
thing be thus, why could not diverse mortasl men (who without comparison know
less then women) take themselves for happy, that one alone would command and
govern them: so that such a one were a sage and virtuous person.

Since man is naturally politic, which is to be a friend of company: the
company engenders envy, and afterward discord nourishes war, and war
brings in tyranny, and tyranny destroys the Commonwealth: and the
Commonwealth being lost, all men think their lives in peril.

Therefore it is very necessary, that in the Commonwealth many be governed by
one alone: For to What is required in the government of the common wealth.
conclude, There is no Commonwealth well governed but by one alone. The great
travels and inconveniences which the Ancients found in times past, were the
occasision that it was ordained in the public weal, that all should obey one:
Since that in a Camp one only Captain is obeyed, and in the Sea one Pilot
followed, In the Monastery all obey one Prelate, and in the Church all obey one
Bishop; and since in a Hiue of Bees, one Be only leads all the rest: It
were not reason that men should be without one King, nor the Commonwealth
without a Governor.

These men that will not have a King in a Commonwealth, are like unto drones
and waspes, which without travel eat the sweat of others. And my opinion in
this case should be, that every man that will not be commanded, as an abject
of the common weal should be expulsed and cast out thereof: For in a
commonwealth there can be no greater enemy then he that desires that many
should rule therein. In that public Weal, where one alone has care for all,
and all obey the commandments of one only, there God shall be served, the
people shall profit, the good shall be esteemed, and the evil despised, and
besides the Tyrants shall be suppressed. For a governance of many is not
profitable, unless they refer themselves to the judgment of a few, and to the
arbitrament of one alone. Oh how many people and realms (because they would not
obey their Princes by justice) have since by cruel tyrants been governed with
tyranny: For it is even a just plague, that they which desire the scepters of
righteous Princes, should feel and prove the scourge of cruel tyrants.
Always it was, and shall be, that in the world, there was one to command,
another to obey, one to govern, and another to be governed.

In this case let no man say, I am excepted: for until this day there has no
Prince nor Knight bin seen, but has traveled under this yoke: I warn and
pray, and importunately require you all, that you be loyal, and faithful
servants, to the end you may deserve to have loving Lords: For the Prince that
is wicked causes his subjects to rebel, and the seditious subject makes his
Lord become a tyrant. It is a great thing to the people, their Princes be good
or evil: For there are no Princes so stable, that always will disemble the
evil: nor there is no governor so very a tyrant, but sometimes will acknowledge
God suffers evil Governors for the offenses of the people.
the good. Oftentimes God suffers that there be Emperors in the Empire, Kings
in Realms, Lords in Cities, and Prelates in Churches, not all only as the
Common wealth desires, nor as the good government requires, but as the
offense of the multitude deserves: For we see many that have the charge of
souls, which deserve not to keep the sheep: That to be true, plainly
appears: For such do not govern but disorder, they do not defend but offend:
they do not resist the enemies, but engage and fell the innocent: they are no
Judges but Tyrants: they are not gentle Pastors but cruel Hangmen: they are
not encreasers of the Commonwealth, but destroyers of Justice: they are not
ordayners, of the Laws but inuentors of tributes: their hearts wake not to
good, but to invent and work all mischief. And finally, God sends us such
Prelates and Governors, not for that they should be Ministers of his laws,
but for that they should be scourgers of our offenses.

CHAP. XXIX, That in a public weal there is no greater destruction then where
Princes daily consent to new orders, and change old customs.
IN the first book of the Kings, the 8. Chapter, of the holy 1 Reg. 8.
and sacred scripture is said: that Samuel (when he was old) in his stead
placed his two sons to govern the people, whose names were Iohel and Abiah,
for that naturally the Fathers are desirous to advance their children to honor.

The sons of Samuel were resident and held the judgment in the City of
Beersheba, which was the furthest part of Judea, and the old Samuel went to
dwell in the City Ramah. The honorable and most ancient men, (among the
people of Jerusalem) assembled together, and decreede to send Ambassadors to
Samuel, which should be the wisest men of all the Synagogue: for the ancients
in those days were so circumspect, that they never committed any affairs in
the common wealth into the hands of young men. The Ancients then being arrived
at Ramah, spoke these words unto Samuel.

Samuel, thou art now old, and for thy years thou can not govern the
people, therefore thou like a pitiful Father have committed the government
of the people into the hands of thy children.

Wherefore we let thee know in this case, that thy children are covetous. First,
they do receive bribes of the suitors. And secondarily, they do great injury
to the people: Therefore we are come to require thee to give unto us a King
that may govern us, and that might lead us in battle: for we will no more
Judges to judge us, but Kings for to govern us.

The aged Samuel hearing the embassage, was ashamed of that the Ancients of
Judea had told him: first seeing his children to be evil: Secondarily,
because they would take their offices from them, And truly herein Samuel had
just occasion, both to be ashamed, and also sorry.

For the enormities, vices and wickedness of the young children The folly of
youth.
are swords that pass through the hearts of the old and ancient Fathers.
Samuel seeing that the Hebrews were determined to deprive them of their
office, and government of the people, had none other remedy but even to make
his moan to God of his grief, and God hearing his complaints, said unto him:
Samuel. Be not sad, nor lament not, for their demanding a King (as they do)
they do not mislike thy person, but they disprayse my providence, and marvel
not though they forsake thy children, for they are somewhat too young, since
they have forsaken me their God, and worship false Idols. Since they demand a
King. I have determined to give them one, but first tell to them the conditions
of the King, which are these.

The King whom I will give you, shall take your Children, with your Charriots
and beasts, and shall send them laden with burdens. And yet therewith not
contented, he shall make your children poastes by the way, Tribunes and
Centurions in his Battles, and shall make them laborers and gardeners in his
gardens, he shall make them sow his seeds, and paste his bread, and furbish his
harnes, and Armor.

You shall have besides both delicate and tender daughters, the which you shall
little enjoy: For the King that I will give you, shall command them to keep
and attend The power and (...) of a King.
those that are wounded in the wars, he shall make them Cooks in his Palace,
and Caters of his expenses.

The King that I will give you, if he handle your Sons and Daughters evil,
much worse he will handle your goods. For on the beasts and fertile Fields
that you have his Heard shall feed, he shall gather the best grapes of your
vines, he shall choose of your Olive trees the best olyues and oils. And if
any fruit afterward remain in your fields, he will they shall be gathered,
not by you, but of his workmen: And afterward the King that I will give you
shall oppress you much more.

For of every pecke of corn, you shall give him one, of ten sheep you must
needs give him one: so that of all things which you shall gather against your
wills, you shall give the tenth. Of your Slaves the King shall be served sooner
then you: and he shall take all your Oxen that labor, and travail in your
own Possessions, and shall bring them to plough in his own ground and
tenements. So that you shall pay tribute, and the King shall take his own
profit, for the wealth and commodity of his Palace.

And all this which I have rehearsed before, the King shall have whom I will
give you. The History which here I have declared, is not Ovid, nor yet the
Eglogges of Virgil, nor yet the fayning of Homer; but it is the sentence and
the very word of God.

O mortal ignorance, that we demand and know not why nor wherefore, to whom
nor where, neither when we demand, which causes men to run into sundry
errors. For few men are so wise that they offend not in choosing, and that
they can ask with reason. The folly of men.


The Hebrews asked (as they think) the better, and GOD gives them the worse,
they ask one to govern them, and God gives them a Tyrant to destroy them:
they ask one that should maintain them in Justice, and he threatens them
with tyranny: they require one that should give them, and he gives them one
which robs them: They require one to deliver them from bondage, and he
ordains one to keep them as slaves.

And finally, the Hebrews trusting to be deliured of their Judges, which ruled
not according to their appetits. God shall give the^ a king that shall take away
their goods from them by force.

Oh how many times ought we to pray unto GOD, to give us Princes in our
Commonwealth, and Prelates in our Churches, which do know how to govern us,
and minister unto us: How much we are bound to pray unto God for good Governors.
not according to the weight of our soul, but according to the measure of his
mercy?

Plato says in the first book of laws, that one of the most Excellent laws
which the Siciones had in their Province, was, to keep their Cities, that they
should not change nor alter any thing therein.

Truly those Barbarous were sage, in their doing: and Plato was very discreet
to commend them therein; For nothing destroys a Commonwealth sooner then to
suffer chaunges ofttimes therein.

All these things seemed to be true in the Hebrews, the which in their
government were very rash and indiscreet.

For first they governed themselves by Patriarckes, as Abraham was. After they
were governed by Prophets, as Moses. By Captains, as Iosuab: by Judges, as
Gedeon: by Kings, as David: and after they governed themselves by Bishops, as
Abdias was, and in the end the Hebrews not contented with all these, GOD
suffered that they should fall into the hands of Antichus, Ptholomeus, and
Herodes, all Tirants.

This punishment fell (according to the just judgment of God) upon them for
their offenses: for it was even meet, that they that would not enjoy the
pleasant liberty of Judea, should taste the cruel servitude of Babylon.

The condition which chanced in the government, to the unconstant Hebrews,
the same happened unto the proud Romans. The which in the beginning of their
Empire were governed by Kings: afterward by x. men: The government of Rome.
Then by the Consuls: so by the Dictators: by the Censors: and afterward, by
the Tribunes, and Senators: and in the end, they came to be governed by
Emperors, and tyrannous Princes. The Romans invented all these alterations
in their gouernme^ts, for none other cause, but to see whether they could be
delivered from the commandment of another. For the Romans in this case were
so proud hearted, that they had rather dye in liberty, then live in captivity:
God had so ordained it, and their woeful case did so promise it, when they were
above all other Kings and Realms of the Earth, that then the slave should be
obedient to his yrons, and the subject should acknowledge the homage to his
Master. And though that subjects do move wars, though Kings also do win
Realms, and Emperors conquer Empires: yet will they, or nill they, both great
and small, should acknowledge themselves for servants.

For during the time of our fleshly life, we can never withdraw our selue from
the yoke of servitude. And say not you Princes, for that you are puissant
Princes, that you are exempted from servitude of men. For without doubt it is a
thing more intolerable, to have their hearts burdened with thoughts, then
their necks laden with The care of Princes.
yrons.

If a slave be good, they take from him some yrons: but to you that are
Princes, the greater you are, the greater cares you have. For the prince that
for his Commonwealth takes care, has not one moment of an hour quiet. A
slave hops to be delivered in his life, but you cannot look to be delivered
till after your death. They lay yrons on the slave by weight, but thoughts
burden you without measure. For the woeful heart is more burdened with one hour
of care, then the body is pressed with twenty pound of iron. A slave or
prisoner if he be alone, many times fyleth off his yrons but you Princes when
you are alone, are more grievously tormented with thoughts: For solitary places
are Arbours and Gardens, to woeful and heavy hearts.

A slave has nothing to care for but himself alone: but you that be princes
have to satisfy and please all men, For the Prince should have a time for
himself, and also for those which are about him.

The divine Plato said well, that he that should have the least part of a
Prince, and belonging to a Prince, ought to be the Prince himself. For to that
end the Prince should be all his own, he ought to have no part in himself.

Though a slave work and travel in the day, yet he sleeps without care in the
night: but you Princes pass the time in hearing importunate suites, and the
nights in fetching innumerable sighs.

Finally, I say, that in a slave (be it well, or be it evil) all his pain is
finished in one year, or is ended at his death; but what shall a woeful Prince
do when he dies. If he were good there is but a short memory of his
goodness: and if he has been evil, his infamy shall never have end.

I have spoken these things to the end that great and small, Lords and servants
should confess and acknowledge, the true Seigniory to be only unto him, who
for to make us Lords above, became a servant here beneath.

CHAP. XXX. When the Tyrants began to ratgne, and upon what occasion
commanding, and obeying first begann. And how the authority which the Prince
has, is by the ordinance of God.
CEasing to speak any further of the Poetical Histories, and ancient
faynings, and speaking the truth, according to the divine Histories, the first
that did live in this World, was our Father Adam, who did eat of the fruit
forbidden, and that not so much for to trespass the commandment of one, as
for not to displease his wife Eve: For many now a days, had rather suffer
their conscience a long time to be infected: then one only day to see their
wives displeased.

The first homicide of the world was Caine: The first that dyed in the World
was Abel: The first that had two wives in the World was Lamech. The first City
of the World was by Enoch built in the fields of Edon: The first Musition was
Tubalcaim: The first which sailed in the World, was Noe: The first Tyrant of
the World was Nembroth: The first Priest was Melcrisedech: The first King of
the World was Anraphel: The first Duke was Moses: The first which was called
Emperor in the World, was Julius Caesar. For until this time, they which
governed, were called Consuls, Censors and Dictators. And from Julius Caesar's
hitherto have been called Emperors.

The first battle that was given in the world (as we read) was in the wild
valleys, which now they call the dead and salt sea: For a great part of that,
that then was the maine land is now the dead sea. The holy Scriptures cannot
deceive us, for it is full of all truth, and by them it is declared, that
eighteen hundred years after the World began, there was no battle
assembled, nor company that met to fight in the field: for at that time when
they had no ambition nor covetousness, they knew not what battle meant.

It is reason therefore that in this writing we declare the cause, why the
first battle was fought in the world, to the end Princes may thereof be
advertised, and the curious Reader remain therein satisfied.

The manner was this, that Bassa being King of Sodom, Bersa King of The reason
why wars first began.
Gomorrhe, Senaab King of Adamee Semebar King of Seboime, and Vale King of
Segor, were all five Tributaries to Chodor Lanmor King of the Elamites, which
five Kings conspired against him, because they would pay him no tribute, and
because that they would acknowledge no homage unto him. For the realms paying
tribute, have always rebelled and sowed sedition.

This rebellion was in the 13, year of the reign of Chodor Laomor, King of
the Elamites, and immediately the year following, Anraphel king of Sernaar,
Arioch king of Ponte, and Aradal King of the Allotali, joined with Chodor
Laomor. All which together began to make wars, to destroy Cities and
Countries upon their enemies.

For the old malice of the war is, That where they cannot have their enemies
which are in the fault, they put to sack and destroy those which are innocent
and guiltless.

So the one assaulting, and the other desending, in the end all come to the
field, they gave battle as two enemies, and the greatest part was overcome of
the fewest, and the fewest remained victorious over the greatest, which thing
God would suffer in the first battle of the world, to the end Princes might
take example, that all the mishappes of the Wars come not, but because they
are begun of an unjust occasion.

If Chodor Laomor had held himself contented as his Predecessors did, and
that he had not conquered Realms in making them subject, and had not caused
them to pay tribute, neither they unto him would have denied reason: nor he
with them would have waged battle. For through the covetousness of the one,
and the ambition of the other, enmities grew between the people.

This considered which we have spoken of Sygnorie, and of those which came
into contentions for signories.

Let us now see from whence the first original of servitude came, and the
names of servants and Lords How servitude began.
which were in the old time, and whether servitude was by the discord of
virtuous men, first brought into the World, or else invented by the ambition of
tyrants: for when the one commands, and the other obeys, it is one of the
novelties of the world, as the holy Scripture declares unto us in this manner.
The holy Patriarch Noah had three sons, which were Sam, Ham, and Iaphet: and
the second son (which was Ham) begot Cusn, and this Cusn begotte Nimrod,
Nimrod made himself a Hunter of wild beasts in the woods and mountains: He
was the first that began to play the Tyrant amongst men, enforcing their
persons and taking their goods: and the Scripture called him Oppressor hominum,
which is to say, an Oppressor The first tyrant that ever was.
of men: For men of evil life always commit much evil in a Commonwealth.

He taught the Chaldeans to honor the fire, he was the first that presumed to
be an absolute Lord, and the first that ever required of men homage and service.

This cursed tyrant ended his life in the golden World, wherein all things were
in common, with the Commonwealth: For the Ancients used their goods in
common: but their wills only they reserved to themselves. They ought not so
think in a light matter, for his person to have been a tyrant, but they ought
to think it a greater matter, to have been a rebel in a Commonwealth: and
much more they ought to esteem it as an evil matter in him, which has been
(as he was) a disturber of the good customs of his country: but the most
unjust of all is, to leave behind him any evil custom brought into the common
wealth: for if he deserve great infamy which works evil in his life: truly
he deserves much more, which trauelleth to bring that evil in ure after his
death. Eusebius seems to affirm, that after Nimrod had destroyed the realm of
Chaldea by his plagues, came to Italy with 8. sons, and built the of Camesa,
which afterward, in Saturnes time was called Valentia, and in the time of
Romulus it was called as it is at this present, Rome. And since this thing was
thus, a man ought not to marvel, that Rome in ancient time was possessed with
Tyrants, and with Tyrants beaten down, since by so so famous and renowned
tyrants it was founded. For even as Jerusalem was the daughter of the patient,
and the mansion of the quiet Kings in Asia: so was Rome the mother of proud
Princes in Europe.

The Histories of the Gentiles, (which knew not the holy Scripture) declare in
an other sort the beginning of signorie and servitude, and when they came into
the world: for the Idolaters not only did not know the Creator of the World,
but also they were ignorant of many things which began in the world. They
therefore say, that the Tyrant Nimrod (amongst the others) had a son called
Belus, and that this Belus was the first that reigned in the land of Syria, and
that he was the first that invented wars on the earth, and that he Belus
the first inuentor of wars
set up the first Monarche among the Assyrians, and in the end he dyed after
he had reigned 65. years in Asia, and left the world in great wars. The first
Monarchy of the world, was that of the Assyrians, and continued 132. years.

The first King was Belus, and the last King was Sardanapalus, whom (at that
time when he was slain) they found spinning with women, having a Distaffe in
his hand, wherewith they use to spinne: and truly his vile death was too good
for such a cowardly King: For the Prince ought not to defend that with the
Distaffe, that his Predecessors had won with the sword.

As we have said Nimrod begat Belus, who had to wife Semyramis, which was the
mother of Ninus, which Ninus succeeded his Father in tyranny, and in the Empire
also: and both the Mother and the Son not contented to be tyrants, invented
statues of new Gods: For man's malice pursues rather the evil, which the
wicked do invent, then the good which virtuous men begin.

We would have showed you, how the Grandfather, and the Father, the Mother and
the Son, were Idolaters and warlike, to the end Princes and great Lords might
see, that they began their Empires, more for that they were ambitious
persons, then for that they were good, patient, or virtuous men. Albeit that
Nimrod was the first that ever committed any tyranny, and whether it be true
or not that Belus was the first that invented wars, and that Chodor Laormor
was the first that invented battles, and that there be others, whereof the
Writings make no mention, every man taking for himself, and afterward all
together: those were occasions of evil enough in the world to agree unto those
things. Our inclination is greatly to be blamed: For those which have credit
for their evil, are many: and those which have power to do well, are but very
few.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the golden age in times past, and worldly misery which we have
at this present.
IN the first age, and golden world, all lived in peace, each man took care
for his own lands, every one planted and sowed their trees, and corn, every
one gathered his fruits, and cut his vines, knedde their bread, and brought up
their children, and finally, all lived by their own proper sweat and travel;
so that they all lived without the prejudice or hurt of any other.

O worldly malice, O cursed and wicked world, that thou never suffer things
to remain in one estate, and though I call thee cursed, marvel not thereat:
for when we are in most prosperity, then thou with death persecutest us most
cruelly.

Without tears, I say not that I will say, that two thousand years of the
World were past before we knew what the World meant: God suffering The
mutability of the World.
it, and worldly malice invented it, ploughes were turned into weapons, oxen to
horses, goades unto lances, whips to arrows, slings to Crossebowes,
simplicity into malice, travel into idleness, rest to pain, peace to war,
love to hatted, charity to cruelty, justice to tyranny, profit to damage,
alms to theft, and above all, Faith into Idolatry.

And finally, the swet they had to profit in their own goods, they turned to
bloud-shedding, to the damage of the Commonwealth. And herein the World
shows it self to be a world: herein worldly-malice shows it self to be
malicious, in so much as the one rejoices, and the other lamenteth: the one
rejoices to stumble, to the end that other may fall and break their necks,
the one rejoices to be poor, to the end the other may not be rich: the one
rejoices to be dispraysed, to the end the other may not be honored: the one
delights to be sad, to the end the other should not be merry: And to
conclude, we are so wicked, that we banish the good from our own house, to
the end the evil might enter in at the gates of an other man.

When the Creator created the whole World, he gave to each thing immediately
his place: that is to say, he placed intelligence in the uppermost Heaven: he
placed the stars in the Firmament, the planets in the orbs: the birds in
the air: the earth on the Center, the Fishes in the Water, the Serpents in the
hoales, the beasts in the mountains: and to all in general, he gave place to
rest themselves in.

Now let Princes and great Lords be vainglorious, saying, that they they are
Lords of the earth: for truly of all that is created, God only is the true
Lord thereof; because the miserable man for his part has but the use of the
fruit: for if we think it reasonable that we should enjoy the profit of
that which is created: then were it more convenient we should acknowledge God
to be the Lord thereof.

I do not deny, but confess, that God created all things, to the God made al
things for the use of man.
end they should serve man upon condition, that man should serve God likewise:
but when the creature ryseth against God, immediately the Creator resists
against man.

For it is but reason that he be disobeyed, who one only commandment will
not obey.

O what evil fortune has the creature, only for disobeying the commandment
of his Creator: for if man had kept his commandment in Paradise, God had
conserved to the World the signorie: but the Creatures whom he created for his
service are occasion to him of great troubles: for the ingratitude of benefit
heapeth great sorrow to the discreet heart. It is great pity to behold the man
that was in Paradise, and that might have been in Heaven: and now to see him in
the world, and above all to be interred in the entrals of the earth: For in
Terrestrial Paradise he was innocent, and in heaven he had been blessed; but
now he is in the world, environed with cares, and afterward he shall be
thrown into his grave, and gnawne of the Worms. Let us now see the
disobedience we had in the commandment What man loft by Adams fall.
of God, and what fruit we have gathered in the world. For he is very simple
that dare commit any vice, taking no delight nor pleasure thereof in his body.
In my opinion through the sins which our forefathers committed in Paradise,
the servitude remains in us their children which are on the earth. For so
much as if I enter into the water, I drown, if I touch the fire I burn, if I
come near a dog, he biteth me, if I threaten a horse, he easteth me, if
I resist the wind it blows me down, if I persecute the serpent, he
spoyleth me, if I smite the bear he destroys me, and to be brief I say,
that the man that without pity eats men in his life, the Worms shall eat
his entrals in his life after his death.

O Princes and great Lords, lode your selves with cloth of gold, heap up your
great Treasures, assemble many Armies, invent Iusts and turneis, seek pastimes
and pleasures, revenge your selves of your enemies, serve your selves with your
subjects, marry your children to mighty Kings, and set them in great estate:
cause your selves to be feared of your enemies, employ your bodies to all
pleasures, leave great possessions to your heirs, raise sumptuous buildinges
to leave memory of your persons: I swear by him that shall judge me, that I
have more compassion to see your sinful souls, then I have envy to see your
vicious lives: for in the end all pastimes will vanish away, and they shall
leave you for a gage to the hungry worms of the earth.

O if Princes did consider (though they have been borne Princes, created A
warning for all sorts of people.
and nourished in great estates) that the day they are borne, death immediately
comes to seek the end of their life, and takes them here and there when
they are sick, now tumbling, then rising; he never leaves them one hour
until their woeful burial: Therefore since it is true, (as indeed it is) that
that which Princes possess in this life is but small, and that which they hope
in the other is so great: Truly I marvel why Princes, the which shall lie so
straight in the grave, dare lie in such and so great largeness in their life.
To be rich, to be Lords, and to have great estates, men should not thereof at
all be proud, since they see how frail man's condition is: for in the end
life is but lone, but death is enheritage. Death is a patrimony and heritage,
which successively is inherited: but life is a right which daily is
surrendered. For death counts us so much his own, that often times unawares,
he Nothing so sure as death.
comes to assault us: and life takes us such strangers, that often times we
not doubting thereof, it vanishes away If this thing then be true, why will
Princes and great Lords presume to command a strange house, which is this
life, as in their own house which is the grave? Leaving aside the said
opinions, I say that for sin only scruitude came to dwell in us, and entered
into the world: for if there had been no sinners, we ought to believe there
had been no Lords, nor servants. For as much as servitude generally enters
into this World through sin: I say that the Seigniory of Princes is by the
divine commandment; for he says: By me the King does govern, and by me
the Prince does minister Justice.

I conclude in this sort, with this reason: That since it is true, Princes are
sent by the hands of God for to govern us, We are bound in all, and for The
reason we have to obey our Prince.
all to obey them: for there is no greater plague in a public weal, then to
be disobedient to the Prince.

CHAP. XXXII. How King Alexander the great, after he had overcome King Datius
in Asia, went to conquer the great Indea, and of that which happned unto him
with the Garamantes, and how the good life has more power then any force of
war.
IN the year of the Creation of the World, 4970. in the first age of the
World, and in the 4027. years of the foundation of Rome, Iado being High
Priest in Hierusalew, Decius and Mamilius at Rome Consuls, in the third year
of the Monarchy of the Greeks, Alexander the Great (son to Philip King of
Macedonia) gave the last battle to Darius King of Persia, wherein King
Alexander escaped very sore wounded, and Darius slain, so that the whole
Empire of the Persians came under the government of the Greeks: For the
unfortunate Princes do not only lose their lives with which they came into the
world, but also the Realms which they did inherit.

After that Darius was dead, and Alexander saw himself Lord of the field, and
that the Persians and Medes were become subject to the Grecians, though many
Kings and Lords dyed in those cruel batailes: yet it seemed to Alexander a
trifle to be Governor of all Asia, wherefore he determined in person to go
conquer the great India. For, Proud and stout hearts obtaining that which
they desire, immediately begin to esteem it as little. All The pride of
Alexander.
his Armies repaired, and placing governors in all the Realm of Asia,
Alexander departed to conquer the great India: for he had promised and sworn
to his gods, that through all the World there should be but one Empire, and
that that should be his: and moreover that he would never pass through any
strange Realm or Country, but it should give obedience unto him, or else
forthwith he would destroy it: for tyrannous hearts have never any regard to
the damage of another, until they have obtained their wicked desires.

Alexander then going to conquer Realms, and destroy Provinces: by chance one
said unto him, That on the other side of the mountain Riphei (toward the
parts of India) was a barbarous Nation which were called Garamantes, as yet
never conquered by the Persians and Medes, Romans, nor Greeks, neither any
of them ever triumphed over them: for they had no weapons, nor esteemed them
not, since they had no riches.

King Alexander, (who for to conquer and subdue Realms and strange countries
was very diligent and hardy and to see new things very desirous,) determined,
not only to send to see that country, but also to go himself in person, and
in that place to leave of him some Memorial: which thing forthwith he
accomplished. For he left them Altares, as Hercules left in Gades, pillars.
For man's heart is so stout, that it Trauelleth not only to compare with many,
but also to excel all.

The Ambassadors of Alexander were sent to Garamantes, to advertise them of
the coming of King Alexander the great, and of the terrible and cruel
battles, which he in the wars had overcome: and to declare unto them how the
puissant K: Darius was slain, and that all Asia was under his subjection, and
how every City did yield themselves: against whom he neither lifted spear
nor sword, because all yielded to his commandment. With these and such other
like things they would have feared them, for that words often times makes men
more afraid, especially when they are spoken of brave stout men, then do the
swords of cowards.

Lucius Bosco says, in his third book of the antiquityes of the Grecians, (of
whom the original of this history is drawn) that after the Ambassadors of
Alexander had spoken to the Garamantes, they were nothing at all troubled for
the message, neither did they fly away from Alexander, nor they prepared any
war, neither took they in hand any weapon, nor yet they did resist him, Yea,
and the chiefest of all was, that no man of the Country ever departed out of
his house.

Finally, they neither answered the Ambassadors (of Alexander,) to their right
message, nor yet spoke one word unto them, concerning their coming. And truly
the Garamantes had reason therein, and did in that right wisely: For it is but
mere folly for a man to persuade those men with words who enterprise any
thing of will.

It is a marvelous matter to hear reported the hystories of these Garamantes,
(that is to say) that all their houses were of equal height, all men were
apparelled alike, the one had no more authority then another, in feeding they
were no glouttons, in drinking wine they were temperate, concerning pleas and
debates, they were ignorant, they would suffer no idle man to live among them,
they had no weapons, because they had no enemies: and generally, they spoke few
words, but that which they spoke was always true.

King Alexander being somewhat informed of those Garamantes, and their life,
determined to send for them, and called them before his presence, and instantly
desired them (if they had any wise men among them, to bring them unto him, and
by writing or by word of mouth, to speak somewhat unto him. For Alexander was
such a friend to sage men, that all the realms which he overcame, immediately
he gave to his men, excepting the Sages, which he kept for his own person.

Quintus Curtius, by king Alexander says, that a Prince does well spend his
treasors to conquer many Realms, only to have the conversation of one wise man.
And truly he had reason: for to princes it is more profit in their life to be
accompanied with Sages: then after their deaths, to leave great treasours to
their heirs. Certain of those Garamantes the^ being come before the presence
of Alex: the great, one among them (as they thought the most ancientst) himself
alone (the residue keeping silence,) in the name of them all spoke these words.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of an Oration which one of the Sages of Garamantia made unto
King Alexander, a goodly lesson for all ambitious men,
IT is a custom, king Alexander, amongst us Garamantes, to speak seldom one
to another, and scarsely never speak to strangers, especially if they be busy
and unquiet men: For, the tongue of an evil man is no other but a plain
demonstration of his envious heart.

When they told us of thy coming into this country, immediately we
determined not to go out to receive thee, nor to prepare our selves to resist
thee, neither to lift up our eyes to behold thee, nor to open our mouths to
salute thee, neither to move our hands to trouble thee, nor ye to make war
to offend thee. For greater is the hate that we bear to riches and honors,
which thou love, then the love is that thou have to destroy men, and subdue
Countries, which we abhor.

It has pleased thee we should see thee, not desiring to see thee, and we have
obeyed thee, not willing to obey thee, and that we should salute thee, not
desirous to salute thee: wherewith we are contented, upon condition, that
thou be patient to hear us. For that which we will say unto thee, shall tend
more unto amendme^t of thy life, then to dissuade thee from conquering our
country. For it is reason that Princes which shall come hereafter do know, why
we living so little, esteem that which is our own: and why thou dying,
take such pains to possess that which is another man's.

O Alexander, I ask thee one thing, and I doubt whether thou can answer me
thereunto or no? For those hearts which are proud, are also most commonly
blinded.

Tell me whether thou go? from whence thou come? what thou meanest? what
thou think? what thou desire? what thou seek? what thou demandest? what
thou searchest? A compendious reprehension.
and what thou procurest? and further, to what Realms and Provinces thy
disordinate appetite extends? Without a cause do I not demand thee this
question, what is that thou demandest and what it is that thou seek: For I
think thou thy self know not what thou would? For proud and ambicious
hearts know not what will satisfy them. Since thou art ambitious, honor
deceives thee: since thou art prodigal, covetousness beguyleth thee: since thou
art young, ignorance abuses thee: and since thou art proud, all the world
laugheth thee to scorn: in such sort, that thou followest men and not reason:
thou followest thine own opinion, and not the counsel of an other, thou
embracest flatterers, and repulsest virtuous men. For Princes and Noble men had
rather be commended with lies, the^ to be reproved with truth. I cannot tell
to what end you Princes live so deceived, and abused, to have and keep in
your palaces more flattrers, iuglers, and fools, then wise and sage men. For
in a princes palace if there be any which extolleth their doings, there are
ten thousand which abhor their tyrannies. I perceive by these deeds
(Alexander) that the gods will sooner end thy life, then then wilt end thy
wars. The man that is brought up in debates, discentions, and strife, all his
felicity consists in burning, destroying, and blood shedding: I see thee
defended with weapons, I see thee accompanied with tirants, I see thee rob the
temples. I se thee without profit wast the treasors, I see thee murder the
Innocent and trouble the patient, I see thee evil willed of all, and beloved
of none, which is the greatest evil of all evils. Therefore how were it
possible for thee to endure such and so great travels, unless thou art a
fool, or else because God has appointed it to chastise thee.

The Gods suffer oftentimes that men being quiet. should have some weighty
affairs, and that is not for that they should be honored: at this present,
but to the end they should be punished for that which is past.

Tell me I pray thee, peradventure it is no great folly to empouerish many, to
make thy self alone rich? It is not (peradventure) folly that one should
command by tyranny, and that all the rest lose the possession of their
Seigniory. It is not folly perchance to love (to the damnation of our souls)
many memories in the world of our body. It is not folly perchance that the Gods
approve thy disordinate appetite alone, and condemn the will and opinion of
all the World beside: peradventure it is not folly, to win with the tears of
the poor, and comfortless widows) so great and bloody victories:
peradventure it is no folly, willingly to wet the earth with the blood of
Innocents, only to have a vain glory in this World? Thou think it no
folly peradventure (God having divided the World into so many people) that thou
should usurp them to thee alone? O Alexander, Alexander, truly such works
proceed not from a creature nourished among men on the earth: but rather of
one that has been brought up among the infernal Furies of Hell: for we are
not bound to judge men by the How we ought to judge of men.
good nature they have: but by their good and evil works which they do.

The man is cursed (if he have not been cursed, he shall be cursed) that lives
to the prejudice of all others in this world present, only to be counted
courageous, stout, and hardy, in time to come. For the gods seldom suffered
them to enjoy that quietly in peace, which they have gotten unjustly in the
wars.

I would ask thee, what insolency moved thee to reuolte against the lord K.
Darius? after whose death thou have sought to conquer all the world? and thus
thou do not as a King that is an inhertitor, but as a tyrant, that is an
oppressor, For him properly we call a tirant, that without justice and reason
takes that which is another man's.

Either thou searchest justice, or thou searchest peace, or else thou searchest
riches, and our honor? Thou searchest rest, or else thou searchest favor of thy
friends, or thou searchest vengeance of The property of a tyrant.
thine enemies. But I swear unto thee (Alex:) that thou shall not find any of
all these things, if thou seek by this means, as thou have begun: For the
sweet Sugar is not of the nature of the bitter gumbe. How shall we believe
thou searchest justice, since against reason and justice, by Tyranny thou rulest
all the earth? how shall we believe thou searchest peace, since thou causest them
to pay tribute which receive thee: and those which resist thee, thou handlest
the^ like enemies? How can we believe that thou searchest rest, since thou
troublest all the world? How can we believe thou searchest gentiles, since thou
art the scourge and sword of human frailnes? how can we believe that thou
searchest riches, since thine own Treasures suffiseth thee not: neither that
which by thee vanquished comes into thy hands, nor that which the conque rors
offer thee? How shall we believe thou searchest profit to thy friends, since
that of thy old friends, thou have made new enemies? I let thee understand
(Alex:) that the greatest ought to teach the least, and the least to obey the
greatst

And Friendship is only amongst equals. But thou, (since thou suffer none
in the World to be equal and like unto thee, look not thou to have any
Friend in the world. For Princes oftentimes by ingratitude loose faithful
Friends: and by ambition win mortal enemies.

How shall we believe thou searchest revenge of thine enemies, since thou take
more vengeance of thy self, being alive, then thine enemies would take of
thee, if they took thee prisoner? though perchance in times past they used thy
Father Philip evil, and have now disobeyed thee his Son: It were far
better counsel for thee to make them thy Friends by gentleness, then to confirm
them Enemies by cruelty. For the Noble and pitiful hearts when they are
revenged of any, make of themselves a butcherie.

We cannot with truth say, that thy Trauells are well employde to win such
honor, since thy conversation and life is so unconstant? For truly honor
consists not in that Flatterers say, but in that which Lords do. For the
great Familiarity of the wicked, causes the life to be suspected.

Honor is not gotten by liberal giving of Treasours at his death, but by
spending it well in his life: For it is a sufficient In what true Honor
consists.
proof, that the man which esteems renown, does little regard Money: and it
is an apparent token, that man who little esteems Money, greatly regards
his renown.

A man wins not honor by murdering Innocents, but by destroying Tyrants: for
all the harmony of the good government of princes is, in the chastising How a
Prince must win honor.
of the evil, and rewarding the good.

Honor is not won in taking and snatching the goods of an other, but in
giving and spending his own.

For there is nothing that beautifieth the Majesty of a Prince more, then for
to show his noblenes in extending mercy and favor unto his subjects, and
giving gifts and rewards to the virtuous.

And to conclude, I will let thee know who he is, that wins true honor in
this life: and also: a perpetual memory after his death: and that is not he
which leads his life in Wars, but he that takes his death in peace.

O Alexander, I see thou art young, and that thou desirst honor, wherefore I
let thee understand, that there is no man farther from true honor, then he
which greedily procures and desires the same. For the ambitious men, not
obtaining what they desire, remain always defamed, and in winning and getting
that which they search, true honor notwithstanding will not follow them.

Believe me in one thing Alexander, that the most truest honor ought through
worthy deeds to be deserved, and by no means to be procured: For all the
honor which by tyranny is won, in the end by infamy is lost.

I am sorry for thee Alexander: For How true honor is won.
I see thou want Justice, since thou love Tyranny: I see thou lackest
peace, because thou love war: I see thou art not Rich, because thou have
made all the world poor: I see thou lackest rest, because thou seek
contention and debate: I see thou have no honor, because thou winnest it by
infamy: I see thou want friends, because thou have made them thine enemies.

Finally, I see thou do not revenge thy self of thine enemies, because thou
art (as they would be) the scourge to thy self.

Then since it is so; why art thou alive in this World, since thou lackest
virtues, for the which life ought to be desired? For truly that man, which
without his own profit, and to the damage of an other leads his life, by
Justice ought forthwith to lose his breath.

For there is nothing that sooner destroys the Weal public, then to permit
unprofitable men therein to live.

Therefore speaking the truth, you Lords and Princes are but poor, I believe
thou conquerest the World, because thou know not thy superior therein: and
besides that, thou will take life from so many, to the end that by their death
thou may win renown.

If cruel and warlike Princes (as thou art) should inherit the lives of them
whom they slay, to augment and prolong their lives, as they do inherit goods
to maintain their pride, although it were unmeet, then war were tolerable,

But what profits the servant to lose his life this day, and his Masters
death to be differred but until the The property of a wise man.
morrow? O Alexander, to be desirous to command much, having respite to live
but little: me thinks it were a great folly and lack of wisdom.
Presumptuous and ambitious men which measure their works not with the few days
they have to live, but with the arogant and haughty thoughts they have to
command: They lead their life in travel, and take their death with sorrow.
And the remedy hereof is, that if the wise man cannot obtain that which he
would, he should content himself with that which he may.

I let thee to know Alexander, that the perfection of men is not to see much,
to hear much, to know much, to procure much, to come to much, to travel
much, to possess much, and to be able to do much: but it is to be in the
favor of the Gods.

Finally, I tell thee, that that man is perfect, who in his own opinion
deserves not that he has, and in the opinion of another, deserves much more
then that he possesses. We are of this opinion amongst us, that he is
unworthy to have honor, who by such infamous means searches for it. And
therefore thou, Alexander, deseruest to be slave unto many, because thou
think to deserve the signory over all. By the immortal Gods I swear, I
cannot imagine the great mischief which entered into thy breast, so
unrighteously to kill King Darius (whose vassal and friend thou wast only)
because thou would possess the Empire of the whole World? For truly
servitude in peace is more worth then Signiory in war. And he that shall
speak against that I have spoken, I say he, is sick, and has lost his taste.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The sage Garamante continues his Oration, showing that
perpetuity of life cannot be bought with any worldly treasure. Among other
notable matters he makes mention of the seven laws which they observed.
Thou will not deny me Alexander, but What mean a wise man should use.
that thou werte more healthful when thou wast King of Macedo^^^ then thou art
now being Lord of all the earth: for the excessive travel brings men out of
all order.

Thou will not deny me Alexander, that the more thou gettest, the more thou
desire: for the heart which with covetousness is set on fire, cannot with
wood and bows of riches, but with the earth of the grave be satisfied and
quenched.

Thou will not deny me (Alexander) but the abundance that thou thy self have,
seems unto thee little, and the little which an other man possesses, seems
unto thee much: For the Gods, to the ambitious, and covetous hearts gave this
for penance that neither with enough, nor with too much they should content
them selves.

Thou will not deny me (Alexander) if in deed thy heart be covetous, that
first the pleasures of life shall end before thy covetousness: for where vices
have had power long time in the heart, there death, only, and none other has
authority to pluck up the roots.

Thou will not deny me (Alexander) that though thou have more then all, yet
thou enioyest least of any: for the Prince that possesses much, is always
occupied in defending it: but The greedy desires of man never satisfied.
the Prince that has little, has Time and leisure in quiet to enjoy it.

Thou will not deny me (Alexander) though thou call thy self Lord of all,
yet thou have but only the name thereof, and others thy servants and subjects
have all the profits: for the greedy and covetous hearts do travel and toil
to get, and in wasting that which they have gotten, they pine away.

And finally (Alexander) thou will not deny me, that all that which thou have
in the long conquest gotten, is little, and that which of thy wisdom and
quietness thou have lost, is much: For the Realms which thou have gotten are
innumerable, but the cares, sighs and thoughts which thou have heaped upon thy
heart, are innumerable.

I let thee know one thing, that you Princes are poorer then the poor
Subjects: for he is not rich that has more then he deserves, but he that
desires to have less then possesses. And that therefore Princes you have
nothing: For though you abound in great Treasurs, yet notwithstanding, you are
poor of good desire.

Now Alexander, let us come to the point, and cast account, and let us see The
man is happy that has content.
us see to what end thy Conquest will come? Either thou art a man, or thou art
a god; And if thou be any of the gods, command, or cause that we be
immortal: and if thou can do any such thing, then take us and our goods
withal. For perpetuity of the life, can by no riches be bought.

O Alexander, I let thee understand, that therefore we seek not to make war
with thee: For we see that both from thee, and also from us, death will shortly
take away the life. For he is a very simple man, that thinks always to
remain in another man's house as in his own.

It thou Alexander, could give us, (as God) everlasting life, each man would
travel to defend his own house; But since we know we shall dye shortly, we
care little whether to thee or any other, our goods and riches remain. For if
it be folly to dwell in an other man's house as his own, it is a greater
folly to him that loses his life, in taking thought and lamenting for his
goods.

Presuppose that thou art not god, but a man; I conjure thee then, by the
immortal gods, and do require thee that thou live as a man, behave thy self
as a man, and covet no more then an other man, neither desire How a man ought
to conceive of himself.
more nor less then a man: for in the end thou shall dye as another man, and
shall be buried as another man, and thou shall be thrown into the grave, and
then there shall be no more memory of thee.

I told thee before that it grieved me to see thee so hardy and courageous,
so apt and so young, and now it grieueth me to see thee so deceived with the
world: and that which I perceive of thee is, that then thou shall know thy
folly when thou shall not be able to find any remedy. For the proud Young man
before he feels the wound has already the ointment.

You which are Grecians call us Barbarous, because we enhabite the mountains.

But as touching this I say, that we rejoice to be barbarous in our speech and
Greeks in our doings: and not as you which have the Grecian tongue, and do
barbarous works.

For he that does well, and speaks rudely, is no barbarous man: but he which
has the tongue good, and the life evil. Since I have begun to that end nothing
remain unspoken, I will advertise thee of our laws and life, and marvel not
to hear it, but desire to observe and keep it: for infinite are they which
extol virtuous works, but few are they which observe the same.

I let thee know (Alexander) that we have short life, we are few people, we
have little lands, we have little goods, we have no covetousness, we have few
laws, we have few houses, and we have few friends, and above all we have no
enemies: for a Wise man ought to be friend to one, and enemy to none.

Besides all this, we have amongst us great friendshippes, good peace, great
love: much rest, and above all, we hold our selves contented: for it is
better to enjoy the quietness of the grave, then to live a discontented life.

Our Laws are few, but in our opinions they are good, and are in seven words
only included as here follows.

We ordain that our children make no more Laws then we their Fathers do
leave unto them: for new Laws makes them to forget good and ancient The laws
of the Garamantes.
customs.

We ordain that our Successors shall have no more Gods then two, of the which
the one God shall be for the life, and the other for the death: for one God
well served is more worth, then many not regarded

We ordain that all be apparrelled with one cloth, and hosed of one sort,
and that the one have no more apparel then the other: for the diversity of
garments engenders folly among the people.

We ordain that when any woman which is married has had three children that
then she be separated from her husband, for the abundance of children
causes men to have covetous hearts. And if any woman has brought forth any mo
children, then they should be sacrificed unto the Gods before her eyes.

We ordain that all men and women speak the truth in all things, and if any
be taken in a lie, committing no other fault, that immediately he be put to
death for the same: For one liar is able to undo a whole multitude.

We ordain that no woman live above forty years, and that the man live until
fifty, and if they dye not before that time that then they be sacrificed to the
Gods: for it is a great occasion for men to be vicious, to think that they
shall live many years.

CHAP, XXXV. That Princes ought to consider, for what cause they were made
Princes, and what Thales the Philosopher was, of the 12. questions asked him,
and of his answer he made unto them.
IT is a common and old saying (which many times by Aristotle the noble and
virtuous Prince has been repeated) That in the end all things are done to
some purpose: for there is no work neither good nor euil^ but he that does it,
means to some end.

If thou demaundest the Gardener to what end he waters so often his plants, he
will answer thee, it is to get some money for his herbs. If thou demaundest
why the river runs so swift, a man will answer thee, that it his to the end
it should return from whence it came.

If thou demaundest why the trees budde in the spring time, they will answer,
to the end they may bear fruit in harvest. If we see a traveler pass the
mountains in the snow, the rivers with peril, the woods in fear, What gifts
God bestows up on Princes, above other men.
to walk in extreme heat in Summer, to wander in the night time in the cold
winter: and if by chance a man does ask one of them saying: Friend, whether
go thou, wherefore take thou such pains? And he answers, Truly sir, I
know no more then you to what end, neither can I tell why I take such pains. I
ask thee now, what a wise man would answer to this innocent Traveler? Truly
(hearing no more) he would judge him to be a fool: for he is much
unfortunate, that for all his travel looks for no reward. Therefore to our
matter, a Prince which is begotten as an other man, borne as an other man,
lives as an other man, dies as an other man: And besides all this commands
all men, if of such a one we should demand, why God gave him signiory, and
that he should answer he knows not, but that he was borne unto it.

In such case let every man judge, how unworthy such a King is to have such
authority. For it is impossible for a man to minister justice, unless he knew
before what justice means.

Let Princes and noble men hear this word, and imprint it in their memory,
which is, that when the living God determined to make Kings and Lords in this
world: he did not ordain them to eat more then others, to drink more then
others, to sleep more then others, to speak more the^ others, nor to rejoice
more then others: but he created them upon condition, that since he had made
the^ to command more then others, they should be more just in their lives the^
others.

It is a thing most unjust, and in the Common wealth very slanderous, to see
with what authority a puissant man commands those that be virtuous: and with
how much shame, himself is bound to all vices. I know not what Lord he is that
dare punish his subject for one only offense committed, seeing himself to
deserve for every deed to be chastised: For it is a monstrous thing, that a
blind man should take upon him to lead him that sees.

They demanded great Cato the Censor what a King ought to do, that he should
be beloved, feared, and not despised; he answered, The good Prince should be
compared to him that sells Tryacle, who if the poison What is required in a
Prince.
hurts him not, he sells bis Triacle well, I mean thereby, that the
punishment is taken in good part of the people, which is not ministered by the
vicious man: For he that makes the Tryacle shall never be credited, unless
the proof of his Triacle be openly known and tried: I mean that the good
life is none other then a fine Triacle to cure the Commonwealth. And to whom
is he more like, which with his tongue blazeth virtues, and imployeth his
deeds to all vices: then unto the man, who in the one hand holds poison to
take away life; and in the other Triacle to resist death? To the end that a
Lord be wholly obeyed, it is necessary that all that he commands be
observed, first in his own person: for no Lord can nor may withdraw himself
from virtuous works.

This was the answer that Cato the Censor gave, which in mine opinion was
spoken more like a Christian then any Roman.

When the true God came into the World, he employed 30. years only in works,
and spent but two years and a half in teaching: For man's heart is persuaded
more with the work he seeks, then with the word which he hears. Those
therefore which are Lords, let them learn and know of him which is the true
Lord, and also let Princes learn why they are Princes: for he is not a Pylot
which never sailed on the seas. In mine opinion, if a Prince will know why he
is a Prince, I would say to govern well his people, to command well, and to
maintain all in justice, and this should not be with words, to make them
afraid, neither by works which should offend them: but by sweet words which
should encourage them, and by the good works that should edify them: for the
noble and gentle heart cannot resist, him, that with a loving countenance
commands, Those which will rule and make tame, fierce, and wild beasts, do
threaten and rebuke them a hundred times, before they beat them once: and if
they keep them tied, they show them sundry pleasures: So that the wildness
of the beast is taken away, only by the gentle and pleasant usage of the man,
therefore since we have this experience of brute and savage beasts (that is to
say) that by their well doing, and by the gentle handling of them, they
voluntarily suffer themselves to be governed: much more experience we
reasonable men ought to have, that is to know, that being right and well
governed, we should humbly, and willingly obey our sovereign Lords: for there
is no man so hard hearted, but by gentle usage will humble himself.

O Princes and noble men, I will tell you in one word, what the Lord ought to
do in the government of his commonwealth.

Every Prince that has his mouth full of truth, his hands open to give
rewards, and his ears stopped unto lies, and his heart open to mercy, such a
one is happy, and the realm which has him, may well be called prosperous,
and the people may call themselves fortunate: For where as truth, liberality,
and clemency rules in the heart of a Prince, there wrongs, injuries, and
oppressions do not reign. And contrariwise, where the Prince has his heart
fleshed in cruelty, his mouth full of tyrannies, his hands defiled with blood,
and enclineth his ears to hear lies: such a Prince is unhappy, and much more
the people the which by such a one is governed: for it is impossible that there
is peace and justice in the common wealth, if he which governs it, be a
lover of lies and flatteries.

In the year 440. before the Incarnation of Christ, which was in the year 244.
of the foundation of Rome: Darius the fourth being King of Persia, and Brutus
and Lucius at Rome Consuls, Thales the great Philosopher flourished in Greece,
who was Prince of the seven renowned Sages: by the which occasion, all the What
time Thales the Philosopher flourished.
Realm of Greece had, and recovered renown: For Greece boasted more of the
seven Sages which they had, then Rome did of all the valiant Captains she
nourished.

There was at that time much contention between the Romans and the Greeks,
for so much as the Greeks said, they were better, because they had more Sages,
and the Romans said the contrary, that they were better, because they had
always more Armies.

The Greeks replied again, that there were no laws made but in Greece. And
the Romans to this answered, that though they were made in Greece, yet they
were observed at Rome. The Greeks said, that they had great Universities to
make Wise men in. And the Romans said, that they had many great temples to
worship their Gods in: for that in the end they ought to esteem more one
service done to the immortal Gods, then all the other commodities that might
come unto men.

A Thebane Knight was demanded, what he thought of Rome and Greece: and he
answered, me thinks the Romans are no better then the Greeks, nor the
Greeks then the Romans: For the Greeks glory in their tongues, and the
Romans in their Lances: but we refer it to virtuous works: For one good
work is more worth, then either the long staves of the Romans, or the
eloque^t tongues of the Greeks,

Therefore touching my matter, this Philosopher Thales was the first that found
the Pole (called the North Thales the first that found out the North star.
star) to sail by, and the first that found the division of the years, the
quantity of the Sun and the Moon, and the first that said souls were
immortal, and that the World had a soul. And above all, he would never
marry; for the care to content a wife, and the thought to bring up the
children, does much dull the wits of wise men.

This Philosopher Thales was very poor, wherefore (some disdayning him for his
poverty) to declare and show that he was more rich then all they: he bought
the next year all the Olives he could get: for by Astronomy he knew that in
the third year there would be a great want and scarsitie thereof throughout
all the Country: Wherefore all were compelled to come to him for Olives, which
at his own price he sold: and in this sort he showed them that mocked him,
that he willingly despised riches, and lovingly embraced poverty: For, he that
willingly in this world is poor, ought not to be called poor.

This Philosopher Thales was a Mirror amongst the Sages of Greece, and was
greatly reverenced of all the Kings of Asia, and highly renowned in Rome.

And further he was so wise, and had so ready a wit, that to all sudden
questions he was demanded, he gave present answer forthwith, which thing
declared him to be of a marvelous wit, and truly it was a great matter: for
the most part of mortal men cannot tell how to answer, nor what to demand.

Many and diverse questions we asked him, as Diogenes Laertius affirms, in
the answering whereof he showed great wisdom, the treasure of memory, and
subtilty of understanding.

First, he was asked, What GOD was? Thales answered; Of all the most
antiquities, GOD is the most ancient thing. For all the Ancients past neither
saw him take beginning, nor those which shall come, shall see him have ending.
Questions resolved by Thaks.


Secondarily, he was asked, What thing was most beautiful: he answered, The
world: because no Artificial paynting could make the like.

Thirdly he was asked, What was the greatest thing: To that he answered,
Place, wherein all things do stand. For the place which contains all, of
necessity must be greater then all.

Fourthly, it was asked him, Who knows most: he answered, That no man was
wiser then Time, because Time always only invented new things; and is he
which renueth the old.

Fifthly, they asked him, What was the lightest thing? he answered, the wit of
man, because that without travel and danger it passes the Sea, to discover and
compass all the whole earth.

Sixthly, they asked him, What was the strongest thing: he said, That man that
is in necessity: For necessity reuiueth the understanding of the rude, and
causes the coward to be hardy in peril.

Seventhly, they asked him, What was the hardest thing to know? he answered,
for man to know himself: For there should be no contentions in the world, if
man knew himself.

Eighthly, they asked him, What thing was sweetest to obtain: he answered,
Desire: For the man rejoices to remember the pains past, and to obtain to
that he desires present.

Ninthly, they asked him, when the envious man is quiet: he answered, when he
sees his enemy dead, or utterly undone For truly the prosperity of the enemy
is a sharp knife to the envious heart.

Tenthly, he was asked, What man should do to live uprightly? He answered,
to take the counsel to himself, which he gives to another. For the undoing
of all men is, that they have plenty of counsel for others, and want for
themselves.

The eleventh question was, they asked him, What profit he has that is not
covetous? whereunto he answered: That such a one is delivered from the
torments of his Avarice, and besides that he recouereth friends for his
person: For riches tormenteth the Auaricious, because he spends them not.

The twelfth, they asked him, What the Prince should do to govern others? he
answered, he ought first to govern himself, and then afterward to govern
others. For it is impossible the Rod should be right, where the shadow is
crooked.

By the occasion of this last answer, I did bring in here all these questions,
to the end Princes and Rulers might Princes and Magistrates supporters of the
common wealth
see, how that every one of them is as the rod of Justice, and that the
Commonwealth is none other but a shadow of them, which in all, and for all,
ought to be right. For immediately it is perceived in the shadow of the
Comon-wealth, if the Justice or life of him which governs, be out of his
order. Therefore concluding that all I have spoken before, if a Prince would
ask me why he is a Prince: I would tell him in one word only: that he which
is the High Prince, has made you a Prince in this world, to the end you should
be a destroyer of heretics, a father of orphans, a friend of Sages, a hater
of malicious, a scourge of Tyrants, a rewarder of good, a defender and
protector of Churches, a plague of the wicked, a only lover and friend of the
Commonwealth, and above all you ought to be an upright minister of Justice:
beginning first with your own person and Palace: For in all things amendment
is suffered, except in Justice, which ought to be equal, between the Prince
and Commonwealth.

CHAP. XXXVI. What Plutarch the Philosopher was: Of the wise words he spoke to
Traian the Emperor: And how the good Prince is the head of the Publikeweale.
IN the time of Traiana the Emperor, there flourished in his Court a
Philosopher named Plutarch, a man very pure, and of good life, wise in science,
and well esteemed The description of Plutarch.
in Rome. For Traian the Emperor desired greatly to have Wise men in his
company, and to make notable and sumptuous Buyldings in every place where he
came.

It was he which wrote the lives of many noble Greeks and Romans, and above
all he made a Book entitled The doctrine of Princes, which he offered to
the Emperor Traian: in the which he shows his virtues, the zeal which he
had to the Commonwealth, the highness of his eloquence, and the profoundnes of
his knowledge.

For he was elegant in writing, and pleasant in speaking: and among all other
things which he wrote in his book, were these words following: most worthy
to be noted, and written in Golden letters; And they are such:

I let thee to know Lord Traian, that thou and the Empire are but one mystical
body, in manner and form of a lively body: For they should, and ought to be
so correspondent and agreeable, that the Emperor should rejoice to have such
subjects, and the Empire ought to be glad to have such a Lord.

And to the end we may describe the mystical body, which is the Empire, in
the form and shape of a natural man, you shall understand that the head which
is above all, is the Prince which commands all: the eyes whereby we see, are
the good men in the Commonwealth whom we follow: the ears that hear what we
say, are the Subjects, which do what we command them: the tongue wherewith
we speak, are the Sages, of whom we hear the laws and doctrines: the hayres
which grow on our heads, are those which are vexed and gricued, and that
demand justice of the King: The hands and arms, are the Knights, which
resist the enemies: the feet which sustaineth the members, are the tyllers of
the ground which gives meat to all Estates: the hard Bones that sustaineth
the feeble and soft Flesh, are the Sage men, which endure the burden and
travel of the Commonwealth: the Hearts which we see not outwardly, are the
Privy Councillors,

Finally, the neck that knitteth the body with the Head, is the love of the
King, combined with the whole Realm, which make a Commonwealth,

All the words abouenamed spoke Plutarch the great, unto Traian the Emperor.
And truly the invention and grace of him, proceeded of an high and deep
understanding; For the head has three properties, which are very necessary for
the governor of the Commonwealth.

The first is, that even as the head is of all other members of the body the
highest, so the authority of the Prince exceeds the estates of all others.

For the Prince only has authority to command, and all others are bound to
obey,

Admit there be many that are stout, rich, and noble men in the Commonwealth:
The authority of Princes.
yet all ought to know and acknowledge service to the Lord of the same. For
the noble and worthy Princes do daily ease many of diverse services, but they
will never exempt any man from their loyalty and allegiance. Those which are
valiant and mighty in a Realm, should content themselves with that wherewith
the battlements do upon a Castle (that is to know) that they are hier then the
rampers wherein men walk on the Walls, and lower then the pinnacles which are
on the top: for the wise man of high estate, ought not to regard the Prince
which is the high pinnacle, but ought to look on the alleis, which are the
poor comfortless.

I would speak a word, and it greeueth me (that is) whereas great Lords desire
in the commonwealth to command, is like unto him that holds his arms and
hands over his head: For all that I have heard, and for all What is most
requisite in the Common wealth.
that I have read, and also for all that has chanced in my time, I counsel,
admonish, and warn all those which shall come after this time, that if they
will enjoy their goods, if they will live in safeguard, and if they will be
delivered from tyranny, and live quiet in the Commonwealth, that they do not
agree to have in one Realm above one King and one Lord: For it is a general
rule, where there are many Rulers in a Commonwealth, in the end both it and
all must perish.

We see by experience, that Nature formed us with many sinews, many bones,
with much flesh, with many fingers, and with many teeth: and to all this one
only body had but one head: wherefore though with many estates the
Commonwealth is ordained: yet with one Prince alone it ought to be ruled. If
it consisted in men's hands to make a Prince they would then also have the
authority to put him down: but being true, as it is most true indeed, that the
Prince is constituted by God, none but God alone ought to deprive and depose
him of his estate, but things that are measured by the divine judgment, man
has no power with razour to cut them. I know not what ambition the mean can
have? neither what envy the lowest can have, nor what God the only letter up
of Princes.
pride the highest can have, to command, and not to obey, since we are sure,
that in this mystical body of the Commonwealth, he which is most worth,
shall be no more esteemed, then the fingers, or paring the nails, or the falling
of an hair from the head.

Let every man the fore live in peace in his commonwealth, and acknowledge
obedience unto his prince: and he that will not do so, away with him: for even
as the only offense proceeds of him, so let the only pain rest upon him.
For it is an old saying, That he that takes up the sword against his Master,
will shortly after lay his head at his feet. The second condition is, To
compare the King to the head, because the head is the beginning of Man's life.
The most part of things that ever God created, according to their natures,
work their operations, as in growing high, and toward the heavens.

We see the vapors ascend high, the Trees budde out on high, the sourges of the
Sea mount high, and the nature Man differs from all other creatures.
of Fire is always to ascend and mount on high: only the miserable Man,
grows downwards, and is brought low, by reason of the feeble and frail
flesh, which is but Earth, and comes of earth, and lives on earth: and in
the end returns to earth again, from whence he came.

Aristotle says well, That Man is as a Tree, planted with the roots vpwardes:
whose root is the head, and the stock is the body: the branches are the
arms, the barcke is the Flesh, the knoties are the bones, the sap is the
heart: (which with the brain, is the seat of the soul, first living, and
last dying:) the rottennes is malice, the gum is love, the flowers are
words: and the Fruits, are the good works.

To make the man to go uprightly, his head should be where his feet are, and
the feet where the head is, since the head is the root, and the feet are the
bows: but in this case I swear that we are correspondent to our beginning:
for it our flesh be planted contrariwise, so much more contrary we have our
life ordered.

Therefore concerning our matter, I say, that the Realm has no less his
beginning of the King, then the King of the Realm: which thing is plainly
seen, for that the King gives laws and institutions unto a Realm, and not
the Realm to the King. The gifts and benefits which the King gives, comes
to the realm and not from the Realm to the King.

To invent wars, to take truce, to make peace, to reward the good, and to
punish the evil, proceeds from What benfite comes by a good Prince.
the King to the Realm, and not to the contrary. For it appertains only to
the Majesty of a Prince, to command and ordain: and to the common wealth to
authorize and obey him.

As in a great sumptuous building it is more dangerous, where one stone of the
foundation does fall, the^ when ten thousand tiles fall from the top: so he,
ought more to be blamed for one only disobedience committed and done to the
King, and his justice, then for five thousand offenses against the common
wealth: For we have seen of a little disobedience, a great slander arise in a
common wealth. O it is a goodly matter for a Prince to be beloved of his
subjects, and a goodly thing also for the Realm to be fearful of their King:
for the king that is not loved of his Subjects, cannot live in peace or quiet:
and therealm that is not fearful of their King cannot be well governed. The
Realm Sicilia had always mighty Princes and Governors: for in ancient time it
was governed by virtuous Princes, or else by cruel and malicious tyrants. In
the time of Seuerus the Emperor, there raigne^ in Cecil, a King called Lelius
Pius, who had so many good things in him, that throughout all the Empire he
was very well esteemed, and chiefly for four Laws amongst others, he ordained
in that Realm, which were these following.

We ordain, that if amongst equal Good laws ordained.
persons there be any injuries offered, that they be punished, or else that
they be assembled: for where envy is rooted between two, it profits more to
reco^ncile their good wills, then to punish their persons.

We ordain, that if the greatest be offended by the least, that such offense
be little reproved, and well punished: for the audacite and little shame, and
also the disobedience of the servant to the master, ought not to be reformed,
but by grievous punishment.

We ordain, that if any resist or speak against the commandment of a Prince,
that presently (without delay) he suffer death before them all: for they may
boldly by the way of supplication, reverently declare their griefs, and not by
slander rebelliously disobey their Lords.

We ordain, that if any raise the common wealth against the Prince, he that
can first strike off his head, may lawfully without fearing any danger of
punishment: for his head is justly taken from him, that would there should be
many heads in the common weal.

Of all this before spoken, Herianus is the Author, in his fourth Book of the
Kings of Sieile, where he puts many and singular Laws and Customs, whith
the Ancients had to the great confusion of those that be present

For truly the Ancients did not only exceed those that be present in their
works and doings: but also in speaking profound words. Therefore returning to
our matter, man's life greatly trauelleth always to defend the head, in such
sort that a man would rather suffer his hand to be cut off, then to suffer a
wound to be made in his head,

By this comparison: I mean that a fault in a Commonwealth, is a cut which
cankereth and festereth, but the disobedience to a Prince is a wound which
forthwith kills. If a man did ask me what union Princes should have with
their Common wealth, I would answer them in this sort, that the wealth of the
King and Realm consists herein. That the King should accompany with the
good, and banish the evil. For it is impossible that the King should be What
the Prince ought to do
beloved of the Commonwealth, if the company he has about him be reputed
vicious. He should also love his Realm without dissimulation, and the Realm
should serve him unfeignedly: for the Commonwealth which knows it to be
beloved of their Prince, shall not find any thing too hard for his scruice.

Further, that the King use his Subjects as his children, and that the Subjects
serve him as a Father: for generally the good Father cannot suffer his children
to be in danger, neither the good children will disobey their Father.

Also the King ought to be just in his commandments, and the subjects
faithful: For if it be a good thing in their services, to live under a just
Law, it is much better to live under a just King.

Also the King ought to defend his Subjects from enemies, and they ought well
to pay him his tribute: For the Prince who defends his people from enemies
and tyranny, worthily deserves to be Lord of all their goods,

Also the King ought to keep his Commonwealth in quiet, and ought not to be
presumptuous of his person: for the Prince which is not feared, and well
esteemed, shall never be obeyed in his commandment.

Finally, I say, that the good King ought to do his Realm pleasure, and the
faithful subjects ought to endeavor themselves, never to displease their
King. For that Prince cannot be called unfortunate, who of his Commonwealth is
loved and obeyed.

CHAP. XXXVII. As there are two senses in the head, smelling and hearing: So
likewise the Prince which is the head of the Commonweal, ought to hear the
complaints of all his Subjects, and should know them all, to recompense their
services.
We have showed, how the Prince is the common wealth. The King compared to the
Common wealth
and now we will let you understand another notable thing which is this: that
as all senses are in the head, so ought all estates to be in Princes: for the
virtues which are in many spread and scattered should be in one Prince found and
gathered.

The office of the feet is not to see but to go: the hands office is not to
hear, but to labor: the shoulders not to feel, but to bear: All these
offices are not seemly for the members, which are his Subjects, but
appertains to the King alone to exercise them: For the head to have eyes, and
no other members, means naught else, but that only to the Prince, and to
none other, appertains to know all: for Julius Caesar knew all those of his
Host, and named them by their proper names.

I counsel, and admonish you, Oh ye Princes all, which shall hear, see, or
read this thing, that ye do rejoice to visit, and to be visited: to see and
to be seen: to talk, and to be talked with: For the things which with your
eyes you see not, you cannot perfectly love. A man ought also to know that the
head only has ears to note, that to the king, and to none other, appertains
to hear all, and to have the The King the only head of all
gates open for all them that have any suits: For it is no small matter to a
commonwealth, to hear and obtain of the Prince easy audience.

Helius Spartianus commends highly Tratan the Emperor, that when he was on
horseback to go to the war, alighted again, to hear the complaint of a
poor Roman. which thing was maruellously noted amongst all the Romans: for
if men were not vain they should give a Prince more honor for one work of
Justice, then for the victory in many battles.

Truly to a King it is no pleasure, but rather pain and grief, and also for
the common people annoyance, that their Prince always should be enclosed and
shut up. For the prince which shuts his gates against his subjects. causes
them not to open their hearts willingly to obey him. How many and great
slanders does there arise in the commonwealth, only for that the prince
sometime will not speak?

Julius Caesar was Emperor, and the head of all the Empire, and because he
was musing of weighty matters, The death of Julius Caesar.
and would not hearken to him which would have revealed the treason conspired
against him, was the same day, with 33. wounds in the Senate murdered. The
contrary is read of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, who was so familiar with all
men, that howbeit he was chief of all, and that the affairs which now are
divided to many, depended then only of him: yet he never had porter of his
gate, nor Chamberlain of his chamber: and for many affairs that ever he had
to dee with many men (were they never so great) he was never longer then one
day about the^. For truly (if I may say it) a prince is not worthy to be
beloved, that is scarce of his words, unto those which faithfully serve him
with works: For wise princes should be quick in hearing, and grave in
determining. For many come to speak with Princes, which think that their
counsels shall not be accepted, nor their requests granted, yet they desire
importunatly to be heard, and of truth the prince ought to hear them: For the
heavy heart with sorrows burdened, when it is heard, is greatly lightened.

I would feign know why the sense of smelling is only in the head, and not in
the feet, nor in the hands, neither in any other part of the body? Truly it
signifies naught else, but that it appertains to the Prince (which is the
head of all) to hear, and know all, and therefore it is necessary he be
informed of all their lives. For the prince cannot govern his Commonwealth A
Prince ought not to be sparing in words.
well, unless he knows the particularities thereof. It is necessary that the
Prince know the good, to the end he may prefer them: For that Commonwealth
is greatly slandred, wherein the evil are not punished, nor the good honored.
It is necessary that the prince know the sage, to counsel with them: For the
ancient Romans never admitted any for cou^sellors, but those which with
Phylosophie were adorned. It is necessary he know the evil for to correct
them: for there is a great disorder in the Commonwealth, where without any
shame the wickedness of the wicked is cloked and unpunished. It is necessary the
prince do know those that are able to teach, for in the court of the Roman
princes, there were always Captains, which taught and showed how to handle
their weapons, and wise men, which taught and instructed them Sciences,

It is necessary the prince knew the poor of his Realm, for to aid and
succor them: For the Prince should so govern the Commonwealth, that among
the rich nothing should abound: nor among the poor any thing should want. It
is necessary the Prince know the presumptuous and malicious, for to humble What
is required in a Prince for the government of the Commonwealth.
them: For the poor by envy, and the rich by pride, heretofore have
detstroyed great Commonwealths.

It is necessary the prince know the peacekeepers, for to keep and maintain
them in peace: For it is the duty of a prince to pluck down the stout
stomachs of the proud, and to give wings of favor to the humble.

It is necessary that the Prince know them which have done him Service, to the
end they may be rewarded, according to their merits: For the stout and noble
heart for little favor showed unto him, binds himself to accomplish great
things.

It is necessary the Prince know the Noblemen of his Kingdom, to the end
that when time of need shall require, he might retain and take them into his
service: For it is but meet, that that man which is adorned with virtue and
Nobility, should be preferred above all others in the Commonwealth.

Finally (I say) it is necessary, that the Prince should know the murmurers,
never to credit them: and likewise to know those that tell the truth, always
to love them. For none should be more familiar, the^ the wise man to give him
counsel, and the upright man, to tell the truth. And contrariwise, none ought
to be more abhorred of the Prince, then the Flatterer and ignorant man.

O how necessary it is for a Prince to know and understand all things in his
Realm, to the end no man might deceive him, as they do now a days. For the
most part of princes are deceived, for none other cause, but for that they will
not be counseled, and informed by wise and discreet men. For, many crout^h
unto princes with fair words, (as though they meant him good service) but
their intent is contrary, by deceyt to get an Office, and secke their own
profit.

Helius Spartianus says, that Alexander Seuerus (the xxv. Emperor of Rome)
was a man very stout, and virtuous, and amongst all other things, The
commendations of the Emperor Alexander Scue. us.
they greatly commended him, because in his chamber he had a familiar book,
wherein he had written all the Nobles of his Realm and Empire, and when any
Office was void, they said nothing else to him, but that it is void: for the
Emperor did not grant it to him that sought it, but (by the secrate
information of his Book) to him that best deserved it.

I will and may swear, and all other princes shall well affirm the same, that
though they err in distributing their Offices, they do not err for that they
would err: Yet they cannot deny, but that they err grievously, for that they
will not be informed, and though they be informed, yet it were better they were
not informed at all: For he shall never give the prince good nor perfect
counsel, which (by that counsel) intends to have some proper interest. The
chiefest thing for princes, is to know how to choose the best in prosperity,
and how to avoid the worst in adversity, and to know how to reward the good
men liberally.

And truly in this case Noble princes should have more consideration toward
them which have done them the worthiest and loyalst service, then to the
importunate suits of his Familiar friends: For he shall thank the servant
that procures it, but not the Prince that gives it.

All that we speak is to no other purpose, but to persuade, that since the
Prince is Lord of all, it is reason, that he be informed of the state and
condition of all: for otherwise he shall be deceived by a thousand malicious
hearts which are in the Common wealth. Therefore to conclude I say, if the
Prince be not informed of the life of all, the skin will seem flesh, the
brain meat, the straw corn, the brass gold, the gall honey, and the dregs
good wine: I mean in dividing his offices, thinking to hit the white, he shall
often times mil^e the butte.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the great Feast the Romans celebrated to the God Ianus, the
first day of January, and of the bounty and liberality of the Emperor Mareus
Aurelius the same day:
AMong the solemn The feasts of the Romans.
feasts which the ancient Romans used, this was one to the god Ianus, the
which they celebrated the first day of the year, which now is the first of
January. for the Hebrews began their year in March, and the Romans began
at January.

The Romans painted this god with two faces, signifying thereby the end of the
year past, and the beginning of the year present. To this god Ianus was
dedicated in the city of Rome a sumptuous Temple, which they called the Temple
of peace, and was in great reverence throughout all the City: for the Citizens
on this day offered great gifts and sacrifices, because he should defend them
from their enemies: For there is no Nation nor people to whom war ever
succeeded so prosperously, but that they had rather live in peace then in war.

When the Roman Emperors went to the wars, or came from the wars, first
they visited the Temple of Jupiter, secondarily, the Temple of the Vestall
virgins, and thirdly, they visited the Temple of the god Ianus: because there
was a Law in Rome, that the Emperor should at his going forth to the wars
visit the Temple of Jupiter last of all, and at his return again, the Temple
of Ianus first. And let them that be desirous of Antiquities here know, that
when the Emperor should go to the wars in the Temple of the Goddess Vesta,
they put upon his shoulders the royal mantell, and in the Temple of Jupiter
all the Senators kissed his foot, and in the Temple of Ianus the Consuls
kissed his arm. For since the time that the cruel Sylla caused three thousand
neighbors to dye which kissed his right hand, they never after kissed the
hands of any Emperor in Rome: Therefore since the Gentiles would not issue out
of Rome before that first they had taken the benediction of The duty of every
good Christian.
those vain Gods: how much more ought Christian Princes to do it, which know
well that their Temples are consecrated to the true God, and ordained for his
service only. For the man that forgets God, and commits his affairs to
men, shall see how his business will thrive at the hands of men. Therefore
proceeding forth, the day wherein the Feast of the god Ianus was celebrated,
every man left his work, and rejoiced through all the streets of Rome, no
more then less then in the feasts of Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Berecinthia: For
the feasts of the other gods (since they were many in number) were not
celebrated, but in certain places in Rome. The Romans on that day, put on
their best apparel, for they had a custom in Rome, that he which had not
that day change of apparel to honor the Feast, should either go out of Rome,
or else keep himself locked in his his house.

That day they set on their houses many lights, and made great bonefires before
their doors, and had sundry and many plays and pastimes: for the feasts of
vain men are more to delight their bodies then to reform their minds. They
watched all the night in the Temples, and also they delivered all the prisoners
which were imprisoned for debt, and with the common treasures paid their debts.
Furthermore, they had a custom in Rome, that they should sustain all the An
ancient custom in Rome.
Senators (which were fallen into poverty) with the goods of the commo^wealth.

They had that day Tables set before their doors, furnished with all sorts of
meats, so that that which remained and was left, was more worth then that
which was eaten, For vain glorious men auant themselves more of that which in
bankets and feasts is left, then they do of that which is eaten.

They sought all that day for poor men, because they should be provided of all
things: For it was an ancient law, that none should be so hardy to make any
open feast, except first he had provided for all them of his street.

The Romans thought that if they spent liberally that day, the god Ianus would
deliver them from poverty, because he was the god of temporal goods.

And they said further, that the god Ianus was a God very thankful, and
acknowledged the services that were done unto him, and believed earnestly that
if they spent freely for his sake, he would requite it double. In the feast of
this god Ianus many processions were made, not altogether, but the Senate went
by themselves, the Censors by themselves, the people by themselves, the
Matrones by themselves, the Maidens by them* the Vestall Virgins by themselves,
and all the strange Ambassadors went with the captives in procession, there
was a custom in Rome that the same day the Emperor should An other custom in
Rome.
wear the Imperial robe, all the captives which could touch him with their
hands were delivered, and all the transgressors pardoned, exiles and outlawries
were called again. For the Roman Princes were never present in any feast, but
they showed some noble example of mercy, or gentleness toward the peeple. At
this time Marcus Aurelius was Emperor of Rome, and married with the beautiful
Lady Faustina, (who in the feast of Ianus) leaving in procession the company of
the Senators, came into the procession of the Captives, the which easily
touched his robe, whereby they obtained liberty, the which they so greatly
desired: I say desired; for truly the Captive is contented with a small thing.
And because there is no good thing by any good man done, but immediately by the
wicked it is repined at: this deed was so contrary to the evil, as joyful to
the good: for there is nothing be it never so good, not so well done, but
forthwith it shall be contraried of them that be evil.

Of this thing I have seen by experience (in this miserable life sundry
examples) that even as among the good one only is noted to be chief: so
likewise among the evil, one is noted principal above the rest. And the worst
I find herein is, that the virtuous do not so much glory of their virtue, as
the evil and malicious has shame and dishonor of their vice: for virtue
naturally makes a man to be temperate and quiet, but vice makes him to be
dissolute and retchlesse.

This is spoken, because in the Senate of Rome, there was a Senator called
Fuluius, whose beard and hayres were very white, but in malice, he was most
cankered black: so that for his years he was honored in Rome of many, and
for his malice he was hated of all.

The Senator Fuluius made friends in the time of Adrian to succeed in the
Empire, and for this cause he had always Marcus Aurelius for his competitor,
and wheresoever he came he always spoke evil of him, as of his mortal enemy.

For the envious heart can never give a man one good word. This Senators heart
was so puffed with envy that he seeing Marcus Aurelius to obtain the Empire
being so young, and that he being so old could not attain thereunto: there
was no good that ever Marcus Aurelius did in the Commonwealth openly, but it
was Nothing so hurtful, as an envious tongne.
grudged at by Fuluius, who sought always to deface the same secretly. It is
the nature of those which have their hearts infected with malice, to spitte out
their poison with words of spite. Often times I have mused which of these two
are greater, the duty the good have to speak against the evil, or else the
audacity the evil have to speak against the good: For in the World there is
no brute beast so hardy, as the evil man is, that has lost his fame.

Oh would to God the good to his desire had as much power to do good works, as
the evil has strength to his affection, to exercise wicked deeds: for the
virtuous man finds not one hand to help him in virtue to work, yet after
he has wrought it, he shall have a thousand evil tongues against his honest
doings to speak.

I would all these which read this my writing, would call to memory this word
(which is) that among evil men the chiefest evil is, that after they have
forgotten themselus to be men, and exiled both truth and reason, the^ with all
their might they go against truth and virtue with their words, and against
good deeds with their tongs: for though it be evil to be an evil man, yet
it is worse not to suffer an other to be good, which above all things is to
be abhorred, and not to be suffered. I let you know and assure you, Princes
and Noble men, that you in working virtuous deeds, shall not want slanderous
tongues, and though you be stout, yet you must be patient to break their
malice. For the Noble heart feels more the envy of another, then he does
the labor of his own body. Princes should not be dismayed, neither ought they
to marvel, though they be told of the murmuring at their good works: For in
the end they are men, they live with men, and cannot escape the miseries of
men: For there was never Prince in the World yet so high, but he has been
subject to malicious tongues. Enuse an enemy to virtue.
Truly a man ought to take great pity of Princes, whether they be good or
evil: for if they be evil, the good hate them, and if they be good, the
evil immediately murmureth against them.

The Emperor Octauian was very virtuous, yet greatly persecuted with envious
tongues, who on a time demanded (since he did good unto al men) why he
suffered a few to murmur against him? he answered: you see my friends, he
that has made Rome free from enemies, has also set at liberty the tongues of
malicious men: for it is not reason that the hard stones should be at liberty,
and the tender stones tied.

Truly, this Emperor Octauian by his words declared himself to be a Wise
man, and of a noble heart, and lightly to weigh both the murmurings of the
people, and also the vanities of their words, which thing truly a wise and
virtuous man ought to do: For it is a general rule, that vices continually
seek defendors, and virtues always gets enemies. In the Book of Laws the
divine Plato says well, that the evil were always double evil, because they
were weapons defensive, to defend their malicious purpose: and also carry
weapons offensive, to blemish the good works of others.

Virtuous men ought with much study to follow the good, and with more diligence
to fly from the evil: For, a good man may command all other virtuous men
with a back of his finger, but to keep himself only from one evil man, he
had need both hands, feet and friends.

Themistocles the Thebane said, that he felt no greater torment in the World
then this, that his proper honor should depend upon the imagination of an
other: for it is a cruel thing that the life and honor of one that is good,
should be measured by the tongue of an other that is evil: for as in the Forge
the coals, cannot be kindled without sparks nor as corruption can not be in
the sinckes without ordure: so he that has his heart free from malice, his
tongue is occupied always in sweet and pleasant communication. And
contrariwise out of his mouth, whose stomach is infected with malice,
proceeds always words bitter and full of poison: for, if out of a rotten
furnace the fire burns, it is impossible that the smoke should be clear. It
is but a small time, that (in profane love) he that is enamored, is able to
refrain his love, and much less time is the wrathful man able to hide his
wrath: for the heavy sighs are tokens of the sorrowful heart, and the words
are those that disclose the malicious man.

Pulio says in the first book of Caesar's, that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius
was very virtuous in all his works, sage in knowledge, just in judgment, The
praise of Marcus Aurelius.
merciful in punishment: but above all things he was wise in dissembling, and
herein he was very discreet: for there was never patient man but prospered well
in all his affairs. We see that through patience and wisdom, many evil
things become reasonable, and from reasonable are brought to good, and from good
to excellent. The contrary happens to them that are moved more then they need:
for the man which is not patient, looks not yet for any good success in his
affairs, though they are just. The Emperor Marcus often times was wont to say,
that Julius Caesar wan the Empire by the sword, Augustus was Emperor by
inheritance, Caligula came to it, because his father conquered Germany, Nero
governed it with tyranny, Titus was Emperor, for that he subdued Jury, the good
Traian came to the Empire by his clemency and virtue: but I (says he)
obtained the Empire through patience only: for it is a greater patience to
suffer the injuries of the malicious, then to dispute with the Sage in the
University.

And this Emperor said further, Patience overcomes many matters.
in the government of the Empire: I have profited more through patience, then
by science: for science only profits for the quietness of the person, but
patience profits the person, and the Commonwealth.

Julius Capitolinus says that the Emperor Antoninus Pius was a prince very
True patience described.
pacient, and in such sort, that often times being in the Senate, he saw both
those which loved him, and also those that were against him with the people
when they did rebel: yet his patience was so great, that neither his friends
for the unthankfulness of themselves, remained sad, neither his enemies for
any displeasure by him done, did at any time complain. Meaning therefore in
this Chapter, to join the end with the beginning: I say, that as the Emperor
Marcus Aurelius put himself among the captives, and that this deed in Rome of
all men was commended: The Senator Fuluius could not refrain from speaking,
for that he had not the wit to endure it, wherefore as it were scoffing he spoke
these words to the Emperor.

Lord, I marvel why thou yeeldest thy self to all, which thing for the
reputation of the Empire cannot be suffered, for that it is not decent for thy
Majesty.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius seeing and hearing that in the presence of them
all, the Senator Fuluius spoke unto him these words, he took it patiently, and
with pleasant countenance said, The Questions which the Senator Fuluius
propounds, let it be for to morrow, because my answer may be the riper,
and his choler the quieter. Therefore the next day following, the Emperor
Marcus came into the High Capitol (as Pulio declares in the life of Marcus
Aurelius) and spoke these words.

CHAP. XXXIX. Of the answer the Emperor Marcus Aurelius made to the Senator
Fuluius before all the Senate, being reproved of him for his familiarity he
used to all, contrary to the majesty and authority of the Roman Emperor,
wherein he painteth envious men.
FAthers Conscript, and sacred Senate, I would not yesterday answer to that
which the Senator Fuluius spoke unto me, because it was somewhat late, and for
that we were long in sacrifices, I thought that neither time nor place was
convenient to answer thereunto. For it is a sign of a little wisdom, and of
great folly for a man to answer suddenly to every question. The liberty that
indiscreet men have to demand, the self same privilege has the Wise for to
answer: for though the demand proceed of ignorance, yet the answer ought to
proceed of Wisdom:

Truly wise men were well at ease, if to every demand they should answer the
simple and malicious: who (for the most part) demand more to vex other men,
then for to profit themselus, more for to prove then to know: wherefore Wise
men ought to dissemble at such demaundes: for the Sages ought to have their
ears open to hear, and their tongue tied because they should not speak. I
The property of a wise man.
let you know (ancient Fathers, and sacred Senate) that that little which I
know, I learned in the Isle of Rhodes, in Naples, in Capua, and in Tharente.
And all Tutors told me, that the intention and end of men to study, was only
to know to govern themselves amongst the malicious: For science profits
nothing else, but to know how to keep his life well ordered, and his tongue
well measured. Therefore I protest to God, that which I will say before your
sacred presence, I will not speak it of any malice or ill will, but only to
answer unto that which touches the authority of my person: for the things
which touch The replye of the Emperor.
the honor, ought first by word to be answered, and afterward by sword to be
revenged.

Therefore now beginning my matter, and addressing my words to thee Fuluius,
and to that which thou spakest unto me, asking why I show my self so to all
men: I answer thee: It is because al men should give them selves to me.

Thou know well Fuluius, that I have been a Consul as thou art, and thou
have not been an Emperor as I am. Therefore believe me in this case, that
the Prince being despised, cannot be beloved of his people: The gods will not,
nor the laws do permit, neither the Commonwealth willingly should suffer,
that all Princes should be Lords of many, and that they should not communicate
but with a few: For Princes which have been gentle in their lives, the
Ancients have made them gods after their deaths, The Fisher, to fish for many
fishes in the river, goes not with one Boat alone, nor the Mariner to fish in
the deep sea, goes not with one net only. I mean, that the profound wills,
which are deeply in the hearts, ought to be won some by gifts, other by
promises, other by pleasant words, and other by gentle entertainment: For
Princes should travel more to win the hearts of their Subjects, then to
conquer the realms of strangers:

The greedy and covetous hearts care not, though the prince shuts up his
heart, so that he open his cofers: but Noble and valiant men little esteem
that which they lock up in their cofers, so that their hearts be open to
their friends. For Love can never but with love again be requited.

Since Princes are Lords over many, How a Prince ought to behave himself.
of necessity they ought to be served with many: and being served with
many, they are bound to satisfy many: and this is as generally, as
particularly, they cannot dispense with their Servants. For, the Prince is no
less bound to pay the service of his Servant, then the master is to pay the
wages of the hired labourer.

Therefore if this thing be true (as it is) how shall poor Princes do, which
keep many Realms, and in keeping them they have great expenses, and for to
defray such charges, they have but little money? For in this case, let every
man do what he will, and let them take what counsel they like best.

I would counsel all others, as my self have experimented, that is: that the
Prince should be of so good a conversation, amongst those which are his,: and so
affable and familiar with all, that for his good conversation only, they
should think themselves well apaide. For with rewards, Princes recompense the
trauells of their Servants: but with gentle and fair words, they steal and
rob the hearts of their subjects.

We see by experience, that diverse Merchants had rather buy dearer in one
shop, because the mercha^t is pleasant, then to buy better cheap in an other,
whereas the merchant is churlish. I mean that there are many, which had rather
serve a prince to gain nothing but love only, then to serve an other prince
for money. For there is no service better employed, the^ to him which is
honest, good, and gracious: and to the contrary, none worse bestowed then on
him which is unthankful and churlish.

In Princes Palaces there shall never want evil and wicked men, malicious The
Court never without flatterers.
and devilish flatterers, which will seek means to put into their Lords heads
how they shall raise their rents, leuy Subsidies, invent tributes, and borrow
money: but there are none that will tell them how they shall win the hearts
and good wills of their Subjects, though they know it more profitable to be
well beloved, then necessary to be enriched.

He that heapeth treasure for his Prince, and separateth him from the love of
his people: ought not to be called a faithful servant, but a mortal enemy.

Princes and Lords ought greatly to endeavor themselves to be so conversant
among their Subjects, that they had rather serve for good Will, then for the
payment of money: for if money want, their service will quail: and hereof
proceeds a thousand inconveniences unto Princes, which never happen unto
those that have servants, which serve more of good will then for money: for he
that loves with all his heart, is not proud in prosperity, desperate in
adversity: neither complayneth he of poverty, nor is discontented being
fauourles: nor yet abashed with persecution: and finally, love and life are
never separated, until they come unto the grave.

We see by experience, that the rablement of the poor Laborers of Sicill is
more worth, then the money of the Knight of Rome: For the Labourer every time
he goes to the field, brings some profit from thence: but every time the
Knight shows himself in the market place, he returns without money.

By the comparison, I mean, that Princes should be affable, easy to talk
with all, pleasant, merciful, benign, and stout: and above all, that they be
gracious and loving, to the end that through these qualities, and and not by
money, they may learn to win the hearts of their subjects. Princes should
greatly labor to be loved, specially if they will find who shall succor
them in adversity, and keep them from evil will and hatred, which those
Princes cannot have that are hated: but rather, every man rejoices at their
fall and misery: for each man enjoys his own travel, and truly the furious
and sorrowful hearts take some rest, to see that others have pity and
compassion upon their griefs.

Princes also should endeavor themselves to be loved and well willed, because
at their death they may of all their servants and friends be lamented. For
Princes ought to be such, that they may be prayed for in their life, and
lamented and remembered after their death. How cursed is that Prince, and also
how unhappy is that Commonwealth, where the servants will not serve their
Lord, but for reward: and that the Lord does not love them but for their
services: For there is never true love where there is any particular interest.

With many stones a house is builded, and of many men and one Prince (which is
the head of all) the Common wealth is made: For he that governs the Common
wealth may be called a Prince, and otherwise not: and the Commonwealth cannot
be called or said a Common wealth, if it has not a Prince which is the head
thereof.

If Geometry do not deceive me, the lime which joins one stone with an
other, suffers well that it be mingled with sand, but the cornerstone that
lies on the top ought to be meddled, with vnsl^ked lime. And it sounds
unto good reason: For if the nether-stones separate, the wall opens: but if
the corner The love of the prince to his people.
stone should slip, the building incontinently falls.

I suppse (Fathers conscript,) you understand very well to what end I apply
this comparison. The love of one neighbor with an other, may suffer to be cold
but the love of a Prince to his people, should be true and pure.

I mean that the love amongst friends may pass sometimes although it be
cold: but that love between the King and his people, at al times ought to be
perfect. For where there is perfect love, there is no feigned words, nor
unfaithful service.

I have seen in Rome many debates and hurly-burlyes among the people, to have
bin pacified in one day: and one only which between the Lord and the
Commonwealth arises, cannot be pacified until death: For it is a dangerous
thing for one to strive with many, and for many to contend against one.

In this case, where the one is proud, and the other rebels, I will not
excuse the Prince, nor yet let to condemn the people. For in the end he that
thinks himself most innocent, deserves greatest blame. And from whence
think you comes it, that Lords now adays command unjust things by fury?
and the Subjects in just matters will not obey by reason, I will tell you.

The Lord doing of will, and not of right, would cast the wills of all in his
own brain, and derive from himself all counsel. For even as Princes are of
greater power then all the rest: so they think they know more then all the
rest.

The contrary happens to subjects, who (being provoked, I cannot tell you with
what Frenzy) despising the good understanding of their Lord, will not obey
that which their prince wills, for the health of them all, but that which
every man desires particularly: For men now a days are so fond that every
man thinks the Prince should look on him alone. The fondnes of our time.


Truly it is a strange thing (though it be much used among men) that one man
should desire that the garments of all others should be meet for him: which is
as impossible, as if one man's Armor should arm a whole multitude.

But what shall we be (Fathers conscript and sacred Senate) since our Fathers
left us this world with such folly: and that in these debates and strifes, we
their children, are always in dissension and controversy, and in this
wilfalnes, we shall also leave our children and heirs?

How many Princes have I seen and read of in my time, of my predecessors, which
were utterly undone, by too much pride and presumption? but I never read nor
heard of any, which were destroyed for being courteous, and loving to his
subjects.

I will declare by some examples, which I have read in books, to the end that
the Lords may see what they Pride the overthrow of great personages.
win by their good conversation, and what they loose by being too hautie.

The Realm of the Sidonians was greater then that of the Chaldeans in weapons,
and inferior in antiquity, unto that of the Assyrians,. In this Realm there
was Debastia, which was called a King of Kings, that endured two hundred and
xxv. years, because all these Kings were of a commendable conversation. And
another of Debastia, endured no longer then forty years. And our ancients
took pleasure of peace, whereof we are (...): and were ignorant of the (...)
which we now use so much.

Always they desired to have Kings, which should be good for the
Commonwealth in peace, rather then valiant and courageous in the war: as
Homere in his Ilyades says:

The ancient Egiptians called their Kings Epiphanes, and had a custom, that
Epiphanes should enter into the temples barefoote: And because it chanced the
Epiphane on a time to come into their Church hoased, he was immediately for
his disobedience deprived and expulsed the Realm, and in his stead an other
created.

Homere declares here, that this king was proud, and evil conditioned,
wherefore the Egyptians deprived him, and banished him the Realm, taking
oceasion that he did not enter into the temple barefoot. For truly when Pride
the fall of many great men.
Lords are euill-willed, and not beloved, for a little trifle and occasion the
people will arise, and rebel against them.

The said Homer said also, that the Parthes called their Kings Assacides, and
that the sixth of that name was deprived and expulsed the Realm: for that of
presumption he bad himself to the marriage of a knight, and being bidden and
desired, would not go to the marriage of a poor Plebeyan.

Cicero in his Tusculanes, says, That in old time, the people persuaded their
Princes to communicate with the poor, and that they should abstain and fly
from the rich: For among the poor they should learn to be merciful, and
with the rich they shall learn nothing but only to be proud.

Ye know right well (Fathers conscript) how this our country was first
called Great Greece, afterward it was called Latium, and then Italy.

And when it was called Latium, they called their kings Marrani, and truly
although their borders were but narrow: yet at the least their stoutnesse was
great.

The Annals of those times say, that after the third Syluius, succeeded a
Marrine, who was proud, ambicious, and evil conditioned, in such sort, that
for fear of the people, always he slept locked up: and therefore they both
deprived him, and banished him the Realm: For the ancients said, That the
king should lock his doors at no hour of the night against his Subjects:
neither he should refuse in the day to give them audience.

Tarquine which was the last of the seven Kings of Rome, which was very
unthankful toward his Father in law, Tarquine noted of unthankfulness.
he was an infamy to his blood, a traitor to his country, and cruel of his
person, who also enforced the Noble Lucretia, and yet notwithstanding this they
do not call him unthankful, infamous, cruel, traitor, nor adulterer: but
Tarquine the proud: only for that he was evil conditioned.

By the faith of a good man, I swear unto you (Fathers conscript) that if the
miserable Tarquin had bin beloved in Rome, he had never bin deprived of the
Realm, for committing adultery with Lucretia. For in the end if every light
offense, which in youth is committed, should be punished within short space,
there should be no Commonwealth.

All these evils both before and after Tarquine, were committed by the ancients
in the Roman Empire, which were such as these, (of this young and light
prince) and were nothing in comparison The punishment of Tarqui
unto thee. For truly considering the youth of the one, and the experience of
the other: the greatest offense of the young, is but a counterfeit to the least
that the old commits.

Julius Caesar last Dictatour, and first Emperor of Rome, (being a thing
commendable both to Senators, to salute the Emperor on their knees, and to
the Emperor, to rise against them, and resalute each one according to this
order (because of presumption, and that he would not observe this ceremony,)
with xxiii. wounds they dispatched him of his life.

Tiberius was an Emperor, whom they blame for drunkenness. Caligula was an
Emperor also, whom they accuse of Incest with his Sisters, Nero was an
Emperor, who (for that he slew his Mother, and his master Seneca:) has for
ever bin named cruel.

Sergius Galba was a devouring and a gluttonous Emperor, for that he caused for
one only Banquet, seven thousand Bynds to be killed, Domitian was an Emperor,
who was greatly noted of all evils. For all evils which in many The miserable
end of evil Governors.
were scattered, in him alone were found. All these miserable Princes in the
end were betrayed, hanged, and beheaded. And I swear unto ye (Fathers
conscript) that they died not for their vices, but because they were proud and
evil conditioned. For finally, the Prince for one vice only, cannot much
endamage the people: but for being too haultie and presumptuous, and of evil
conditions, they may destroy a Commonwealth:

Let Princes and great Lords be assured, that if they give many occasions of
evil example, afterward one onely-suffiseth, to stir their subjects to
destroy them. For if the Lord show not his hatred, it is for that he will not,
but if the subject do not revenge, it is for that he cannot.

Believe me (fathers conscript, and sacred Senate,) that even as the Physician
with a little triacle purges many evil humors of the body, so the sage
Princes, with very little benevolence, draw out of their Subjects, much rancour
and inward filthiness of heart: diuerting their evil wills into true and
faithful love.

And because the members should be agreeable with the head, in mine opinion it
behooves the people to obey the commandments of their Prince and to do
honor, and to reverence his person: and the good Prince to be just and equal
to all in general, and gentle in conversation with every one.

O happy commonwealth, wherein the Prince finds obedience in the people and
the people in like manner love in the Prince, For the love of the Lord,
springs obedience in the subject: and of the obodience of the Subjects,
springs love in the Lord.

The Emperor in Rome; is, as the Spyder in the midst of her Cobweb: The true
pattern of a virtuous Prince.
the which being touched with the needles point, by one of the threedes of the
same (be it never so little) immediately the spyder feels it.

I mean, that all the work which the Emperor does in Rome, are immediately
published throughout all the country. For in fine, since princes are the
myrrour of all, they can not well cloak their vices.

I see (Fathers conscript) that I have bin judged here of worldly malice,
because I accompanied the captives in procession, and also, because I suffered
my self to be touched with them, to the end they might enjoy the privilege
of their liberty: and in this case I render most humble thanks unto the
immortal Gods, because they made me a merciful Emperor: to set those at
Liberty, that were in prison: and that they made me not a cruel tyrant, to
set those in prison, which were at liberty. For the proverb says, that with
one bean, a man may take 2. pigeons: eue^ so chanced the like herein yesterday.
For the benefit was don for those miserable Captives: but the example of
humanity was showed to all strange nations. And know ye not, that when the
prince vnloseth the irons from the feet of the captives, he binds the hearts,
goods, and lands of his subjects? Concluding therefore I say, that to the
Princes it were more safety, and to the Common wealth more profit, to be
served in their Palaces by free hearts with love: then by subjects which are
kept under by fear.

CHAP. XL. Of a Letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend
Pulio, declaring the opinion of certain Philosophers concerning the felicity
of man.
MArcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, tribune of the people, high Bishop, second
Consul and Monarche of all the Roman Empire, wishes to thee Pulio his old
friend, health to thy person, and prosperity against thy evil fortune. The
letter that thou wrotest unto me from Capua, I received here at Bethinia, and
if thou did write it with a good heart, I did read it with willing eyes:
whereof thou ought somewhat to content thee: For it is an old saying of
Homer, That that which is well viewed with the eyes, is tenderly beloved of A
true saying of Homer.
the heart. I protest unto thee by the faith of the immortal gods, that I do
not write unto thee as a Roman Emperor, that is to say, from the Lord to the
servant: for in this sort, I should write unto thee brief, and touching the
purpose: which thing ought not to be done to the peculiar friend: For the
Letters of grave men should never begin, and the Letters of us friends should
never end. I write unto thee my friend Pulio, as to a private friend, to an
old companion of mine, and as to him, which is a faithful secretary of my
desires, and in whose company I was never displeased, in whose mouth I never
found lie, and in whose promise there was never breach made. And the thing
being thus. I should commit treason in the law of friendship, if I keep secret
from thee any of my inward conceits: for all the griefs which lie buried in
the woeful heart, ought not to be communicated but with a faithful friend.

Do thou think Pulio, that the Roman Emperor has little travel to write
unto thee as Emperor, to speak as Emperor, to walk as Emperor, A
description of a perfect friend.
and to eat as Emperor: and finally, to be as Emperor indeed: Certes I do
not marvel hereat. For truly the life of the virtuous Emperor, is but a
Dyall which orders or disordereth the Commonwealth: and that whereof I
marvel, is of the folly of Rome, and vanity of the Common wealth. For as much
as all say, that the Prince (if he will seem grave, and be well esteemed of the
people) ought to go softly, to speak little, and to write briefly: so that
for writing of letters they will he be brief, and for conquering of strange
Realms, they do not rebuke him although he be long.

Wise men should desire that their Princes be of gentle condition, to the end
they fall not to tyranny, That they have their mind uncorrupted to minister to
all equal justice, that their thought be good, not to desire strange Realms,
that they have their hearts void from wrath, that they be sound within to
pardon injuries, that they love their Subjects to be served of them, that they
know the good to honor them, and that they know the evil to punish them: and
as for the surplus, we little regard whether the King go fast, whether he eat
much, or write brief. For the danger is not in that which is in the lack of
his own person: but it is in the negligence that he uses in the commonwealth.

I have received (my Friend Pulio) great comfort of thy letter, but yet much
more I should have received of thy presence: for the letters of ancient
friends, are but as a remembrance of times past.

It is a great pleasure to the Mariner, to talk of the perils past (being in
the haven, and to the Captain to glory of the battle, after the victory.)

I mean above all pleasures this is the What pleasure it is to remember
dangers past.
greatest to men, being now faithful friends, to talk of the trauells and
dangers which they had passed, when they were young men. Believe me in one
thing, and do not doubt thereof: There is no man that knows to speak, that
knows to possess, nor that ca^ judge or take any pleasure, neither that well
knows how to keep the goods which the gods have given him, unless it be he
that has bought it dearly, with great travel. For with all our hearts we
love that thing, which with our own proper labor and travel we have gotten.

I ask thee one thing: who is he that owes most to the Gods, or that is most
esteemed amongst men? of Traian the just, which was brought up in the Wars of
Dace, Germany, and Spain? or of Nero the cruel, which was nourished in all
the deliciousnes of Rome. Truly the one was none other then a Rose among
briars, and the other, was but a Nettle amongst flowers. I spoke this, because
the good Traian has governed his life in such sort, that always they will
smell the Rose by the pleasant savor: but the cruel Nero has left the sting
the nettle of his infamy. I will not speak all, because many are, and were
made good, but for the most part the princes which were brought up deliciously;
gave every man occasion that al should be offended, for the evil governance of
their lives in their Realms: and because they never experimented any kind of
travel in themselves, they do little esteem the pains of another.

I will not that thou think my friend Pulio, that I have forgotten the time
that is past, though the Gods brought me to the Empire present. For though we
together were tossed with the torments of youth, yet now we may repose our
selves in the calmes of our age. I do remember, that thou and I did study in
Rhodes in letters, and after we had sown weapons in Capua, it has pleased the
gods that the seeds of my Fortunes should ripen here in Rome: and to thee,
and to others better then I, Fortune would not give one only ear. I do not
give thee license, that thy thought be suspicious of me, since thou of my heart
art made a faithful Friend: for if unconstant Fortune does trust me, to
gather with travel the grape, know thou that here in my palace, thou shall
not want of the wine. The Gods will not suffer, that now in this moment, thou
shuldst find my heart shut from thee, whose gates Two good properties of Marcus
Aurelius.
I found always (for the space of twenty years) open unto me. Since that my
Fortunes wrought me to the Empire, I have always had two things things before
mine eyes: that is to say, not to revenge my self of mine enemies, neither to
be unthankful to my friends: For I pray to the Gods daily, rather then
hereafter, through unthankfulness my renowm should be defamed: that even now
with forgetfulness my body should be buried.

Let a man offer to the Gods what sacrifices he will, let him do as much
service to men as he can: yet if he be unthankful to his friend, he ought in
all, and for all, to be utterly condemned. Because thou should see my
friend Pulio, how greatly the ancient friend ought to be esteemed, I will
declare thee an example of a Philosopher, the which to hear, thou will
somewhat rejoice.

The ancient Histories of the Grecians declare, that among the seven Sages of
Greece, there was one named Periander, who was Prince and Governor a great
while: and he had in him such liveliness of Spirit on the one side, and such
covetousness of worldly goods on the other side, that the Historiographers are
in doubt, whether was the greater, the Philosophy that he taught reading in
the Schools, or the tyranny that he used in robbing the Commonwealth: for
truly the science which is not grounded of truth, brings great damages to the
person.

In the second year of my Empire, I was in the City of Corinth, where I saw
the Grave which contained the bones of Periander, where about was engraven in
Greek verses and old letter this Epitaph.

Within the compass of this narrow grave,
Wretched Periander, enclosed lies,
Whose cruel facts, could Greece alone not have
So small a soil his hunger could suffice. The Epitaph of Periander.

Here lodges oak, lo Periander dead,
His filthy flesh, the hungry worms do eat,
And living he, with Orphelines good was fed
His greedy guts did crave such dainty meat.
The Tyrant Periander stays here,
Whose life was built, to hinder all the rest,
And eke whose death, such profit large did bear
As brought relief to him that had the least.
Here wicked Periander, rests now,
His life did cause great peopled realms decay:
His death that forced, his living sprite to how,
Assurde them life, that stood in brittle stay.
The cursed Periander here does lie,
Whose life did shed the poor and simple blood:
And eke that clambe, to riches rule so hye,
By others swette, they sought for wasting good.
Of Corinth lo, here Periander rest,
To seem for just, that equal Laws did frame
Yet flitting from the square that they possessed,
By virtues doom, deserude a Tyrants name,
The Catiue Periander sleeps here,
That finished has his 80. years with shame,
And though his life that thousands bought so deer
Be faded thus, yet bloometh still his blame.
There was more letters on the grave, but because it was alone in the field,
the great waters had worn it, so that scarsely the letters could be road:
and truly it was very old, and in his time it seemed to be a sumptuous
thing, but the negligence of reparation lost it quite: and it is not to be
maruelleed at, for in the end time is of such power, that it causes renowned
men to be forgotten and all the sumptuousbuildings to decay and fall to the
earth.

If thou will know, my friend Pulio, in what time the tyrant this Philosopher
was, I will thou know, that when Catania the renowned City was builded in
Cicilia, near the Mount Ethna, and when Perdica was the 4. King of Macedonia,
and that Cardiced was the third King of the Medes, and when Candare was fifth
king of the Libeans, and that Assaradoche was ninth King of the Assyrians, and
when Merodache was twelfth King of the Caldeaus, and that Numa Pompilius
reigned second King of the Romans: and in the time of those so good Kings,
Periander reigned amongst the Assirians.

And it is meet thou know an other thing also which is this, That this
Periander was a Tyrant, not only in deed, but also in renown: so that they
spoke of no other thing through Greece, but it tended hereunto: Though he had
evil works, he had good words, and procured that the affairs of the
Commonwealth should be well redressed. For generally, There is no man so
good, but a man may find somewhat in him to be reproved: neither any man so
evil, but he has some thing in him to be commended.

I do yet remember (of my age, being neither too young, nor too old) that I saw
the Emperor Traian my Lord, suppe once in Agrippine: and it so chanced, that
words were moved to speak of good and evil Princes in times past, as well of
the Greeks as of the Romans, that all those which were present there,
commended greatly the Emperor Octauian, and they all blamed the cruel Nero:
for it is an ancient custom to flatter the princes An usual custom among all
Nations.
that are present and to murmur at Princes that are past.

When the good Emperor Traian was at dinner, and when he prayed in the Temple,
it was marvel if any man saw him speak any word: and that day, since he saw
that they excessinely praised the Emperor Octauian, and that the others
charged the Emperor Nero with more then needed: the good Traian spoke unto
them these words. I am glad you commend the Emperor Octauian, but I am angry
you should in my presence speak evil of the Emperor NERO, and of none other:
for it is great infamy to a Prince being alive, to hear in his presence any
Prince evil reported after his death. Truly the Emperor Octauian was very
good, but ye will not deny me but he might have been better: and the
Emperor Nero was very evil: but you will grant me he might have been
worse. I speak this, because Nero in his first five years was the best of
all, and the other nine following he was the worst of all: so that there is
both cause to disprayse him, and also cause to commend him.

When a virtuous man will speak of Princes that are dead before Princes which
are alive, he is bound to praise only one of their virtues that they had, and
has no license to reveal the vices whereof they were noted: for the good
deserves reward, because he endeavors himself to follow virtue: and the
evil likewise deserves pardon, because through frailety he has consented to
vice.

All these words the Emperor Traian spoke, I being present, and they were
spoken with such fiercenes, that all those which were there present both
changed their color, and also refrayned their tongues. For truly the
shameless man feels not so much a great stripe of correction, as the gentle
heart does a sharp word of admonition.

I was willing to show thee these things, my friend Pulio, because that since
Traian spoke for Nero, and that he found in him some praise, I do think no
less of the tyrant Periander, whom though for his evil works he did, we do
condemn: yet for his good words that he spoke, and for the good laws which
he made, we do praise: For in the man that is evil, there is nothing more
easier then to give good counsel, and there is nothing more harder then to
work well,

Periander made diverse laws for the Common wealth of the Corinthians, whereof
here following, I will declare some.

We ordain and command, that if any by multiplying of words kill another (so
that it were not by treason) Diverse laws made by to Periander the tyrant.
that he be not therefore condemned to dye, but that they make him slave
perpetual to the brother of him that is slain, or to the next of his kin or
friends: for a short death is a less pain then a long servitude.

We ordain and command, that if any thief be taken, he shall not dye, but
with a hot iron shall be marked on the forehead to be known for a thief:
for to shameless men long infamy is more pain then a short life.

we ordain and command, that the man or woman, which to the prejudice of an
other shall tell any lie, shall for the space of a month carry a stone in
their mouth: for it is not meet that he which is wont to lie, should always
be authorized for to speak.

We ordain and command, that every man or woman, that is a quarreller and
seditious person in the common wealth, be with great reproach banished from
the people: for it is impossible that he should be in favor with the gods,
which is an enemy to his neighbor.

We ordain and command, that if there be any in the Common wealth, that
have received of an other a benefit, and that afterward it is proved he was
unthankful, that in such case they put The punishment of ingratitude.
him to death: for the man that of benefits received is unthankful, ought
not to live in the world among men.

Behold therefore my friend Pulio, the antiquity which I declared unto thee,
and how merciful the Corinthians were to murderers, thieves and Pirates: And
contrary, how severe they were to unthankful people, whom they commanded
forthwith to be put to death.

And truly in mine opinion the Corinthians had reason, for there is nothing
troubles a wise man more, then to see him unthankful to him, whom heo has
showed pleasure unto. I was willing to tell thee this history of Periander for
non other cause but to the end thou should see and know, that for as much as
I do greatly blame the vice of unthankfulness, I will labor not to be noted
of the same: For he that reproves vice, is not noted to be virtuous: but he
which utterly flies it.

Count upon this my word that I tell thee, which thou shall not think to be
feigned, that though I be the Roman Emperor, I will be thy faithful friend,
and will not fail to be thankeful toward thee. For I esteem it no less
glory to know how to keep a friend by wisdom: then to come to the estate of an
Emperor by Philosophy.

By the letter thou sentest, thou requiredst me of one thing to answer thee:
for the which I am at my wits end: For I had rather open my treasure to thy
necessities, then to open the books to answer to thy demands, although it be to
my cost. I confess thy request to be reasonable, and thou deseruest worthy
praise: for in the end it is more worth to know, how to procure a secret of
Antiquities past, then to heap up treasures for the necessities in time to
come.

As the Philosopher makes Philosophy his treasure of knowledge to live in
peace, and to hope, and to look for death with honor, so the covetous (being
such a one as he is) makes his treasure of worldly goods for to keep and
preserve life in this world in perpetual wars, and to end his life, and take
his death with infamy. Herein I swear unto thee, that one day employed in
Philosophy is The commendation of Philosophy.
more worth, then ten thousand which are spent in heaping riches: For the life
of a peaceable man is none other then a sweet peregrination: and the life of
seditious persons is none other but a long death.

Thou requirest me, my friend Pulio, that I write unto thee wherein the
Ancients in times past had their felicity: know thou that their desires were so
diverse, that some dispraysed life, others desired it: some prolonged it, others
did shorten it: some did not desire pleasure but travels, others in travels did
not seek but pleasures: that which variety did not proceed, but of diverse
ends, for the tastes were diverse, and sundry men desired to taste diverse meats.
By the immortal gods I swear unto thee, that this thy request makes me muse
of thy life, to see that my Philosophy answers thee not sufficiently therein:
For if thou ask to prove me, thou think me presumptuous: if thou demand
in mirth, thou countest me to be too light, if thou demaundest it not in good
earnest, thou take me to be simple: if thou demaundest me for to show it
thee, be thou assured I am ready to learn it: if thou demandest it for to know
it, I confess I cannot teach it thee: if thou demandest it because thou may
be asked it, be thou assured that none will be satisfied with my answer: and
if perchance thou do ask it, because sleeping have dreamed it, seeing that
now thou art awake, thou ought not to believe a dream: for all that the
fantasy in the night does imagine, the tongue does publish it in the morning.

O my friend Pulio, I have reason to complain of thee, for so much as thou
do not regard the authority of my person, nor the credit of thy Philosophy,
wherefore I fear least they will judge thee too curions in demanding, and me
too simple in answering: all this notwithstanding, I determine to answer thee,
not as I ought, but as I can, not according to the great thou demaundest, but
according to the little I know, And partly I do it to accomplish thy request,
and also to fulfill my desire. And now I think that all which shall read this
letter, will be cruel Judges of my ignorance.

Of the Philosopher Epicurius.
IN the Olimpiade: 103. Serges being King of Perses, and The battle between
the Athenians and Lysander.
the cruel tyrant Lysander Captain of the Peloponenses, a famous battle was
fought between the Athenians and Lysander, upon the great River of Aegeon,
whereof Lysander had the victory: and truly unless the histories deceive us,
the Athenians took this conflict grievously, because the battle was lost more
through negligence of their Captains then through the great number of their
enemies.

For truly many win victories more through the cowardlinesse that some have,
then for the hardiness that others have. The Philosopher Epicurus at that time
flourished, who was of a lively wit, but of a mean stature, and had memory
fresh, being meanly learned in Philosophy, but he was of much eloquence and
for to encourage and counsel the Athenians, he was sent to the wars: For
when the Ancients took upon them any wars, they chose first Sages to give
counseil, then Captains to lead the soldiers. And amongst the Prisoners the
Philosopher Epicurus was taken, to whom the tyrant Lysander gave good
entertainment and honored him above all other: and after he was taken, he
never went from him, but read Philosophy unto him, and declared unto him
histories of times past, and of the strength and virtues of many Greeks and
Trojans. The tyrant Lysander rejoiced greatly at these things: For truly
tyrants take great pleasure to hear the prowess and virtues of Ancients past,
and to follow the wickedness and vices of them that are present.

Lysander therefore taking the triumph, and having a Navy by sea, and a great
Army by land, upon the river of Aegeon, he and his Captains forgot the danger
of the wars, and gave the bridle to the flothfull flesh, so that to the great
prejudice of the Common wealth they led a dissolute and idle life. For the
manner of tyrannous Princes is, to leave off their ownt travel, and to enjoy
that of other men's.

The Philosopher Epicurus was always brought up in the excellent University of
Athens, whereas the Philosophers lived in so great poverty, that naked they
slept on the ground: The poverty of the Philosophers of Athens.
their drink was cold water, none amongst them had any house proper: they
despised riches as pestilence, and labored to make peace where discord was,
they were only defenders of the Common wealth, they never spoke any idle word,
and it was a sacrilege amongst them to hear a lie: and finally, it was a Law
inviolable amongst them, that the Philosopher that should be idle should be
banished, and he that was vicious should be put to death.

The wicked Epicurius forgetting the doctrine of his Master, and not esteeming
gravity (whereunto the Sages are bound) gave himself wholly both in words and
deeds unto a voluptuous and beastly kind of life wherein he put his whole
felicity. For he said, There was no other felicity for slothful men, then to
sleep in soft beds: for delicate persons to feel neither hot nor cold: for
fleshly men to have at their pleasure amorus Dames: for drunkards not to want
any pleasant wines, and gluttons to have their fills of al delicate meats: for
herein he affirmed to consist all worldly felicity.

I do not marvel at the multitude of his Scholars which he had, has, and
shall have in the world. For at this day there are very few in Rome, that
suffer not themselves to be mastered with vices: and the multitude of those
which live at their own wills and sensuality, are infinite. And to tell the
truth, my friend Pulio, I do not marvel that there has been virtuous, neither
do I muse that there has been vicious: for the virtuous hops to rest
himself with the Gods in an other World by his well doing: and if the vicious
be vicious, I do not marvel, though he will go and engage himself to the
vices of this world, since he does not hope, neither to have pleasure in this,
not yet to enjoy rest with the gods in the other. For truly the unsteadfast
belief of an other life (after this) wherein the wicked shall be punished,
and the good The small hope of the wicked.
rewarded causes that now a days the victous and vices reign so as they do.

Of the Philosopher Eschilus.
ARtabanus being the sixth king of Persians, and Quintus Concinatus the
husbandman The Philosopher Aeschilus described.
being only Dictator of the Romans, in the Province of Tharse, there was a
Philosopher named Aeschilus, who was evil favored of countenance, deformed of
body, fierce in his looks, and of a very gross understanding, but he was
fortunate of credit: for he had no less credit amongst the Tharses, then
Homer had among the Greeks: They say, that though this Philosopher was of a
rude knowledge, yet otherwise he had a very good natural wit, and was very
diligent in hard things, and very patient with these that did him wrong, he
was exceeding courageous in adversity, and moderate in prosperities. And the
thing that I most of all delighted in him was, that he was courteous and
gentle in his conversation, and both pithie and eloquent in his communication.
For that man only is happy, where all men praise his life, and no man
reproves his tongue.

The ancient Greeks declare in their Histories, that this Philosopher
Aeschilus was the first that invented Aeschilus the first inuenter of Tragedies.
Tragedies, and that got money to represent them: and since the invention was
new and pleasant, many did not only follow him, but they gave him much of
their goods.

And marvel not thereat my friend Pulio, for the lightness of the Common
people is such, that to see vain things all will run: and to hear the
excellency of virtues, there is not one will go.

After this Philosopher Aeschylus had written many books specially of
Tragedies, and that he had afterward traveled through many Countries and
Realms, at the last he ended the residue of his life, near the Isles which
are adjoining unto the Lake of Meatts.

For as the divine Plato saves, when the ancient Philosophers were young,
they studied, when they came to be men they traveled, and then when they were
old they retired home.

In mine opinion this Philosopher was wise to do as he did, and no less shall
men now a days be that will imitate him. For the Fathers of wisdom are
Science and Experience: and in this consists true knowledge when the man at
the last returns home from the troubles of the World.

Tell me, my friend Pulio, I pray thee, what does it profit him that has
learned much, that has heatd much, that has known much, that has seen
much, that has been far, that has bought much, that has suffered much,
and has proved much, that had much, if after great travel he does not retire
to repose himself a little: truly he cannot be counted wise but a fool that
willingly offers himself to travel, and has not the wit to procure
himself rest: for in mine opinion, the life without rest, is a long death.

By chance as this ancient Philosopher was sleeping by the lake Meatis, a
Hunter had a Hare with him in a Cage of wood to take other Hares by: whereon
the Eagle seized, which took the Cage with the Hare on high: and seeing he
could not eat it, he cast it down again, which fell on the head of this
Philosopher, and killed him.

This Philosopher Aeschylus was demanded in his life time, wherein the
felicity of this life consisted? he answered, that in this opinion it
consisted in sleeping, and his reason was Aeschilus his opinion, wherein the
felicity of this life consisted.
this, that when we sleep the entisements of the flesh do not provoke us, nor
the enemy persecute us, neither the friends do importune us, nor the cold
winter oppress us, nor the heat of long Summer does annoy us, nor yet we are
not angry for any thing we see, nor we take any care for any thing we hear.

Finally, when we sleep, we feel not the anguishes of the body: neither
suffer the passion of the mind to come.

To this end ye must understand that when they were troubled, he gave them
drinks, which caused them immediately to sleep, so that so soon as the man did
drink it, so soon he was a sleep.

Finally, all the study wherein the Epicurians exercised themselves, was in
eating and seeking meats: and the chief study of this Aeschilus was in
sleeping, and having soft beds,

Of the Philosopher Pindarus.
IN the year of the foundation of the City of Rome, 262. Darius the second of
that name, King of Persia, who was the son of Histapsie, and in the lynage of
Kings, the fourth King of Persia, Iunius Brutus, and Lucius Collatinus being
Consuls in Rome which were the first Consuls that were in Rome.

There was in the great City of Thebes in Egypt, a Philosopher named Pindarus,
who was Prince of that Realm. They write of this Philosopher, that in
Philosophy he excelled all those of his time, and also in teaching, singing,
and playing of Music, he was more excellent then any of all his
Predecessors: for the Thebanes affirmed, that there was never any seen of such
aptnes in speaking and so excellent delivering of his fingers in playing, as
Pindarus was: and moreover he was a great Moral Philosopher, but not so
excellent in natural Philosophy: For he was a quiet and virtuous man, and
could better work then reach, which thing is contrary now a days in our Sages
of Rome. For they know little, and speak much: and worst of all in their
words they are circumspect, and in their deeds very negligent. The divine
Plato in his book that he made of Laws, mentions this Philosopher, and
Iunius Rusticus in his Thebaide shows one thing of him, and that is, that an
Ambassador of Lides being in Thebes, seeing Pindarus to be of a virtuous
life, and very disagreeable in his words, he spoke unto him in such words.

O Pindarus, If thy words were so limed before men, as thy works are pure
before the Gods, I swear unto thee by those Gods that are immortal, that thou
should be as much esteemed in Life, as Promotheus was; and should leave
as much memory of thee after thy death in Egypt, as the great Homere left of
his life in Greece.

They demanded of this Pindarus wherein felicity consisted? he answered: In
such sort ye ought to Wherein true felicity consists.
know, that the inward scule follows in many things (for the most part) the
outward body: the which thing presupposed I say, that he that feels no
grief in his body, may well be called happy: For truly if the flesh be not
well, the heart can have no rest.

Therefore according to the counsel of Pindarus, the Thebanes were above all
other Nations and people most diligent to cure the diseases of their bodies.
Annius Seuerus says, that they were let blood every month for the great
abundance of blood in their bodies. They used every week vnmitations for the
full stomachs.

They continued the bathes for to avoid opilations. They carried sweet favors
about them against the evil and infected airs. And finally, they studied
naught else in Thebes, but to preserve and keep their bodies as deliciously as
they could invent.

Of the Philosopher Zeno.
IN the Olimpiade 133. Cneus Seruillus, and Caius Brisius then Consuls Of the
Philosopher Zeno.
in Rome, which were appointed against the Artikes in the month of January,
immediately after they were chosen: and in the 29. year of the reign of
Ptolomeus Philadelphus, this great Prince Ptolomeus built in the coast of
Alexandry a great Tower which he named Pharo, for the love of a lover of his
named Pharo Dolouina. This Tower was built upon four engines of glass, it was
large and high, made four square, and the stones of the Tower were as bright
and shining as glass, so that the Tower being twenty foot of breadth, if a
candle burned within, those without might see the light thereof.

I let thee know my friend Pulio, that the ancient Historiograpers did so much
esteem his building, that they compared it to one of the seven buildings of
the World.

At that time when these things flourished, there was in Egypt a Philosopher
called Zeno, by whose counsel and industry Ptolomeus built that so famous a
Tower, and governed his land. For in the old time the Princes that in their
life were not governed by Sages, were recorded after their death in the
Register of fools.

As this Tower was strong, so he had great joy of the same, because he kept
his dearly beloved Pharo Dolouina therein enclosed, to the end she should be
well kept, and also well contented. He had his wives in Alexandria, but for the
most part he continued with Pharo Dolouina. For in the old time, the Perses,
Siconians, and the Chaldeans did not marry, but to have children to enherite
their goods: and the residue of their life, (for the most part) to lead with
their Concubines in pleasure and delight: The Egyptians had it in great
estimation that were great Wrestlers, especially, if they were wise men, and
above all things, they made great defiance against strangers: and all the
multitude of wrastlers was continually great: so there were notable Masters
among them. For truly he that daily uses one thing, shall at the last be
excellent therein.

The matter was thus: That one day amongst them, there were many Egyptians,
there was one that would not be overthrown, nor cast by any man unto the
earth.

This Philosopher Zeno perceiving the strength and courage of this great
Wrastler: thought it much for his estimation if he might throw him in
wrestling, and in proving he threw The strength of Zeno.
him dead to the earth, who of none other could ever be cast.

This victory of Zeno was so greatly to the contentation of his person, that
he spoke with his tongue, and wrote with his pen, that there was none other
joy or felicity, then to know how to have the strength of the Arms to cast
down others at his feet. The reason of this Philosopher was, that he said it
was a greater kind of victory to overthrow one to the earth, then to overthrow
many in the wars: For in the wars one only wrongfully takes the victory,
since there be many that do win it: but in wresiling, as the victory is to
one alone, so let the only victory and glory remain to him, and therefore in
this thing felicity consists: for what can be more, then the contention of
the heart. Truly we call him in this world happy that has his heart content,
and his body in health. Wherein felicity consists.


Of the Philosopher Anacharsis.
WHen the King Heritaches reigned among the Medes, and that Tarquin Priscus
reigned in Rome, there was in the coasts of Scithia a Philosopher called
Anacharsis, who was borne in the City of Epimenides. Cicero greatly commended
the doctrine of this Philosopher, and that he cannot tell which of these two
things were greater in him, that is to say, the profoundnesse of Knowledge that
the Gods had given him, or the cruel malice wherewith he persecuted his
enemies. For truly as Pithagoras says. Those which of men are most evil
willed, of the gods are best beloved.

This Philosopher Anacharsis then being as he was of Scithia (which nation
amongst the Romans was esteemed Barbarous) it chanced, that a malicious
Roman sought to displease the Philosopher in words: and truly he was moved
thereunto, more through malice then through simplicity: For the outward
malicious words are a manifest token of the inward malicious heart.

This Roman therefore said to the Philosopher: It is impossible Anacharsis
that thou should be a Scithian borne: for a man of such eloquence cannot
be of such a Barbarous Nation? To whom Anacharsis answered:

Thou have said well, and herein I assent to thy words, howbeit I do not
allow thy intention: for as by reason thou may disprayse me to be of a
barbarous Country, and commend me for a good life: so I may justly accuse thee
of a wicked life, and praise thee of a good Country.

And herein be thou Judge of both, which of us two shall have the most praise
in the World to come: neither thou that art borne a Roman, and leadest a
barbarous No respect of persons with God.
life: or I that am borne a Scythian, and lead the life of a Roman: For in
the end, in the Garden of this life I had rather be a green Apple Tree and
bear fruit, then to be a dry Liban drawn on the ground.

After that Anacharsis had been in Rome a long time, and in Greece, he
determined for the love of his Country (now being aged) to return home to
Scythia, whereof a brother of his named Cadmus was King, who had the name of a
King, but in deed he was a tyrant,

Since this good Philosopher saw his brother exercise the works of a Tyrant,
and seeing also the people so desolate, he determined to give his brother the
best counsel he could, to ordain laws to the people, and in good order to
govern them: which thing being seen of the Barbarous, by the consent of them
all, as a man, who invented new devises to live in the World, before them all,
openly was put to death.

For I will thou know O my friend Pulio, that there is no greater token that
the whole Common wealth is full of vice: then when they kill or banish those
which are virtuous therein: so therefore as they led this Philosopher to death,
he said he was unwilling to take his death, and loath to lose his life:
wherefore one said unto him these words: Tell me Anacharsis, since thou art a
man so virtuous, so sage, and so old, me thinks it should not grieve thee to
leave this miserable life: For the virtuous man should desire the company of
the virtuous men, the which this world wants: The Sage ought to desire to
live with other Sages; whereof the world is destitute: and the old man ought
little to esteem the loss of his life, since by true experience he knows
in what travels he passed his days: For truly it is a kind of folly for a man
which has traveled and finished a dangerous and long journey, to lament to
see himself now in the end thereof,

Anacharsis answered him. Thou speak very good words my friend, and I would
that thy life were as thy counsel is: but it grieueth me that in this
conflict I have neither understanding, nor yet sense to taste, not that I have
time enough to thank thee: For I let thee know, that there is no tongue can
express the grief which a man feels, when he ought forthwith to dye. I
dye, and as thou see they kill me only for that I am virtuous, I feel
nothing that tormenteth my heart so much, as King Cadmus my brother does, for
that I cannot be revenged: For in my opinion the chief felicity of man
consists in knowing, and being able to revenge the injury done without
reason, before a man does end his life.

It is a commendable thing that the Philosopher pardon injuries (as The opinion
of Anacharsis.
the virtuous Philosophers have accustomed to do) but it should be also just,
that the injuries which we forgive, the Gods should therewith be charged to
see reuengement: For it is a hard thing to see a tyrant put a virtuous man to
death, and never to see the Tyrant to come to the like,

Me thinks my friend Pulio, that this Philosopher put all his felicity in
revenging an injury, during the like in this world.

Of the Sarmates.
THe Mount Caucasus as the Cosmographers say, does divide in the midst great
Asia, the which begins in Indea, and ends in Scithia, and according to the
variety of the people which inhabit the villages, has this mount diverse
names, and those which dwell toward the Indians differ much from the others.
For the more the Country is full of mountains, so much the more the people
are Barbarous. Amongst all the other Cities which are adjacent unto the same,
there is a kind of people called Sarmates, and that is the Country of
Sarmatia, which stands upon the river of Tanays. There grow no vines in the
Province, because of the great cold: and it is true, that among all the
Oriental nations there are no people, which more desire Wine then they do:
For the thing which we lack is commonly most desired.

These people of Sarmatia are good men of War, though they are unarmed, they
esteem not much delicate meats, nor sumptuous The felicity of the Sarmatians.
apparel: for all their felicity consists in knowing how they might fill
themselves with Wine.

In the year of the foundation of Rome, p 318. our ancient Fathers determined
to wage battle against those people, and other Barbabarous Nations, and
appointed a Consul called Lucius Pius. And since in that wars fortune was
variable, they made a Truce, and afterward all their Captains yielded
themselves and their country into the subjection of the Roman Empire, only
because the Consul Lucius Pius in a banquet (that he made) filled them with
Wine.

Within this tomb Lucius Pius lies, The Epitaph of Lucius Pius.

That whilom was a Consul great in Rome,
And daunted eke (as shame his slander cries)
The Sarmates stern not by Mauors his doom.
But by reproof, and shame of Roman arms,
He vanquished has, not as the Romans use,
But as the bloody tirants, that with swarms
Of huge deceites, the fierce assaults refuse.
Not in the wars by biting weapons stroke,
But at the boorde with sweet delighting food,
Not in the hazard fight he did them yoke.
But feeding all in rest, he stole their blood.
Nor yet with mighty Mars, in open field,
He rest their lives with sharp ypersing spears,
But with the push of drunken Bacchus shield,
Home to hie Rome, the triumph lo he bears.
The sacred Senate set this Epitaph here, because all Roman Captains, should
take example of him: For the Majesty of the Romans consists not in
vanquishing their enemies by vices and deliciousness, but by weapons and
prayers,

The Romans were very sore grieved with the and a city of this Consul Lucius
Pius, and not contented to have beheaded him, and to have set on his grave so
defamous a title: but made proclamation forthwith through out all Rome by the
sound of a Trumpet, how all that Lucius Pius had done, the sacred Senate
condemned for nothing, and should stand to no An ancient custom in Rome.
effect: For there was an ancient Law in Rome, when they beheaded any by
justice, they should also take away the authority he had in Rome.

After the wars were ended, and all the land of Sarmatia subject, the Consul
Lucius Pius came to Rome, and for reward of his travel, required the
accustomed triumph: the which was not only denied him, but also in recompense
of his fact, he was openly beheaded, and by the decree of all the Senate,
about his grave was written this Epitaph.

And not contented with these things the sacred Senate wrote to the Sarmates,
that they did release them of their homage, making themselves subjects of the
Romans: wherefore they restored them again to their liberty.

They did this thing because the custom among the stout and valiant Romans
was, not to get nor win Realms in making their enemies drunk with
delicate Wines, but in shedding their proper blood in plain field.

I have told thee this my friend Pulio, because the Consul Lucius Pius did
perceive that the Sarmates put all their felicity to ingorge themselves with
wine.

Of the Philosopher Chylo.
IN the 15. Dinastia of the Lacedaemonians, and Deodeus being King of Medes,
Gigion being king of Lides, Argeus being king among the Macedonians, and
Tullius Hostilius king of the Romans: in the Olympiade 27. there was in
Athens a Philosopher borne in Greece, whose name was Chylo: one of the seven
Sages, which the Greeks had in their treasury.

In that time there was great wars between the Athenians, and the
Corinthians, as we may perceive by the Greeks histories which we see written.

Since Troy was ruinated and destroyed, there was never peace in Greece, for
the wars betwixt the Wars in Greece, ever since the destruction of Troy.
Greeks and Troyans was never so great as that which afterward they made among
themselves.

Since the Greeks were now wise me^, they did divide the offices of the
Commonwealth, according to the ability of every person, that is to know, that
to the stout and hardy men they gave the government: to the sage they
recommended the Embasies of of strange countries.

And upon this occasion the Athenians sent the Philosopher Chilo to the
Corinthians to treat of peace, who came unto the city of Corinth.

By chance on that day there was celebrated a great Feast, wherefore he found
all men playing at dice, the women solacing themselves in their gardens: the
Priests short with their crosse-bowes in the Temples: the Senators played in
the consistory at tables: the masters of Fence played in the streets: And to
conclude, he found them all playing.

The Philosopher seeing these things, without speaking to any man, or lighting
off from his horse, returned to his country, without declaring his message:
and when the Corinthians went after him, and asked him why he did not declare
the cause of his coming, he answered:

Friends, I am come from Athens to Corinth, not without great travel, and now
I return from Corinth to Athens not lattle offended: and ye might have seen
it, because I spoke never a word to any of you of Corinth: For I have no
commission to treat of peace with unthrifty players, but with sage governors.
Those of Athens commanded me not to keep Idleness and pastimes hated by the
philosopher
company with those that have their hands occupied with Dyce: but with those
that have their bodies laden with harnes, and with those which have their Eyes
dazeled with Books. For those men which have wars with the Dyce, it is
impossible they should have peace with their Neighbors.

After he had spoken these words, he returned to Athens. I let thee understand
my friend Pulio, that the Corinthians think it to be the greatest felicity in
the world to occupy days and nights in plays: and marvel not hereat, neither
laugh thou them to scorn. For it was told me by a Greek being in Antioche,
that a Corinthian esteemed it more felicity to win a game, then the Roman
Captain did to win a Triumph.

As they say the Corinthians were wise and temperate men, unless it were in
Plays, in the which thing they were too vicious. Me think my friend Pulio,
that I answer thee more amply then thou requirest, or that my health suffers,
that which is little: so that both thou shall be troubled to read it, and I
here shall have pain to write it.

I will make thee a brief sum of all the others which now come to my
remembrance, the which in diuersethings have put their joy and chiefest
felicities.

Of Crates the Philosopher.
CRates the Philosopher put his felicity to have good fortune in prosperous
navigations, saying, that Crates the Philosopher
he which sayleth by sea, can never have perfect joy at his his heart, so long
as he confidereth that between death and life there is but one bourd:
Wherefore the heart never feels so great joy, as when in the Haven he
remembers the perils which he has escaped on the sea.

Of Estilpho the Philosopher.
EStilpho the Philosopher put all his felicity to be of great power, Estilpho.
saying, that the man which can do little, is worth little, and he that has
little, the gods do him wrong to let him live so long: For he only is happy
which has power to oppress his enemies, and has wherewithal to succor
himself, and reward his friends.

Of Simonides the Philosopher.
SImonides the Philosopher put all his felicity to be well beloved Simonides.
of the people, saying, That churlish men and evil conditioned, should be
sent to the mountains amongst brute beasts, For there is no greater happiness
or felicity in this life, then to be beloved of all in the Commonwealth.

Of Archita the Philosopher.
ARchita the Philosopher, had all his felicity in conquering a Bartell,
Archita.
saying that naturally man is so much friend to himself, and desires so much
to come to the chief of his enterprise: that though for little trifles he
played, yet he would not be overcome: For the heart willingly suffers all
the travels of the life, in hope afterward to win the victory.

Of Gorgias the Philosopher.
GOrgias the Philosopher put al his felicity to hear a thing which Gorgias.
pleased him, saying, That the body feels not so much a great wound, as the
heart does an evil word: For truly there is no music that sounds so
sweet to the ears, as the pleasant words are sauourie to the heart.

Of Chrysippus the Philosopher,
CHrysippus the Philosopher had all his felicity in this World, Chrysippus.
in making great buildings, saying, that those which of themselves left no
memory, both in their life, and after their death deserved infacny: For great
and sumptuous buildings, are perpetual monuments of noble courages.

Of Antisthenes the Philosopher.
ANtisthenes the Philosopher put al his felicity in renown after his
Antistenes.
death. For says he, there is no loss but of life, that flitteth without
fame: For the Wise man needs not fear to die: so he leave a memory of his
virtuous life behind him.

Of Sophocles the Philosopher.
SOphocles had al his joy in having children, which should possess the
inheritance of their Father: Sophocles.
saying that the graft of him, that has no children, surmounteth above all
other sorrows: for the greatest felicity in this life is to have honor and
riches, and afterward to leave children which shall inherit them.

Of Euripides the Philosopher.
Euripides the Philosopher had all his joy in keeping a fair woman, Euripides.
saying his tongue with words could not express the grief which the heart
endures, that is accombred with a foul woman: therefore of of truth, he
which happens of a good and virtuous woman, ought of right in his life to
desire no more pleasure.

Of Palemon the Philosopher.
PAlemon put the felicity of men in Palemon.
eloquenee, saying and swearing that the man that cannot reason of all things,
is not so like a reasonable man, as he is a brute beast: for according to the
opinions of many, there is no greater felicity in this wretched world, then to
be a man of a pleasant tongue, and of an honest life.

Of Themistocles the Philosopher.
THemistocles put all his felicity, Themistocles.
in discending from a Noble lynage, saying, that the man which is come of a
mean stock, is not bound to make of a renowned fame: for truly the virtues
and prowesses of them that are past, are not but an example to move them to
take great enterprises which are present.

Of Aristides the Philosopher.
ARistides the Philosopher put all his felicity in keeping temporal goods
saying, that the man Aristides.
which has not wherewith to eat, nor to sustain his life, it were better
counsel for him, of his free will to go into the grave, then to do any other
thing: For he only shall be called happy in this world, who has no need to
enter into an other man's house.

Of Heraclitus the Philosopher.
HEraclitus put al his felicity in heaping Heraclitus.
up treasure, saying that the prodigal man, the more begets, the more he
spends, but he has the respect of a wise man, who can keep a secret treasure
for the necessity to come. Thou have now sufficiently understood my friend
Pulio that 7. months since, I have been taken with the fever quartaine, and I
swear unto thee by the immortal Gods, that at this present instant writing
unto thee, my hand shakes which is an evident token, that the cold does take
me, wherefore I am constrained to conclude this matter which thou demaundest
me although not according to my desire: For amongst true friends, though the
works do cease wherewith they serve: yet therefore the inward parts ought not
to quail, wherewith they love.

If thou do ask me my friend Pulio, what I think of all that is above
spoken, and to which of those I do stick: I answer thee: That in this No
perfect felicity in this world.
World I do not grant any to be happy, and if there be any, the gods have
them with them: because on the one side, chosing the plain and dry way
without clay, and on the other side all stony and myerie, we may rather call
this life the precipitation of the evil, then the safeguard of the good.

I will speak but one word only, but mark well what thereby I mean which
is, that amongst the mishaps of fortune we dare say, that there is no
felicity in the World: And he only is happy from whom wisdom has plucked
envious adversity, and that afterward is brought by wisdom to the highest
felicity. And though I would, I cannot endure any longer, but that the
immortal Gods have thee in their custody, and that they preserve us from evil
fortune: Since thou art retired now unto Bethinie, I know well thou would I
should write thee some news from Rome, and at this present there are none, but
that the Carpentines and Lusitaines are in great strife and dissension in
Spain.

I received letters how that the barbarous were quiet, though the Host that was
in Ilium were in good case: yet notwithstanding the Army is somewhat fearful
and timorous. For in all the coast and borders, there has been a great plague.

Pardon me my friend Pulio, for that I am so sickly, that yet I am not come to
my self: for the fever quartane is so cruel a disease, that he which has it,
contenteth himself with nothing, neither takes pleasure in any thing. I send
thee two of the best horses that can be found in all Spain: and also I send
thee two cups of gold of the richest that can be found in Alexandria. And by
the law of a good man I swear unto thee, that I desire to send thee two or
three hours of those which trouble me in my fever quartane.

My wife Faustine saluteth thee and of her part, and mine also to Cassia thy
old mother, and noble Widow we have commended. Marcus the Roman Emperor
with his own hand writes this, and again commends him unto his dear friend
Pulio.

CHAP. XLI. That Princes and great Lords ought not to esteem themselves for
being fair, and well proportioned,
IN the time that Joshua triumphed amongst the Hebrews, and that Dardanus
passed from great Greece to Samotratia, and when the sons of Egenor were
seeking their sister Europe, and in the time that Siculus reigned in Scicil, in
great Asia, in the realm of Egypt, was builded a great City called Thebes, the
which K. Busiris built, of whom Diodorus Siculus at large mentions. Pliny in
the 36. Chapter of his natural history, and Homer in the second of his
Iliades, and Statius in all the book of his Thebiade do declare great maruels
of this City of Thebes, which thing ought greatly to be esteemed, for a man
ought not to think that feigned which so excellent authors have written. A
description of the City of Thebes.


For a truth they say, that Thebes was in circuit forty miles, and that the
walls were thirty stades hie and in breadth six.

They say also that the City had a hundred gates very sumptuous and strong, and
in every gate two hundred Horsemen watched.

Through the midst of Thebes passed a great river, the which by milles and fish
did greatly profit the City.

When Thebes was in his prosperity, they say, that there was two hundred
thousand fires, and besides all this, all the Kings of Egypt were buried in
that place.

As Strabo says, De situ orbis, when Thebes was destroyed with enemies, they
found therein seventy seven Strabo de situ orbis.
Tombs of Kings which had bin buried there.

And here is to be noted, that all those tombs were of virtuous kings: for
among the Egyptians it was a law A Law among the Egyptians
inviolable, that the King which had been wicked in his life should not be
buried after his death: Before the noble and worthy Numantia was founded in
Europe, the rich Carthage in Affricke, and the hardy Rome in Italy, the goodly
Capua in Campaigne, and the great Argentine in Germany, and the holy Helia in
Palestine: Thebes only was the most renowned of all the World: For the
Thebanes amongst all Nations were renowned, as well for their riches, as for
their buildings, and also because in their laws and customs they had many
notable and severe things, and all the men were severe in their works, although
they would not be known by their extreme doings. Homer says that the
Thebanes had five customs, wherein they were more extreme then any other
Nation.

1 The first was, that the children drawing to five years of age, were marked
in the forehead with a hot Iron, because in what places soever they came they
should be known for Thebanes by the mark.

2 The second was, that they should accustom their children to travail
always on soote. And the occasion why they did this was, because the Egyptians
kept their beasts for their Gods: and therefore whenever they traveled, they
never rid on horseback, because they should not seem to sit upon their god.

3 The third was that none of the Citizens of Thebes should marry with any of
strange nations, but rather caused the^ to mary parents with parents, because
the friends marrying with friends they thought the friendship and love should
be more sure.

4 The fourth custom was, that no Thebane should in any wise make a house for
himself to dwell in, but first By the example of the Thebanes is showed the
duty of every Christian.
he should make his grave wherein he should be buried.

^ Me thinks that in this point the Thebanes were not too extreme, nor
excessive, but that they did like sage and wise men: yea and by the law of
verity I swear, that they were sager then we are. For if at least we did
employ our thought but two hours in the week to make our grave: It is
impossible but that we should correct every day our life,

3 The fifth custom was, that all the boys which were exceeding fair in their
face, should be by them strangled in the cradell: and all the gyrles which were
extreme foul, were by them killed and sacrificed to the Gods. Saying, that
the Gods forgot themselves, when they made the men fair, and the women foul:
For the man which is very fair, is but an imperfect woman: and the woman which
is extreme foul, is but a savage and wild beast.

The greatest God of the Thebanes, was Isis who was a red bull nourished in the
river of Nile, and they had a custom, that all those which had red hair
immediate should be sacrifised. The contrary they did to the beasts, for since
their God was a Bull of tawny color, none durst be so bold to kill any beasts
of the same color. In such form and manner, that it was lawful to kill both
men and women, and not the brute beasts.

I do not say this well done of the An in humane custom among the Thebans.
Thebanes to slay their children, nor yet I do say that it was well done to
sacrifise men and women, which had red or tawny hair, nor I think it a thing
reasonable, that they should do reverence to the beasts of that color: but I
wonder why they should so much despise foul women and fair men, since all the
world is peopled both with with fair and foul. Then since those barbarous
(living as they did under a false law) did put him to death, whom the gods had
adorned with any beauty: we then which are Christians by reason ought much
less to esteem the beauty of the body: knowing that most commonly thereupon
ensues the uncleanness of the soul.

Under the Crystal stone lies ofttimes a dangerous worm, in the fair wall
is nourished the venomous Coluler, within the middle of the white tooth is
engendered great pain to the gummes, in the finest cloth the moths do most
hurt, and the most fruitful tree by worms is soonest perished. I mean, that
under the clean bodies and fair countenances, are hid many and abominable
vices. Truly not only to children which are not wise, but to all other which
are light and frail, beutie is nothing else but the mother of many vices, and
the hinderer of all virtues. Let Princes and great Lords believe me, which
think to be fair and well disposed, that where there is great abundance of
corporal goods Beauty the mother of vices.
and graces, there ought to be great bones of virtues to be able to bear
them. For the most high trees by great winds are shaken: I say, that it is
vanity to be vain glorious in any thing of this world be it never so perfect:
and also I say that it is a great vanity to be proud, of corporal beauty.
For among all the acceptable gifts that nature gave to the mortals, there is
nothing more superfluous in man, and less necessary, then the beauty of the
body. For truly whether be we fair or foul, we are nothing the better beloved
of God, neither thereby the more hated of men, O blindness of the world! O
life which never lives! O death which never shall end! I know not why man
through the accident of this beauty should or durst take upon him any vain
glory or presumption: since he knows that all the fairest, and most perfitest
of flesh, must be sacrificed to the worms in the grave. And know also, that
all the propernesse of the members shall be forfeited to the hungry worms
which are in the earth.

Let the great scorn the little as much as they will, the fair mock the
foul at their pleasure, the whole disdain the sick, the well made envy the
deformed, the white hate the black, and the Giants despise the Dwarfes: yet in
the end all shall have an end. Truly in my opinion, the trees bear Time the
consumer of al things
not the more fruit, for that they are straight only, nor for being high,
neither for giving great shadow, nor for being beautiful, nor yet for being
great. By this comparison I mean, that though a noble and stout man be proper
of person, and noble of lineage, shadowing of favor, comely in countenance, in
renown very high, and in the commonwealth puissant, that therefore he is not
the better in this life.

For truly the common wealths are not altered by the simple laborers which
travel in the fields: but by the vicious men which take great ease in their
lives. Unless I be deceived, the Swine and other beasts are fed under The
smalest creatures profitable in the commonwealth.
the Oaks with the Acornes, and among the pricking briers and thorns the sweet
Roses do grow, the sharp Beech gives us the sauory chestnuts. I mean, that
deformed and little creatures often times are most profitable in the
commonwealth. For the little and sharp countenances, are signs of valiant and
stout hearts.

Let us cease to speak of men which are fleshly, being eftsoons rotten and
gone, and let us talk of sumptuous buildings which are of stone, which if we
should go to see what they were, we may know the greatness and the height of
them. Then we shall not know the manner of their beauty: and that which seemed
to be perpetual, in short space we see it end, and lose the renown, in such
sort that there is never memory of them hereafter.

Let us all leave the ancient buildings and come to the buildings now a days,
and none shall see that there is no man that makes a house, be it never so
strong nor fair, but (living a little while) he shall see the beauty thereof
decay. For there are a great number of ancient men, which have seen both the
tops of famous and strong buildings made, and the foundation and ground thereof
decayed. And that this is true it appears manifestly, for that if the top
decay, or the walls fall, or else if the timber be weak, or the joints open,
or the windows wax rotten, or the gates do break, the buildings forthwith
decay.

What shall we say of goodly halls and galleries well appointed, the which
within short space, by coals or candles of children, or by torches of pages, or
smoke of chimneys, by cobwebs of spiders, become as dry and foul, as before
they were fresh and fair.

Then if that be true which I have said of these things, I would now gladly
know, what hope man can have of the countenance of his beauty, since we see
the like destruction of corporal beauty, as of stones, wood, brick and clay.

O unprofitable Princes, O children too foolish hardy, do you not remember that
all your health is subject to sickness, as in the pain of the stomach, in the
heat of the liver, the inflammation of the feet, in the distemperance of
humors, in the motions of the air, in the conjunctions of the Moon in the
Eclipse of the Sun: I say do you not know that you are subject to the
tedious Summer, and intolerable Winter? Of a truth I cannot tell how you can
be (among so many imperfections and corruptions) so full of vain glory, by
your beauty, seeing and knowing that a little fever does not only deface and
man the beauty, but also makes and colors the face all yealow, be it never
so well favored.

I have marvelled at one thing, that is to say, that all men are desirous to
have al things about their body clean their gowns brushed, their coats neat,
their table handsome, and the bed fine, and only they suffer their souls to
be foul, spotted and filthy. I durst say, and in the faith of a Christian
affirm, that it is a great lack of wisdom, and a superfluity of folly, for
a man to his have house clean, and to What folly it is for man not to regard
his own soul.
suffer his soul to be corrupted. I would know what pre-eminence they have
which are fair, above others to whom nature has denied beauty.

Peradventure the beautiful man has two souls, and the deformed creature but
one? peradventure the most fairest are the most healthful, and the most
deformed are the most sickliest: peradventure the most fairest are the wisest,
and the most deformed the most innocent: peradventure the fairest are most
stout, and the deformed most cowards: peradventure the fair are most
fortunate, and the fool most vnluckiest: peradventure the fair only are
accepted from vice, and the foul deprived from virtue: peradventure those
which are fair, of right have perpetual life, and those which are foul, are
bound to replenish the grave: I say no certainly.

Then if this be true, why do the great mock the little, the fair the foul,
the right the crooked, and the white the black, since they know that the vain
glory which they have, and their beauty also, shall have an end to day or
tomorrow.

A man that is fair and well proportioned, is therefore nothing the more
virtuous: and he that is deformed and evil shapen, is nothing therefore the more
vicious: so that virtue depends not at all of the shape of body, neither yet
vice proceeds of the deformity of the face. For daily we see the deformity
of the body to be beautified with the virtues of the The virtue of the mind
beautifieth the whole body.
mind: and the virtues of the mind, to be defaced with the vice of the body
in his works. For truly he that in the usage of his life has any botch or
imperfection, is worse then he that has four botches in the shoulders.

Also I say, that though a man be great, yet it is not true that therefore he
is strong: so that it is not a general rule, that the big body has always a
valiant courageous heart nor the man which is of little person, should be of a
vile and false heart. For we see by experience, the greatest men, the most
cowards: and the least of personage, the most stout and hardy of heart.

The holy Scipture speaks of king David, that he was red in his countenance,
and not big of body, but of a mean stature, yet notwithstanding as he and the
mighty Giant Goliath were in camp, David killed Goliath with a sling, and with
his own sword cut of his head.

We ought not marvel, that a little sheapheard should slay so valiant and
mighty a Giant. For ofttimes of a little spark comes a great light: and
contrariwise by a great torcha man can searcely see to do any thing: This king
David did more, that he being little of body, and tender of years, killed the
Lions, and recoured the lambs out of the wolves throtes: and besides this, in
one day in a battle with his own hands, he slew to the number of 800. men.
Though we cannot find the like in our time, we may well imagine, that of the
800. which he slew, there were at least 300. of them as noble of lineage as he,
as rich in goods, as fair in countenance, and as high of stature: but none of
these had so much force and courage, since he escaped alive, and they remained
in the field dead. Though Julius Caesar was big enough of body, yet
notwithstanding he was The deformity of Julius Caesar.
evil proportioned: For he had his head all bald, his nose very sharp, one
hand more shorter then the other. And albeit he was young, he had his face
riuelled, his color somewhat yellow, and above all he went somewhat crooked,
and his girdle was half undone. For men of good wits do not employ themselves
to the setting out of their bodies. Julius Caesar was so unhandsome in his
body, that after the battle of Pharsalique, a neighbor of Rome said unto the
great Orator Tullius.

Tell me Tullius, why have thou followd the partialities of Pompeius since thou
art so wise, know thou not that Julius Caesar ought to be Lord and Monarch
of all the world? Tullius answered. I tell thee true my friend, that I seeing
Julius Caesar in his youth so evil and unseemly girded, judged never to have
seen that, that is seen of him, and did never greatly regard him. But the old
Sylla knew him better. For he seeing Julius Caesar so uncomely, and so slouenly
apparrelled in his youth, oftentimes said unto the Senate: beware of this young
man so evil marked. For if you do not watch well his proceeding, it is he that
shall hereafter destroy the Roman people, as Suetonius Tranquillus affirms
in the book of Caesar.

Albeit that Julius Caesar was vncomlie in his behauior, yet in naming only
his name he was so feared through the world, as if by chance any king or
Princes did talk of him at their table as after supper, for fear they could
not sleep that night until the next day. As in Gallia Gotica where Julius
Caesar gave battle, by chance a French knight took a Caesarian knight
prisoner, who being led prisoner by the Frenchmen, said Chaos Caesar, which is
to say: Let Caesar alone. Which the Gaulloys hearing the name of Caesar, let
the prisoner escape, and without any other occasion he fell besides his horse.

Now then let Princes and great Lords see, how little it avails the valiant
man to be fair or foul, since that Julius Caesar being deformed, only with
naming his name, caused all men to fear to change their countenance, Hanniball
the aduenterous captain of Carthage is called monstrous not only for his
deeds he did in the world: but also for the evil proportion of his body. For
of his two eyes he lacked the right, and of his two feet he had the left foot
crooked, and above all, he was little of body, and very fierce and cruel of
countenance.

The deeds and conquests which Hanniball did among the people of Rome, Titus
Liuius declares at large: yet I will recite one thing which an The valiant
deeds of Hanniball.
Historiographer declares, and it is this.

Frontine in the book of stoutness of the Penians declares, that in
seventeen years that Hannibal warred with the Romans, he slew so great a
number that if the men had bin converted into Kine, and that the blood which
was shed had been turned into Wine, it had been sufficient to have filled and
satisfied his whole army being four score thousand footmen, and seventeen
thousand horsemen in his camp.

I demand now, how many were at that time fairer and more beautiful of their
bodies and countenance, then he was, whose beauty at this day is forgotten,
whereas his valiantness shall endure for ever.

For there was never any Prince that left of him eternal memory, only for
being beautiful of countenance: but for enterprising great things with the
sword in the hand.

The great Alexander was no fairer nor better shapen then another man. For the
Chronicles declare of him, The description of Alexander.
that he had a little throat, a great head a black face, his eyes somewhat
troubled, the body little, and the members not well proportioned, and with all
his deformity he destroyed Darius, king of the Perses and Medes, and he
subdued all the tyrants: he made him self Lord of all the Castles, and took
many kings, and disherited and slew mighty Lords of great estate, he searched
all their riches, and pilled all their treasors, and above all things all the
earth trembled before him, not having the audacitie to speak one word against
him.

Of a letter the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his Nephew, worthy to be
noted of all young Gentlemen. CHAP. XLII.
SExtus Cheronensis, in his second book of the life of Marcus Aurelius
declared, that this good Marcus Aurelius had a sister called Annia Melena, the
which had a son named Epesipus, who was not only nephew, but also Disciple
to Marcus Aurelius. And after he was created Emperor, he sent his nephew into
Greece to study the Greek tongue, and to banish him from the vices of Rome.

This young Epesipus was of a good and clear judgment, well made of his body,
and fair of countenance: and since in his youth he esteemed his beauty more
then his learning, the Emperor his uncle wrote him a letter The letter of
Marcus Aurelius.
in Greek, which said thus.

Marcus Aurelius the Roman Emperor, first Tribune of the people, and Bishop,
wishes to thee Epesipus his Nephew and Scholar, health and doctrine.

In the third Calends of December came thy cousin Annius Verus, at whose
coming all our parentage rejoiced, and so much the more because that he
brought us news out of Grecia,

For truly when the heart has the absence of that he loves, it is no minute
of an hour without suspicion. After that thy cosen Annius Verus had spoken in
generally to all, bringing news from their friends and children, we talked
together, and he gave me a letter of thine, which is contrary to that which was
written me out of Greece, because thou writest to me, that I should send thee
money to continue thee in study, and they did also write unto me from thence,
that thou art more youthful, and given more to the pleasures of the world,
then becomes thee.

Thou art my blood, thou art my Nephew, thou were my Scholar, and thou shall
be my son if thou art good. But God will never that thou be my Nephew, nor
that I shall call thee my son, during the time that thou shall be young, fond,
light and frail For no good man should have parentage with the vicious.

I cannot deny but that I love thee from the bottom of my stomach, and so
likewikewise thy unthriftiness greeueth me with all my heart. For when I read
the letters of thy follies. I will content my self.

For the sage wise men, though (against their wills) they hear of such things
past, yet it pleases them to redress other things that may come heareafter.

I know well that thou can not call it to mind, though perhaps thou have it,
that when thy unlucky mother and my sister Annia Melena died, she was then young
enough, for she was no more but eighteen years of age, and thou had not
then four hours.

For thou were borne in the morning, and she dyed just at noonetide: so when
the wicked child possessed his life. then the good mother tasted death.

I can tell thee that thou have lost such a mother, and that I have lost such a
sister, that I believe there was no better in Rome.

For she was sage, honest, and fair, the which things are seldom seen now a
days. For so much as thy mother was my sister, and that I had brought her up
and married her, I read then Rethorike at Rhodes, because my poverty was
extreme, that I had no other thing but that which by reading Rethorike I did
get.

When news came unto me of the death of thy mother, and my sister Annia
Milena, al comfort laid on side sorrow oppressed my heart in such wise, that
all members trembled, the bones shiuered, my eyes without rest did lament, the
heavy sighs overcame me, at every minute my heart vanished away, from the
bottom of my heart I inwardly lamented, and bewailed thy virtuous mother and
my dear sister.

Finally sorrow executing his privilege on me, the joyful company grieved
me, and only with the lovely care I quieted my self, I know not nor cannot
express unto thee how, and in what sort I took the death of my sister Annia
Milena thy mother: for in sleeping I dreamed of her, and dreaming I saw her,
when I was awake she represented her self before me, remembering that she
lived, I was sorry to remember her death. Life was so grievous unto me, that I
would have rejoiced to have been put in the grave with her. For truly he
feels assuredly the death of another, which always is sorrowful, and
lamenting his own life.

Remembering therefore the great love which my sister Milena bare unto me in her
life, and thinking wherein I might requite the same after her death: I imagined
that I could not by any means do any thing that was more acceptable for her,
then to bring thee up, thou which art her child, and left an Orphane so young.

For of all trauells to a woman, this is the chiefest: to leave behind her
children to bring up. My sister being dead, the first thing I did was, that I
came to Rome, and then sent thee to Capua to be brought up there, in the which
place, hard at my nose, they gave thee suck two years.

For thou know right well, that the money which by reading Rethorike I gate,
scarcely satisfied for thy daily feeding: but that in the night I read some
extraordinare lecture, and with that I paid for the milk, which thou suckedst
on the dugge, so that thy bringing up depended upon the labor of my life.

After that thou were weined and and brought from the teate, I sent thee to
Bietro, to a friend and kinsman of mine named Lucius Valerius, with whom thou
remainedst until five years were fully accomplished, where I found both him
and thee all things necessary. For he was in great poverty, and a great
blabber of his tongue, in such sort that he troubled What offense comes by much
talk.
all men, and angered me much. For truly a man should as willingly give money to
cause him to be silent, which is talkatiue: as to give a wise man to hear him
to speak.

The five years accomplished, I sent thee to Toringue, a city of Campaignia,
to a Master which taught children there, called Emilius Torquates, of whom, to
the end he should teach thee to read and to write three years: I took a
son of his, whom he gave me to read to him Greek four years, so that
thou could not have any profit in thee, without the increase of great
travel, and augmenting pain to my heart.

And after thou were seven years old, that thou could read and write well,
I sent thee to study, in the famous city of Tareth where I kept thee four
years paying to the masters a great sum of money: Because now a days
through our evil fortunes, there is none that will teach without great
stipend. Without lamenting I do not tell thee, that in the time that Cincinos
(which were after the death of Quintus Cincinatus, until Cyna and Catulus) the
philosopher and masters were by the sacred Senate paid, and none ceased to
study for lack of money.

For in those days they which would apply themselves to virtue and sciences,
were by the common treasure maintained. As our fathers were Learning well
regarin ancient times.
well ordered in their things: so they did not divide offices by order only
but also by order they paid their money in such sort that they paid first
with the common treasure, the priests of the Temples, Secondly, the masters of
schools and studies. Thirdly, the poor widows and Orphans. Fourthly, the
strange knights, which of their own free wills voluntarily were made citizens
of Rome. Fifthly, all the old souldiesr, which had served 35. years continually
in the wars. For those which were retired home to their own houses, were
honorably found of the commonwealth,

The twelve years past I my self was in Tarenthe, and carried thee to Rome,
where I read unto thee Rhetorike, Logike and philosophy, and also the
Mathematical sciences, keeping thee in my house, in my company, at my table,
and in my bed, and further more I had the in my heart, and in my mind. The
which thing thou should esteem more, then if I gave thee my house and al my
goods. For the true benefits is that only which is done without any respect
of profit or interest,

I kept thee with means in this sort in Laurence, in Rhodes, in Naples, and in
Capua, until such time as the gods created me Emperor of Rome. And then I
determined to send thee to Greece, because thou should learn the Greek
tongue, and also to the end thou should accustom thy self to work that
which true philosophy requires. For the true and virtuous philosophers ought
to conform their works to that they say, and publish their words with their
deeds.

There is nothing more infamous then to presume to be sage, and to be desirous
to be counted virtuous: principally for him that speaks much, and works
little. For the man of a pleasant tongue, and evil life, is he which with
impostumes undoes the commonwealth. When I sent thee to An evil man a wicked
member in a commonwealth.
Greece, and withdrew thee from Rome, it was not to exile thee out of my
company, so that thou having tasted of my poverty; should not rejoice at my
prosperity: but it was that considering thy youthful disposition and
lightness, I was afraid to undo thee in the palace, chiefly least thou
would have presumed to have bin too bold and familiar, because thou were my
nephew. For truly Princes which take pleasure that their children be familiar
with them, they give occasion that men shall not count them wise, and cause
also the young men to be esteemed for light, I have told thee that I did for
thee in Italy.

I will now let thee know what thou have done, and do in Greece, so that I
will show thee to be notorious, that is to know that thou taking and esteeming
thy self to be well disposed in thy youth, thou have forsaken thy study, and
despised my counsayles, thou art accompanied with vain and light men, and have
most viciously employed the money which I had sent thee to buy books. All the
which things to thee being hurtful, are to me no less dishonor and shame.

For it is a general rule, when the child is foolish and ill taught, and How
children should be brought
the blame and fault is laid on the masters neck, who has taught him, and
brought him up. It greeueth me not for that he brought thee up, neither for
that I have taught thee to read, and cause thee to study, neither likewise to
have kept thee in my house, to have set thee at my table, nor also to have
suffered thee to lie with me in my bed, neither it greeueth me to have
consumed so much on thee: but with all my heart it greeueth me, that thou have
not given me occasion to do thee good. For there is nothing that greeueth a
noble Prince more, then not to find persons able of capacity, to do them any
good. They tell me that thou art well made of thy body, and fair in
countenance, and that thou presumest also in those things: wherefore to enjoy
the pleasures of thy person, thou have forsaken Philosophy, wherewith I am not
contentented. For in the end the corporal beauty, carely or sat, perishes
in the grave: but virtue and science, makes men to be of immortal memory. The
gods never commanded it, neither the studies and universities of Italy suffered
it, to have the body fine and trim, the visage fair and clear, and the
heart full of Philosophy: for the true Philosopher, of all other things
esteems least the setting forth of the body. For that the demonstrations and
tokens of a true and perfect philosopher is to have his eres troubled, his eye
bries burnt, and the head bald, the ball of his eyes sunk into his head, the
face yellow, the body lean and feeble, the flesh dry, the so^te vnhosed, the
garment poor, the eating little, and the watching great. Finally he ought to
live as a Lacedemonian, and speak as a Grecian. The tokens of a valiant and
renowned captain, are his wounds and hurts, and the sign of a studious
philosopher, is the despising of the world. For the wise man ought to think
himself as much dishonored, if they call him stout, and sturdie: as a captain
when they call him a coward and negligent. I like well that the philosopher
study the ancient antiquities of his forefathers, that wrote the profound
things for the time to come, that he teach profitable and wholesome doctrines
to those which are now alive, that he diligently enquire of the motion of the
stars, that he consider what causes the alteration of the elements. But I
swear unto thee Epesipus, that never sage of Rome came to those things, nor
philosopher of Greece likewise, but in searching the quietness of the soul,
and despising the pleasures of the body: Touching the body I am like to beasts,
but concerning the spirit I am partly like to the gods, since that following the
things of the flesh I am made less then my self, and in following the motions
of the spirit, I am made more then I am. For truly sensuality makes us
inferior to beasts, and reason makes us superior unto men. The worldly
malice and presumption naturally desires, rather to mount then to descend: and
to command, rather then to be commanded. And since it is so, why do we by vices
abase our selves to do less then beasts being possible for us by virtues to do
more then men. Amongst all the members, which men can have, there is nothing
more tender to break, nor any thing more easy to corrupt, then is the
handsomnes of the body, where we are so proud. For in mine opinion, to esteem
himself to be a handsome and proper person, is no other thing, but to esteem
our selves that dreaming we shall be rich and mighty, and afterward awaking we
find our selves to be poor and miserable. And me thinks th^s thing to be
true, because I will declare, what it is to see a young The description of a
young man.
man in his first age. the head little, the hair yeallow, the brow long, the
eyes green, the cheeks whit, the nose sharp the lips colored, the beard
forked, the face lively, the neck small, the body of good proportion, the arm
little, the fingers long, and to conclude, so well proportioned in his members,
that men's eyes should always desire to behold him, and the hearts always
seek to love him.

If this young man so fair and well proportioned, remained long time in his
beauty and disposition, it were good to desire it, to procure it, to keep it,
to pay s^ it, and to love it well: for in the end if we love the beauty in
beasts and buildings, by greater reason we should desire it in our selves. But
what shall we say, that when we do not watch, this little flower which
yesterday flourished on the tree, fair and whole, without suspicion to be lost,
one little hoary frost suddenly wastes and consumes it, the vehement wind
ouerthrows it, the knife of envy cutteth it, the water of adversity undoes
it, and the heat of persecutions pineth it: and finally the worm of short
life gnaweth it, and the putrefaction of death decays and brings it down to
the ground. O man's life that art always cursed, I count fortune cruel, and
thee unhappy, since she will that thou tarriest on her, which dreaming gives
thee pleasures, and waking works the displeasures: which gives into thy
hands travel to taste, and suffers thee not only to listen after quier:
which will thou prove adversity, and agree that thou have prosperity but at
her will: finally she gives there life by ounces, and death without measure.

The wicked and vicious say, that it is a great pleasure to live in ease: but I
protest unto them, that there was never any mortal man had so much pleasure in
vices, but that he remained in great pain after that they were banished from
him.

For the heart, which of long time The of the wicked.
has been rooted in vice, incontinently is subject to some great alteration, I
would all would open their eyes to see how we live deceived: for all the
pleasures which delight the body, make us believe that they come to abide with
us continually, but they vanish away with sorrows immediately. And on the
contrary part the infirmities and sorrows that blind the soul say, that they
come only to lodge as guests, and ramaine with us continually as householders.

I marvel of thee Epesipus, why thou do not consider what shall become of
the beauty of thy body hereafter, since thou leest presently the beauty of those
departed interred in the grave? By the diversity of fruits man does know the
diversity of trees in the Orchyard, that is to say, the Oak by the Acornes,
the Date tree by the Dates, and the Vines by the Grapes: but when the root is
dry, the body cut, the fruit gathered, the leaf fallen and when the tree is
laid on fire and become ashes, I would now know if this ashes could be known
of what tree it was, or how a man might know the difference of the one from the
other? By this comparison I mean to say that for so much as the life of this
death and the death of this life comes to seek us out, we are all as trees
in the Orchard, whereby some are known by the roots of their predecessors,
others by the leaves of their words, others by the branches of their friends,
some in the flowers of their beauty, and other some by the bark of their foul
skin. The one in their mercifulness, the other in their stoutness, other
in their hardiness being aged, others in their hastiness of their youth,
others in their barrenness by their poverty, others by their fruitfulness in
riches. Finally, in one only thing we are all alike, that is to say, that all
universally go to the grave, not one remaining.

I ask now when death has done his office, executing all earthly men The
office of death.
in the later days: what difference is there then between the fair and the
foul, which lie both in the narrow grave? certainly, there is none, and if
there be any difference, it shall be in the making of their graves, which
vain men invented. And I do not repent me for calling them vain, since
there is no vanity nor fondnes comparable to this, for they are, not contented
to be vain in their lives but will also after their drathes enterprise their
vanities in sumptuous and stately sepulchers.

The coal of the Cedar (in mine opinion) that is high and fair, is nothing
more whether when it is burnt, then the coal of the oak which is little and
crooked: I mean oftentimes the Gods do permit, that the bones of a poor
Philosopher are more honored then the bones of Princes.

With death I will threaten thee no longer, for since thou art given to the vices
of this life, thou would not as yet that with a word it should destroy thee:
but I will tell thee on ^ word more, though it grieve thee to hear it: which
is that God created thee to die, women bare thee to dye, and thou came into
the world for to die: and to conclude I say, some are borne to day, on
condition they dye, tomorrow ^^d give their places to others.

When the great and fearful Trees begin to budde by the roots, it
signifies that time draws on for them to cut the dry and withered branches.
mean that to see hildren borne in Ihe House is no other, but to cite the
Grandfathers and Fathers to the grave.

If a man would ask me what death is? I would say a miserable lake wherein all
worldly men are taken: for those that most safely think to pass it over,
remain therein most subtly deceyned. I have always read of the What death
is.
Ancients past, and have seen of the young men present, and I suppose, that
the self same will be to come hereafter: that when life most sweetest seems
to any man, then suddenly, death enters in at their doors.

O immortal Gods, I cannot tell if I may call you cruel, I know not if I may
call you merciful, because you gave us flesh, bones, honor, goods, friends,
and also you give us pleasure; finally ye give to men all that they want, save
only, the cup of life, which to your selves you did reserve. Since I may not
that I would, I will that I may: but if it were referred The miserable estate
of man.
to my will, I would rather one only day of life, then all the riches of Rome:
for what avails it to toil and take pains to increase honor and worldly
good, since life daily diminishes.

Returning therefore to my first purpose, thou must know that thou esteemest
thy self, and glorifiest in thy personage and beauty: I would gladly know of
thee, and of others, which are young and fair, if you do not remember that
once ye must come to be old and rotten: for if you think you shall live but
a little, then reason would you should not esteem your hea^ties much: for by
reason it as a strange thing that lise should abate us, and folly train us.

If you think to become aged, ye ought to remember, and always to think,
that the steel of the knife, which does much service, at length decays, and
is lost for lack of looking to.

Truly the young man is but a new knife, the which in process of time
cankereth in the edge: For on one day he breaks the point of understanding,
another, he loses the edge of cutting, and to morrow the rust of diseases
takes him, and afterward by adversity he is writhen, and by infirmities he
is diseased, by riches he is whetted, by poverty he is dulled again: and
finally, oftentimes it chances that the more sharp he is whetted, so much the
more the life is put in hazard.

It is a true thing, that the feet and hands are necessary to climb to the
vanities of youth: and that afterward stumbling a little, immediately rolling
the head downwards, we descend into the misery of age: For (to our seeming)
yesterday we knew one that was young and beautiful, and within short time
after, we hear that he is dead and rotten.

When I consider many men as well friends as enemies, which were (not long
ago) flourishing in beauty and youth' and presently I see them to be old and
dry, sick and foul, truly I think that as then I dreamed of them, or that
they be not now as they were then.

What thing is more fearful, or more credible, then to see a man become
miserable in short space, that the fashion of his visage should change, the
beauty of the face should be lost, the beard wax white, the head bold, the
cheeks and forehead full of wrinckles, the teeth (as white as Iuorie) become
black, the light feet by the gout to seem crepeled, and and afterward
waxes heavy, the palsy weakenneth the strong arm, the fine smoth throat with
wrinckles is playted, and the body that was straight and upright, waxes weak
and crooked.

Above all that I have spoken, I say to thee Epesipus, which presumest to be
fair, that he which through his propernesse in youth was the mirror of all,
becomes to be such a one, that he doubts whether he be the self same now
in his age (that he was in his youth, Do what thou will, praise and glorify
thy beauty as much as thou think good, yet in the end the beauty of men is
none other: but as a veil to cover their eyes, a pair of fetters for the
feet, manacles for the hands, a lime rod for the wings, a thief of time,
an occasion of danger, a prouoker of trouble, a place of lechery, a sink of
all evil, and finally, it is an inuentor of debates, and a scourge of the
affectioned man.

Since thou have forsaken thy study, I am not bound to send thee any thing,
chiefly wasting thy money in childish and youthful to yes: but not withanding
all those things, I send thee by Aulus Vegenus two thousand crowns for thy
apparel, and truelle thou shall be very unthankful, if thou do not know
the benefit done unto thee: for a man ought to give more thanks for that which
is done of courtesy, then for that which is offered of necessity,

I cannot tell what to let thee understand in these parts, but that thy sister
Anania Salaria is married, who says she is content. I pray God it be so, for
with money men may be helped to marriages, but it lies in the gods to content
the parties. If thou will know of Torings thy cofin, thou shall understand she
is embarked in the fleet which went to Spain, and indeed I never thought
otherwise wise on her, after she had been three days hid in the way of
Salaria: For maids that will betimes gather their grapes, it is a token that
they will go on warfare with Soldiers.

Of Annius Rufus thy friend and companion, I certify thee that he is gone
into the Isle of Helespont, and he goes by the authority of the Senate, to
understand the government thereof: and albeit he be young, yet he is wise,
and therefore I suppose he will render a good account of his commission: for of
these two extremities the aged that do decline, or the young that are wise: I
had rather hold my self to the wisdom of the young, then to the white
beardes of the aged.

My wife Faustine saluteth thee, and be thou assured that in thy affairs (at
the least in my seeming) she is very favorable unto thee, and daily she
instantly requires me not to be angry with thee saying, that Sage men ought
not to esteem the lightness of youth, and that there is no old man that is
sage, but he which in all things was light and youthful. I say no more to thee
in this case, but if thou will be good, I cannot deny that thou art not my
Nephew my old Scholar and servant: for if in thee I see amendment, I will
withdraw mine ire, For truly among the loving hearts there is nothing that
plucketh up the evil will unless it be the good life. At the request of my
wife Faustine I have written thee this word, and I say no more but of her part
and mine thou commend us to all the University. The Gods have thee in their
custody, to whom it may please to give thee amendment of life. Marcus Aurelius
the Roman Emperor, to thee Annius Epesius writes with his own hand.

CHAP. XLIII. How Princes and great Lords in old time were lovers of wise men.
ONe of the chiefest things that wan reputation and eternal memory to the The
counsel of wise men ever respected among the Ancients.
ancient Princes and Governors, was that they sought wise men to be always
conversant about them, whose grave counsel their Realms always observed and
obeyed. It profits a King little to lead with him a great number of Sages to
govern him and his Realm: if his Subjects are armed: with malice not to obey
him. Let Princes know, which esteem not the counsel of Sages, that their
commandment of other shall not be regarded: for the Law which by will is
made, and not of right ordained, deserves not to be obeyed.

We which turn and toss the leaves of the ancient Histories cannot deny,
but that the Romans naturally were proud. Yet we must confess, that as they
have been stout in things touching wars; so they have showed themselves
temperate, in the affairs of the public weal. And truly herein Rome declared
her wisdom, and might, for as by hardy and stout Captains the enemies were
destroyed in war: so by Sage and Wise men the common wealth was governed and
maintained in peace.

Often times with my self I muse, whereupon all these discords grew between
Lords and subjects Princes and vassels, and my count being made, I find that
they have both reason: for the subjects complain of the little love of their
Lord: and the Lords complain of the great disobedience of their subjects: for
to say the truth, disobedience is so much augmented, and the desire of
commandment is become so licentious, that it seems to the Subjects, that the
weight of a feather is lead: and on the contrary, it seems to Princes, that
for the flying of a fly, they should draw their swords.

All this evil and damage comes not, but because that Princes have not with
them wise men which may counsel them: for there was never any good Prince that
credited evil counsel.

There are two things in Princes and Prelates which govern the soul: the one
is the dignity of the office, and the other is the nature of the person. What
is required of every Magistrate.
It may well be that one may be good in his person, and evil in his
government: and the contrary, he may be evil of his person, and good in
government. And therefore Tullius Cicero says, that there never was, nor shall
be, such a Julius Caesar in his person, nor so evil a Governor as he was for
the Commonwealth. It is a great grace in a man to be good; but it is much more
that he be a good Prince. And for the contrary, it is a great evil for a man
to be evil; but it is much worse for him to be an evil Prince. For the evil
man is only evil to himself, but the evil Prince endamageth all others: for
the more the poison is scattered through the body, in so much more danger he
is of his life. I mean, the more power a man has over the Commonwealth: so
much the more evil and damage he does if his life be evil, I marvel why
Princes and great Lords should be so curious to search the best medicines to
cure their bodies: and that they are so slack and slow in seeking sage persons
to govern their Common wealth. For without comparison, it is greater damage
that the Common wealth be evil governed, then if the Prince and Governor
thereof should be sick in his person. Hitherto we have neither read nor seen
that any Prince has perished for lack of physic, but for lack of
Counselors: We have seen and read of infinite Kings and Realms that have
been destroyed, and utterly undone.

The lack of a Physician may cause danger in man's person: but the lack What
hurt comes by evil Counselors
of a wise man may set discord among the people: for where there is any tumult
amongst the people, a ripe counsel of a^ Wise man profits more, then a
hundred purgations of rubarbe.

Isidorus in the fourth book of his Etimologies affirms, that the Romans were
four hundred years without Physicians: For Esculapius the son of Apollo was
the last Physician in Greece. And in the Temple of the same Esculapius, they
set by the Image of Archabuto, a man very notable in Surgery: For the Romans
were so beneficial to virtuous persons, that to every one that exceeded other
in any kind of virtue, they rewarded him with money, they set up a Statue of
him for memory, or else they made him free in the common wealth. And then when
the Surgian Archabuto was become ancient and very rich, and when by occasion
of great and dangerous wounds he did cut off the arms and legs of certain
Romans, thought him a cruel and an unnatural man: Wherefore they drove him
out of his house, and killed him with stones in the field of Mars.

And let no man man marvel thereat, for oftentimes me^ suffer less harm in
enduring the pain, then to tarry for the cruel remedies the Surgians apply
unto it.

Some will say, that when Rome was without Surgeans, the Romans were
discomfited and half lost. To this I will answer, that they never had a more
prosperous time, then in the four hundred years when they were without
Surgeans: for then was Rome undone, when they received Surgeans, for at that
time they drove Philosophers out of Rome. I do not speak this as a prejudice
to any Surgean: for me thinks that Princes cannot be without some among them:
For as the flesh is seeble and delicate, so daily needs it remedies to
comfort it. The sage Surgeons gives us none but good and healthful counsels:
for they do not persuade us to any other thing, but that we be sober and
continent in eating, drinking, sleeping, traveling, and working, and that in
all things we should be temperate.

The end why I speak these things is, to persuade princes, prelates, and great
Lords, that the great diligence they have to seek Surgeans, and the sum of
money they waste to maintain and content them, they should spend part of that
to seek wise men to counsel their persons: for if men knew what it were to
keep a wise What benefit proceeds from good Counselors
man, to command in their house, they would give for one only wise man all
their goods: ye ought for to have pity and compassion upon those princes and
great Lords, which lose so many days in the month, and so many hours in the
day, in speaking of wars, buildings, weapons, meats, beasts, of huntings and
medicines, and oftentimes of other men's doings, and of other vain things, not
necessary for man's life. And this communication they use with those that are
neither virtuous nor wise: the which can neither wisely talk, nor yet answer
directly unto that which is asked. Oftentimes it chances that a prince at
randon moves a matter, which they never saw written before, nor with their
ears they never heard the like, neither in all their life time they had
knowledge thereof, and yet they will seem to give judgment of it (or better to
say) obstinately to contend, as if all the days of their life they had studied
it: which thing proceeds of great shame, and evil bringing up: For the
privy Council may speak before their princes, but be they never so privy,
with license or without license it is not lawful for them to contend. Helius
Spartianus in the life of Alexander Seuerus says, that the Emperor Seuerus
was demanded onceby an Ambassador of Greece, What thing was most painful to
him in Rome? whereunto the Emperor answered, There is nothing grieueth me
more, then when I am merry, that my servants should raise any strife or debate:
I am not displeased that matters should be debated, but this grieueth me, when
one will obstinatly strive, that has no ground of that he speaks, he
cannot otherwise but be called obstinate.

Theodosius the Emperor was once demanded What a Prince ought to do to be
good? whereunto he answered, The virtuous Prince when he goes abroad, ought to
have grave and wise men in his company to discourse withal, when he is at his
meat, to have wise men at his board disputing, and when he withdraws him
self a part to be reading with wise men: and finally at all vacant times he
ought to be found with sage men counselling: for the Knight which enters into
battle without weapons, is as hardy as the prince which will govern the
common wealth without the counsel of wise men.

Lampridius in the book of the Roman gests says, that the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius neither at his meat, at his going to bed, at his vprising, in his
travel openly, nor secretly, suffered at any time that fools should sing or
communicate with him, but only wise and virtuous men, whom always he most
entirely loved.

Of truth he had reason, for there is nothing, be it in jest or in earnest,
but it is better liked of a wise man the^ of a fool, If a Prince be sad,
cannot a wise man peraduentur by the saying of the holy Scripture counsel him
better, then a fool by foolish words? If a Prince be prosperous, shall it not
be better (to keep him in the same property) to associate himself with a
wise man, rather then to put his trust in a fool and malicious person? If a
Prince be destitute of money, cannot perchance a wise man find him better
means to get it, then a fool which does nothing but ask? If a Prince will
pass the time away, shall not he be more comforted with a wise man that
reckons unto him the sauoury histories done in times past, then harkening a
fool speak foolishly, and declaring things dishonestly, with the sayings of
the malicious of the time present? That that I speak of Surgians, the self
same I speak of fools: For I do not say that they keep them for their
pastime, though truly we might better say to lose their time, then to pass
their time: for that may justly be called time lost, which is spent without
Time best spent in the service of God.
the service of God, and profit of their neighbors.

That which I most marvel at is, not so much for the great authority that
fools have in the Palaces of Princes and great Lords, as for the little
succor and credit which wise men have among them: For it is a great injury
that fools should enter into the palace of princes, even unto their beds
side, and that one wise man may not, nor dare not enter into the hall: So that
to the one there is no door shut, and to the other, there is no gate open.

We which are at this present, of right do commend those that were before us,
for no other cause, but that in times past, though the Sages were few in
number, and the world was replenished with barbarous people: yet the Sages of
those barbarous people were greatly esteemed, and had in reverence.

And this custom endured long time in Greece, that when a Philosopher passed
by a Greek, he rose and spoke unto him: and he might not sit: for the
contrary, all those which shall live hereafter will reprove us, which are at
this present. Forasmuch as we have so great a multitude of Sages, and do not
live amongst barbarous, but amongst Christians: and it is a grief to see, and
shame to write how little wise men are esteemed: for at this day (through our
offenses) not those which have most science: but those which have most riches,
in the common wealth do command: I know not whether the divine wisdom has
deprived them, or that the worldly malice has lost the taste of them. For now
a days there is no sage that lives al alone to be wise, but it is necessary
for him to travel how to gain his living: for necessity enforces him to
violate the rules of true Philosophy.

O world, world, I know not how to escape thy hands, nor how the simple man and
idiot defends himself How little wisdom now a days is regarded.
out of thy snares, when the Sage and wise men (yea with all their wisdom) can
scarsely set their foot sure on the ground. For all that Wise men of this World
know, is little enough to defend them from the malicious.

Reading that which I read of time past, and seeing that which I see of time
present: I am in doubt which was greater, the care that virtuous Princes had in
seeking out Sages to counsel them, or the great covetousness that others have
at this present, to discover mines and treasures.

Speaking therefore in this matter, as I think: I desire that those which have
the charge of gouernment^ (whether he be Prince, Prelate, or private person I
pass not) that they once may have about them sage men, that be wise in deed,
and that they would love them above all the treasure they had heaped. For in
the end, of good counsel there comes profit: and much treasure, is a token
of great danger.

In the old time when virtuous Princes dyed, and that they left their children
for Successors in their Realms, and besides that, forasmuch as they saw their
children young, and evil instructed in the affairs of their Realms, they
committed them to Tutours, that should teach them good works and doctrine,
rather then they would give them Suruayors, which should increase and augment
their Cofers and Rents: For truly if the Commonwealth be defended with great
treasures, it is not governed with good counsels.

The princes which are young, accustomely are given to vices: for in the one
part youth reigns, and on the other part honesty wants.

And to such, truly vices are very dangerous, specially if they want Sages to
counsel them, to keep them Youth subject to many vices.
from evil company. For the courageous youth will not be brideled, nor their
great liberty can be chastised.

Princes without doubt have more need of wise and stayed men about them, to
profit them in their counselles, then any of all their other Subjects: for
since they are in the view of all, they have less license to commit vice then
any of all: For if you behold all, and that they have authority to judge all,
will they, nill they, they are beholden and judged of all.

Princes ought to be circumspect whom they trust with the government of their
Realms, and to whom they commit the leading of their Armies, whom they send as
Ambassadors into strange Countries, and whom they trust to receive and keep
their treasures: but much more they ought to be circumspect in examining of
those whom they choose to be their Counselors: For look what is he that
counsels the prince How circumspect Princes ought to be
at home in his palace: so likewise shall his renown be in strange countries,
and in his own Commonwealth.

Why should they not then willingly examine and correct their own proper
palace? Let Princes know, if they do not know, that of the honesty of their
servants, of the providence of their Counsels, of the sagenesse of their
persons, and of the order of their house, depends the welfare of the
Commonwealth: for it is impossible that the branches of that tree, whose
roots are dried up, should be seen to bear green leaves.

CHAP. XLIIII. How the Emperor Theodosius provided ^ise men at the hour of
his death, for the edification of his two sons, Archadius and Honorius.
I Gnatius the Historian in the book that he made of the two Theodosij, of the
2. Archadij, and of the 4. Honorii, declares (...) Theodosius.
that the first and great Theodosius being ^0. years old, and having governed
the empire 11. years lying on his death bed, called Archadius and Honorius his
two sons, and committed them to Estilconius, and Ruff^nus to be instructed, and
ordained them likewise for governors of their estates and signiories. Before
that the father dyed, he had now created his children Caesar's, being then of
the age of 17. years. Therefore the Father seeing them not as yet ripe, nor
able to govern their Realms and Signiories: he committed them unto masters and
tutors. It is not always a general rule, though one be of 25. years of age,
that he has more discretion to govern realms then another of fifteen: for
daily we see, that we allow and commend the ten years of one, and reprove
the forty years of an other.

There are many Princes tender of years, but ripe in counsels: and for the
contrary there are other Princes old in years, and young in counsels. When
the good Emperor Vespatian dyed, they determined to put his son Titus in the
government of the Empire, or some other aged Senator, because they said
Titus was too young,

And as they were in controversy of the matter, the Senator Rogerus Patroclus
said unto the Senate: For my part I require rather a Prince which is young and
sage: then I do a Prince which is old and foolish.

Therefore now as touching the children of Theodosius, one day Estiltorius the
tutor of Archadius speaking to a Greek Philosopher, very sage, whose name was
Epimundus, said thus unto him.

Thou and I long time have been acquainted together in the Palace of the
Emperor Theodose my Lord, who is dead, and we are alive: thou know it had
been better that we two had dyed, and that he had lived: for there be many to
be servants of Princes, but there are few to be good Princes I feel no
greater grief in this world, then to know many Princes in one Realm. For the
man which has seen many Princes in his life, has seen many novelties and
alterations in the common wealth. Thou know well that when Theodosius my
master dyed, he spoke to me these words, the which were not spoken without
great sighs and multiplying of tears. O Estilconus, I dye, and am going into
an other world, wherein I shall give a straight account of the Realms and
Seignories which I had under my charge: and therefore The duty of every good
Christian.
when I think of mine offenses I am maruellously afraid: But when I remember
the mercy of God, then I receive some comfort and hope.

As it is but meet we should trust in the greatness of his mercy: so likewise
is it reason we should fear the rigor of his justice. For truly, in the
christian law they are not suffered to live (as we which are Princes that live
in delights of this world, and without repentance to go to Paradise: Then when
I think of the great benefits which I have received of God, and of the great
offenses which I have committed, and when I think of the long time I have
lived, and of the little which I have profited, and also that unprofitably I
have spent my time: On the one part I am loath to dye, for that I am afraid to
come before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ: and on the other part I would
live no longer, because I do not profit.

The man of an evil life, why does he desire to live any longer? My life is
now finished, and the time is short to make amends. And since God demands
naught else but a contrite heart, with all my heart I do repent, and appeal
to his justice, of mercy, from his justice to his mercy, because it may please
him to receive me into his house, and to give me perpetual glory, to the
confusion of all my finnes and offenses. And I protest I dye in the holy
catholic faith, and commend my soul to God and my body to the earth: and to
you, Estilconus and Ruffinus my faithful servants, I recommend my dear
beloved children: for hereby the lone of the children is seen, in that the
Father forgets them not at the hour of his death.

In this case of one only thing I do warn you, one only thing^^ require The
love of a master to his servants
you, one thing I desire you, and one only thing I command you, and that is,
that you occupy not your minds in augmenting the realms and seignories of my
children: but only that you have due respect to give the^ good education and
virtuous servants: for it was only the wise men which I had about me, that
thus long have maintained me in this great authority. It is a goodly thing for
a Prince to have stout captains for the wars: but without comparison it is
better to keep and have wise men in his palace: for in the end, the victory of
the battle confisteth in the force of many: but the government of the
commonwelth oftentimes is put under the advice of one alone.

These so doleful and pitiful words my Lord and Master Theodosius spoke unto
me. Now tell me, Epimundus, what I shall do at this present to fulfill his
commendement? For at his heart he had nothing that troubled him so much as to
think whether his children would undo, or increase the Common wealth. Thou
Epimundus, thou art a Grecian, thou art a Philosopher, thou have understanding,
thou art an old servant, thou art my faithful friend: therefore for all these
things thou art bound to give me good and healthful counsel: For many times
I have heard Theodosius my master say, That he is not accounted sage which has
turned the leaves of many books: but he which knows, and can give good and
healthful counsel: Epimundus the philosopher answered to these words; Thou
know well, Lord Estilconus, that the ancients and great Philosophers ought
to be brief in words, and very perfect in their works: for otherwise to speak
much, and work little, seems rather to be done like a tyrant, then like a
Greek Philosopher. The Emperor Theodosius was thy Lord, and my friend. I say
friend, because it is the liberty of a Greek Philosopher, to acknowledge no
homage nor service to a superior: for he in his heart can have no true
license: that to rebuke the vicious keeps his mouth shut. In one thing I
content my self in Theodosius above all other Princes, which were in the
Roman Empire, and that is, that he knew and talked wisely of al his affairs,
and also was dilligent to execute the same: for all The fault of many Princes.
the fault of princes is, that they are apt and bold to talk of virtues, and in
executing them, they are very slack and fearful. For such Princes cannot
continue in the virtue, which they do commend: not yet resist the vice which
they do disprayse.

I grant that Theodosius was an executor of justice, merciful, stout, sober
valiant, true, loving, thankful, and virtuous: and finally, in all things,
and at all times he was fortunate: for Fortune oftentimes brings that to
princes, which they will and desire: yea many times better then they look for.
Presupose it be true (as it is most true) that the time was always prosperous
to the Emperor Theodosius: yet I doubt whether this prosperity will continue
in the succession of his children For worldly prosperity is so mutable, that
with one only man in a moment, she makes a thousand shrewde turns: and so
much the The inconstancy of the world.
more it is hard to continue steadfast in the second hour.

Of slow and dull horses, come oftentimes courageous and fierce colts: and even
so of vertuousfathers come children evil brought up: For the wicked children
inherit the worst of the Father, which is riches, and are dishenherited of the
best, which are virtues. That which I perceyne in this matter, as well of the
father which is dead, as of the children which are alive, is that Theodose was
virtuous in deed, and the children are capable to follow both good and evil,
and therefore it is requisite that you now go about it: for the Prince which is
young is in great peril, when in his youth he begins not to follow the steps
of virtue.

To speak particularly of Archadius and Honorious, I let thee know Estilconus,
that it is a thing superfluous to talk of it; for I should lose my time,
because the things of princes are very delicate, and though we have license to
praise their virtues, yet we are bound to dissemble their faults.

As a sage father, Theodose, I desire thee to give his children good doctrine,
and always to accompany the^: But I as a friend do counsel thee that thou
keep them from evil: for in the end all is evil to accompany with the evil,
and forsake the good: but the worst evil pursues us, rather by the presence
of the evil, then by the absence of the good. It may well be that one being
alone, and without the company of the good, may yet notwithstanding be good:
but for one that is accompanied with evil men, to be good of this I greatly
doubt: for the same day that a man accompanies himself with the vicious, the
self same day he is bound to be subject to vice. O Estilconus, since thou so
much desire to accomplish the comma^deme^t of thy Lord and master Theodose,
if thou can not cause that Archadius and Honorius (which are young princes) do
accompany with the good: yet at the least withdraw them from the company of the
evil: for in the courts of princes vicious men are none other but solicitors
in this world to tempt others to be vicious: how many and what solicitors have
we seen, thou and I in Rome, the which forgetting the affairs of their Lords,
did solicit for themselves vices and pleasures. I will not tell what servants
of princes have The younger sort must accompany with the virtuous.
bin in times past, but what they were, and what they are, every man may easily
see. I will tell thee only, not of those which ought to be cou^sellors to
princes: but also of those which ought not to live in their courts: For the
counselors and officers of princes ought to be so just: that sheares cannot
find what to cut away intheir lives nor that there needs any needle or thread
to amend their fame. If thou Estilconus have heard what I have said, mark now
what I will say, and keep it in memory, for it may profit thee one day.

In the Courts of Princes proud men ought to have no familiarity nor
entertainment. For it is unseemly that those which are not gentle in Proud
and ambitious men ought not to govern.
words should command: and those that have not their hearts ready to obey,
should be familiar with the Prince.

In the Courts of Princes, there ought not to be of Counsel, and much less
familiar, envious men: for if envy reign amongst Princes and Counselors
there shall always be dissentions in the commonwealth. In the Courts of
Princes hasty men ought not to have familiarity: for oftentimes it chances
that the impatience of Counselors, causes the people to be evil content
with their Princes.

In the Courts of Princes there ought not to be familiar, nor of counsel,
greedy nor covetous men, for the Princes give great occasion to the people to
be hated, because their servants have always their hands open to receive
bribes,

In the Courts of Princes there ought not to be familiar fleshly men: for the
vice of the flesh has in it so little profit, that he that is wholly overcome
therewith, is, or ought to be to the Prince always suspected.

In the Palace of a King, there ought not to be drunkards or gluttons: for
whereas the familiars ought principally to serve their Princes with good
counsel, in mine opinion a man being full and surcharged with excess is more
like to bleach and break wind after his surfeit, then able to give any
profitable counsel in the Common wealth.

In the Palace of Princes, ought not to be resiant nor familiar blasphemers:
for the man which is a servant and openly dare blaspheme his Creator, will not
spare in secret to speak evil of the Lord.

In the palace of Princes ought not to be of counsel nor familiar the
negligent and delicate persons: for there is nothing (next unto the divine
providence) that helps Princes more to be puissant and mighty then when their
servants are faithful and diligent.

In the palace of Princes, defamed men ought not to have familiarity: for the
Prince cannot excuse himself to be thought culpable, when they do rebuke
him, if in his house he maintain servants, which openly are defamed.

In the palace of princes they ought not to suffer Idiots and fools: for the
realms are not lost for that the Princes are young, uncircumspect, and
vicious: but for that their Counselors are simple and malicious.

Woe, woe be to the land, where the Lord is vicious, the subject seditious, the
servant covetous, and the Counselor simple and malicious: for then the common
wealth perishes when ignorance and malice reigns in the prince and governor
of the same,

Those words passed between the noble Knight Estilconus, and the wise
Philosopher Epimundus, upon the bringing up of those two princes Archadius and
Honorius, And because that princes and prelates might see, (which now have the
charge to govern people) how much the Ancients did desire to have sage men
about them notwithstanding that I have spoken, I will show you here some
notable and ancient examples.

CHAP. XLV. How Cresus King of Lydea was a great friend and lover of Sages. Of
a letter the same Cresus wrote to the Philosopher Anacharsis. And of an other
letter of the Philosophers answer to the King.
IN the year of the Creation of the World, 4355. and in the third age,
Sardanapulus being king of the Assyrians, Ozias King of the Hebrews, and
Elchias being high Bishop of the holy temple, at that time when Rea the mother
of Romulus lived, in the second year of the first Olimpiade, the great and
renowned Realm of Lydes had beginning: as Pliny in Plin lib. de not. hist.
the fifth book of the Natural History says. Lidia is in Asia minor, and
first was called Meonia, and afterward was called Lidia, and now is called
Morea. This Realm of Lydes had many worthy Cities, that is to say, Ephese,
Colose, Aclasomena, and Phorea. The first King of Lydes was Ardisius, a man of
great courage, and a Grecian borne, and reigned 36. years. The second, was
Aliaces, who reigned 14, years. The third was Meleus, and he reigned 12.
years. The fourth was Candale, and reigned 4. years. The fifth was Ginginus,
and reigned 5. years. The sixth was Cerdus, and reigned 6. years. The 7. was
Sadiates, and reigned 15. years. The eight was Allates, and he reigned 49.
years, and the ninth was Cresus, and reigned 15. years: and of this King
Cresus, Zenophon declares, that he was more valiant in feats of war, then
comely of personage: for though he was lame of one foot, blemished of one eye,
lacking one ear, and of body not much bigger then a dwarf: yet for all this
he was a just man, very constant, stout, merciful, The description of Cresus.
courageous, and above all he was a great enemy to the ignorant; and a
special friend to the Sage.

Of this king Cresus, Seneca speaks in his book of Clemency: and says,
that the Sages were so entirely beloved of him, that the Greeks (which had the
fountain of eloquence) did not call him a lover, but entitled him the love of
Sages: for never no man did so much to attain to the love of his Lady, as he
did to draw to him, and to his Country sage men.

This king Cresus therefore being Lord of many barbarous nations (the which
loved better to drink the blood of the innocent, then to learn the science of
the wise) like an excellent prince determined for the comfort of his person,
and remedy of his Common wealth, to search out the greatest Sages that were in
Greece. At that time flourished the famous and renowned Philosopher Anacharsis,
who though he was born and brought up amongst the Seythians, yet he was always
resident notwithstanding in Athens: For the University of Athens did not
despise those that were Barbarians, but those that were vicious.

The King Cresus sent an Ambassador in great authority with riches, to the
Philosopher Anacharsis, to persuade and desire him, and with those gifts and
presents to present him, to the end it might please him to come and see his
person, and to set an order in his Common wealth.

Cresus not contented to send him gifts which the Ambassador carried, The
godly mind of Cresus.
but for to let him understand why he did so: wrote him a letter with his own
hand, as hereafter follows.

The letter of King Cresus, to Anacharfis the Philosopher.
CResus King of Lydes, wishes Anacharsis great Philosopher, which remainest in
Athens, health to thy person, and increase of The letter of king Cresus.
virtue. Thou shall know how well I love thee, in that I never saw thee, nor
knew thee, to write unto thee a letter. For the things which with the eyes have
never bin seen: seldomtimes with the heart are truly beloved. Thou do
esteem little (as truth is) these my small gifts, and presents which I send
thee: yet I pray thee greatly esteem the will and heart wherewith. I do visit
thee. For noble hearts receive more thankefully that which a man desires to
give them: then that which they do give them in deed. I desire to correct this
my Realm, and to see amendment in the commonwealth.

I desire good order for my person, and to take order touching the government
of my palace. I desire to communicate with Sages, somethings of my life, and
none of these things can be done without thy presence: for there was never any
good thing made but by the mean of wisdom. The description of Cresus.
I am lame, I am crooked, I am bald, I am a counterfeit, I am black, and also
I am broken, finally, amongst all other men I am a monster. But all these
imperfections are nothing to those that remain, that is to say, I am so
unfortunate, that I have not a Philosopher with me. For in the world there is
no greater shame, then not to have a wise man about him to be conversant with
all.

I count my self to be dead, though to the simple fools I seem to be a live.
And the cause of death is, because I have not with me some wise person. For
truly he is only alive amongst the living: who is accompanied with the Sages.

I desire thee greatly to come, and by the immortal gods I conjure thee that
thou make no excuse: and if thou will not at my desire, do it for that thou
art bound. For many men ofttimes condescend to do that which they would not:
more for virtues sake then to satisfy the demand of any other.

Thou shall take that which my Ambassador shall give, and believe that which he
shall tell in my behalf, and by this my letter I do promise thee, that when
thou shall ariue here, I will make thee treasorer of my coffers, only
counsailour of mine affairs, secretary of my counsel, father of my children,
reformer of my Realm, master of my person, and Governor of my Commonwealth:
finally, Anacharsis shall be Cresus, because Cresus may be The liberal mind of
Cresus.
Anacharsis. I say no more, but the gods have thee in their custody, to whom I
pray that they may hasten thy coming.

The Ambassador departed to go to Athens, bearing with him this letter and
many sewels and bags of gold: and by chance Anacharsis was reading in the
University at the arrival of the Ambassadors of Athens. Who only said and
did his message to Anacharsis, presenting unto him the gifts and the letter. Of
which thing all those of the University marvelled, for the barbarous Princes
were not accustomed to seek Philosophers, to govern their commonwealth: but to
put them to death, and take from them their lives. After the great Philosopher
Anacharsis had heard the Embassage, seen the gifts, and received the lerter,
with out altering his countenance, or elation of his person, impediment in his
tongue, or desire of the riches immediately before the phisophers, said these
words, which hereafter are written.


The letter of the Philosopher Anacharsis to the king Cresus.
ANacharsis the least of the Philosophers, which to thee Cresus, most mighty
and puissant king of Lides, the health which thou wishest The answer of the
Philosopher Anacharsis.
him, and the increase of virtue which thou sendest him. They have told us many
things here in these parts, as well of thy Realm, as of thy person, and there
in those parts they say many things, as well of our University, as of my self.
For the heart takes great pleasure, to know the conditions and lives of all
those in the world.

It is well done to desire and procure to know all the lives of the evil, to
amend our own. It is well done to procure and know the lives of the good for
to follow them: but what shall we do? since now a days the evil do not
desire to know the lives of the evil, but for to cover them and keep them
secret, and do not desire to know the lives of the good for to follow them.

I let thee know, king Cresus, that the Philosophers of Greece felt not so much
pain to be virtuous, as they felt in defending them from the vicious, For if a
man once behold virtue, immediately she suffers to be taken: but the evil for
any good that any man can do unto them, never suffers themselves to be
vanquished. I believe well that tyranny of the Realm is not so great as they
talk of here, neither ought thou likewise to believe that I am so virtuous,
as they report me to be here. For in mine opinion those which declare news of
strange countries, are as the poor which wear their garments al patched and
peeced, whereof the pieces that were sown on a new, are in more quantity of
cloth: then the old which before they had, when they were first made,

Beware (king Cresus) and be not as the barbarous Princes are, which use good
words, to cover the infamy of their cruel deeds.

Marvel not though we Philosophers, readers in schools, desire not to live
with princes and governors of realms: For evil Princes for none other intent
seek the company of wise men, but only because they would through them excuse
their faults. For doing as thou do, of will, and not of right, you will that
the vulgar people think you do it by the counsel of a wise man. I let thee
understand, king Cresus, that the prince which desires to govern his people
well, ought not to be content to have one only Sage in his Palace. For it is
not meet that the government of many do consist in the advice of one alone.

The Ambassador has said by word, and the self same thy letter testifies,
that thou art certified that I am counted for Sage throughout all Greece, and
that this presupposed, I would come to thee to govern thy commonwealth.

And for the contrary, thou doing thus as thou do, condemnest me to be an
Idiot, for thou thinking that I would take thy gold, is nothing else, but for
to rail upon me as a fool.

The chief point wherein true philosophy is known, is when he despises the
things of the world: for there never agrees together the liberty of the
soul, and the care of the goods in this life,

O king Cresus, I let thee understand that he which knows most the Wherein
consists true philosophy.
cause of the Element is not called Sage: but it is he which least knows the
vices of this world. For the true philosopher profits more by not knowing the
evil, then by learning the good.

I let thee understand I am threescore and seven years old, and yet never
before this time there reigned ire in me, but when thy Embassage was presented
to me, and that I saw laid at my feet such treasures and riches. For upon
this deed I gather, that either wisdom lacks in thee, or that great
covetousness abounds in me.

I do send thee thy gold again which thou sendest me, and rhy Ambassador
shall declare (as witness of sight) how greatly it has slandered all Greece.
For it was never seen nor heard of, that in any wise they should suffer gold
to enter into the University How little the philosophers desire riches.
of Athens. For it should not only be a dishonor to the Philosophers of
Greece to have riches, but also it would turn them to great infamy to desire
them.

O King Cresus, if thou know it not, it is but reason thou know it, that in
the Schools of Greece we learn not to command, but to obey: not to speak,
but to be silent: not to resist, but to humble our selves: not to get much, but
to content us with little: not to revenge offenses, but to pardon injuries: not
to take from others, but to give our own: not to be honored, but to travail
to be virtuous: finally, we learn to despise that which other men love: and to
love that which other men despise, which is poverty. Thou thoughtest that I
would accept thy gold, or else that I would not. If thou thoughtest I would
have taken it, then thou had had reason not to have received me afterward
into thy Palace: for it is a great infamy, that the covetous man should be
acceptable to a Prince. If thou thoughtst that I would none of it, thou were not
wise to take the pains to send it: for Princes ought never to take upon them
things, wherein (as they think) that subjects should lose their honesty in
receiving them.

Seeking Cresus and behold that by diligence it little avails to search for
the physician, and afterward to do nothing of that which by him is ordained.

I mean that it shall not profit, but rather it shall be harm, that I come
into thy commonwealth, and that afterward thou will not do that which I shall
ordain therein, for great dangers ensue to alter the humors with siropes:
unless they take afterward a purgation to purge away the same. For to
redress thy barbarous realm, and to satisfy thy good desire, I am determined
to condescend unto thy request, and to accomplish thy commandment, upon
condition, that thou shall ensure me of these things following.

For the laborer ought not to sow his seed before the ground be plowed and
tilled.

The first, thou shall for sake the evil Certain points required to be
performed by the physopher.
custom which ye barbarous kings dovse, that is to say, to heap up treasures,
and not to spend them. For every Prince which is covetous of treasures, is
scarcely of capacity to receive good counsel:

The second, thou shall not only banish out of thy palace: but also out of thy
court al flatterers, for the Prince that is a friend to flatterers of
necessity must be an enemy of the truth.

The 3. thou shall end the wars that thou (at this present) do maintain
against the people of Corinth, for every Prince that loves foreign wars,
must needs hate the peace of his commonwealth.

The fourth, thou shall banish from thy house all Iuglers, comediants and
ministrels. For the Prince which occupies himself to hear vain and trifling
things, in time of necessity shall not apply himself to those which be of
weight and importance.

Fifthly, thou shall provide that all loyterers and vacabonds be expulsed from
thy person, and banished thy palace: for iidlenesse and negligence are cruel
enemies of wisdom.

Sixthly, thou shall banish from thy court and palace, and liers all seditious
men: for when liers are suffered in the Palace of Princes, it is a sign that
the king and the realm falls into utter destruction.

The seventh, thou shall promise that in the days of thy life thou shall not
press me to receive any thing of thee: for the day that thou shall corrupt me
with gifts it is necessary that I corrupt thee with evil counsels. For there
is no counsel that is good, but that which proceeds from the man that is not
covetous.

If on these conditions the king Cresus desires the Philosopher Anacharsis,
the Philosopher Anacharsis desires the king Cresus: and if not, I had rather
be a disciple of sage philosophers, then a king of the barbarous people. Vale
felix Rex. Since this letter does declare it, it is needless for my pen to
write it, that is to say, what was the humanity and goodness of king Cresus,
to write unto a poor Philosopher: and how great the courage of a philosopher
was to despise the gold, and to say (as he did) in this behalf. Therefore let
princes note hear, that such ought the Sages to be they should choose, and let
Sages note here also upon what conditions they ought to enter into the palace
of princes. For this is such a bargain, that it seldom times chances, but
that one of the parties are deceived.


CHAP XLVI. Of the wisdom and sentences of Phalaris the tyrant, and how he
put an Artisan to death for inuenting new torments.
IN the last year of the Latins, and in the first year of the Romans
Ezechias being king of the Jews, and Azaria great Bishop of the holy temple,
Abacucke Prophet in Iewrie, and Merodach being king in Babylon, and when the
Lacedaemonians built Byzance (which now is Constantinople,) Phalaris the famous
Tyrant was then living.

Of this Phalaris, Ovid says, that he was deformed in his face, pore The
description of Phalaris.
blind of his eyes, and exceeding covetous of riches, and never observed any
thing that he promised. He was thankful to his friends, and cruel to his
enemies: finally, he was such a one, that tyrannies which severally were
scattered in others, in him alone were altogether assembled.

Amongst all the iniquities that he invented, and amongst the tyranies that he
committed, he had one virtue very great, which was, that even as he was head of
all tyrannies, so was he chief lover and friends of all philosophers and sage
men.

And in all those six and thirty years which he governed the Realm by
tyranny, they never found that any man touched his beard, nor that any man
sat at his table with him, spoke unto him, or slept in his bed, nor that any
man saw in his countenance any mirth, unless it were some Philosopher or Sage
man, with whom, and to whom he liberally put his body in trust.

The Prince that absenteth himself from Sage men, and accompanies with
fools: I say unto him, though he be a Prince of his commonwealth, he is a
cruel person. For it is a greater pain to live among fools, then to die
amongst Sages. Pulio in his first book, Degestis Romanorum says, that a
worthy and excellent painter presented a table to Octauian the Emperor,
wherein were drawn all the virtuous Princes, and for their Chiefetaine,
Octauian the Emperor was drawn: at the foot of this table were all the
tyrannous princes painted, of the which Phalaris was chief and Captain. This
table viewed by Octauian the Emperor, he commends the work, but he
disallowed the intention thereof, saying, The speech (...).
Me thinks not meet that I being a live, should be set chief and principal
of all the virtuous men that are dead. For during the time of this wicked life,
we real subject to the vices of weak and feeble flesh. Also it seems unto
me an unjust doing, that they should put Phalaris for principal and Captain
of all the tyrants: since he was a scourge and enemy to fools and ignorant
men: and so earnest a lover and friend of Sages, and wise Philosophers The fame
of this cruel Phalaris being known, and his extreme cruelties he used, spread
through all Greece.

A neighbor and Artificer of Athens called Perillus (a man very excellent in
mettels, and a great worker in works of fountains,) came to Phalaris the
tyrant, saying, that he would make such a kind of torment, that his heart
should remain revenged, and the offender well punished. The matter was, that
this workman made a Bull of Brass, wherein there was a gate by the which they
put the offender, and in putting the fire under the Bull, it roared, and cried,
in manner as it had been alive: which thing was not only a horrible and cruel
torment to the miserable creature that endured it, but also it was terrible to
him or those that saw it.

Let us not marvel neither at the one, nor at the orhet: for truly the
pitiful heart (which is not fleshed in in cruelty) has as much pity to see
another man suffer, as of the sorrow and torment which he himself feels.

Phalaris therefore seeing the inuenuention of this torment, (whereof the
inuentor hoped for great reward) provided, that the inuentor of the same should
be put within the Bull, and that the cruelty of the torment should be
experimented in none, save only on the inuentor.

Truly in this case Phalaris showed himself not a cruel tyrant, but rather a
merciful Prince and a Sage Philosopher: for nothing can be more just, then
that the invention of the ma^ce be executed on the frail flesh the inuentor.

Now because Phalaris was a great friend of Sages, the Philosophers of Greece
came oftentimes to see him, which were very gently received of him. Though to
say the truth they profited more with his goods, then he did with their
Philosophy.

This tyrant Phalaris was not only a friend of Sages: but also he was very
well learned, and deeply seen in moral Philosophy: the which thing appears
well in the Epistles which he wrote with his own hand, I can not tell wherein
he showed himself greater, either in the sentences and doctrines which he
wrote with his pen: or in the slaughter and cruelties which he did with his
sword.

O how many companions had Phalaris the tyrant, in this case in times past, and
that (as I would) there were none also at this time present, which in their
pleasant words The frailty of the flesh.
did resemble the Emperor Nero.

I never read other thing of those that are gone, neither have I seen
otherwise of those that are present, but many they are that blase virtues, and
infinite which run after vices. For of truth we are very light of tongue and
too feeble of flesh.

The Epistles which this Phalaris wrote are known to al men, I mean of those
which know Greek, or Laten: and for those that know them not, I was willing to
draw these that are present, and to put them in our vulgar tongue for two
causes.

The one to the end Princes might see how good a thing it is to be Sage, and
how tyrants ^were praised for being Sages, and giving good counsel.

The other, to the end the people might see how easy it is to speak well and
how hard it is to work well. For there is nothing better cheap in the world
then counsel. The sententences therefore of the Epistles of Phalaris are these
which follow, in such sort as I could most briefly gather them, to reduce them
in good and profitable style to write them.

The particular love which princes show to one more then to another, breeds
oftentimes much envy in their realms For the one being loved and the other
hated, of this comes hatred, and of hatred commes evil thoughts, of evil
thoughts proceeds malice, and of malice comes evil words, the which break
out into worse deeds.

Finally, when a Prince shows not to equals his favor indifferently, he
sets fire in his commonwealth. Princes ought to forbid, and sages ought to
consent, that rebels and quarellers should trouble those which are quiet and
peace makers: for when the people rise, immediately covetousness Covetousness
the over throw of Justice.
is awaked. When covetousness grows, justice falls, force and violence
rules, snatching reigns, lechery is at liberty, the evil have power, and
the good are oppressed: finally all do rejoice one to live to the prejudice of
another, and every man to seek his own private commodity. Many vain men do
raise discentions and quarrels amongst the people, thinking that in troubled
water, they should augment their estates, who in short space do not only lose
the hope of that they sought: but also are put out of that they possessed. For
it is not only reasonable, but also most just, that those by experience feel
that, which their blind malice will not suffer them to know.

It is much good for the people that the governors be not unfortunate, but
that of their nature they were happy. For to luckie princes fortune gives many
things even as they demand, yea and gives them better then they lock for.
What princes ought to do.


The noble and valiant Princes, when they see themselves with other princes, or
that they are present in great acts, ought to show the freenes of their hearts,
the greatness of their realm, the pre-eminence of their person, the love of
their commonwealth, and above all the discipline of their court, and the
gravity of their counsel and palace. For the Sage and curious men should not
behold the prince in the apparel, which he wears: but the men which he
has to counsel him.

The Sage men, and those that be not covetous, if they do employ their forces
to heap up treasures, ought to remember in their hearts, how to employ
themselves to spend their money well: Since fortune is Mistress in all things,
and that to her they do impute both good and evil works, he alone may be
called a princely man, who for no contrariety of fortune is overcome: For truly
that man is of a stout courage, whose heart is not vanquished by the force of
Fortune: Though we praise one for valiant with the sword, we will not
therefore praise him for excellent with the pen. Although he be excellent
with his pen, he is not therefore excellent with his tongue: Though he have
a good tongue, he is not therefore well learned: And though he be learned,
he has not therefore a good renowm, And though he has a good renown he is
not therefore of a good life: For we are bound to receive the doctrine, of
many which write: but we are not bound to follow the lives which they do
lead. There is no worse office amongst men, then for to take the charge to
punish the vices of another, and therefore a man ought to fly from it, as for
the pestilence: for in correcting vices, hatred is more sure to the corrector,
then amendment of life is to the offender. He has and possesses much that
has good friends: for many aid their friends when they would have helped them
more if they could. For the true love is not wearyed to love, nor cease not
to profit. Though Sage men have lost much, they ought not therefore to
despair, but that they shall come to it again in time. For in the end time
does not cease to do his accustomed alterations, nor perfect friends cease not
to do that which they ought.

The proud and disdainful man (for the most part) always falls into some
evil chance: therefore it is a commendable medecin some times to be
perseecuted, for adversity makes a wise man live more safely, and to walk in
less danger. For so much as we do excuse him which commits the fault,
there is neither the offender, nor the offense but deserves pain. For such a
one that commits the fault through sudden anger, did evil: and if he did
commit it by deliberation, he did much worse. To desire to do all things by
reason is good, and likewise to lay them all in order is good, but it is very
hard: For temperate men have such respect in compassing their doings, and by
weight to cast all the inconveniences, that scarcely they ever determine to go
about it.

To the man which has government two things are dangerous, that is to say,
too soon, or too late: But of those two, the worst is too soon. For if by
determining late, a man loses that which he might have gotten: by determining
too soon, that is lost, which is now gained, and that which a man might have
gained.

To men which are too hasty, chance daily many evils and dangers, as says
the old proverb, The hasty man never wants woe: For the man being impatient,
and having his understanding Two things requisite in every man.
high, afterward come quarrels and brawlings, displeasures, varieties, and
also vanities, which loses their goods, and puts their persons in danger.
Since all naturally desire to be happy, he alone amongst all others may be
called happy, of whom they may truly say: He gave good doctrine to live and
lest good example to dye.

These and many other sentences of Phalaris the Tyrant, wrote in his Letters,
whereof Cicero profited much in his works, and Seneca also in his Epistles, and
many other writers besides. For this Tyrant was very brief in words, and
compendious in Sentences.

This Phalaris being in his City of Agrigentine, a Philosopher of Greece
wrote him a taunting Letter, charging him with Tyranny: to which he made
answer with this Letter following.

The Letter of Phalaris the Tyrant, to Popharco the Philosopher.
PHalaris Agrigentine, wishes unto The letter of Phalaris.
thee Popharco the Philosopher, health and consolation, through the comfortable
Gods. I received thy Letter here in Agrigentine, and though it sauoured
somewhat Satyrlike, I was not agrieued therewith: For of Phylysophers and
Sages, (as thou art,) we should not be grieved with the sharp words you
tell us, but only to consider the intention whereupon you speak them.
Quarrellers and malicious persons, will have the words by weight and measute,
but the virtuous and patient men do not regard but the intentions. For if we
should go about to examine every word they speak unto us, we should give our
selves to much pain, and we should always set in the Commonwealth debate. I
am a Tyrant, and as yet am in tyranny: but I swear unto the immortal gods,
whether the words were good or bad, I never altered it. For if a good man tell
it me, I take it for my pastime. Thou writest unto me that all Greece is
offended with me there: but I let thee understand, that all Agrigentine is all
edified with thee here. And thereof thou may praise me. For if the Tyrants
were not so much dispraysed, the Philosophers should not be so well loved. Thou
art counted for good, and art good: and I am counted for evil, and am evil:
But in mine opinion thou shuldst not be proud for the one, neither I should
despair for the other. For the day of the life is long, and therein Fortune
does many things: and it may well be, that from a tyrant I shall be a
Philosopher: and thou from a philosopher shall be a tirant. See my Friend, that
the long time makes oftentimes the Earth to be turned to silver: and the
silver and Gold becomes nothing worth. I mean, that there never was a tirant
in any realm, but that first he had been brought up in the study of Greece. I
will not deny, that all the renowned Tyrants have not bin nourished in
Scictle: but also thou shall not deny me, that they were not borne in Greece.
Therefore see and behold to whom the fault is: from the mother which bare
them, or from the Nurse which gave them suck. I do not say that it shall be,
but I say that it may well be, that if I were there in Greece, I should be a
better philosopher then thou: and if thou were here in Agrigentine, thou
would be a worser Tyrant then I. I would thou should think, that thou
might be better in Greece where thou art: and that I might be worse in
Agrigentine, where I am. For that thou do not so much good as thou might
do: and I do not so much evil as I may do. The cunning man Perillus came into
these parts and has made a Bull, wherein he has put a kind of torment, the
most fearfullest in the world: and truly I caused, that that which his malice
had invented, should be of none other then of himself experime^ted. For there
is no iuster Cruelty well rewarded.
law, that when any workma^ has invented Engines, to make other men die, then
to put them to the torments by them invented, to know the experience in
themselves. I beseech thee heartily to come and see me, and be thou assured thou
shall make me good. For it is a good sign for the sick, when he acknowledges
his sickness to the physician. I say no more to thee, but that once again I
return to solicit thee, that thou failest not to come see me, for in the
end, if I do not profit of thee, I am sure thou shall profit by me, and if
thou winnest, I cannot lose.


CHAP. XLVII. How Philip K: of Macedonie, Alexander the great, the K:
Ptolomeus, the K: Antigonus, the K: Archelaus, and Pirrus K: of the Epirotes,
were all great lovers and friends of the Sages,
IF Quintus Curtius deceive me not, the great Alexander, son to k. Philip of
Macedonie, did not deserve to be called great, for that he was accompanied
The praise of Alexander the great.
with thousands of men of War, but only he wanne the renown of Great, for
that he had more Philosophers on his Counsel then all other Princes had.

This great Prince never took upon him Wars, but that first the order of
executing the same should before his presence be examined of the The praise of
Alexander the Great.
Sages, and wise Philosophers. And truly he had reason: for in affairs where
good counsels have proceeded, they may always look for a good end.

These Hystoriographers which wrote of great Alexander (as well the Grecians as
the Latins,) know not whether the fierceness wherewith he struck his
Enemies was greater, or the humanity wherewith he embraced his counsel. Though
the sage philosophers which so accompanied the great Alexander, were many in
number: yet notwithstanding amongst all those, Aristotle, Anaxarcus, and
Onesichrates, were his most familiars. And herein Alexander showed himself
very wise. For wise Princes ought to take the counsel of many, but they ought
to determine and conclude upon the opinion of few.

The great Alexander did not content himself to have Sages with him, neither
to send only to desire those which were not his: but oftentimes himself in
person would go see them, visit them, and counsel with them, Saying: That the
Princes which are the servants of Sages, come to be made Masters and Lords
over all.

In the time of Alexander Magnus, Diogenes the philosopher lived, who neither
for entreaty, nor yet for any promises that were made, would come for to see
Alexander the Great. Wherefore Alexander the Great went for to see him, and
when he had desired him that he would go with him, and accompany him,
Diogenes answered.

O Alexander, since that thou The saying of Diogines.
wilt win honor in keeping of men in thy company: it is not reason then that
I should loose it, to forsake my study. For in following of thee, I shall not
follow my self: and being thine, I shall cease to be mine.

Thou art come to have the name of the Great Alexander, for conquering the
world, and I have attained to come to renown of a good Philosopher, in flying
the world. And if thou do imagine that thou have gotten and won: I think I
have not erred nor lost. And since thou will be no less in authority then a
King, do not think that I will lose the estimation of a Philosopher. For in
the world there is no greater loss unto a man, then when he loses his
proper liberty.

When he had spoken these words, Alexander said unto them that were about him
with a loud voice: By The saying of Alexander.
the immortal Gods I swear, and as god Mars rule my hands in Battle, if I
were not Alexander the Great, I would be Diogenes the Philosopher.

And he said further, In mine opinion there is no other Felicity upon the
earth then to be King Alexander. who commands all, or to be Diogenes to
command Great Alexander: who commands all,

As king Alexander was more familiar with some Philosophers, then with others:
so he esteemed some books more then others. And they say he read oftentimes
in the Iliades of Homer, which is a book where the story of the destruction of
Troy is: and that when he slept, he laid under his head upon a bolster his
sword, and also his book.

When the great King Alexander was borne, his father Philip king of Macedonia
did two notable things. The first was, that he sent many Two notable things of
K. Philip of Macedonie.
and very rich gifts into the I Will of Delphos, where the Oracle of Apollo was,
to the end to present them with him, and to pray him, that it would please him
for to preserve his son.

The other thing that he did was, that immediately he wrote a letter to the
great Philosopher Aristotle, wherein he said these words.

The letter of King Philip to Aristotle the Philosopher,
PHilip King of Macedonia wishes health and peace, to the philosopher Aristotle
which reads in the University of Greece, I let the understand that Olympias
my wife is brought to bed of a goodly man child, whereof both she and I, and
all Macedonia do rejoice: For kings and Realms ought to have great joy, when
that there is borne a son sueccssour of the natural prince of the province. I
render thanks unto the immortal gods, and have sent many great gifts to the
Temples, and it was not so much for that I have a son, as for that they have
giuenhim unto me, in the time of so great and excellent Philosopher. I hope
that thou will bring him up, and teach him in such sort that by heritage he
shall be Lord of my patrimony of Macedonia, and by desert he shall be Lord of
Asia: to that they should call him my son, and thee his father. Vale foelix,
iterumque vale.

Ptolomeus father in law, who was the eight king of the Egyptians, did greatly
love the Sages as well of Caldea, as of Greece, and this thing was esteemed for
a great virtue in king Ptolome: For there was as much envy between the
philosophers of Greece, and the Sages of Egypt: as between the Captains of
Rome, and the Captains of Carthage.

This Ptolome was very wise, and did desire greatly to be accompanied The
praise of Ptolome
with Philosophers: and after this he learned the letters of the Latins,
Caldes, and Hebrews: for the which cause, though the kings named Ptolomei were
eleven in number, and all warrelike men: yet they put this for the Chief, and
Captain of all, not for battles which he wanne, but for the sentences which
he learned.

This king Ptolomeus had for his familiar, a Philosopher called Estilpho
Magarense, who was so entirely beloved of this Prince, that (laying aside
gentleness and benefits which he showed him) he did not only eat with the
king at his table: but oftentimes the king made him drink of his own cup.

And as the savors which Princes show to their servants, are but as a watch to
prove the malicious: it chanced, that when this king gave the philosopher to
drink that which remained in his cup, an Egyptian knight moved with envy,
said unto King Ptolome. I think Lord how thou art never satisfied with
drinking, to leave that which remains in the cup, for the Philosopher to
drink after thee. To whom the king answered. Thou say well, that the
Philosopher Estilpho is never filled with that which I do give him: For that
which remains in my cup, does not profit him so much to drink: as the
Philosophy which remains in him should profit thee, if thou would take it.

The king Antigonus was one of the most renowned servants that king Alexander
the great ever had, who after his death enherired a great part of his Alexander
unhappy in his death.
Empire: for how much happy the king Alexander was in his life, so much he was
unhappy at the time of his death: because he had no children which might
enherite his goods, and that he had such servants as spoiled him of his
renown.

This king Antigonus was an vnthrist, and excessive in all vices: But for all
he loved greatly the philosophers, which thing remained unto him from king
Alexander, whose palace was a school of all the good philosophers of the
world. Of this ensample they may see what great profit ensues, of bringing up
of them that be young, for there is none that ever was so wicked or inclined
unto evil: but that in long continuance may profit somwehat in his youth.

This king Antigonus loved two philosophers greatly, the which flourished in
that time, that is to say, Amenedius, and Abio, of which two Abio was well
learned, and very poor: For in that time no philosopher durst openly read
philosophy, as if he were worth any thing in temporal goods.

As Laertius says, and as Pulio declares it better, in the book of the rulers
and noble men of the Greeks.

The Schools of the Vuiuersitie were so correct, that the philosopher which
knew most, had least goods: so that they did not glorify of any thing eise,
but to have poverty, Pholosophers only rejoice in poverty.
and to know much of philosophy. The case was such, that the philosopher Abio
was sick, and with that sickness he was so vexed, that they might almost see
the bones of his weak body. The king Antigonus sent to visit him by his own
son, by whom he sent him much money to help him withal. For he lived in
extreme poverty, as it behooved the professors of philosophy. Abio was sore
sick being aged, and crooked, and though he had made himself so lean with
sickness: yet notwithstanding he burned always upon the week of good life. I
mean that he had no less courage to despise those gifts: then the king
Antigonus had nobles to send them.

This Philosopher not contented to have despised those gifts in such sort, said
unto the son of Antigonus who brought them: Tell king Antigonus that I give
him great thanks, for the good entertainment he gave me always in my life,
and for the gifts he sends me now at my death.

For one friend can do more to another, then to offer him his person, to
depart with his proper goods. Tell the king thy father, that I marvel what he
should mean, that I now being four score years of age, and have walked all
my life time naked in this world, should now be laden with vestures and money,
since I A custom among the Egyptians.
must pass so great a gulf in the Sea, to go out of this world, The Egyptians
have a custom to lighten the burden of their Camels when they pass the
Desartes of Arabia, which is much better then to ouercharge them. I mean, that
he only passes without travel the dangers of the life, which banisheth from
him that thought of temporal goods of this world.

Thirdly, thou shall say to the King thy Father, that from hence forth when any
man will dye, he do not succor nor help him with Money, Gold, nor Riches,
but with good and ripe counsel. For Gold will make him leave his life with
sorrow, and good Counsel will move him to take his death with patience.

The fifth king of the Macedonians was called Archelaus, who they say to be the
grandfather of king Philip, father of the great Alexander. This king boasts
himself to descend from Menelaus King of the Grecians, and principal Captain
which was at the destruction of Troy. This king Archelaus was a great friend to
the Sages, and amongst others there was a Poet with him called Euripides, who
at that time had no less glory in his kind of Poetry: then Archelaus in his
king dome being king of Macedonia. For now a days, we esteem more the Sages
for the books which they wrote then we do exalt kings for the Realms which
they ruled, or the battles which they overcame.

The familiarity which Euripides had with the king Archelaus was so great,
that in the Realm of Macedonie nothing was done, but first it was examined by
the hands of this Philosopher.

And as the simple and ignorant would not naturally be subject to the The
miserable death of Euripdes.
Sage: it chanced that one night Euripides was talking a long time with the
King, declaring unto him the ancient Histories: and when the poor Poet would
depart to go home to his house, his enemies espied him, and let the hungry
dogs fly upon him: the which did not only tear him in pieces, but also
eat him every morsel. So that the intrayles of the dogs, were the woeful
grave of the most miserable Poet.

The King Archelaus being certified of this woeful case, immediately (as soon
as they told him) was so chafed, that almost he was bereft of his senses. And
hereat marvel not at all: For gentle hearts do alter greatly, when they are
advertised of any sudden mishappe. As the love which the King had to
Euripides in his life was much, so likewise the sorrow which he felt at his
death was very great: for he shed many tears from his eyes, he cut the hairs
off his head, he rounded his beard, he changed his apparel which he ware,
and above all, he made as solemn a funeral to Euripides, as if they had
buried Ulysses. And not contented with all these things he was never merry,
until such time he had done cruel execution of the malefactors: for truly
the injury or death which is done unto him whom we love: is no other but as a
bath and token of our own good wills. After justice was executed of those
homicides, and that some of the bones (all gnawne of the dogs) were buried, a
Grecian Knight said unto King Archelaus, I let the know (excellent king) that
all Macedonta is offended with thee because that for so small a loss thou have
showed so great sorrow.

To whom king Archelaus answered, Among Sages it is a thing sufficiently The
worthy saying of Archelaus.
often tried, that noble hearts ought not to show themselves sad for mishaps
and sudden chances: for the king being sad his Realm cannot, (and though it
might, it ought not) show it self merry. I have heard my father say once, that
Princes should never shed tears, unless it were for one of these causes.

1 The first, the Prince should bewail the loss and danger of his common
wealth: for the good Prince ought to pardon the injuries done to his person,
but to revenge the least act done to the Commonwealth, he ought to hazard
himself.

2 The second, the good Prince ought to lament, if any man have touched his
honor in any wise: for the prince which weepeth not drops of blood for the
things touching his honor, deserves to be buried quick in his grave.

3 The third, the good Prince ought to bewail those which can little, and
suffer much: For the Prince which bewayleth not the calamities of the poor, in
vain, and without profit lives on the earth.

4 The fourth, the good Prince ought to bewail the glory and prosperity
wherein the tyrants are: For that Prince which with tyranny of the evil is not
displeased, with the hearts of the good is unworthy to be beloved.

5 The fifth, the good Prince ought to bewail the death of Wise men: For to a
Prince there can come no greater loss, then when a wise man dies in his
Common wealth.

These were the words, which the King Archelaus answered the Grecian Knight,
who reproved him because he had wept for the death of Euirpides the Philosopher.

The ancient Historiographers can say no more, of the estimation which the
Philosophers and wise men had, A saying worthy observation.
as well the Greeks as the Latins: but I will tell you one thing worthy of
noting. It is well known through all the world, that Scipio the Ethnicke, was
one of the worthiest that ever was in Rome: for by his name, and by his
occasion, Rome got such a memory as shall endure.

And this was not only for that he conquered Affricke, but for the great
worthiness of his person. Men ought not to esteem a little these two gifts
in one man, that is to say to be happy and aduenturous: For many of the
Ancients in times past wanne glory by their swords, and after lost it by their
evil lives. The Roman Historiographers say, that the first that wrote in
Heroical meeter in the Latin tongue, was Ennius the Poet, the works of whom
was so esteemed of Scipio the Ethnic, that when this aduenturous and so luckie
Roman dyed, he commanded in his will and testament, that they should hang the
image of this Ennius the Poet over his grave.

By that the great Scipio did at his death, we may well conjecture how great a
friend he was of Sages in his life: since he had rather for his honor, see the
Statue of Ennius on his grave: then the banner wherewith he won and conquered
Affricke.

In the time of Pirrus (which was King of the Epirotes, and great enemy of the
Romans) flourished a Philosopher named Cinas, borne in Thessaly. who (as they
say, was the Disciple of Demosthenes. The Historiographers at that time did so
much esteem this Cinas, that they said he was the Master and measure of man's
eloquence: for he was very pleasant in words and profound sentences. This Cinas
served for three offices in the Palace of king Pirrus.

1 First he made pastime at his Table in that he did declare: for he had a
good Sentences of Cinna.
grace in things of laughter.

2 Secondarily, he wrote the valiant deeds of his history: for in his style
he had great cloquence, and to write the truth he was a witness of sight.

3 Totrdly, he went for Ambassadouring at affairs of great importance: for he
was naturally subtle and witty, and in dispatching business he was very
fortunate. He used so many means in his business, and had so great persuasion
in his words, that he never took upon him to speak of things of war: but
either he set a long truce, or else he made a perpetual peace. The King
Pirrus said to this Cinas. O Cinas for 3. things I thank to the immortal
Gods.

1 The first, for that they created me a King, and not a servant: for the
greatest good that mortal men have, is to have liberty to command many, and
not be bound to obey any,

2 The second, I thank the immortal gods for that they naturally made me
stout of heart: for the man which with every trifle is abashed, it were better
for him to leave his life.

3 The third, I give the immortal gods thanks for that in the government of
my commonwealth, and for the great affairs and business of my realm (as well
in wars as in other things) they gave me such a man (as thou art) in my
company: For by thy gentle speech, I have conquered and abtained many Cities,
which by my cruel sword I could never win nor attain. These were the words
which Pyrrus said unto his friend Cinas the Poet. Let every Prince know now,
how great lovers of wise men those were in times past: and as upon a sudden I
have recited these few examples, so with small study I have heaped infinite
Histories.


The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE DYALL OF PRINCES. WHEREIN THE AVTHOR TREATS HOW
NOBLE Princes and great Lords should behave themselves toward their Wives:
And how they ought to nourish and bring up their Children.
CHAP. I, Of what excellency Marriage is, and whereas common people marry of
free will, Princes and Noblemen ought to marry of necessity.
AMong all the friendships and companies of this life, there is none so natural
as that between the No love comparable to that of man and wife.
husband and the wife living in one house: For all other companyes are caused
by free will only, but this proceeds both by will and necessity. There is at
this day no Lion so fierce, no Serpent so venomous, no Viper so infectiue, no
Aspicke so mortal, neither any beast so terrible, but at the least both male
and female do once in the year meet and conioyne: and although that in brute
beasts there lacks reason, yet notwithstanding they have a natural
instinction to assemble themselves for the conservation of their kind.

In this case men deserve no less reproach then Beasts merit praise: For after
that the Females by generation are big, they never agree that the Males
should accompany with them. According to the diversity of Nations, so among
themselves they differ the one from the other, in Laws, Languages, Ceremonies,
and customs: but in the end all agree in one thing, for that they enforce
themselves to celebrate marriage. As the Scripture teaches us, Since the world
was created, there has nothing been more ancient, then the Sacrament of
Marriage: For that day that Man was formed, the self same day he celebrated
marriage with a Woman, in the terrestrial Paradise.

The ancient Hystoriographers (as well Greeks as Latins) wrote many great
things in the praise of Marriage: but they could not say nor write so much, as
continual experience does show us. Therefore leaving the superfluous, Five
things follow marriage.
and taking the most necessary, we say that five commodities follow the Sage
man, who has taken the yoke of Matrimony.

The first is, the memory which remains to the children, as successors and
heirs of their Fathers. For as the Philosopher Pythagoras says: When a
father passes out of this present life, and leaves behind him a Child being
his Heir, they cannot say unto him that he dies, but that he waxes young in
his Child, since the child does inherit the Flesh, the Goods, and the memory
of the Father.

Among the ancients it was a common proverb, that the taste of all tastes is
Bread, the savor of all savors is Salt, and the greatest love of all Loves is
from the Fathers to their children. And though perchance we see the Father
show some rigor to their children, we ought not therefore to say that they hate
them, and despise them: for the tender love of the Father to the Son is such,
that he cannot endure him to do any thing amiss, or worthy of rebuke. Not
only The love of the Father to the child.
men of reason and brute beasts, but also the Hedge and Garden-trees, to their
possibility, procure to continue their kind: and it is plainly seen, in that
before the fruits and herbs were formed to be eaten, the seeds and kirnels
were made to be kept. Men naturally desire honor in their life, and memory
after their death. Therefore (I say) that they come to honor by High, and
Noble, and Heroycall facts, but the Memory is left by the good and Legittimate
children: For the children which are borne in adultrie, are begotten in sin,
and with great care are nourished.

The second benefit of Marriage is, that they avoid adultery, and it is no
small matter to avoid this vice. For the Adulterers are not only taken in the
Christian religion for offenders: but even amongst the Gentiles also, they are
counted infamous.

The sage Solon in the laws that he gave unto the Athenians, commanded upon
straight precepts that they The saying of Solon.
should Marry, to avoid adultery, upon pain that the child borne in
adultrie, should be made the common slave of the City. The Romans (as men
foreseeing all things,) ordained in the tables of their Laws, that the
children which were born in adultery should not be heirs of the Goods of their
Fathers. When the Orator Eschynes was banished out of Athens, as he came by
the Rhodes, he took no such pains in any one thing as he did in persuading the
Rhodians to marry, and not to live in adultery: For among those barbarous,
Matrimony was not common, but only among them which were Officers of the
Commonwealth.

Cicero in a familiar Epistle, says: that the great Roman Marcus Porcio,
being governor in the Commonwealth, never agreed that an Uncle of his should
be master of the Romain chiualry, unless he were married: which office was
promised him by the Senate. His name was Rufus, a stout and valiant man of
war: this notwithstanding Marcus Porcio said, that that praise which Rufus
deserved for being valiant, and hardy: he lost again for living in adultery.
And that he would never grant his voice, nor be in place where they committed
any charge in the wars to a man that had not a lawful wife.

I say therefore, that if the Gentiles and Infidels esteemed Marriage so much,
and despised the deeds of the adulterers so greatly: much more true Christians
should be in this case wary and circumspect. For the gentiles feared nothing
but only infamy: but all true Christians ought to fear both infamy, and also
pain. Since that of necessity man's seed must increase, and that we see men
suffer themselves to be overcome with the flesh: it were much better that they
should maintain a good Household, and live uprightly with a wife, then to waste
their goods, and burden their conscience with a Concubine. For it is oftentimes
seen, that that which a Gentleman consumes abroad upon an Harlot with shame,
would keep his Wife and Children at home with honesty.

The third commodity of Marryage A third commodity of Marriage.
is, the laudable and loving company, the which is, or ought to be between
them that are Matryed: The ancient Philophers defining what Man was, said;
That he was a creature, the which by nature was sociable communicable, and
reasonable: whereof it follows, that the man being solitary and close in his
conditions, cannot be in his stomach but envious. We that are men love the
good inclination, and do also commend the same in beasts: for all that the
sedicious man and the resty horse eat, we think it evil spent. A sad man, a
sole man, a man shut in, and solitary, what profit can he do to the people?
For if every man should be locked up in his house, the Commonwealth should
forthwith perish.

My intention is to speak against the Vacabonds, which without taking upon
them any craft or faculty, pass the age of forty, of fifty years, and
would not, nor will not marry yet, because they would be vicious all the days
of their life. It is a great shame and conscience to many men, that never
determine with themselves to take upon them any estate, neither to be Married,
chaste, secular, or Ecclesiastical: but as the cork upon the water they
swim, whether their Sensuality leads them.

One of the most laudable and holy companyes which is in this life, is the
company of the Man and the Woman, in especially if the woman be virtuous:
For the noble and virtuous wife withdraws all the sorrows from the heart of
her Husband, and accomplisheth his desires, whereby he lives at rest. When the
wife is virtuous, and the husband wise, we ought to believe that between them
two is the true love: For the one not being suspect with the other, and having
children in the midst, it is impossible but that they should live in concord.
For all that I have read and seen, I would say, that if the man and the wife
do live quietly together, a man may not only call them good married folks, (but
also holy persons) for to speak the truth the yoke of matrimony is so great,
that it cannot be accomplished without much merit. The contrary ought and may
be said of those which are evil married: whom we will not What inconenience so
loves them that are not married in the fear of the Lord.
call a company of Saints, but rather a company of devils. For the wise
that has an evil husband, may say, she has a devil in her house: and the
Husband that has an evil Wife, let him make account that he has a Hell it
self in his house. For the evil wives are worse then infernal Furies.
Because in hell there are none tormented but the evil only: but the evil
woman tormenteth both the good and the evil.

Concluding therefore this matter, (I say also and affirm) that betwixt the
Husband and the wife which are well married, is the true and very love: and they
only and no others, may be called perfect and perpetual friends. The other
Parents and Friends, if they do love and praise us in our presence, they hate
and despise us in our absence. If they give us fair words, they bear us evil
hearts: Finally, they love us in our prosperity, and forsake us in our
adversity: but it is not so amongst the Noble and virtuous married persons:
For they love both within and without the house, in prosperity, and in
adversity, in poverty and in riches, in absence, and in presence, seeing
themselves merry, and perceiving themselves sad: and if they do it not,
truly they ought to do it: For when the Husband is troubled in his foot, the
wife ought to be grieved at her heart.

The fourth commodity of Marriage is, that the men and women married, The
fourth commodity belonging to marriage.
have more authority and gravity then the others. The laws which were made
in old time in the favor Marriage, were many and diverse: For Capharoneus, in
the laws that he gave to the Egyptians, commanded and ordained upon grievous
pains, that the man that was not married, should not have any office of
government in the Commonwealth. And he said further, that he that has not
learned to govern his house, can evil govern a commonwealth.

According to the Laws that he gave to the Athenians, he persuaded all those
of the Commonwealth to marry themselves voluntarily: but to the heads and
Captains, which govern the affairs of war, he commanded to marry of
necessity, saying: That to men which are lecherous, God seldom gives
victoryes.

Lycurgus the renowned governor and giver of the laws to the Lacedaemonians,
commanded that all Captains of the armies, and the Priests of the temples
should be married: saying, That the sacrifices of Married men were more
acceptable to the Gods, The worthy sayings of Lycurgus.
then those of any other. As Pliny says, in an Epistle that he sent to
Falconius his friend, rebuking him for that he was not married: where he
declares that the Romans in old time had a law, that the Dictatour, and the
Praetor, the Censour and the Questour, and all the Knights should of necessity
be married: For the man that has not a wife and children Legitimate in his
house, cannot have nor hold great authority in the Commonwealth.

Plutarche, in the book that he made of the praise of Marriage, says: that
the Priests of the Romans did not agree to them that were unmarried, to come
and sit down in the temples: so that the young-Maydens prayed without at the
Church door, and the young men prayed on their knees in the Temple, only the
married men were permitted to sit or stand.

Plynie in an Epistle that he wrote to Fabarus his father in law, says, that
the Emperor Augustus had a custom, that he never suffered any young man in his
presence to sit, nor permitted any man Married, to tell his tale on The
praise of marriage
foot. Plutarch, in the book that he made in the praise of women, says:
that since the Realm of Corinth was peopled more with Batchelours then with
Married men, they ordained, amongst them, that the man or woman that had not
been married, and also that had not kept Children and House, (if they lived
after a certain age) after their deaths should not be buried.

CHAP. II. The Author following his purpose, declares that by means of
Marryage, many mortal enemies have been made good and perfect Friends.
BY sundry examples that we have declared, and by all that which remains to
declare, a man may know well enough, of what excellency Matrimony is: not
only for the charge of Conscience, but also for the things touching honor:
for to say the truth, the men that in the Commonwealth are married, give small
occasion to be slaundered, and have more cause to be honored. We cannot deny,
but that Matrimony is trouble some and chargeable to them that be married for
two causes: The one is, in bringing up their children: and the other, The cares
incident to ma^^age.
in suffering the importunities of their Mothers. Yet in fine, we cannot deny,
but that the good and virtuous wife is she that sets a stay in the house,
and keeps her husband in estimation in the Commonwealth: for in the public
affairs, they give more faith and credit unto those that are charged with
children, then unto others that are laden with years.

The fifth commodity that ensues Matrimony, is the peace and reconciliations
that are made between the enemies by means of Marriage. Men in this age are
so covetous, so importune, and malicious, that there are very few but have
enemies, whereby grows contention and debate: for by our weakness we fall
daily into a thousand occasions of enmities; and scarcely we can find one to
bring us again into friendship. Considering what men desire, what things they
procure, and whereunto they aspire, I marvel not that they have so few
friends: but I much muse that they have no more enemies. For in things of
weight, they mark not who have been their friends, they consider not they are
their neighbors, neither they regard that they are Christians: but their
conscience laid a part, and honesty set a side, every man seeks for himself
and his own affairs, though it be to the prejudice of all his neighbors.
What friendship can there be amongst proud men, since the one will go
before, and the other disdayneth to come behind? What friendship can there
be amongst envious men, since the one purchases, and the other possesses?
What love can there be between two covetous men, since the one dare not spend,
and the other is never satisfied to hourd and heap up? For all that we can
read, see, go, and travel, and for all that we may do, we shall never see nor
hear tell of men that have lacked enemies: for either they be vicious or
virtuous. If they be evil and vicious, they are always hated of No man content
with his own estate.
the good: and if they be good and virtuous, they are continually persecuted of
the evil.

Many of the ancient Philosophers spent a great part of their time, and lost
much of their goods, to search for remedies and means to reconcile them that
were at debate and contention, and to make them by gentleness good friends and
lovers. Some said that it was good and profitable to forget the enmities for a
time: for many things are pardoned in time, which by reason could never take
end. Others said that for to appease the enemies it was good to offer money,
because money does not only break the feminate and tender hearts, but also the
hard and craggy rocks: others said, that the best remedy was, to set good men
to be mediators between them, in especially if they were sage and wise men:
for the honest faces and stout hearts are ashamed when they are proserred money,
and the good do humble themselves by entreaty. These means well considered, and
the remedies well sought out to make friends, there are none so ready and so
true as Marriage: for the marriage done Sacramentally is of such and so great
excellency, that between some it causes perfect friendship, and between
others it appeaseth great injuries.

During the time that Julius Caesar Marriage the cause of love and amity.
kept him elfe as father-in-law to the great Pompeius, and that Pompeius held
himself his son in law, there was never evil will nor quarells between
them: but after that Pompeius was divorced from the house of Caesar, hatred,
envy, and enmities engendered between them, in such sort that they contended in
such, and so cruel wars, that Pompeius against his will lost his head, and
also Julius Caesar shortened his life. When those that dwelled in Rome ravished
and robbed the daughters of the Sabines, i^ after they had not changed their
counsel, and of thieves to become husbands, without doubt the Romans bad been
all destroyed: for the Sabines had made an oath to adventure both their goods
and their lives, for to revenge the injuries done unto them, their daughters
and wives: but by the means of Marriage they were conferred in great amity
and love. For the Romans received in marriage the daughters of the Sabines
whom before they had ravished. Greater enmity there cannot be, then that of
God toward men, through the sin of Adam: notwithstanding there never was, nor
never shall be greater friendship then that, which was made by the godly
marriage: and for greater authority to Marriage a means of Peace between God
and man.
confirm marriage, the Son of God would that his Mother should be married;
and afterward he himself was present at a Marriage, where he turned the Water
into Wine, though now adays the evil married men do turn the wine into
water. He does not speak here of Religious persons, nor men of the Church,
neither of those which are closed in devout places: for those (fleeing the
occasions of the world, and choosing the ways less dangerous) have offered
their souls to GOD, and with their bodies have done him acceptable Sacrifices:
for there is difference between the Religion of Christ, and the sinful
Sinagogue of the Jews; for they offered Kidds and Muttons, but here are not
offered but tears and sighs. Leaving therefore all those secrets apart which
men ought to leave to God: I say and affirm, that it is a holy and commendable
counsel to use his profit with the Sacrament of Marriage, the which, though
it be taken of all voluntarily, yet Princes and great Lords ought to take it
necessarily: For that Prince that has no wife nor children shall have in his
Realm much grudging and displeasure. Plutarch in the Book he made of
Marriage says, that amongst the Lidians there was a law well observed and
kept, that of necessity their Kings and Governors should be married; and they
had such respect to this thing, and were so circumspect in this matter, that if
a Prince dyed, and left his Heir an infant, they would not suffer him to
govern the Realm until he were married. And they greatly lamented the day of
the departing of their Queen out of this life; for with her death the
government ceased, the Royal authority remained void, and the Commonwealth
without government, so long time as the King deferred to take another wife: and
so they What is required of every virtuous Prince.
were sometimes without King or government. For Princes are, or ought to be,
the mirror and example of all, to live honest and temperate, the which cannot
well be done unless they be married, or that they see themselves to be
conquerors of the flesh, and being so, they are satisfied: but if they be not
married, and the flesh does assault them, then they live immediately conquered.
Wherefore of necessity they must go by their Neighbors houses, or else by
some other dishonest places, scattered abroad, to the reproach and dishonor of
them and their kindred: and oftentimes to the great peril and danger of their
Persons.

CHAP. III. Of sundry and diverse Laws which the Ancients had in Contracting
Matrimony, not only in the choice of Women, but also in the manner of
celebrating Marriage.
IN all Nations, and in all the Realms of the World, Marriage has always
been accepted, and marueilously commended: for otherwise the world had not
been peopled, nor yet the number of men multiplied.

The ancients never disagreed one from another in the approbation and acception
of Marriage: but there was amongst them great difference and strife, upon the
contracts, ceremonies, and vsages of the same. For they used as much difference
in contracting Matrimony, and choosing their wives: as these Epicures do desire
the variety of sundry delicate meats. The divine Plato, in his Book he made
of the Commonwealth, did counsel, that all things should be common, and that
not only in bruit beasts, in moueables, and heritages; but also that women
should be common: for he said, that if these two words, thine, and mine, were
abolished and out of use, there should not be debates nor quarrels in this
world. They call Plato, Divine for many good things which he spoke: but now they
may call him Worldly, for the counsel profane which he gave. I cannot tell what
beastliness it may be called, nor what greater rudenes may be thought that the
apparel should be proper, and the wives common. The brute beast does not
know that which came out of her belly, longer then it sucketh of her breasts.
And in this sort it would chance to men, yea, and worse too, if women were
common in the Commonwealth: for though one should know the Mother, which has
borne him, he should not know the Father, which has begotten him. The
Tharentines (which were well renowned amongst the ancients, and A law among the
Tharentines.
not a little feared of the Romans) had in their City of Tharente a law and
custom to marry themselves with a legitimate wife, and to beget children: but
besides her a man might yet choose two others for his secret pleasures.
Spartianus said, that the Emperor Hellus Verus, as touching women, was very
dissolute: and since his wife was young and fair, and that she did complain
of him, because he led no honest life with her, he spoke these words unto her:
My wife, thou have no cause to complain of me, since I remain with thee
until such time as thou art quick with child: for the residue of the time,
we husbands have license and privilege to seek our pastimes with other women.
For this name of a wife contains in it honor: but for the residue, it is a
grievous burden and painful office.

The like matter came to Ptolomeus King of Egypt, of whom the Queen his wife
did greatly complain. Admit that all the Greeks have been esteemed to be
very wise, amongst all those, the Athenians were esteemed of most excellent
virtue: for the Sages that governed the Commonwealth, remained in Athens with
the Philosophers which taught the Sciences. The Sages of Athens ordained A law
among the Athenians.
that all the neighbors and inhabitants might keep two lawful wives, and
furthermore, upon pain of grievous punishments, did command, that none should
presume, nor be so hardy to maintain any concubine; for they said, when men
haunt the company of light women, commonly they misuse their lawful Wives. As
Plutarch says in his Politiques, the cause why the Greeks made this law was,
considering that man could not, nor ought not to live without the company of a
woman, and therefore they would that a man should marry with two wines. For if
the one were diseased and lay in, yet the other might serve in bed, wait at
the Table, and do other businesses in the house.

Those of Athens had another great respect and consideration to make this law,
which was this, that if it chanced the one to be barren, the other should bring
forth children in the Commonwealth: and in such case, she that brought forth
Children, should be esteemed for Mistress, and the other that was barren,
should be taken for a servant.

When this law was made, Socrates was married to Xantippa, and to accomplish
the law, he took another called Mirra, which was the daughter of the
Philosopher Aristides: and since those two women had great quarrels and debates
together, and that thereby they slaundered their Neighbors, Socrates said
unto them: My wives, ye see right well that my eyes are hollow, my legs are
withered, my hands A worthy saying of Socrates.
are wrinckled, my head is balde, my body is little, and the hairs are white:
Why do ye then that are so fair, stand in contention and strife for me,
that am so deformed? Though Socrates said these words (as it were in jest)
yet such words were occasion, that the quarrels and strifes between them
ceased.

The Lacedaemonians (than in the time of peace and war, were always contrary
to the Athenians) observed it for an inviolable law, not that one man should
marry with two wives, but that one woman should marry with two husbands: and
the reason was, that when one Husband should go to the war, the other should
tarry at home. For they said, that a man in no wise should agree to leave his
Wife alone in the commonwealth.

Pliny writing an Epistle unto his friend Locratius, and Saint Hierome,
writing to a Friar called Rusticus says: That the Atbenians did use to marry
Brethren with the Sisters: but they did not permit the Auntes to marry with
their Nephews, neither the Uncles with their Nieces. For they said, that
brothers and sisters to marry together, was to marry with their semblables:
but for uncles to marry Nieces, and Aunts with Nephews, was as of fathers to
daughters, and of mothers to sons.

Melciades which was a man of great renown amongst the Grecians, had a son
called Cimonius, who was married to his own sister called Pinicea, and being
demanded of one why he took his sister in marriage: he answered: My sister
is fair, sage, rich, The spech of Cimonius.
and made to my appetite, and her Father and mine did recommend her unto me:
and since by the commandment of the Gods, a man ought to accomplish the
behests and requests of Fathers, I have determined (since Nature has given me
her for my sister) willingly to take her for my lawful Wife.

Dyodorus Siculus says, that before the Egiptians received any Laws, every
man had as many Wives as he would: and this was at the liberty of both
parties, for as much as if she would go, she went liberally, and forsook the
man, and likewise he left her when she displeased him: For they said that it
was impossible for Men and Women to live long together, without much trouble,
contentions, and brawles.

Dyodorus Siculus said one thing, (where he speaks of this matter,) which
as yet I never read in any book, nor heard of the ancients past, which was that
amongst the Egiptians there was no difference in Children: For they accounted
them as legitimate, though they were children of slaves. For they said, that
the principal doer of the generation was the Father and not the mother, and
that therefore the Children which were borne among them, took only the flesh of
the mother, but they did inherit their honor and dignity of the part of the
Father.

Julius Caesar in his Commentaries says, that (in Great Britain, now called
England,) the Brittons had an use, that one Woman was married unto five men,
the which beastliness is not read to have been in any Nation of times past:
For if it be slander for A beastly custom in old time. in England.
one man to have diverse Wives, why should it not also be a slanderous and
shameful thing, for one woman to have many Husbands? The noble and virtuous
Women ought to be married for two causes.

The first is, to the end God should give them children, and benediction, to
whom they may leave their goods, and their memory. The second, to the end they
should live every one in their own house, accompanied and honored with their
husbands. For otherwise (I say for a truth) that the woman that is not
contented and satisfied with her own proper husband, will not be contented nor
satisfied, with all men in the world.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that the Cymbres did use to marry with
their proper and natural daughters: the which custom was taken from them by
the Consul Marius, after that he did overcome them in Germany, and that of
them he had triumphed at Rome. For the Child which was borne of such Marriage,
was Son of the Daughter of one sole Father, and was Son and Brother of one
only Mother, and they were also Cousins, Nephews, and Brothers of one only
Father and mother.

Truly such custom proceeds rather of wild beasts, then of reasonable
creatures: For many, or the more part of brute Beasts, (after the females have
brought forth males) within one year after, they do accompany with their
dammes, which brought them forth.

Strabo in the situation of the world, and Seneca in an Epistle, say: That the
Lydes and the Armenians had a custom, to send their Daughters to the Rivers
and Havens of the Sea, to get their Marriages, selling their bodies to
strangers: so that those which would Marry, were first forced to sell heyr
virginity.

The Romans (which in all their affairs and businesses were more Sage and
modest, then other Nations) used An ancient custom among the Romans.
much circumspection in all their marriages: For they kept it as an ancient
law, and use accustomed, that every Roman should marry with one woman, and
no more: For even as to keep two wives among the Christians, is a great charge
of conscience, so was it deemed amongst the Romans much infamy.

Amongst the ancient and renowned Orators of Rome, one was called Metellus
Numidicus, the which one day making his Oration to the Senate, said these words;

Worthy Senators, I let you understand, that I have greatly fludyed what the
counsels should be, that I ought to give ye touching marriage? For the counsel
rashand sudden, oftentimes is not profitable. I do not persuade you at all to
marry, neither yet do say that ye shall not marry: but it is true, that if
ye can live without a woman, ye shall be free from many troubles. But what
shall we do, O yea Romans? since that Nature has made us such, that to
keep women it is a great trouble: and to live without them, it is more danger?
I dare say (if in this case my opinion might be accepted) that it should not
be evil done to resist the lust since it comes by fits, and not to take
Wives, which are continual troubles. These were the words which Metellus
Numidicus spoke, the which were not very acceptable, nor pleasant to the
Fathers being in the Senate: for they would not that he should have spoken
such words against Marriage. For there is no estate in this life, wherein
Fortune shows her force more, then in this state of Matrimony. A man may
prove them in this sort, that if the fashions and vsages of the ancients were
diverse, as concerning ordinance: truly there was no less contrariety in
their contracts and ceremonies.

Boccace the Florentine, in a Book that he made of the Marriages of the
ancients, recites many and sundry customs, that they used in making the
Marriages, whereof he tells some, not for to follow, or maintain them: but
to reprove and condemn them. For the writers did never write the vices of
some, but only to make the virtues of others more clearly to be known.

The Cymbres had a custom, that when they would Marry, (after the A law among
the Cymbrians.
marriage was agreed upon) he that was made sure should pare his nails, and
send them to his wife that should be: and she in like sort sent hers unto him.
And then when she of him, and he of her, had received the nails the one of
the other, they betook themselves Married for ever: and did afterward live
together, as man and wife.

The Theutonians had a ceremony, that the man that was sure, rounded the hair
of her to whom he was made sure, and she did the like unto him: and when the
one suffered the other to do so, immediately they celebrated Marriage. The
Armenians had a law, that the Bridegroom should pinch the right ear of the
Bride, and the Bride should likewise pinche the The law of the Armenians.
left ear of the Bridegroom: and then they took themselves married for ever.

The Elamites had a custom, that both parties which were made sure, pricked
one the others little finger, until they bledde: the which blood they did
suck naturally, and this done they were married. The Numidians used, that the
Bryde-groome and the Bryde should gather together a piece of Earth, and with
their spittle they tempered it, and therewith the one anointed the forehead of
the other: so that the Marriage between them, was to annoint the one and the
other with a little clay. When those of Dace would be married, the Bridegroom
and the Bryde, each one of themselves, were brought in Charryots, the one
meeting the other: and when they came together, the Bryde-groome gave a new
name to the Bride, and she likewise to him, and from that time forwards they
lived as in lawful Matrimony.

When they of Hungary would marry, the one sent unto the other a familiar A
custom among the Hungarians
god made of silver, whom they called Lares, and when they had received the God
of each other, the marriage was finished, and they lived as man and wife. The
Siconians had a custom and law, that when they should marry, the one sent to
the other a shoe: and that received of both, they agreed to the marriage.

The Tharentines had a custom, that when they did marry, they set themselves
at the table to eat, and the one did feed the other: so that if by mishappe,
the one should chance to feed himself, that marriage was not esteemed for
constant nor good.

The Scythians had a custom, and they kept it as a law, that when men and
women should Marry: as now they touch the hands the one of the other, so did
they touch with their The custom of the Scythians
feet, afterward they set together their knees, then they touched with their
hands, and then they set their buttocks together, and so their heads, and in
the end they embraced the one the other. All these ceremonies done, the
Marriages were assured, and sufficiently confirmed: and so we might say of
many others, but to avoid tediousnes, we will follow our matter:

CHAP. IIII. How Princesses and great Ladies ought to love their Husbands, and
that love ought not by Coniurations and Enchauntments to be procured: but by
wisdom, honesty, and virtue desired.
ALl men that desire to atchieue and obtain any worthy thing in this life,
invent and search many means to come thereunto: for men by good provision and
circumspection compass sundry things, which otherwise they should lose:
unless they would by force take them. As in the marriages of our Christian
Religion, wherein we do not suffer, that the man and the wife be parents, and
nigh of blood: leaving apart that the one is a man, and the other a woman: that
the one is strong, and the other weak: often times it chances, that there is
between the man and the wife more contrariety in conditions, then diversity
in Lineage: I would say therefore (for healthful counsel, and necessary
advise) to the great Dames, and Princesses, and to all other wives, since they
must needs eat and drink with their husbands, that they must sleep, treat,
be conversant, Good counsel for all sorts of women.
and talk, and finally, live and dye with their Husbands, that they use much
diligence to bear with their conditions: For to say the troth, the wife ought
in all things to follow the conditions of her husband: and the husband in some
things to bear with the conditions of his wife. So that she by her patience,
ought to suffer the imperfections of him, and he likewise by his wisdom ought
to dissemble the importunities of her: and in such sort they ought to agree and
love together, that all those of the Commonwealth should rejoice at their
behauiors. For married men, which are quarrellers and seditious persons, the
Neighbors in stead of weeping and wayling, for the deprivation of their life,
demand gifts the one of the other, for bringing news of their death. Admit
that the Husband be covetous, and unthrifty, that he be deformed in his body,
that he be rude in condition, base of lineage, rash in his speech, in
adversities fearful, in prosperities careless, in the end being (as he is)
Husband, we cannot deny, but in the house he ought to be chief master. For
the which it is also necessary, that we give now unto the Wives some
healthful counsel, whereby they may bear and suffer quietly such great
troubles. For at this day there is no Husband so loving, nor so virtuous, in
whom the wife shall not find some evil conditions.

First of all, wives ought to endeavor themselves to love their husbands
vnfamedly, if they desire their husbands should love them without
dissimulation: for as we see by experience, Marriage is seldom broken through
poverty, nor yet continued with riches. For the evil married folks through
debate and strife, be separated in one week, whereas by good and true love they
are preserved all the days of their life.

To eat dry and unsavory meats, they use to take salt for to amend it. I
mean that the burdens of matrimony are many, and troublesome, the which all
with love only may be endured. For as Plato the divine Philosopher says: One
thing ought not to be called more painful then another for the labor we
thereunto employbut for the great or small love that thereunto we have. Though
some sundry things be troublesome and tedious, yet when with love it is
begun, it is easily followed, and joyfully achieved: For that travel is
nothing noisome, where love is the mediator.

I know right well and do confess, that the counsel which I give to women is
sharp, that is: for an honest woman to love a dissolute man, for a sage wife
to love a foolish husband, for a virtuous wife, to love a vicious husband.
Women bound to love their Husbands.
For as daily experience shows, there are some men of so foolish conditions,
and other women of so noble conversation, that by reason apparent they ought to
take them for Mistresses, rather then they should accept them for Husbands.

Although this, in some particular cases is true, I say and affirm, that
generally, all women are bound to love their Husbands, since that willingly,
and not by compulsion they were not enforced to take them: For in like manner,
if the Marryage pleased not the Woman, she has not so much cause to complain
of her Husband, for asking her: as she has reason to complain of her own
self, that accepted him. For the misfortunes that by our own folly do
chance, although we have cause to lament them, we ought also to have reason
to dissemble them. Be the man never so wild and evil brought up, it is
impossible, if the wife love him, but he must needs love her again. And though
perchance he cannot force his evil conditions to love her, yet at the least
he shall have no occasion to hate her. The which ought not to be little
esteemed: For there are many wives not only of the Plebeians, but also of the
noble Dames, that could be content to forgive their Husbands all the pleasures
they should do them, and also all the love that they ought to show: if they
would refrain their Tongues, from speaking injurious words, and keep their
hands from dealing loathsome stripes. We have many notable examples in
hystories, of mane Noble and stout Ladies (as well Greeks as Romans:) which
after The tongue cause of debate.
they were married, had so great faithfulness, and bare such loyalty to their
husbands, that they not only followed them in their trauells, but also
delivered them in their dangers.

Plutarch in the book of the noble women, declares, that the Lacedaemonians,
keeping many Nobles of the Athenians prisoners (which at that time were their
cruel and mortal enemies) and being judged to die, their wives concluded to
go to the prison where they lay, and in the end they obtained The love of
women toward their Husbands.
of the Gayler thereof, that they might go in, and talk with their husbands:
for indeed the tears were many, that were shed, and the gifts were not few
which unto them were offered. The Wives therefore entering into the prison, did
not only change their apparel with their Husbands, but also the liberty of
their persons: for they went out as women, and the women in their steads,
remained there as men. And when they brought out these Innocent wives from
prison, to execute justice, supposing they were men, the Lacedaemonians
understanding the faith fulness of the women, determiued that they should not
only be pardoned, but also that they should be greatly rewarded and honored,
for the good examples of other women to whom they were married. The ancient and
great renowned Panthea, when news was brought her that her husband was dead in
battle, she her own self determined to go seek him out, with hope, that
as yet he was not utterly dead; and finding him dead, with the blood of him she
washed all her body, and likewise her face, strikeing with a knife her self to
the heart, and embracing her husband, she yielded up the ghost, and so together
they were carried to the grave. Porcia, The praise of Women.
the daughter of Marcus Porcia the great, when she heard that her husband
Brutus was taken and slain, she felt for that news so great sorrow, that all
her friends seeing her take the matter so grievously, hid from her all Iron
wherewith she might kill her self: and did labor to keep and preserve her
from danger, wherein she might fall and shorten her life. For she was so
excellent a Roman, and so necessary to the Commonwealth, that if they had
lamented the death of Brutus her husband, with tears of their eyes, they ought
to bewail the loss of his wife Porcia, with drops of blood in their hearts.
Porcia therefore feeling in her self a woeful and afflicted heart, for the
death of her entirely beloved husband, to declare that that which she did was
nor feigned, nor for to please the people, but to satisfy her great and
marvelous love: since she found neither sword nor knife to kill her self,
nor cord to hang her self, neither well to drown her in, she went to the
fire, and with as great pleasure did eat the hot fiery coals, as an other
would have eaten any delicate meats. We may say that such kind of death was
very strange and new, which the Roman found to increase, augment, and manifest
her love: Yet we cannot deny, but that she wanne to the posterity of her
name a perpetual memory: For as a Noble Dame she would quench with coals of
fire her burning heart, that enflamed was with fiery brands of love. As
Diodorus Seculus says, it was a law and custom amongst the Lidians, The Law
amongst the Lidians
to marry themselves with many wives: and when by chance their husbands dyed,
the wives which they had, met together, and fought in some plain place. And
the women which remained only alive, and of the conflict had the victory, cast
themselves into the grave of their husband: so that those women then fought for
to dye, as men now fight for to live.

CHAP. V. Of the revenge a woman of Greece took of him that had killed her
husband, in hope to have her in marriage.
PLutarch in the Book that he made of the Noble and worthy Women, declares a
thing worthy of rchearsall, and to be had in memory.

In the City of Galacia were two renowned Citizens, whose names were Sinatus
and Sinoris, which were by blood Cousins, and in familiarity friends: and for
the love of a Greeks daughter, being very Noble, beautiful, and exceeding
gracious, they both striued to have her in marriage: and for to attain to
their desires, they both served her, they both followed her, they both loved
her, and for her, both of them desired to dye. For the dart of love is as a
stroke with a clod of earth, the which being thrown amongst a company, does
hurt the one, and blind the others. And as the fatal destinies had ordained
it: Sinatus served this Lady called Camma in ^uch sort, that in the end he
obtained her in marriage for his lawful wife: which thing when Sinoris
perceived, he was ashamed of his doings, and was also wounded in his heart. For
he lost not only that, which of so long time he had sought, loved, and served:
but also the hope to attain to that, which chiefly in his life he desired.
Sinatus therefore seeing that his wife Camma was noble, meek, gracious, fair,
and loving, and that in all things she was comely and well taught: decreed to
offer her to the Goddess Diana, to the end that she would preserve her from
peril, and keep her from infamy. Truly we cannot reprove the knight Sinatus
for that he did, nor we ought to note him for rash in his council: for he
saw that his wife was very fair, and therefore much desired. For with great
difficulty that is kept, which of many is desired. Though Camma was The love
of Sinoris and Comma
now married and that she was in the protection of the goddess Diana: yet
notwithstanding her old friend Sinoris died for her sake, and by all means
possible he served her, continually he importuned her, daily he followed her,
and hourly he required her. And all this he did, upon certain hope he had,
that such diligent service should suffice to make her change her sacred mind:
and as she had chosen Sinatus for her husband openly, so he thought she
should take him for her friend secretly. For many women are as men without
taste through sickness, the which eat more of that that is hurtful and
forbidden: then of that which is healthsome, and commanded. Not without a
cause Camma was greatly renowned throughout al Galatia for her beauty: and much
more among the virtuous esteemed for her honesty. The which evidently in this
was seen, that after she was married, Sinoris could never cause her to receive
any Jewel, How good women ought to behave themselves.
or other gift, nor that she would hear him speak any word, nor that she
would show her self in the window, either to him, or to any other, to the end
to be seen in the face. For it is not sufficient for Ladies to be pure good;
but also to give no occasion for men to judge (that if they durst) they would
be evil. As it is true indeed, that the heart which is entangled with love,
dare boldly adventure himself in many kind of dangers to accomplish that
which he desired: so Sinoris seeing that with fair words he could not flatter
her, nor with any gifts win her, determined to kill Sinatus her husband, upon
hope, that when she should be widow, he might easily obtain her in matrimony.
For he thought, although Camma was not evil, it was not for that she wanted
desire to do it, but because she had no commodious place to accomplish it.
And, to be short, Sinoris would needs execute and bring to effect his deuilish
and damnable intent: so that soon after he vilely slew his said companion
Sinatus. After whose death the Noble Lady Camma was of Sinoris greatly desired,
and by his Parents much importuned, that she would condescend to take and marry
him, and that she would forgive him the death of her husband Sinatus, which
then was buried. And as she was in all her doings such a Princely woman, she
imagined with her self, that vnper the pretense of marriage, she might have
opportunity to accomplish her desires: wherefore she answered unto his Parents,
that she did accept their counsel; and said to Sinoris, that she did choose
him for her husband, speaking these words more for to comfort him, then with
intent to pardon him. And as amongst those of Galatia there was a custom, that
the new married folks should eat together in one dishe, and drink in one cup:
the day that the marriage was celebrated, Ca^ma determined to prepare a cup with
poison, and alsso a lute, wherewith she began to play, and sing with her
prober voice before the Goddess Diana in this manner.

TO thee Dian, whose endless reign does stretch,
Above the bonds of all the heavenly rout:
And eke whose aid with royal hand to retch,
Chief of all Gods, is most proclaimed out.
I swear, and with unspotted faith protest,
That though till now I have reserude my breath:
For no intent it was, but thus distressed,
With wailfull end to wreke Sinatus death.
And if in mind I had not thus decreed,
Whereto should I my pensive days have spent
With longer dole: for that forepassed deed,
Whose often record new sorrows still has bent.
But oh sinee him their kindled spite has slain,
With tender love whom I have waide so dear:
Since he by fate is rest from fortunes rain,
For whose decay I dreadlesse perish here.
Since him by whom my only life I led,
Through wretched hands the gaping earth now have:
Ought I by wish to live in any sted,
But closde with him together in the grave.
O bright Dian, since senseless him I see,
And Makeles I, here to remain alone:
Since he is graude where greedy worms now be,
And I survive surmounted with my fone.
Since he is pressed with lumpes of wretched soil,
And I thus chargde with flame of frozen care:
Thou know Dian, how hard with restles toil
Of hot abhoring mind my life I spare.
For how can this unquiet breast reserve,
The fainting breath that strives to draw his last:
Since that even then, my dying heart did starve,
When my dead Phere in swallowing earth was cast.
The first black day my husband sleptin grave,
By cruel sword my life I thought to spend:
And since a thousand times I thought to have,
A stretched cord my sorrows wrath to end.
And if till now to waste my pining days,
I have deferde by slaughter of my hand:
It was but lo, a fitter cause to raise,
Whereon his sharp revenge might justly stand.
Now since I may in full suffising wise,
Redeem his breath (if wayward will would let)
More deep offense by not revenge might rise,
Then Sinoris erst by guiltles blood did get.
Thee therefore mighty Jove Iiustly crave,
And eke thy daughter chaste in thankful sort:
That lo the offering which of my self ye have.
Ye will vouchsafe into your heavenly fort.
Since Sinatus with soon enflamed eyes,
Amongst the Acaian routes, me chiefly viewed,
And eke amidst the prease of Greeks likewise,
Chose for his phere, when sweetly he had sewed.
Since at my will the froth of wasting wealth,
With gladsome mind he trained was to spend,
Since that his youth, which slippeth lo by stealth,
To wait on me he freely did commend.
Since he such heaps of lingering harms did waste,
Aye to content my wanton youthful will,
And that his breath to fade did pass so fast,
To glut their thirst, that thus his blould did spill.
Though great the duty be, which that I owe
Unto his graued ghost and cindred mould:
Yet lo me seems, my duty well I show,
Performing that, my feeble power could.
For since for me untwined was his thread
Of guiltless life, that ought to purchase breath:
Can reasons doom conclude, I ought to dreed,
For his decay to clime the steps of death.
In wretched earth my father graued lies,
My dear mother has run her race of life,
The pride of love no more can daunt mine eyes,
My wasted goods are shrunk by fortunes strife.
My honor soon ecclipsed is by fate,
My young delight is lo for done by chance,
My broken life these passed haps so hate,
As can my grieved heart no more advance.
And now remaynes to duty with my phere,
No more but refuse lo, my irksome life
With willing mind, followed eke with drere,
Which I resign, as fitteth for a wife.
And thou Sinoris, which Iunos yoke do crave,
To press my corpse, to feed thy liking lust,
The rout of Homers gods, thee grant to have,
In stead of royal feats, a throne of dust.
In change of costly robes and rich array,
A simple winding sheet they digne thee give,
And eke in stead of honest wedlocks stay,
They sing thy dirge, and not vouchsafe thee live.
In place of Himens hye vnfiled bed,
They lay thee up in closure of thy grave:
In stead with precious meats for to be fed,
They make the Woormes, for fitter prey thee have.
In stead of song, and Musickes tuned sown,
They wait on thee, with loud lamenting voice,
In change of joyful life, and high renown,
Thy cruel death may spread with wretched noise.
For you, great gods, that stalled be on hie,
Should not be just, ne yet such titles claim,
Unless this wretch, ye ruthlesse cause to die,
That lives now, to slander of your name.
And thou Dian, that haunted Courts do shun,
Know with what great delight this life I leave:
And when the race of spending breath is done,
Will pierce the soil that did my phere receive.
And if perchance the paled ghosts despise
Such fatal fine, with grudge of thankelesse mind:
Yet at the least, the shamefast living eyes
Shall have a Glass, rare wisely gifts to find,
Wherein I will that Lucrece sect shall gaze,
But none that live, like Helens line inblaze.
ANd when the prayer was ended, that this fair and virtuous Camma The death of
Sinoris and Camma.
made, she drank, and gave to drink to Sinoris of this cup of poison, who
thought to drink no other but good wine and water: and the case was such, that
he died at noone days, and she likewise in the evening after. And truly, her
death of all Greece, with as great sorrow, was lamented: as her life of all men
was desired.

Princesses and great Ladies may most evidently perceive by the examples
herein contained, how honest and Honorable it is for them to love and
endeavor themselves to be beloved of their husbands: and that not only in
their life, but also after their death: For, the wife to serve her husband in
his life, seems ofttimes to proceed of fear: but to love and honor him in
his grave, proceeds of love. Princesses and great Ladies ought not to do that
which many other women of the common people do, that is to say, to seek some
drinks, and invent some shameful sorceries to be beloved of their husbands:
for albeit it is a great burden of conscience, and lack of shame in like
manner to use such superstitions; yet it should be a thing too unjust, and very
slanderous, that for to be beloved of their husbands, they should procure to
be hated of God. Truly, to love, to serve, and content God, it is not hurtful
to the woman, for that she should be the better beloved of her husband: but
yet God has suffered, and does permit oftimes, that the women being feeble,
deformed, poor, and negligent, should be better beloved of their husbands,
then the diligent, fair and rich. And this is not for the services they do to
their husbands, but for the good intention they have to serve and love GOD,
which shows them this special favor: for otherwise God does not suffer,
that he being with her displeased, she should live with her husband contented.
If women would take this counsel that I give them in this case, I will teach
them furthermore a notable enchauntment, to obtain the love of their husbands,
which is, that they be quiet, meek, patient, solitary, and honest, with which
fine herbs they may make a confection, the which neither seen nor tasted of
Good counsel for women.
their husbands, shall not only cause them to be beloved, but also honored:
For women ought to know, that for their beauty they are desired; but for their
virtue only they are beloved.

CHAP. VI. That Princesses and great Ladies ought to be obedient to their
Husbands; and that it is a great shame to the Husband that his wife should
command him.
MAny ancient Historiographers travailed greatly, and consumed long time in
writng, to declare what authority the man ought to have over the woman, and
what servitude the woman owes to the man: and some, for to advance the
dignity of the man, and others to excuse the frailty of the woman, alleged
such vain things, that it had been more honor for them not to have written
at all, then in such sort as they did: for it is not possible but the Writers
should err, which write not as reason teaches, but rather as their fantasy
leads.

Those that defend the frailty of the woman said, that the woman has a body
as a man, she has a soul as a man, she has reason as a man, dies as a man,
and was as necessary for generation as man, she lives as a man, and therefore
they thought it not meet that she should be more subject to man, then man to
her: for it is not reason that that which nature has made free, should by any
laws of man be made bond. They said furthermore, that God created not the
creatures, but to augment the generation of mankind, and that in this case the
woman was more necessary then the man: for the man engendereth without pain
or travail, but the woman is delivered with peril and danger, and with pain
and travail nourishes up the child. Wherefore it seems great unkindness
and cruelty, The great dangers women sustain.
that the women (which are delivered with peril and danger of their lives, and
bring up their children with labor and toil of their bodies) should be used
of their husbands as slaves.

They said further, that men are those that curse, that move seditions, that
make wars, that maintain enmity, that wear weapons, that shed man's blood,
and commit sundry other mischiefs, which the women do not: but in stead of
killing men, shedding blood, and other notorious evils, that men do, they
employ themselves to increase men. And since it is so, then women, rather then
men, ought to have dominion and command in the Commonwealth: for women
increase the Commonwealth, and men diminish it: for neither divine nor humane
law commands, that the foolish man should be free, and govern: and that
the wise woman should be bond, and serve.

Those of Achaia affirmed this opinion, and groundeth themselves upon The
custom of the Achaians.
this reason, and observed it as a custom, That the husbands should obey, and
the wives command. And so they did, as Plutarch says in the Book of
Consolation: for the husband swept and made clean the house, made the bed,
washed the buck, covered the table, dressed the dinner, and went for water: And
of the contrary part, his wife governed the goods, answered the affairs, kept
the money; and if she were angry, she gave him not only foul words, but
also oftimes laid her hands on him to revenge her anger. And hereof came this
ancient Proverb, the which of many is read, and of few understood: that is to
say, Vita Achaiae; The life of an Achaian. When in Rome the husband suffered to
be ruled and commanded of his wife, the neighbors would say unto him in manner
of a reproach, Vita Achaia: which is as much as if a man would say, Go, go as
thou art, since thou live after the law of Achaia, where men have so little
discretion, that they suffer themselves to be governed (be it well or evil)
of their Wives, and that every woman commands her Husband.

Pliny, in an Epistle that he wrote, reproved greatly his friend Fabatus,
for that he kept in his house a wife, the which in all his doings ruled and
commanded him: wherein he told him, that he durst do nothing without her
commandment. And to make the matter to seem more heinous, in the latter end
of his Epistle he said these words, Me valde poenitet quod tu solus Rome polles
vita Achaia: which is, It grieueth me much, that thou alone in Rome should
lead the life of one of Achaia.

Julius Capitolinus says, that Anthonius Caracalla, being in love with a fair
Lady of Persia, and seeing that he could not enjoy her, nor obtain his desire,
promised to marry her according to the law of Achaia: and truly she showed
her self more wise in her answer, then he did in his demand, telling him,
that she would not, nor might not marry; for because she had promised her
self to the goddess Vesta, and that she had rather be a servant of the gods,
then a Mistress of men. The Parthes had The Law of the Parthians.
a law contrary to them, and likewise those of Thrace, the which so little
esteemed women, that their husbands used them none otherwise then like
servants. And in this case men had so great liberty, or to say better,
lightness, that after a woman had borne and brought forth twelve children,
the children remained in the house, and the husbands sold their wives to them
that would give most, or else they changed them for others that were more young.

And the children agreed to the selling of their own mother, to the intent
that their father might refresh himself with another that was more young: and
the old and barren woman, should either be buried quick, or else serve as a
slave.

Dionisius Halicarnaseus says, that the Lides had a law, and the Numiaians in
like manner, that the woman The Law of the Lideans
should command things without the house, and the man should provide for those
that were within: but according to my poor judgment, I cannot tell how this
law was kept, nor how they could fulfill it; for by reason, the wife should not
go out of the house but very little: and therefore me thinks that they ought
not to command any thing abroad, nor the husband should enter into an other
man's house, for to command there.

Licurgus in the laws that he gave to the Lacedaemonians says, that the
husbands should provide abroad, see all things necessary for the house: and
that the wives should keep and dispose them within: So that this good
Philosopher divided the travail between the man and the woman: but yet
notwithstanding he reserved the rule and authority to the man: For to say the
truth, it is a monstrons thing that the wife should command the husband in his
house.

Under our Christian Religion there is neither Divine, nor human Laws, but
will prefer Man above all other things: and though some Philosophers would
dispute to the contrary, and that many men would have followed them, yet me
thinks that a man should not praise nor commend them for their opinions: for
there can be nothing more vain nor light, then by man's law to give that
authority to woman, which by nature is denied her.

We see by experience, that women Women weak of nature.
of nature are all weak, frail, fearful, and tender: and finally, in
matters of weight not very wise. Then if matters of government require not
only science and experience, but also strength and courage to enterprise
doubtful things, wisdom for to know them, force to execute them, diligence
for to follow them, patience for to suffer them, means to endure them: and
above all, great strength and hope to compass them: why then will they take
from man the government, in whom all these things abound, and give it to the
woman, in whom all these things do want? The end why I speak these things
before, is to require, to counsel, to admonish, and to persuade Princcsses and
great Ladies, that they think it spoken (if they will be happy in marriage) to
the end they should be obedient to their husbands: for speaking the truth, in
that house, where the wife commands the husband, we may call her a masculine
woman, and him a feminine man.

Many women are deceived, in thinking, that in commanding their husbands they
live more honorably, and be better esteemed: but truly it is not so; for all
those that see, and perceive it, accounts the woman for vain, and the man in
like manner for foolish The foolish opinion of some women.
.

I know, and can tell right well, that there are some husbands so excessive in
spending, and so wanton in living, that it were not only good that their wives
should rule the^, but also chastise them: but in the end, I say, that
notwithstanding all this, it is better, and more tolerable, that all the goods
be lost, then between them any malice, hate or discention should rise. If a
woman's children dye, she may bring forth others: if she lose her goods, she
may get them again: if her servants go from her she may find others: if she
see her self sad, GOD may comfort her: if she be sick, she may be healed: but
if she be at debate with her husband, I cannot tell what she shall do: for
the wife that forsakes the friendship of her husband, gives to all men
occasion to speak of her folly.

Since women naturally are all jealous, and that of jealousy proceeds
suspicion, I counsel them, if they will not that their husbands commit a
fault, that they do not anger nor chafe them; for if in gage she have his
heart, no other woman shall have his body, from that which he would not
abstain for conscience, he will restrain for shame.

Oftentimes the husbands come home chafed, troubled, wrathful, angry, and
vexed, and then women ought to take heed that they overthwart them not; for if
they do, it cannot be otherwise, but that they shall have either evil words
with his tongue, or else suffer sore blows with his fists. Truly it is not
meet, neither in any case profitable, that Princesses and great Dames should
overthwart their husbands with froward words, nor that they should use to
strive against them; but rather that the wise in all cases should be obedient
and loving to her husband: for it may happen, and daily it does chance, that
they begin to argue in jest, and afterward they end in earnest. The woman
which is sage, wise, and virtuous, ought to weigh with her self, that either
her Husband has occasion so to taunte her, or else peradventure he does it
of a will. I say that in this case if he have occasion, she ought to suffer
and endure him: if he does it of will, she ought to dissemble with him. For
otherwise, it might so take her in the head, that she would burden him with
many evil words: so that he beginning, then the debate should remain
excused, and she being without fault at the beginning, might in the end be
condemned.

There is nothing wherein a Woman shows her, wisdom more then to endure a
rash Husband. A Woman in nothing shows her sagenes more, then to dissemble
with a foolish Husband. Her honesty in nothing can be showed more, then in
suffering a wanton Husband. She can show her worthiness in nothing so much,
as in bearing with an unworthy Husband. I mean, though she understood that
her husband has little, that he knows little, and that he were worth little:
yet she should make men believe that he has much, that he knows enough, and
can do A property of a wise and discreet Husband.
much. For all the honor which she shall so give to her Husband, shall wholly
again redounde on her self.

It is an evil thing (me thinks) that Women should be so bold to speak
against their Husbands: For they cannot speak evil of them, but that they
must witness dishonor of themselves. For if her Husband be a drunkard, they
will say that she is a drunkard wife: and if he be a fool, then she is the
wife of a Fool, and what more? When the Husband shall come to amend, and to
moderate himself, the woman in the end shall be blamed. For if she burden him
with evil words, he acquiteth her with sharp stripes. But if she touches
his honor, it may chance he takes away her life. If perhaps the Husband
should command the wife any unjust thing, I would be of opinion that she
should obey him, but not resist him: and after that his raging fury were past,
and his choler qualilified, then she might say unto him, that he was very
rash to command, and she very wise to obey. For if she be quick of tongue to
answer to every word that he shall speak, without doubt they will not live
one day in concord: Reading therefore that which I have read, hearing that
which I have heard, and having seen also that I have seen, I would counsel
women that they should not presume to command Good counsel for Women.
their Husbands: and I would admonish Husbands that they would not suffer their
Wives to rule them; For in doing the contrary, it is none otherwise, then to
eat with the feet, and travel with the hands, to go with the fingers, and to
feed themselves with their toes.

My mind is not here to speak against the women, nor against the Princesses
and great Ladies, which of their patrimony and heritage possess many Towns
and Cities: for to such I will not take away the services, which are due unto
them by their Subjects, but I do persuade them to the obedience which they
ought to bear to their Husbands. It is not marvel, though that women of
mean estate have sometimes quarrelled with their Husbands: For they have small
Riches to loose, and less honor to adventure, then the Princesses and great
Dames have, the which since they do adventure to command many: why will not
they humble themselves to obey one? speaking with due reverence.

It is for abundance of folly, and want of wisdom, that a Woman should have
presumption to govern a whole Realm, and that she has not grace to obey one
Husband.

Seneca in a Tragedy, says thus: that in the time of the war of
Mithridates, it chanced in Rome that the Consulls sent to the old Knights,
and commanded that they should all be in a readiness to go with Silla the The
saying of (...).
Consul into the wars. And it happened, that when they came into ones house
in Rome to publish the Edict, to warn him to be ready, they found not the
husband, but the wife, who made answer, and said, That her husband ought not,
nor could not go to the wars; and though he would, he should not, neither
would see give him license: for he was an old and ancient Knight, and
therefore he ought to be exempted from the wars.

With this answer, those that heard it were greatly abashed, and the whole
Senate no less offended: wherefore they commanded, that the husband should
be banished Rome, and the wife to be carried to the Prison Mamortine, not for
that he excused himself for going to the wars: but because she commanded her
husband, and because he suffered himself to be commanded of her.

The Senate did this, to that end, that from that time forwards no woman should
presume or contend with her husband: and that no husband should give his wife
any occasion to be bold with him.

CHAP. VII. That Women, and especially Princesses and great Ladies, should be
very circumspect in going abroad out of their houses, and that through the
resort of them that comes to their houses, they be not evil spokenof.
AMong all the counsels that may or ought to be given to Princesses and great
Ladies, this is the first; that they do what they can to have rest in their
houses, and that they go not as strayes to the mansions of other men: for if
such Ladies are good, they get much reputation; and if perchance they be
evil, they take from men all occasion. Whether the husband be present or
absent, it is a most necessary and honest thing that the wife be for the most
part in the house: for by this means the household shall be well governed, and
from the heart of the husband shall be withdrawn all kind of suspicions.

Since the office of the husband is to gather goods and riches, and The
office of the Husband, and duty of the wife.
the office of a wife to keep and preserve them: the hour that she goes out
of the house, she ought to think that her Maidens will stray abroad, the
Children will run out to play, the Varlats and Servants will be out of
order, the Neighbors will take occasions to speak evil, and that which is
worste of all, some will steal the goods out of the house, and the others will
speak evil of the reeowne of the wife.

Oh, God gives a goodly gift and grace to that man which has such and so good
a wife, that of her own nature loves to keep her self within the house. And
truly, I say, that such a one does excuse many griefs, and saves much money:
for she spends not the goods in Apparel, nor gives occasion to men to judge
evil of her person. The greatest debate that is between man and wife is, for
that he desires to get and keep his goods to bring up his children, and to
maintain his family: and on the other part, that she desires to spend all
upon apparel: for women in this case are so curious in loving of themselves,
that they would abstain from meats that should maintain their life, only to
buy a new Gown to set out their pride. Women naturally do love to keep, and
will not spend any thing, except it be in apparel: for every hour (that is
in the day and the night) they desire to have a new Gown to change.

My intention is not to speak of Apparel only, but to persuade Princesses
and great Ladies, that they would keep themselves in their houses; and in so
doing, they should excuse these superfluous wastes and expenses: for her
neighbor seeing her better apparrelled then she is, looks upon her husband,
as she were a Lion. It chances oftentimes (I would to God I had no cause to
speak it) that if by chance there comes any great or solemn Feast or
Marriage, she will never look lovingly on his face, before he has given her
a new gown to her back: and when the poor Gentleman has no money to pay,
of necessity he must run in credit.

And when the vanity of the woman is past, then the time of payment draws
near, and they come to arrest all his goods: so that they have cause to lament
one whole year, for that which they have spent in one hour.

Women seldom contend for that one is fairer, more nobler of lineage, better
married, or more virtuous then another: but only that another goes better
apparelled then she. For touching apparel, there is no woman can endure that
another meaner woman should make comparison with her, nor that in like manner
her equal should excel her.

Lycurgus in the laws that he gave The law of Lycurgus.
to the Lacedaemonians, commanded that their Wives should not go out of their
houses, but at diverse solemn Feasts in the year. For he said, that the women
ought to be making their prayers in the Temples to the Gods, or else in their
houses, bringing up their children. For it is not honest nor commendable,
that the wife should pass her time abroad, trotting from street to street,
as common women. I say that the Princesses and great Ladies are much more bound
to keep themselves at home in their Houses, then other women of meaner degree:
and without a cause I speak it not, for thereby they shall get them more
reputation. For there is no virtue whereby the woman wins more reputation in
the Commonwealth, then always to be seen resident in her house. I say also
that a Wife ought the most part of her time to keep her house, because she
has less occasion then others have to go abroad. For if the poor wife (the
Plebian) go out of her house, she goes for no other cause but for to seek
meat: but if the rich and Noble-woman goes out of her house, it is for nothing
but to take her pleasure.

Let not Princesses marvel, nor let not great Ladies wonder, if they dispose
their feet to trotte, and occupy their eyes to behold, though their enemies
and neighbors with cankered hearts do judge them, and with evil tongues
defame them: For the fond deeds that women do, makes men to be rash of
judgment. I like it well that the husbands should love their wives, that they
should comfort them, and make much of them, and that they should put their trust
in them: but I do discommend that the women should go gadding abroad in
visitation, from house to house, and that their husbands dare not gain say The
property of good Houswifes.
them. For admit that they be good in their persons, yet in this doing, they
give occasion for men to esteem them vain and light.

Seneca says in an Epistle, that the great Roman Cato the Censor ordained
that no woman should go out of her house being alone, and if perhaps it were in
the night, she should not go alone without company, and that the company
should not be such as she would chose, but such as her Husband or Parent would
assign: So that with the same countenance we behold now a common woman, with
the self same looks then we beheld her that went out of her house. What
inconvenience comes by gadding abroad


Noble Ladies (which love their honor) ought greatly to consider and weigh the
many inconveniences that ensue by often gadding abroad: For they spend much to
Apparel them, they lose much precious time in trimming them, they keep
gentlewomen to wait upon them, they will strive with their Husbands to go,
and whiles she is out of the doors, the house shall be evil kept, and all the
enemies, and friends thereby have matter whereupon to talk.

Finally I say, that the woman that goes out of her house, does not weigh the
loss of her honor so much as she does the pleasure she takes abroad.
Presuming (as I presume) to write with gravity, I say, that I am ashamed to
speak it, yet for all that I will not refrain to write of the walks of these
Dames that visit and desire to be visited: amongst whom there is moved
oftentimes such vain communication, that it causes their Husbands to become
enemies: and on the other part they remember more the Gossipings that they have
to go unto, then the heavy burden of their sins, which they ought to lament.

CHAP. VIII. Of the commodities and discommodities which follow Princesses and
great Ladies that go abroad to visit, or abide in the house.
LVcretia by the consent of all, was counted the chiefest of all other Matrones
of Rome, and not for that that she was more fair, more wise, of greater
parentage, or more noble, but because she did withdraw her self from
company, and abode solitary: The commendations of Lucretia.
For she was such a one, that in the heroycall virtues there could be nothing
more desired: nor in women's weakness there was nothing in her to be amended.

The history of the chaste Lucretia is evident in Titus Liuius, that when the
husbands of diverse Romans came home from the wars to their houses, they
found their wives in such fort that some were gaping out at the windows,
others devising vainly at their doors, others in the Fields wandering, others
in their gardens banqueting, others in the market being, and others in the
streets, here and there gadding: but the famous Lucretia was found in her
house alone, weauing of silk: So that she flying company, for that she would
not be seen, made her self in her Honor and renown better to be known.

I will give another counsel to Princesses and great Ladies, the which as I am
willing to give, so I wish they would be as desirous to receive, that is to
say, if they will be esteemed and counted for honest women, that they must
keep themselves from evil company: for though the stinking carrion does no
harm, because we eat it not; yet the unsavory sent thereof annoyeth us by
smelling. The honor of women is so delicate a thing, that if we give them
license to go abroad to visit women, we must also give them leave to be
visited of men: for, that one Dame should visit another, it seems much
charity; that men should visit women, I cannot but think it much
dishonestie. In the presence of their husbands and near kinsfolks, they may be
visited and talked withal, and this is to be understood of approved and
honest persons; Notwithstanding I say, if the Husband be not at home, I would
it should be counted Sacrilege, if any man pass the threshold of the door
to visit the wife.

Plutarch says in the book of the praises of Women, that the wives of the
Numidians, when their Husbands were gone out of their houses, kept The praises
of the wives of Numidia
their Gates shut, and locked themselves in their houses: and they had a
Law, that whatsoever he were that knocked at the door being shut, without
calling, he should have his right hand cut off.

Cicero in the book of his Laws says: That amongst the Romans, there was
an ancient Law, and much used: that if perchance any woman did owe any Money
to any man, and that the Husband (being the debtor) were out of his house, the
Creditour should not ask the wife the debt, because that under the color of
recovering the goods, he should not dishonor her in her fame.

I would say therefore, that if the Creditour was not permitted in Rome to
recover his goods, for that the wife was not of her husband accompanied, much
less they would give license to visit a Woman alone. For it were more reason
that the creditor should enter, for to recover his goods, then thou should
enter only for thy pastime.

The divine Plato in the books of the Commonwealth says, and by profound
reasons persuades the Wives of Greece, that they have no secret Friends, but
that every one keep this saying in memory, for a principle: That the Woman
ought not to have any other Friend then her Husband. For women ought not to
have license to make Friends, nor conditions to make enemies. Princesses and
great Dames ought to consider, that every one of them gives their bodies,
their goods, and their liberty to their Husbands.

Then since it is so I say, that with the liberty, she ought also to give him
her will. For it little avails the man and the wife that their goods be
common, if their wills be private. For to the end that God be served, and the
people edified, both ought in one house to abide at one Table together to eat,
in one Bed to sleep, and besides this, they both ought one thing to love. For
if the man and the wife in love do differ, in their lives they shall never be
quiet.

I admonish, desire, and counsel all all women, if they will be well married;
Where love wants, discord rests.
that they think it good, that their husbands will, that they praise all that
he praises, that they prove all that he proves, that they content
themselves with that wherewith their husbands are contented, and above all,
that they love no more then their husbands shall love: For otherwise it might
be that the wife should set her eyes upon one, and the Husband engage his heart
to another.

Plutarche in the book of his pollitikes, says: That a woman after she is
married, has nothing proper: For the day that she contracteth Marriage, she
makes her Husband the only Lord of her goods, her liberty, and of her person.

So that if the wife wills any other thing, then that which her Husband
wills, if she would love any other thing then that her Husband loves, we
will not call her a true-louer, but an open thief: for thieues do not so much
harm to rob the husband of his money, as the wife does in withdrawing from
him her heart.

If the woman will live in peace with her Husband, she ought to observe
whereunto he is inclined: for so much A property of a good woman.
as if he be merry, she ought to rejoice, and if he be sad, she must temper
herself: if he be covetous, she should keep: if he be Prodigal, she should
spend: if he be impatient, she should dissemble. For the Woman which is wise
and sage, if she cannot as she would, she ought to will what she may. Well,
whether the Husband bes evil inclined, or in his conditions well mannered, I
swear he cannot suffer that his wife should have any other lovers: For though
the man be of a mean stock, he had rather always that his Wife should love
him alone, then the best of the nobility in the town.

One thing I cannot dissemble, because I see that God is therewith offended.
Which is, that maine Ladies make their excuses through sickness, because they
would not pass once in the week come to hear Service, and yet we see them
busy daily, trotting about to visit their Friends: and the worst of all is,
that in the morning for cold they will not rise, to go the Churches, and yet
afterward in the heat of the day, they go a gadding from house to house,
whereas they are oftentimes until night.

I would that the Ladies would but consider with themselves, before they go
out of their houses on visitation, to what end they go abroad: And if
perchance they go abroad to be looked on? let them know for a surety, that
there be few that will praise their beauty, but there be many that will
discommend their gadding.

And wherefore do these Dames assemble together? for some grave matter I
warrant you: Shall I tell ye; It is either to banquette with some dainty
dishes, to talk of their Petigrees, to devise of their Husbands, to see who
has the best Gown, to note who is evil attired, to flatter the fair, to
laugh to scorn the Foul, to murmr at their Neighbors, and that which is
the worste of all, that even they themselves which speak evil of them that
are absent, do gnawe the one the other with envy.

Seldom times it chances that the Dames chide not with their Husbands, after
that in this sort they have been together: for so much as the one notes the
evil Apparel, the other babbling, they note the one to be a Fool, and the
other to be simple, so The quality of naughty Housewiues.
that it seems not that they are meet to visit the one the other: but to
look, and accuse the one the other.

It is a strange thing for the sage woman to think that sheee should take
pleasure abroad, since she has her Husband at home, to whom she may talk:
and has her children to learn, her Daughters to teach, her Family to order,
and her goods to govern: she has her house to keep, and her Parents whom
she ought to please: then since she has within her house such pastime, why
do they accept the company of strange men?

That Married women should have private friends, and love to be visited: it
follows oftentimes that GOD is offended, the Husband iniuried, and the people
slaundered: and the woman that is married, takes little profit, and it
hinders the marriage of her that is to marry. For in such a case although
some desire her for her Riches, yet more will forsake her for her evil fame.

CHAP. IX. That Women great with child, specially the Princesses and great
Ladies ought to be very circumspect, for the danger of the creatures, wherein
is showed many misfortunes happened to Women with child in the old time, for
suffering them to have their wills,
ONe of the most necessary things for him that takes in hand any great
journey, over any dangerous Count eyes is, that at the beginning he ought to
learn the way which he undertakes to go: For it is a thing no less
troublesome, then perilous, that when he should come to rest, of necessity
he should be enforced to travel.

None can deny, but that man's life is a long and tedious journey: the which
begins at our birth, and ends at our death; For in the end to have a long
or short life, is none other, but to come sooner or later to the grave. The
chiefest folly of all (in mine opinion) is this, that some in their own
conceits think they have counsel enough for others, and to all others it
seems that they want for The Folly of man.
themselves. For of right he may be called a fool, that condemns all others
for Fools: and aduaunceth himself to be wise. Every man ought to let his
neighbor live in peace, and though he do esteem himself to be wise, yet he
ought not to think his neighbor a Fool: for there is none so wise, but that
he may occupy it all. For we never yet saw any man so wise of himself, but
that he needed the counsel of an other. And if this want be in those that be
very old, truly it is much more in them that be young: whose flesh is not
dry, but green, the blood not cold, but hot, no deadly heat, but very
lively, the beastial motions not mortified, but quickened, and hereof ensues,
that young men love their own rash advise and opinions, and despise the grave
counsels of others.

When the Trees are tender, they bind them together, because they may grow
right, they bridle the horse when as yet they are but coltes, to the end they
may be easy hereafter to the bridle. They take the Hawks in the nest, to make
them more familiar: and when the beasts are little, they take the^ to teach
them. I mean that a man ought to instruct his children, to the end they may
grow to live well hereafter. I admonish, and tell the Mothers that have
Daughters, that there is no remedy to reform the evil inclination of their
children, but to teach them, and to bring them up well in their youth: For
there is no wound but is dangerous if in time the plaster be not laid
thereunto.

Returning now to our purpose, since How the man child ought to be brought up.
that in all things there is order and measure: We will declare presently how
the Male Child ought to be taught: and first of all we will treat, how a man
ought to provide when the infant is begotten, and when as yet it is alive in
the Mothers womb: To the intent Princesses and great Ladies should live very
circumspectly, when they know they are conceived with child.

I should be excused to speak of this matter, since it is not my profession,
and that as yet I was never married, but by that I have read of some, and by
that I have heard of others, I will and dare be so bold to say one word. For
the Sage often times gives better account of that he has read, then the simple
does of that he has proved. This thing seems to be true, between the
Physician and the Patient: For where the patient suffers the evil, he often
times demands the physician what his sickness is, and where it holds him,
and what it is called, and what remedy there is for his disease: So the
Physician knows more by his science, then the patient does by his experience.

A man ought not to deny, that the women and in especially great Ladies know
not by experience, how they are altered when they are quick, and the great
pains they suffer when they are delivered: we could not deny but that there
is great danger in the one, and great peril in the other, but they shall never
know from whence all comes, and from whence all proceeds, and what remedy
is necessary. For there are many which complain of robberyes, but yet they
know not what the thieues are that have robbed them. First, according to my
judgment and opinion, that which the woman quick with child ought to do is,
that they go softly and quietly, and that they eschew running, either in
coming or going: for though she little esteem the health of her person, yet
she ought greatly to regard the life of the creature. The more precious the
liquor is, and the more weaker the vessel is which contains it: so much the
more they ought to fear the danger, lest the liquor shead, and How women ought
to carry themselves in the time they go with child.
the vessel break. I mean, that the complexion of Women (being with Child)
is very delicate, and that the soul of the creature is more precious: and
therefore it ought with great diligence to be preserved: For all the treasure
of the Indies is not equal in value, to that which the woman bears in her
bowels,

When a man planteth a vineyard, forthwith he makes a ditche, or some Fence
for it, to the end that Beasts should not crop it whiles it is young: nor
that Travelers should gather the Grapes when they are ripe. And if the
Labourer does this thing for to get a little wine only, the which for the
soul and body is not always profitable: How much more circu^spection ought
the woman to have, to preserve her child, since she shall render an accosit to
the Creator of her creature; unto the Church of a christian, and unto her
Husband of a child?

In mine opinion, where the account at the hour of death is so straight, it is
requisite for her, that in the time of her life she be very circumspect: For
GOD knows every thing so well in our life, that there is none that can
beguile him, in rendering his account at his death. There is no wight can
suffer, nor heart dissemble, to see a man have his desire: that is to say, to
have his Wife great with chllde, and ready to bring forth good fruit, and
afterward to see the woeful Mother, by or through some sudden accident perish,
and the innocent babe not to be borne.

When the Woman is healthful, and big with child, she is worthy of great
reproach, if either by running, leaping, or dancing, any mischaunce hap unto
her. And truly the Husband has great cause to lament this case: For without
doubt the Gardener feels great grief in his heart, when in the Prime-time
the tree is laden with blossoms, and yet by reason of some sharp and bitter
Frost, it never bears fruit. It is not only evil that women should run
and leap when they are big and great with child, but it is also dishonest,
and specially for great Ladies: For always women that are common dauncers, are
esteemed as light houswiues.

The Wives in general, Princesses and great Ladies in particular, ought to go
temperately, and to be modest in their mouings: For the modest gate argues
discreetnesse in the person. All women naturally desire to be honored, and
reverenced: and touching The desire of Women.
that I let them know, that there is nothing which in a commonwealth is more
honor for a woman, then to be wise and wary in speaking, moderate and quiet
in going. For it is impossible but that the woman which is light in her going,
and malicious in her talking, should be despised and abhorred.

In the year of the Foundation of Rome, 466. the Romans sent Curious
Dentatus, to make war against King Pyrrus, who kept the city of Tharent, and
did much harm to the people in Rome: For the Romans had a great courage to
conquer strange Realms, and therefore they could have no patience to suffer
any stranger to invade theirs.

This Curious Dentatus was he which in the end overcame King Pyrrus, and was the
first that brought the Elephants to Rome in his triumph, wherefore the
fierceness of those Beasts astonished the Roman people much: for they weighed
little the sight of the Kings laden with yrons, but to see the Elephants as
they did, they wondered much.

Curious Dentatus had one only Sister, the which he entierly loved. They were
seven children, two of the which died in the wars, and other three by
pestilence: So that there were none left him but that sister, wherefore he
loved her with all his heart. For the death of unthrifty children, is but as a
watch for children unprovided of favors. This sister of Curious Dentatus was
married to a Roman Consul, and was conceived, and gone 7. months with child:
and the day that her brother Triumphed, (for joy of her Brothers honor) she
leaped and daunced so much, that in the same place she was delivered, and so
vnluckely, that the Mother took her death, and the Child never lived:
whereupon the feast of the Triumph ceased, and the Father of the infant with
sorrow lost his speech, For the heart which suddenly feels grief
incontinently loses understanding.

Tibullus the Grecian, in the 3. book De casibus Triumphi, declares the
history in good style, how, and in what sort it chanced. Nine years after
Tibullus de casibus triumphi.
that the Kings of Rome were banished for the rape that Tarquine did, to the
chaste Lucretia, the Romans created a dignity, which they called Dictatura,
and the Dictator that had this office, was above all other Lord and chief: For
the Romans perceived that the Commonwealth could not be governed, but by one
head alone. And because the Dictatour had so great authority, as the Emperor
has at this present, and to the end they should not become Tyrants: they
provided that the office of the Dictatorship should last no longer then vi.
months in the year, the which past and expired, they chose another. Truly it
was a good order that that office dured but 6. months. For often times Princes
thinking to have perpetual authority, become negligent in using justice.

The first Dictator in Rome, was Largius Mamillus, who was sent against the
Volces, the which at that time were The first Dictator in Rome.
the greatest enemies to the Romans: For Rome was founded in such a sign,
that always it was beloved of few, and abhorred of many.

As Titus Liuius says, this Largius Mamillus vanquished the Volces, and
triumphed over them, and in the end of that war destroyed their mighty city
called Curiola, and also destroyed and overthrew many places and Fortresses in
that Province: for the cruel hearts do not only destroy the persons, but also
take vengeance of the stones. The hurtes which L: Mamillus did in the Country
of the Volces, were marvelous, and the men which he slew were many, and the
treasories he robbed were infinite, and the captives which he had in his
Triumph were a great number: amongst whom in especial he brought captive a
Noble man's daughter, a beautiful gentlewoma^, the which he kept in his house,
for the recreation of his person: For the ancient Romans gave to the people
all the treasures to maintain the war, and they took to themselves all the
vicious things to keep in their houses. The case was, that this damsel being
with child, Largius Mamillus brought her to solace her self in the orchard,
where were sundry yo^g fruits, and as then not ripe to eat, whereof with so
great affection she did eat, that forthwith she was delivered in the same
place of a creature: so that on the one part she was delivered, and on the
other part the child dyed.

This thing chanced in the gardens of Vulcan, two days after the triumph of
Largius Mamilius, a ruefull and lamentable case to declare, forasmuch as both
the child that was borne, the Mother that was delivered, and also the Father
that begat it, the self-same day dyed, and were buried all in one grave: and
this thing was not without great wayling and lamenting thoroughout all Rome:
For if with tears their lives might have been restored, without doubt none of
them should have been buried.

The first Son of Rome, which rebelled against Rome, was Tarquine the proud.
The second that withstoode Rome (beeeing as yet in Lucanta,) was The first
rebel in Rome.
Quintus Marcius. The third that went against Rome, was the cruel Sylla. The
damages which these three did to their Mother Rome, were such and so great,
that the three several wars of Affrike were nothing to be compared to these
three evil children: for those enemies could scarcely see the walls of Rome,
but these unnatural children had almost not left one stone upon another.

A man ought not greatly to esteem those buyldings which those Tyrants three we
to the ground, nor the buildings which they destroyed, neither the men that
they slew, nor the women that they forced, nor yet the Orphans which they
made: but above all things we ought to lament for that which they brought into
Rome. For the Commonwealth is not destroyed for lack of wealth, riches, and
sumptuous buyldings, but even because all vices abound, and virtues are wanting.

Of these three Romans, he whose name was Quintus Marcius had been Consul
thrice, once Dictator, and four times Censor, and in the end he was with
much shame bannished from Rome, wherewith to revenge this injury, he came
with a great power and Army against Rome: For the proud heart wounded with
injury, is never quiet in his life time, vnill he see his enemies destroyed,
or that on them he has taken vengeance.

Quintus Marcius being very nigh to the Gates of Rome, was most instantly
required that he would not destroy his Mother Rome: but he took no regard,
nor would condescend to any request, until such time that his Mother issued,
with a Niece of his, whom he loved entierly. At whose intercession and tears
he left his anger, and raised his siege from Rome. For many are sooner
overcome with tears, then with importunate and reasonable requests.

The Ladies of Rome used much to have their hairs long and yellow, and to
wear their wastes high and straight. An ancient custom used by the Ladies in
Rome.
And as the Niece of Quintus Marcius was great and big with child, the day
that the peace was made between Q: Marcius and Rome, lacing herself too hard
in her attire, to seem more proper and comely, she long before her time was
delivered of a creature: and the case was so woeful and unfortunate, that the
creature delivered died: the Mother lost her life, and the mother loosing her
life, suddenly her grandmother fell dead to the ground; through which occasion
all the joy and mirth was turned into sorrow and sadness. For it is commonly
seen, when the World is in the greatest joy, then Fortune suddenly turns it
into sorrow. The Authors hereof are Tibulus and Porphyrius, both Grecians.

CHAP. X. The Author follows and declares other inconuemences, and unlucky
chances which have happened to Women with Child.
THe wars of Tarent being ended, immediately begu^ne the wars of Carthage,
of which so long and tedious war, the possession of the Isles of Maiorica and
Minorica were occasion: For So Much as the one would take it, and the other
defend it. This war endured well nigh the space of 40, years: for often times
the wastes and damages which are done in the Wars are greater, then the
profit for which they contend.

The first Captain in this War of the Romans, was Gaius Duellus, and the
first of the Carthaginians, was Hammon, the which with their Ships fought on
the Sea of Scicile the which was very cruel: for there they feared both the
fury of the Sea, and also the cruelty of the Pike, the which two things, put
man's life in great danger.

Of this cruel Battle the Roman Captain remained victorious, forasmuch as
he drowned 14. Sippes, and took other 30. he slew three thousand men, and
brought three thousand The first victory the Romans obtained by Sea.
Carthaginians prisoners: and this was the first victory that the Romans had
by Sea. And that that the Romans most rejoiced at was, that by Sea also they
remained Conquerours.

The Captain Gaius Duellus departing from Scicile came to Rome, where he had a
Sister no less virtuous, then rich and beautiful: in whose house he lodged,
where he made a most costly Supper to all the Senators of Rome, and to all
the Captains which came with him from the wars: for the vicious men knew not
wherein to show their love to their Friends, but by inuiting them to costly
Banquets. The Sister of the Captain Gaius Duellus, for joy of his coming, and
for the pleasure of the Banquet and Feast which was made in her house, did eat
more then she was accustomed, and also more then it behooved one in her case,
so that in the presence of all, she began to annnoy the bidden Guests: For
she not only vomited out the meat of her stomach, but also the blood of her
veins, and therewithal most vnluckely brought forth her fruit which she had
in her entrails, wherewith immediately after the Soul departed from the
body, and so dyed.

Truly this case was no less to be lamented then the other, for so much as
Gaius lost his Sister, the Husband lost his Wife and his Child, and the wife
and the child lost their lives: and for that that Rome lost so Noble and
excellent a Roman, and above all for that it chanced in such a time of so
great joy and pleasure. For there can come no vnluckier news, then in the time
of much mirth to hear tell of any great mischance. Of this matter mention is
made in Blandus, in the book of the declinatio^ of the Empire.

The second war of Affrike, which was between Rome and Carthage, was in the
540. years after the Foundation of Rome, wherein were Captains Paulus
Emilius, and Publius Varro: the which two Consulls fought the great and famous
bloody Battle of Cannas, in the Province of Apulia: I say famous; because Rome
never lost such Nobility and Roman youth, as she lost in that day.

Of these two Consulles, Paulus Emilius in the Battle was slain, and Publius
Varro was overcome, and the most courageous Hanniball remained conqueror of
the Field, wherein dyed xxx. Senators, and 300. officers of the Senate, and
above xl. thousand footmen, and three thousand horsemen. Finally, the end of
all the Roman people had been that day, if Hannibal had had the wit to have
followed so noble a victory, as he had the courage to give so cruel a Battle.

A little before that Publius Varro departed to go to the wars, he was
married to a fair and young Roman called Sophia, and within seven months
she was quick; and as news was brought her, that Paulus Aemilius was dead,
and her husband overcome she died suddenly, the creature remaining alive in her
body. This case above all was very pitiful, in that that after he himself
was vanquished, and The death of Sophia,
and that he had seen his companion the Consul Emilius slain, with so great
a number of the Roman people, Fortune would that with his own eyes he should
behold the entrails of his wife cut, to take out the Child, and likeewise to
see the Earth opened, to bury his wife.

Titus Liuius says, that Publius Varro remained so sorrowful in his heart,
Titus Liuius
to see himself overcome of his enemies, and to see his wife so suddenly, and
so vnluckely stricken with death, that all the time that his life endured, he
neither combed his beard, slept in bed, nor dined at the Table: and hereat we
ought not to marvel: for a man in his heart may be so wounded in one hour, that
he shall never rejoice all the days of his life. If we put no doubts in
Titus Liuius, the Romans had long and tedious wars against the Samnites,
which endured for the space of lxiii. years contiually, until such time as
the Consul Ancus Rutilius (who was a virtuous man) did set a good appointment
of peace between the Samnites and the Romans: For the noble and stout hearts
ought always by virtue to bring their enemies to peace These wars therefore
being so cruel and obstinate, Titus Venurius, and Spurius Posthuminus (which
were Roman Captains) were overcome by Pontius the valiant Captain of the
Samnites: who after the victory did a thing never seen nor heard of before.
That is to say, that all the Roman prisoners whom he took, he put about
their necks a yoke, wherein was written, In spite of Rome, the Romans shall
be subtects to the yoke of the Samnites. Wherewith indeed the Romans were
greatly iniuried, wherefore they sought stoutto be reue^ged of the Samnites:
for the hearts that are haughty and proud, cannot suffer that others have their
minds lofty and high. The Romans therefore created to be Captain of the
War, one named Lucius Papirius, who had Commission to go against the
Samnites. This Lucius was more Fortunate in his doings, then comely of his
person, for he was deformed of his face: notwithstanding, he did so good
service in the war, and Fortune favored him so well, that he did not only
overcome and vanquish, but also destroyed them: and though the injury which
the Samnites did to the Romans was great, yet truly the injury which the
Romans did to the Samnites was much greater. For Fortune is so variable, that
those which The mutabilitie of Fortune.
yesterday we saw in most prosperity, too day we see in greatest adversity.
This Lucius Papirius therefore did not only vanquish the Samnites, kept them
prisoners, and made yokes for their necks, but also he bound them with cords
together, in such sort, that they made them plough the ground, drawing two and
two a plough. And yet not herewith contented, but with gads, they pricked and
tormented them.

If the Samnites had had pity of the Romans being overcome, the Romans
likewise would have taken compassion of them when they were Conquerours. And
therefore the prosperous have as much need of good counsel, as the miserable
have need of remedy. For the man which is not merciful in his prosperity,
he ought not to marvel though he find no friends in his necessity.

This Lucius Papirius had a Daughter married to a Senator of Rome, who was
called Torquatus, and she was called Ypolita, And about that time that she
should have been delivered, she went forth to receive her Father, the which
she ought not to have don: for the throng of the people in receiving him being
great, and she herself being great with child, by a most heavy chance, as
she would have passed in at a narrow gate, she was so pressed in The death of
Ypolita.
the throng, that she changed her life for death, and her Father turned his
m^th and joy into sorrow and sadness. For he took the death of his daughter
very heavily: and so much the more, because it was so suddenly.

I say, he took it heavily, since he was so stout a man, and so Sage
withal, that all Rome thought much that any such sudden chance should have
dismayed so worthy a man, that of his wisdom he could take no benefit: but
heereat let no man marvel: For there are many that have hearts to shed the blood
of their enemies, and yet cannot withholde the tears of their eyes.

Annius Seuerus, in the third book De infelieitate Fortuna, says: that the
day that this woeful mishap chanced to Lucius Papirius, he lift up his eyes
to the Heavens, and weeping said:

Oh Fortune, deceiuer of all mortal men, thou made me to conquer in war,
to the intent to overcome me in peace. My mind was to declare unto you all
these ancients hystories, to the end that al may know, how tender women with
child are: and how diligent their Husbands ought to be to preserve them:
since there is nothing so tender to be kept, nor any glass so easy to be
broken. For there is much glass, that though it fall to the ground yet it does
not break, but a woman The dangs^ of women with child.
with Child, only for treading her foot awry, we see with danger to be
delivered.

CHAP. XI. That Women great with child, and especially Princesses and great
ladies, ought to be gently used of their Husbands.
IF we understand the Chapter before we shall find that women with child
have bin in great dangers, some through leaping, some by dancing, others by
eaung, others by banqueting, others through gadding, others by straight lacing:
and all this proceeds through their own follies, that seek to be destroyers
of their own bodies. Truly herein Princesses and great Ladies are worthy of
much rebuke, when through their own follies they are not safely delivered of
their creatures. And I would gladly they took example, not only of reasonable
men, but also of brute beasts: for there is no beast so brute in the wild
mountains, but escheweth that which to his life and death will be hurtful.

The Bears, the Lyonnesse, and the Wolfes, never issue out of their caves and
dens so long as they be big, and this they do to avoid the dangers of the
Hunters, because at that time they would not be coursed.

Then seeing these things are done by the brute beasts, (whose younglings are
always hurtful unto men,) to the intent their ravening greedy Whealpes might
safely be brought forth to devour our innocent Cattle: How much more then
ought the Woman to be careful for her fruit, which is the increase of
christian congregation? If Women brought not forth, and Children were not
borne, though there be earth, yet there should be none to people it: For GOD
created all things to serve the creature, and created the creatures to serve
their Creator.

Let Women that are with child take example by the Chesse-nuts and Wal-nuts,
how and in what sort they defend their fruit, after that of their blossoms
they are deprived: for the chessenuttree defends his fruit with a rough and
hard husk, the wall-nut keeps her fruit with a thick shale in like manner,
so that the water cannot wet them, nor the wind shake them.

Now since that the Trees (which A good warning for women with child.
have but a vegetative life, and the Beasts but a Sensitive life, take such
heed to themselves, when they feel them ready to bring forth their fruit,
much more women with child ought to take heed to themselves, since they have
reason and understanding, lest through their negligence the creature should
perish. Let every man judge how little he loses, when he loses nuttes and
chessenuts: and for the contrary, let every men judge what the Church loses,
when the women with child do not bring forth their fruit, into the light of
baptism. For our mother the holy Church bewaileth not for that the vines are
frozen: but for the souls that are lost.

To the end that the man may see fruitful blessing which he desires, and
that the woman with child may see her self well delivered, the Husband ought
to beware that he enforces her not much to labor, and the woman likewise
ought to be circumspect that she take not too much idleness. For in women with
child this is a general rule, that too much travel causes them before their
time to deliver: and too much idleness puts them in danger. The man is
cruel that will have his Wife travel, and take as much pains when she is
big, as he would at another time when she is not with child: for the man which
is clothed, can not run so swifte, as he that is naked.

Aristotle in the sixth book de Animalibus, says: When the Lyonnesse is big
with whelp, the Lion does not only hunt for her himself: but also both night
and day he wandreth continually to watch her.

I mean that Princesses and great Aristotle de Animalibus
Ladies, when they be with Child, should be of their Husbands both tended and
served: For the man cannot do the woman so great a pleasure before her lying
down, as she does to him when she brings forth a son

Considering the danger that the woman abides in her deliverance, and
beholding the pains that the Husband takes in her service: without comparison
that is greater which she suffers, then that which he endures. For when the
woman delivers, she does more then her power, and the Husband (though he
serves her well, does less then his duty. The gentle and loving Husband
ought not one moment to forsake his wife, specially when he sees she is
great: For in the law of a good Husband it is written, that he should set his
eyes to behold her, his hands to serve her, he should spend his goods to
cherish her, and should give his heart The property of a good Husband.
to content her. Let not men think it pains to serve their wives when they
are with child, for their labor consists in their strength, but the travel
of their wives is in their entrails. And that which is most pitiful is, that
when the sorrowful women will discharge their burden on the earth, they often
times bring themselves unto the grave.

The mean women of the Plebians ought no less to be reproved, for that when
they are with child they would be exempted from all business of the house: the
which neither they themselves ought to desire, nor yet their husbands to
suffer: for idleness is not only an occasion not to deserve heaven: but also
it is a cause whereby women often times have ill success in their travail: for
considering both the dainty Lady with child, that has her pleasure, and does
little; and on the other side, the poor man's wife, which moderately labors,
you shall see, that the great Ladies, for all their pleasures, abides more
danger then the other does with all her labor.

The husband ought to keep his wife from taking too much pains; for so ought
he to do: and the wife likewise ought to flee too much pleasure, for it
behooves her.

For the mean travel is no other but occasion of a safe delivery. The women
with child also ought to take heed to themselves, and in especially noble and
great ladies, that they be not too greedy and hasty in eating. For the woman
being with child ought to be sober: and the woman which is a great eater, with
great pains shall live chaste. Women with child often times do disorder
themselves in eating licorous meats: and under the color of feeding themselves
and their infant, they take too excessiuely; which is not only unwholesome for
the Child, but also dishonor for their mothers. For truly by the excess of
the Mother (being with child) comes many diseases to the infant when it
lives.

The Husbands also ought neither to displease nor grieve their Wives,
especially when they see them great with child: for of truth oftentimes she
delivers with more danger, by reason of the offenses that men do unto them,
then by the abundance of meats which they do eat.

Though the Woman when she is with Child, in some things does offend her
Husband, yet he like a wise man ought to forbear her, having respect to the
child, wherewith she is great, and not to the injuries that she has
committed: For in the end, the Reasonable Creatures may take example by the
unreasonable.
Mother cannot be so great an offender, but the child is much more innocent.
For the proof of this, it needs not books to read, but only our eyes to
see: how the brute Beasts for the most part (when their females are big) do
not touch them, nor yet the Females suffer them to be touched. I mean, that
the Noble and high Estates ought to absent themselves from their wives
carnally, being great with child: and he that in this case shall show
himself most temperate, shall of all men be deemed most virtuous.

I do not speak this to the end it should bind a man, or that it were an
offense then to use the company of his wife, but unto men that are virtuous I
give it as a counsel. For some A custom among the Mauritanians.
things ought to be done of necessity, and others ought to be eschued for
honesty.

Dyodorus Siculus says, that in the Realm of Mauritania there were so few
men, and so many women, that every man had five wives: where there was a law
among them, that no man should marry under three wives: furthermore they had a
wonderful and foolish custom, that when any Husband died, one of those women
should cast herself quick into the grave, and be buried with him. And if that
within a month she did it not, or that she dyed not, by justice she was
openly put to death: saying, that it is more honesty to be in company with
her Husband in the grave, then it is to be alone in her house.

In the Isles of Baleares the contrary is seen, for there increase so many
men, and so few women, that for one woman there was seven men: and so they had
a custom, especially amongst the poor, that one woman should be married with
five men. For the rich men sent to seek for women in other strange Realms,
wherefore then Merchants came heavy laden with women, as now they do with
merchandise to sell. Upon which occasion there was a custom in those Isles,
that (for as much as there were so few women) when any woman with child drew
near the seven months, they were separated from their husbands, and shut
and locked up in the Temples, where they gave them such things as were
necessary for them of the common treasure. For the ancients had their Gods in
such veneration, that they would not permit any person to eat that which he
brought; but of that which unto the Gods of the Temple was offered. At that
time the Barbarous kept theit wives locked in the Church, because the Gods
having them in their Temples, should be more merciful unto them in their
delivery, and also to cause them to avoid the dangers at that time: and
besides that, because they took it for a great villainy, that the women, during
that time, should remain with their husbands.

The famous and renowned Philosopher, Pulio, in the fifth Book, De moribus
antiquorum, said, That in the Realm of Pannonia, (which now is Hungary) the
women that were great A custom in Hungary
with child were so highly esteemed, that when any went out of her house, all
those which met with her were bound to return back with her; and in such
sort as we at this present do reverence the holy Communion, so did these
Barbarous then the women with child.

The women of Carthage, being with child (when Carthage was Carthage) had as
great privileges, as now our Sanctuaries have for the safeguard of misdoers:
for, in times past, all such offenders as could enter into the house where a
woman lay in childbed, should have been free from correction of Justice.

As Fronto says, in his Book of the Veneration of the Gods, the Gallois
Transalpins did not only honor and reverence the women with child; but also
with much care and diligence watched her delivery: for it little avails the
Ship to have passed safe the dangerous Seas, if at the Shore she be cast away.

The case was in this sort, that all the ancient Gentiles honored some gods in
their Temples, and kept other in The false opinion of the Heathen.
their houses, the which were called Lares and Penates: and when any woman
began to labor, each neighbor brought his familiar god unto her, to present
her with all, because they thought, that the more gods there were, of so much
more power they were to keep her from perils.

Speaking like a Christian; Truly, those gods were of small value, since they
could not help the woman safely to be delivered that was in travail.

CHAP. XII. What the Philosopher Pisto was: and of the Rules he gave
concerning women with child.
IN the time of Octauian the Emperor, was a Philosopher called Pisto, which
was of the sect of Pithagoras; and when Rome flourished, he was very familiar
with the Emperor Octauian, and well beloved of all the people, which ought not
to be a little esteemed: for he which of the Prince is most favored, commonly
of the people is much hated.

This Emperor Octauian was a The Commendation of the Emperor Octauian.
Prince very desirous of all virtuous things; so that when he dined with his
Captains, he spoke of War; when he supped with the Sages, he reasoned of
the Sciences; and he that uttered any dishonest or idle word in his presence,
he always afterward took him as his enemy.

This Pisto was very grave in weighty affairs, very pleasant in slents and
jests; and often times he was demanded many questions of the Emperor, whereof
the answers of some (according to the demands and questions) here follows.

The Emperor said to Pisto, Of all The saying of Pisto.
these that lives, whom take thou to be most Fool? To whom the Philosopher
answered. In my opinion, I take him to be most fool, of whose word there
comes no profit: for truly, he is not so very a fool that flingeth stones
into the wind, as he that utters vain words.

Tell me, Pisto, Whom ought we of right to desire to speak, and whom of right
to command to be silent? He answered; It is good when speech does profit, and
good to keep silence when speech is hurtful: for the one desiring to
maintain the good, and the other to defend the evil, wars begin throughout
all the world.

Tell me, Pisto, from what thing ought the fathers most to keep their
children? He said, In my opinion, parents ought in nothing to watch so much, as
to keep them from being vicious: for the father ought rather to have his son
dye well, then to live evil.

Tell me, Pisto, What shall man do if he be brought to this extremity, That
if he speak truth, he condemns himself: and if he make a lie, he saves
himself? The virtuous man (said he) ought rather to choose to be overcome by
truth, then to overcome by lies: for it is impossible, that a man which is a
liar should continue long in prosperity.

Tell me, Pisto, What shall men do to obtain rest? He answered, As I think,
the man cannot have rest, unless he forsake worldly affairs: for the men that
are occupied with weighty affairs, cannot be without great cares, or always
accompanied of great troubles.

Tell me, Pisto, wherein a man shows himself to be most wise? He answered.
There is no greater proof to know a wise man, then if he be patient to suffer
the ignorant: for in suffering an injury, the heart is more helped by wisdom
then by knowledge.

Tell me, Pisto, What is that thing that the virtuous man may lawfully desire?
He answered, All that is good (so that it be not to the prejudice of any other)
may honestly be desired: but in my opinion, that only ought to be desired,
which openly without shame may be demanded.

Tell me, Pisto, What shall men do with their wives when they are great with
child, to cause that the child in safety may be delivered? He answered, In
the world there is nothing more perilous, iben to have the charge of a woman
with child: for if the husband serve her, he has pain and travail: and if
perchance he do not content her, she is in danger.

In this case the wives of Rome, and their husbands also, ought to be very
diligent, and to the things following more careful, the which I show them more
for counsel then for commandment: for good counsel ought to have as much
authority in the virtuous, as the commandment has in the vicious.

Thou Octauian, as thou art a merciful and a pitiful Emperor, and How good
counsel ought to be regarded.
that thou keep thy Niece Collucia great with child, I know thou desire
that she had presently good and lucky delivery, and that she were delivered
of her pain: all the which thou shall see, if thou do mark these things
that I will show thee here following.

First, the woman ought to beware of dancing, leaping, and running: for leaping
What is required of women with child.
oftentimes makes man to lose his speech, and women with child to lose their
life, wherefore it is not reason that the folly of the mother should be
permitted to put in hazard the life of the child.

The second, the woman being with child, ought to beware that she be not so
hardy, to enter into Gardens where there is much fruit, and that for eating too
many she be not ill delivered: for it is no reason, that the lycorousnes of
the mother be punished with the death of the child.

The third, the woman with child ought to beware of over hard lacing her self
about the middle: for many Roman Dames, for to seem proper, do wear their
Gowns so strait, that it is an occasion to kill their creatures, which is a
heinous matter, that the young babe should lose his life, because his mother
should seem pretty.

The fourth, the women with child ought to beware of eating in a great
Banquet: for often times there comes a sudden deliverance, only through
eating without measure: and it is not meet, that for tasting a thing of little
value, the mother and the child should both lose their lives.

The fifth, the woman being with child ought to beware that she gives no ear
to any sudden news: for she is in more danger for hearing a thing that
grieueth her, then for suffering long sickness that payneth her: and it were
unjust, that for knowing of a trifling matter, the mother that is to be
delivered, and the child that is to be borne, should both in one moment perish.

The sixth, the woman with child ought to beware that she go not by any means
to any Feasts, where there shall be any great assembly of people: for often
times the woman with child, seeing her to be much thrust and pressed, being not
able to say, I am here, may immediately dye in the place: and it is not reason,
but an unjust thing, that the woman, for the desire to see the children of
others, should make of her own Orphans.

The seventh, the husband ought to beware, that she being with child, be not
deneyd any honest thing that she does mind; for ingranting her it cannot cost
him much; but in denying her, he may lose much: and it would not be just,
that since in her bringing forth she honoreth and increases the Commonwealth
of Rome, that Rome should condescend that any woman with child should receive
any hurt or dishonor.

These be the answers that Pisto made the Emperor Octauian, the which he
gave as Rules to women with child, which being so kept, I do assure you, that
the great Ladies should deliver themselves from many perils, and the husbands
also should escape from many sorrows.

Concluding therefore that which above all is spoken, I say, that Princesses
and great Ladies, when they are with child, ought to be more wary and
circumspect then other mean women: for where man hops to have most profit,
there ought he most to be careful.

The Author of this is Pulio, in Pulio de moribus antiq:
his third Book De moribus antiquoru^, and Sextus Cheronsnsis in his fifth
book De legibus domesticis.

CHAP. XIII.
Of three Counsels which Lucius Seneca gave unto a Secretary his friend, who
served the Emperor Nero: and how the Emperor Marcus Aurelius disposed all the
hours of the day.

THe Emperor Nero had a Secretary called Emilius Varro, the which being in
Rome builded a sumptuous house joining unto the Gate of Salaria, whereunto he
invited one day Lucius Seneca to a banquet, to the end the house might be more
fortunate: for the Romans had a prophecy, That according to the good or ill
luck of him that first entered into a new house, so should it continually be
luckie, or unlucky. Lucius Seneca granted to the request of his friend
Emilius Varro: and when they had well eaten, they went both to see this new
building, showing unto Lucius Seneca all things: at the last the Secretary said
thus unto Seneca: Those between both, are for Guests: those Halles, are for
Merchants and Suitors: these Secrets, are for Women: those Chambers, are for
Knights: those Galleries, which are covered, are to avoid the Sun: this
lowest part here, is for Horses: the Sellers, are for the Buttry: in the end he
showed him the whole house, for the furnishing whereof they lacked not one jot.

After the Secretary Emilius Varro had showed him all his house, he looked
when his Guest Seneca would greatly praise and commend it; but he, as though
he knew nothing, said unto Emilius Varro, as he went out of the doors, Whose
house is this? Whereunto Emilius answered: How now, Seneca! can thou not
tell? I have employed all my goods in building this house, and have led thee
all about to see it, and I have told thee that it is mine; and yet do thou
ask me again whose it is?

Lucius Seneca answered: Thou have showed us the house for strangers, the house
for sleues, the house for women, the house for horses; and in all this house
thou have not showed me one little part for thy self, but that another man
does enter into it: for if thou have any interest therein, they have the best
thereof, which is the possession. I account thee a wise man, I do account thee
a man of understanding, and also I know, that with all thy heart, thou art my
friend: and since I have been bidden to day by the, it is but reason, that for
to reward that which thou have done to me, I do some service unto thee, which
shall be to give unto thee some good counsel: for strangers use to pay for the
feast with money, and vain men with telling lies, babblers by counting vain
tales, children by flatteries; but virtuous men ought to pay by giving good
Counsels. This house has cost thee much pain, great griefs, and much money,
and if it cost thee so much, it is but reason that thou enjoy the same: take
therefore these my three counsels, and it may be thou will find thy self
better contented with those, then with money of strangers: for many have
wherewithal to build a house, but they have not understanding to govern the
same.

The first counsel is, Though that Lucius Seneca his counsel.
thou love thy friend very well, or thy wife as well, yet that thou never
discover all the secrets of thy heart neither to thy friend, nor to thy wife:
but that thou always reserve some particular unto thy self: for Plato says,
to whom a man commits his secrets, to him also he gives his liberty.

The second counsel is, That neither in private business, nor in public
affairs, thou occupy thy self so much, but at the least thou do reserve
three hours in the day for thine own rest.

The third counsel is, That thou have in thy house some secret place, whereof
thou alone shall have the key, and therein thou shall have Books, where thou
may study of thy affairs, and also talk with thy friends. Finally, this
place shall be a secretary of thy counsels, and a rest for thy travels.

These were the words that Lucius Seneca spoke to his friend Emilius Varro,
which words were such as he himself was, that is to say, of a sage and
excellent personage: and though the Banquet was rich, yet the payment of Lucius
Seneca was much more worth: for the mind feels more taste in the good and
ripe counsel, then the body does in sauory and delicate meats.

I have told you this example of Lucius Seneca, for to tell another that
happened to the Emperor Marcus Aurclius, with his wife Faustine. And to the
end, that the order of the matter be not turned without breaking our History,
first we will declare here the order which this Emperor observed in his life:
for the Commonwealth shall never be well governed, but where the Prince
governs well his life. Princes of necessity ought to be well ordered in
this life, because How virtuous Princes ought to be.
they may profit the affairs of the Empire, with the particulars of their
house: and because they should use the particulars of their house to the
recreation of their Person: and all these things ought to be divided according
to time: for a good Prince ought to lack no time to do that thing well which
he has to do, nor ought he to have any time vacant to employ himself to
vice.

The worldly call that time good, the which is, or was prosperous unto them:
they call that time evil, which is, or has been contrary and unfortunate
unto them.

The Creator will never that this sentence be approved by my pen: but I call
that time good, which is employed in virtues; and that time evil, that is lost
in vices: for the times are always as one; but men do turn from vice to
virtue, from virtue to vice.

The good Emperor, Marcus Aurelius, did divide the time, by time: so, that
though he had time for himself, he had time likewise to dispatch his own and
others affairs: for the man that is willing, in a small time dispatcheth much
business: and the man which is negligent, in along time does little.

This was the order that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius took in spending his
time: He slept seven hours in the night, and one hour rested How the Emperor
Marcus Aurclius spent his time.
himself in the day. In dining and supping, he consumed only two hours; and
it was not for that he took great pleasure to belong in eating; but because
the Philosophers, which disputed before his Presence, were occasion to prolong
the time: for in seventeen years they never saw him at meat, but one or
other read unto him some Book, or else the Philosophers reasoned before him
Philosophy. As he had many Realms and Provinces, so he appointed one hour for
the affairs of Asia, for Affricke one hour, and Europe another hour: and for
the conversation of his wife, children, and family, he appointed other two
hours of time: he had another hour for extraordinary affairs; as, to hear
the complaints of the grieved, the quarrels of the poor, the complaints of the
widows, and the robberies done to the orphans: for the merciful Prince
gives no less care unto the poor, which for want can do little; then to the
rich, which for abundance can do much. He occupied all the residue of the day
and night to read Books, write works: to make meeter, and in studying of other
Antiquities, to practice with the Sage, and to dispute with the Philosophers:
and finally, he took no taste of any thing so much, as he did to talk of
Science: Unless the cruel wars did let him, or such like affairs troubled
him, ordinarily in Winter he went to bed at nine of the clock, and awaked at
four: and because he would not be idle, he had always a Book under his beds
head, and the residue of the day he bestowed in reading.

The Romans had an ancient custom to bear fire before them: that is to say,
a Torch light in the day, and A custom among the Romans.
a Lamp burning in the night in their Chambers: so that waking, they burned
Wax; and sleeping, they burned Oil. And the cause why the Romans ordained
that the Oil should be made of Olive, and the Wax made of Bees (which was
used to be borne before the Princes) was to the end they should remember, that
they ought to be as gentle and loving as the Oil of Olive is sweet: and as
profitable to the Commonwealth, as the Bees are.

He did rise at six of the clock, and made himself ready openly; and with a
gentle countenance he asked them that were about him, wherein they had spent
all the night, and declared unto them then what he had dreamed, what he had
thought, and what he had read. When he was ready, he washed his face with
odoriferous waters, and loved very well sweet savors: for he had so quick a
sent, that he was much offended when he passed through any stinking place.

In the morning he used to eat two morsels of a Lectuary made of Sticades, and
drank three spoonefulls of Maluesey, or else two drops of Aqua vita, because
he had a cold stomach, for that he gave himself so much to study in times
past. We see it by experience, that the great Students are persecuted more with
sickness then any others: for in the sweetness of the Science, they know not
how their life consumes.

If it were in the Summer season, he went in the morning to recreate himself
to the River of Tiberi, and walked there a foot for two hours; and in this
place they talked with him that had business: and truly it was a great
policy; for, where as the Prince does not sit, the suitor always abridgeth
his talk. And when the day began to wax hot, he went to the high Capitol,
where all the Senate tarryed for him: and from thence he went to the Coliseo,
where the Ambassadors of the Provinces were, and there remained a great part
of the day. Afterward he went to the Chapel of the Vestall Virgins, and
there he heard every Nation by it self, according to the order which was
prescribed. He did eat but one meal in the day, and it was very late; but he
did eat well: not of many and diverse sorts of meat, but of few and good: for
the abundance of diverse and strange meats breeds sundry diseases.

They saw him once a week go through Rome, and if he went any more, it was
a wonder: at the which time he was always without company, both of his own,
and also of strangers, to the intent all poor men might talk with him of
their business, or complain of his Officers: for it is impossible to reform
the Commonwealth, if he which ought to remedy it, be not informed of the
injuries done in the same. He was so gentle in conversation, so pleasant in
words, so Noble amongst the Great, so equal with the least, so reasonable in
that he did ask, so perfect in that he did work, so patient in injuries, so
thankful of benefits, so good to the good, and so severe to the evil, that
all loved him for being good, and all the evil feared him for being just. A
man ought not little to esteem the love that the people bare to this so good a
Prince and Noble Emperor, for so much as the Romans have been thus: that for
the felicity of their estate, they offered to their Gods greater Sacrifice,
then they did in any other Provinces.

And Sextus Cheronensis says, that the Romans offered more Sacrifices to the
Gods, because they should lengthen the life of the Emperor, then they did
offer for the profit of the Commonwealth. Truly their reason was good; for
the Prince that leads a good life, is the heart of the Commonwealth. But I
do not marvel, that the Emperor was so well willed, and beloved of the
Roman Empire: for he had never Porter to his Chamber, but the two hours which
he remained with his wife Faustine.

All this being past, the good Emperor weat into his house, into the secretst
place he had (according to the counsel of Lucius Seneca) the key whereof he
alone had in his custody, and never trusted any man therewith, until the
hour of his death; and then he gave it to an old ancient man called
Pompeianus, saying unto him these words:

Thou know right well, Pompeianus, that, thou being base, I exalted thee The
speech of Marcus Aurelius at his death.
to honor: thou being poor, I gave thee riches: thou being persecuted, I drew
thee to my Palace: I being absent, committed my whole honor to thy trust: thou
being old, I married thee with my daughter, and do presently give thee this
Key.

Behold, that in giving thee it, I give thee my heart and life: for, I will
thou know, that death grieueth me not so much, nor the loss of my wife and
children, as that I cannot carry my Books into the grave. If the Gods had
given me the choice, I had rather choose to be in the grave environed with
Books, then to live accompanied with fools: for, if the dead do read, I take
them to be aline; but if the living do not read, I take them to be dead.

Under this key which I give thee, remains many Greek, Hebrew, Latin, and
Romame Books: and above all, under this key remains all my pains, swet, and
trauells, all my watchings, and labors, where also thou shall find Books by
me compiled: so that though the worms of the earth do eat my body; yet men
shall find my heart whole amongst these Books.

Once again I do require thee, and say, that thou ought not a little to
esteem the key which I give thee: for wise men at the hour of their death,
always recommend that which they best love, to them which in their lives they
have most loved.

I do confess, that in my Study thou shall find many things with mine own
hand written and well ordered: and also I confess, that thou shall find many
things by me left imperfect. In this case, I think, that though thou could
not write them, yet thou shall work them well notwithstanding; and by these
means thou shall get reward of the Gods for working them.

Consider, Pompeian, that I have been thy Lord, I have been thy
Father-in-law, I have been thy Father, I have been thy Advocate, and above
all, that I have been thy special friend, which is most of all: for a man
ought to esteem more a faithful friend, then all the Parents of the world.

Therefore in the faith of that friendship I require, that thou keep this in
memory, that even as I have recommended to others my Wife, my Children, my
Goods, and Riches: So I do leave unto thee in singular recommendation my
Honor: for Princes leave of themselves no greater memory, then by the good
learning that they have written.

I have been eighteen years Emperor of Rome; and it is threescore and three
years that I have remained in this woeful life, during which time I have
overcome many Battles, I have slain many Pirates, I have exalted many good,
I have punished many evil, I have won many Realms, and I have destroyed
many Tyrants: but what shall I do, woeful man that I am, since all my
companions, which were witnesses with me of all these worthy feats, shall be
companions in the grave with the greedy worms?

A thousand years hence, when those that are now alive shall then be dead,
what is he that shall say, I saw Marcus Aurelius triumph over the Parthians: I
saw him make the buildings in Auentino: I saw him well beloved of the people:
I saw him father of the Orphans: I saw him the scourge of Tyrants? Truly if
all these things had not been declared by my Books, or of my friends, the
dead would never have risen again to have declared them.

What is it for to see a Prince (from the time he is borne, until the time he
come to dye) to see the poverty he passes, the perils he endures, the evil
that he suffers, the shame that he dissembleth, the friendship that he
fayneth, the tears which he sheddeth, the sighs that he fetches, the
promises that he makes, and does not endure for any other cause the miseries
of this life: but only to leave a memory of him after his death.

There is no Prince in the world that desires not to keep a good house, to
keep a good table, to apparel himself richly, and to pay those that serve
him in his house: but by this vain honor, they suffer the water to pass
through their lips, not drinking thereof.

As one that has proved it, it is reason that I be beloved in this case, and
that is, That the intent of Princes to conquer strange Realms, and to permit
their own to suffer wrongs, is for no other thing, but because that the
commendations which they speak of the Princes past, they should likewise talk
the same of them that be to come.

Concluding therefore my mind, and declaring my intention, I say, that the
Prince that is Noble, and desires to leave off himself from fame, let him
consider, and see what it is that those can write of him which write his
history: for it profits little, that he atchieue great affairs by the
sword, if there be no Writer to set them forth with the pen, and afterward to
exalt them with the tongue.

These words thus spoken by the Noble Emperor Marcus Aurelius, he gave the key
of his Study to the Honorable old man Pompeianus, that took all the
Writings, and put them in the high Capitol, where the Romans honored them,
as the Christians the holy Scriptures. All these Writings, besides many others,
perished in Rome, when by the barbarous it was destroyed: for the Goths
(utterly to extinguish the name of Rome) destroyed not only the walls Rome
destroyed by the Goths.
thereof, but also the Books that were therein: And truly in this case the
Goths showed more cruelty to the Romans, then if they had slain the
children of their bodies, or beat down the walls of their Cities: For,
without doubt, the lively Letter is a more sweeter witness of renown, that
always speaks; then either the Lime, Sand, or Stone, wherewith Fortresses
are builded.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the importunate suite of the Empress Faustine, to the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius, concerning the Key of his Closet.
WE have declared, how the Emperor Marcus Aurelius had his Study in the
secretst place of all the Palace, and how that he himself did keep the key.
It is to be understood, that he would never let his wife, his children, nor
any other of his familiar friends come into it: for he said, I had rather
suffer that they should take from me my treasures, then that any man should
turn the leaves of my Books.

It chanced, that on a day the Empress Faustine, being great with child,
importuned the Emperor much, by all the means she could, that he would be so
favorable unto her, as to give her the key of his Study: and it is no
marvel, for naturally women despise that which is given the^, and lust for
that that is denied them.

Faustine instantly besought him, not once, but many times, not only with
fair words, but with abundant tears, alleging unto him these reasons: I
have required thee sundry times, that thou would give me the key of thy
chamber, and thou have by jesting made frustrate my request, the which thou (my
Lord) ought not to have done, considering that I am with child: for
oftentimes it chances, that that wherefore the husband rejoices this day, to
morrow he does lament.

Thou ought to remember that I am that Faustine the renowned, the which in
thy eyes am the fairest, and of thy tongue have been most commended, of thy
person I was best beloved, and of thy heart I am most desired: then since it is
true, that thou have me so deeply in heart, why then doubtest thou to show me
the Writings of thy Study. Thou do communicate with me the secrets of the
Empire, and thou hidest from me the books of thy study. Thou have given me thy
tender heart of flesh, and now thou denyest me the hard key of iron: now I
must needs think that thy love was feigned, that thy words were double, and
that thy thoughts, were others then they seemed: for if they had been
otherwise, it had been impossible thou should have denied me the key that I
do ask thee; for where love is unfeigned, though the request be merrily
asked, yet it is willingly granted.

It is a common custom, that you men use to deceive us simple women, you
present us with great gifts, you give many fair words, you make us fair
promises, you say you will do maruels, but in the end you do nothing but
deceive us: for we are persecuted more of you, the^ of any others.

When men in such wise importune the women, if the women had The importunity of
the Empress.
power to deny and withstand, we should in short space bring ye under the
yoke, and lead you by the noses: but when we suffer our selves to be overcome,
then you begin to forsake us, and despise us. Let me therefore (my Lord) see
thy Chamber, consider I am with child, and that I dye unless I see it. If
thou do not to do me pleasure, yet do it, at least, because I may no more
importune thee: for if I come in danger through this my longing, I shall but
lose my life: but thou shall lose the child that should be borne, and the
mother also that ought to bear it.

I know not why thou should put thy noble heart into such a dangerous
fortune, whereby both thou and I at one time shuldperish; I dying so yo^g, and
thou in losing so loving a wife.

By the immortal Gods I do beseech thee, and by the mother Berecinthia I
conjure thee, that thou give me the key, or that thou let me enter into the
Study; and stick not with me thy wife in this my small request, but change thy
opinion: for all that which without consideration is ordained, by importunate
suite may be revoked. We see daily that me^ by reading in Books, love their
children; but I never saw heart of man fall in such sort, that by reading and
looking in Books, he should despise his children: for in the end, Books are
by the words of others made; but children are with their own proper blood
begotten.

Before that any thing of wisdom is begun, they always regard the
inconveniences that may follow: therefore if thou will not give me this key,
and that thou art determined to be stubborn still in thy will, thou shall lose
thy Faustine, thou shall lose so loving a wife, thou shall lose the creature
wherewith she is big, thou shall lose the authority of thy Palace, thou
shall give occasion to all Rome to speak of thy wickedness, and this grief
shall never depart from thy heart: for the heart shall never be comforted,
that knows, that he only is the occasion of his own grief. If the Gods do
suffer it by their secret indgements, and if my woeful mishappes deserve it,
and if thou (my Lord) desire it for no other cause, but even to do after thy
will, for denying me this key, I should dye: I would willingly dye. But of
that, I think, thou will repent: for it chances often times to wise men, That
when remedy is gone, the repentance comes suddenly: and then it is to late
(as they say) to shut the Stable door, when the Steed is stolen.

I marvel much at thee (my Lord) why thou should show thy self so froward
in this case, since thou know, that all the time we have been together,
thy will and mine has always been one! If thou will not give me thy key, for
that I am thy well-beloved Faustine: if thou will not let me have it, since I am
thy dear beloved wife: if thou will not give it me, for that I am great with
child, I beseech thee give it me in virtue of the ancient law: for thou
know it is an inuiolate law among the Romans, that a man cannot deny his
wife with child A law aamong the Roman.
her desires. I have seen sundry times with mine eyes, many women sue their
husbands at the law in this behalf: and thou (my Lord) command, that a man
should not break the privileges of women.

Then if this thing be true (as it is true indeed) why will thou that the
laws of strange children should be kept, and that they should be broken to
thine own children? Speaking according to the reverence that I owe unto thee,
though thou would, I will not; though thou do it, I will not agree
thereunto: and though thou do command it, in this case I will not obey thee:
for if the husband do not accept the just request of his wife, the wife is not
bound to obey the unjust commandment of her husband.

You husbands desire that your wives should serve you, you desire that your
wives should obey you in all, and ye will condescend to nothing that they
desire. You men say, that we women have no certainty in our love: but indeed
you have no love at all: For by this it appears, that your love is feigned, in
that it no longer continues then your desires are satisfied.

You say furthermore, that the women are suspicious, and that is true in you
all, men may see, and not in us: for none other cause there are are so many
evil married in Rome, but because their husbands have of them such evil
opinions.

There is a great difference between the suspicion of the woman, and the
jealousy of the man: for a man will understand the suspicion of the woman; it
is no other thing, but to show to her husband that she loves him with all her
heart: for the innocent women know no others, desire no others but their
husbands only; and they would that their husbands should know none others, nor
search for any others, nor love any others, nor will any others, but them
only: for the heart that is bent to love one only, would not that into that
house should euter any other.

But you men know so many means, and use so many subtilties, that you praise
your selves for to offend them, you vaunt your selves to deceive them, and that
it is true, a man can in nothing so much show his noblenes, as to sustain and
favor a Curtizan.

The husbands please their wives speaking unto the^ some merry words, and
immediately, their backs being turned, to another they give both their bodies
and their goods. I swear unto thee (my Lord) that if women had the liberty
and authority over men, as men have over women, they should find more malice,
deceitfulness and craft by them committed in one day, then they should find in
the women all the days of their life.

You men say, that women are evil speakers, it is true indeed that your
tongues are none other, but the stings of Serpents: for ye do condemn the
good men, and defame the Roman women. And think not (if you speak evil of
other women) to excuse your own: for the man that by his tongue dishonors
strange What evil comes by the tongue.
women, does not so much evil, as he does by defaming his own wife by
suspicion: for the husband that suspecteth his wife, gives all men license to
account her for naught.

Since we women go little out of the house, we travail not far: and since
we see few things, though we would, we cannot be evil tongued: But you men
hear much, you see much, you know much, you wander abroad much, and
continually you murmr.

All the evil that we silly women can do, is to listen to our friends when
they are vexed, to chide our servants when they are negligent, to envy our
neighbors if they be fair, and to curse those that do us injury: finally,
though we speak evil, we cannot murmr, but at those that dwell in the
same Street where we dwell. But you men defame your wives by suspicion, you
dishonor your neighbors in your words, you speak against strangers with
cruelty, you neither keep faith nor promise to your wives, you show your
selves extreme against your enemies, you murmr both at those that be
present, and also at them that be absent: finally, on the one part you are so
double, and on the other part you are so unthankful, that to those whom you
desire, you make fair promises, and those, whose bodies you have enjoyed, you
little esteem.

I confess that the woman is not so good as she ought to be, and that it is
necessary that she should be kept What is required in a Woman.
in the house, and so she shall lead a good life; and being of good life, she
shall have good renown; and having good renown, she shall be well willed:
but if chance any of those do want in her, yet for all that she ought not to
be rejected of her husband: For the frailenesse that men find in women is but
little: but the evils that women taste in men is very great.

I have talked longer then I thought, and have said more boldly then I ought,
but pardon me (my Lord) for my intention was not to vex thee, but to persuade
thee: for in the end he is a fool that takes that for injury, which passes
between the man and the wife in secret.

I stick always to my first point, and if it need, once again I require thee
that thou will give me the Key of thy study: and if thou do otherwise, (as
thou may) thou shall do such a thing, as thou ought not to do. I am not
angry so much for that thou do, as for the occasion thou give me.

Therefore to avoid the peril of my delivery, and to take from me all
suspicion, I pray thee (my Lord) deliver me the key of thy study: for
otherwise I cannot be persuaded in my heart, but that you have a woman locked in
your study. For men that in their youth have been unconstant, though the
apparel that they have be not worn, yet notwithstanding they desire to have
new. Therefore once again to preserve me from peril in my delivery, and to
lighten my heart of this thought, it shall be well done that you let me enter
into your study.

CHAP. XV. The Answer of the Emperor to Faustine, concerning her demand of
the key of the Study.
THe Emperor hearing the words of Faustine, and seeing that she spoke them so
earnestly, that she bathed her woeful words with bitter tears, determined
also to answer her as earnestly, and said unto her these words.

Wife Faustine, thou have told me all that thou would, and I have heard
all The Emperors answer.
thy complaint. Therefore I desire thee now to have as much patience to hear
my answer, as I have had pain to hear thy demand. And prepare thy ears to
hear my words, as I have listened mine to hear thy Folly. For in like matter,
when the tongue does apply it self to speak any word, the ears ought
immediately to prepare them to hear it, for to make answer. For this is most
sure, that he that speaks what he would, shall hear what he would not.
Before I tell thee what thou art, and what thou ought to be, I will first
tell thee what I am, and what I ought to be: For I will thou understand
Faustine, that I am so evil, that that the which mine enemies do report of me
is but a trifle in respect of that which my Familiars and Friends would say if
they knew me. To the end the Prince be good, he ought not to be covetous of
Tributes, neither proud in commandments, nor What is required of every Man,
unthankful of services, nor to be forgetful of the Temples: he ought not to
be deaf to hear griefs, complaints, and quarrels, nor cruel to Orphans,
nor yet negligent in affairs. And the man that shall want these vices, shall be
both beloved of men, and favored of the Gods.

I confess first of all that I have bin covetous. For indeed those which with
many troubles annoy Princes least, and with Money serve them most, are of all
other men best beloved.

Secondarily, I confess that I am proud: For there is no Prince at this day in
the world so brought under, but when Fortune is most lowest, he has his heart
very hanghtie.

Thirdly, I confess that I am unthankful: for amongst us that are Princes,
the services that they do unto us are great, and the rewards that we give
unto them are small.

Fourthly, I do confess that I am an evil founder of Temples: for amongst us
that are Princes, we do not Sacrifice unto the Gods very often, unless it be
when we see our selves to be enuironned with enemies.

Fifthly, I confess that I am negligent to hear the plaintes of the oppressed:
for the Flatterers have toward theys Princes more easy audience by their
Flattery, then the poor, pleading to declare their complaints by truth.

Sixthly, I confess that I am careless for the Orphans: For in the Courts
and Palaces of Princes the Rich and mighty are most familiar; but the
miserable and poor Orphans are scarcely heard.

Seventhly, I confess that I am negligent in dispatching Poor men's causes:
For the Princes often times, not providing in time for their affairs, many great
perils ensue to their Realms.

Now mark here Faustine: how I have told thee, what (according to reason) I
ought to be, and what according to the sensuality I am: and marvel not
although I confess mine error. For the man that acknowledges his fault,
gives hope of amendment. And let us come to talk of thee, and by that I have
spoken of me, thou may judge of thy self: For we men are so evil
conditioned, that we behold the uttermost the offenses of an another, but we
will not hear the faults of our selves. It is a true thing my wife Faustine,
that when a woman is merry, she always speaks more with her tongue, then she
knows in her heart. For women light of tongue speak many things in company,
the which they do lament after when they are alone. All the contrary comes
to woeful men, for they do not speak the half of their griefs: because their
heavy and woeful hearts commands their eyes to weep, and tongs to be silent.

Vain and foolish men, by vain and foolish words do publish their vain What
hurt comes by not governing the tongue.
and light pleasures: and the wise men by wise words, do dissemble their
grievous sorrows. For though they feale the troubles of this life, they
dissemble them as men. Amongst the Sages he is most wisest, that presumes to
know least: and amongst the simple he is most ignorant, that thinks to know
most. For if there be found one that knows much, yet always there is found
another that knows more.

This is one difference whereby the wise men are known from those that be
simple, that is to say: That the wise man to one that asks him a Question,
answers slowly and gravely, and the simple man (though he be not asked)
answers quick and lightly. For in the house where Noblenes and wisdom
are, they give riches without measure, but they give words by ounces. I have
told thee all this Faustine, because thy words have wounded me in such sort,
thy tears in such wise have compelled me, and thy vain judgments have
wearyed me so much, that I cannot say what I would, nor I think thou can
perceive what I say? Those which wrote of Marriage, wrote many things, but they
wrote not so many troubles in all their books, as one woman causes her Husband
to feel in one day.

The ancients spoke well, when they reasoned of Marriages: for at all times
when they talked of Marriage, at the beginning they put these words Crosses
incident to Marriage.
Onus Matrimonij: That is to say, the yoke of Marriage. For truly if the man
be not well married, all the troubles that may happen unto him, in all the time
of his life, are but small in respect to be matched one day with an evil wife.

Do thou think Faustine, that it is a small trouble for the Husband to
suffer ths brawlings of his wife? to endure her vain words? to bear with her
fond words? to give her what she requires? to seek that she desires? and to
dissemble with all her vanities? Truly it is so impatient a trouble, that I
would not desire any greater reuengement of my enemy, then to see him married
with a brawling wife.

If the Husband be proud, you do humble him: For there is no proud man,
whatsoever he be, but a fierce woman will make him stoop. If the Husband be
foolish, you restore him to his senses again: For there is no greater wisdom
in the World, then to know how to endure a brawling woman. If the Husband be
wild, you make him tame: For the time is so much that you occupy in brawling
that he can have no time to speak. If the husband be slow, you make him
run: for he desires so much your contentation in heart, that the woeful man
cannot eat in quiet, nor sleep in rest. If the Husband be a talker, you make
him dumb: for the flouts and mockes that you give him at every word are so
many in number, that he has none other remedy, but to refrain his tongue.

If the Husband be suspicious, you make him change his mind: For the Trifles
that you ask at every hour are such, and so many, and you therewith so
selfe-willed, that he dare not tell what he sees in his own house. If the
husband be a wanderer abroad, you make him forthwith a bider at home: for you
look so ill unto the house and goods, that he finds no other remedy but to
be always at home. If the Husband be vicious, you restrain him immediately:
for you burden his heart with so many thoughts, that his body has no delight
to use any pleasure. Finally, (I say) that if the husband be peaceable, within
short space you make him unquiet: for your pains are such, so many, and so
continual, that there is no heart can wholly dissemble them, nor Tongue that
utterly can keep them secret.

Naturally women have in all things the spirit of contradiction, for so What
women naturally are inclined unto.
much as if the Husbands will speak, they will hold their peace. If he go
forth, they will tarry at home: if he will laugh, they will weep: if he will
take pleasure they will vex him. If he be sorrowful, they will be merry. If
he desire peace, they would have war. If he would eat, they will fast, if he
would fast, they would eat. If he would sleep, they will watch: and if he
will watch, they will sleep. Finally I say, that they are of so evil a
condition, that they love all that we despise, and despise all that we love.

In mine opinion, the men that are wise, and will obtain that which they
desire of their wives: Let them not demand of them that which they would
obtain, if they will come to obtain their desire. For unto them which are
diseased, the letting of Blood is most profitable, when the vein in the
contrary side is opened. It is no other thing to be let blood in the contrary
side, but to ask of the woman with his mouth, the contrary of that which he
desires with his heart: for otherwise, neither by fair words of his mouth,
nor by the bitter tears of his eyes, he shall never obtain that which his
heart desires.

I confess Faustine, it is a pleasant sport to behold the young babes, and
thou can not deny me, but it is a cruel torment to endure the
importunities of their Mothers. Children now and then minister unto us
occasions of pleasures, but you that are their Mothers never do any thing, but
that which turns us to trouble.

It is much pleasure to the Husband when he comes home to find the house
clean swept, to find the Table covered, and to find the meat ready dressed:
this is to be understood, if all other things be well.

But what shall we say when he sees the contrary: and that he finds his
children weeping, his, neighbors offended, his Servants troubled, and above
all, when he finds his Wife brawling? Truly it is better to the woeful
Husband, to go his way fasting: then to tarry and eat at home with brawling.
I durst take upon me to cause that all married men would be content to
forbeareal the pleasures of the Children, with condition that they might be
Free from the annoyance of the Mothers: for in the end the pleasures of the
children ends quickly with laughter, but the griefs of the mothers endures
all their life with sorrow. I have seen one thing in Rome, wherein I was never
deceived, which is, that though men commit great offenses in this World, yet
God deferreth the punishment thereof until another: But if for any woman's
pleasure we commit any fault, God permits that by the same woman, in this
world we shall suffer the pain. There is no crueller enemy to to man, nor more
troublessome to live withal, then the woman is that he keeps in his house:
for if he suffer her once to have her own will, then let him be assured never
after to bring her unto obedience.

The young men of Rome follow the Ladies of Capua, but they may well repent
them: For there was never man that haunted of any long time the company of
women, but in the end to their procurement, either by death or with infamy he
was defaced. For the Gods esteem the Honor above all things, and as they
suffer the wickedness of the evil men, so we see the sharp punishments that
they ordain for them.

I am well assured Faustine of one thing (and I do not speak it by hear say,)
but because continually I have proved it, and it is, that the Husband which
condiscendeth to all that the Wife desires, causes his wife to do nothing of
that her husband commands. For there is nothing that keeps a woman more
under obedience to her Husband, then when oftentimes he denies with sharp
words, her unlawful request.

In my opinion it is much cruelty of the barbarous, to keep (as they do)
their wives like slaves: but it is much more folly of the Romans, to keep
them (as they do,) like Ladies. The flesh ought not to be so lean that it be
in eating dry, nor yet so fat that there be no lean: but it would
participate both of the fat and of the lean, to the intent it might give the
more nourishment. I mean, that the man of understanding ought not to keep his
Wife so short, that she should seem to be his servant, nor yet to give her so
much liberty, that she becomes his Mistress. For the Husband that suffers
his Wife to command more then she ought, is the cause why he himself
afterward is not esteemed as he should be.

I Behold Faustine, you women are in all things so extreme, that for a little
favor you wax proud: and for a little displeasure you become great enemies.

There is no Woman that willingly Women can not endure to have superiors.
can suffer to have any superior, nor yet scarcely can endure to have any
equal: for we see that you love not the highest, nor desire to be loved of the
lowest. For where the lovers be not equal, there their love cannot be
perfect. I know well Faustine, that thou do not understand me, therefore
harken what I do tell thee more then thou think, and more then thou
would.

O what and how many women have I seen in Rome, the which though they had two
thousand pound of Rent in their heads, yet they had three thousand follyes in
their heads: and the worst of all is, that often times her Husband dies, and she
loses her Rent, yet for all that cease not her folly. Now listen Faustine,
and I will tell thee more. All women will speak, and they will that others be
silent. All will command, and will not that they be commanded, and they will
that all be captives to them. All will govern, and will not be governed.

Finally, they all in this one thing agree, and that is, that they will cherish
them that they love, and revenge them of those that they hate. Of that which
before is said it may be gathered, that they make Fools and Slaves of the
young and vain men which follow them, and persecute the Wise men, as enemies
that fly them. For in the end where they love us most, their love may be
measured: but where as they hate us least, their hate exceeds reason.

In the Annals of Pompeius I remember I have read, and do note one thing
worthy of knowledge, that Annals of Pompeyus.
when Pompeius the Great passed first into Asia, as by chance he came by the
mountains of Rypheos, he found in those places a Barbarous nation, that lived
in the sharp mountains as wild beasts: and do not marvel that I do call them
beastly, that live in those mountains. For as the sheep and Cowes that feed
on the fine grass, have their wool soft and fine, so the men who are brought
up in the sharp and wild mountains, use themselves after a rude behavior.

These Barbarous had therefore a law among them, that every neighbor had in
those mountains two Caves: for the sharpnes of the hills permitted A Law among
the Barbarians.
not that they should have any Houses. Therefore in one cave the Husbands, the
Sons, and the Servants were: and in the other his Wife, his daughters, and
his handmaids abode: they did eat together twice in the week, they slept
together other twice in the week, and all the residue of the time they were
separate the one from the other. The great Pompeyus asked them what was the
cause why they lived so? since it was so, that in all the world there was never
seen nor read of such extreme law, nor so strange a custom.

The history says in that place, that an ancient man answered him, saying:
Behold Pompeius, that the gods have given short life unto us that be present,
in respect of that which he gave to our Fathers that are past: and since we
live but forty or fifty years at the uttermost, we desire to enjoy those
days in peace: For the life is so short, and our trouble so long that we have
small time to rejoice in peace after we return from the wars.

It is true that amongst you Romans which enjoy pleasures and riches, life
seems too short, but unto us that have toil with poverty, life seems too
long: For throughout all the year we never keep such solemn Feasts, as when
one passes out of his life.

Consider Pompeius that if men lived many years, there should be time to laugh
and weep, to be good and to be evil, to be poor and to be rich, to be
merry and sad, to live in peace and war: but why will men seek contention in
their life, since it is so short?

In keeping with us (as you do) our own wives, in living we should die, for
the nights should pass in hearing their complaints, and the days in suffering
their brawlings: but keeping them as we do, we see not their heavy
countenance, we hear not the crying of our children, we hear not their
grievous complaints, nor listen unto their sorrowful words, neither we are
troubled with their importunate suites, and yet the Children are nourished in
peace, and the father follows the wars: so that they are well, and we are
better. This was the answer that this old man gave, at the request of the
great Pompeius,

Truly Faustine I say, that though we call the Messagetes Barbarous, in this
case they know more then the Latins. For he that is free from a brawling
woman, has escaped no small pestilence.

I ask thee now Faustine, since those barbarous could not agree, nor would not
have their wives with the^ in those sharp mountains, how shall we other agree
and please you that live in these pleasures in Rome? One thing I will tell thee
Faustine, and I beseech the Gods that thou may understand it, which is. If
the beastly motions of the Flesh did not-force men to will, and also to desire
women, I doubt whether there should be any woman in the world beloved or
suffered. For though nature gives them gifts worthy to be beloved: yet they
through their small discretion cause themselves to be hated. If the gods had
made this love voluntary, as they made it natural, so that we might have
loved as we would, and left again at our pleasure: that man ought worthily to
have been punished, which for the love of any woman would put his life in
danger. The Gods have kept this great secret unto themselves, and the misery
that they gave unto men is very great: since that unto so weak Flesh, he gave
so strong a heart, the which does procure that which does us harm, and
follows that which we ought to abhor.

This is an other secret, that all men know when they offend, but I see no man
that seeks amendment: for I hear all complain of the flesh, and yet I see
all like Butchers follow the flesh: and when it can do least good, then it is
most greedy. I envy not the Gods living, nor the men that be dead, save only
for two things, which be these.

First, I envy the Gods, because they live without fear of the malicious:
Secondarily, I envy the dead, for that they live without need of Women. For
Women are so corrupt, that the corrupt all: and they be such mortal plagues,
that both flesh and heart by them are brought to end.

O Faustine, the love of the flesh is so natural to the flesh, that when from
you the body flies in sport, we then leave our hearts engaged to you in
earnest. And though reason as reason puts desire to fleight, yet the flesh
flesh, yields it self as prisoner.

CHAP. XXVI. The Emperor following his matter admonishes men of the great
dangers which ensue unto them by excessive haunting the company of women. And
recites certain rules for Married men, which (if they observe) may cause them
to live in peace with their Wives.
I Remember that in my youth, as I was of Flesh, I trembled for sear of the
flesh, with mind never to return again, and I do confess that often times I
reuolued in my heart, many holy and chaste meditations: but yet
notwithstanding, I gave my body immediately to sundry filthy vices.

It is a natural thing, that when man has committed any vice, forthwith he
repents him of his deed: and The frailty of man.
so again after his new repentance, he turns to his old vices.

For during the time that we live in this frail flesh, Sensuality bears so
great a rule, that she will not suffer Reason to enter in, at the gate. There
is no man in Rome, (if a man does ask him) but will maruelto declare with his
tongue the thoughts that he has had in his heart, in especially to be chaste,
to be true, to be pacient, and to be virtuous, and peradventure ye talk with
those that somewhat communicate with them, and let a man enquire of his
neighbors they shall find that he is a deeyuer' a liar, and a blasphemer.
Finally, they deceive men by their fair words, and offended the Gods, by
their evil works.

It profits little to Blaze virtues with words, if the hand be negligent to
work them in deed: For a man is not called just, only desiring to be good in
name, but for to labor to be virtuous in works.

The traiterous World in no one thing beguileth wordlings so much, as by
feeding them with vain hope: saying, That they shall have time enough to be
virtuous; So that these The cause why men ought to endeavor to be virtuous
blind men, when they are once deeply rooted in vices, and whilst they hope
for this light of amendment, then suddenly assaulteth them the dreadful dart
of death.

Oh how many have promised unto men, and vowed unto the Gods, and determined
with themselves, that before so many days they would begin to be virtuous?
whom in short space after we have seen to engage themselves to the hungry
worms of the earth? The Gods will that we be virtuous: and for the contrary,
the world and the flesh wills that we be vicious.

Me thinks that it is better to obey the Gods, then to do that which the
World and the Flesh desires: for the praise of virtue is honor, and the pain
of vice is infamy. If thou do consider Faustine, thou shall see that the
Gods are on the one part, which procures us to virtues, and on the other part
is the world and the flesh, which enticeth us unto vices. My opinion is we
should say unto the Gods that we desire to be veriuous, and that we should
say to the world and the flesh, that from henceforth we will give our selves no
more to be vicious.

We ought in such case to satisfy the Gods with works, and to entertain the
world and the flesh with words: that How we ought to to spend our time.
we employ so much time in leading a good life, that we have no time vacant to
speak an idle word.

I let thee know Faustine, that all that I have told thee, I have spoken it
against my self: for always from my youth I had a good mind, and yet for all
that I have bin ouerthrown with vices

Oh how many times in my youth I knew women, I accompanied with women, I
talked with women, and believed women: the which in the end have deceived me,
misused me, and defamed me? At the last I withdrew my self and forsook them:
but I do confess, that if reason kept me from their houses x. days,
sensuality kept me with them x. weeks.

Oh cruel Gods, oh wicked world, oh frail flesh, tell me what it means
Reason leads to virtue, Sensuality to vice.
that reason leads me voluntarily to virtues, and that Sensuality against my
will, draws me to vices?

Do thou not think Faustine, that I consider what a great good it is for to
be good, and what an evil it is to be evil? But what shall I do woeful man,
since at this day there is not so cruel a scourge of my honor, nor so great
an enemy of my renown, as mine own flesh is, the which against me does make
such cruel wars? wherefore I beseech the immortal Gods, since my being here is
against my will, that they do defend me in this so cruel war. The frail flesh
is somewhat to blame, but much more is the foolish and light woman in fault.
For if men were certain that women were chaste, shamefast, and solitary, they
would not dispose their hearts, their bodies, nor bend their Bows to shoot
at their Buttes: they would not consume their time to follow them, loose their
goods to serve them, neither would they suffer so many shames to slander them.
For where the heart has no hope to obtain, there he will give over his suite.

But what shall we do now Faustine (I pray thee tell me) since thou know
better then I, that the shame of the Roman women is now gone, and the women
of Italy are so dissolute, that though men do not regard them yet they do
entice them: If men fly, they call them: if men go back, they approach: if
men are sad, they make them merry: if men are silent, they force them to
speak: and finally, men begin their love in sport, and they temper it in
such sort, that they turn it all into earnest.

I let thee know Faustine, that the means whereby Nature works in man is
very strange: but the shame which the Gods put in Women, is more marvelous.
And if it be true, (as it is true indeed) that the men do lose the sting of
the Flesh, and that the Women do not lose the shame of the visage: I think it
is impossible that there should be a chaste or virtuous woman in Rome. For
there is no Commonwealth more undone, then that where the women have lost
their shame.

O women, what reason have they which fly from you, which are weary of you,
which forsake you, which forget you, which make themselves strangers, and
furthermore, which are dead and buried.

For the hungry worms gnawe in in the graves only, the frail and slymie
flesh of the dead: but you women destroy the goods, honor, and life of the
living.

Oh if the Noble heart knew what evil does follow them, for dallying with
women, I swear unto them, that they would not serve them continually as they
do serve them, but also they would have no lust, nor desire to behold them.

What will thou (I say any more to thee Faustine) but that some escape out of
your hands for effeminate and slandered, others hurt by your tongues, others
persecuted with your works, others deceived with your contenances, others
despised through your hatred, others desperate through your inconstancy,
others condemned by your light judgments, others troubled thoroughly our
unkindness: Finally, those that escape best, are of your hearts abhorred, and
through your follies destoyed.

Then since the man knows that he must pass all these dangers, I can not
tell what fool he is, that will either love or serve you? For the brute Beast
that once has felt the sharp teeth of the dogs, will unwillingly evermore
after come near unto the stake.

Oh unto what peril does he offer himself, which continually does haunt the
company of women? For as much as if he love them not, they despise him, and
take him for a Fool. If he does love them, they account him for light.

If he forsake them, they esteem him for no body. If he follow them, What
dangers are incident to men by following women.
he is acounted lost. If he serve them, they do not regard him. If he do not
serve them, they despise him. If he will have them, they will not. If he will
not, they persecute him. If he do advance himself forth, they call him
importunate. If he fly, they say he is a cowarde. If he speak, they say he is
a bragger. If he hold his peace, they say he is a dissarde. If he laugh, they
say he is a fool. If he laugh not, they say he is solemn. If he gives them
any thing, they say it is little worth: and he that gives them nothing, he
is a pinche-purse. Finally, he that haunteth them, is by them slandered: and
he that does not frequent them, is esteemed less then a man.

These things so seen, heard, and so known, what shall the poor and
miserable men do, in especially, if he be a man of understanding? For though
he would absent himself from women, the flesh does not give him license: and
though he would follow Women, wisdom will not condescend.

Now some men suppose in all their thoughts, that by services and pleasures
they may content women. But I let them know (if they know it not) that the
woman is never contented, Women never contented.
though man does what he can, as a maid, and that he do all that he ought to
do as a husband: though he takes painesfor her sake above his force, and
though with the sweat of his brows he relieueth her need: though every hour
he puts himself in danger, yet in the end she will give him no thanks,
but will say that he loves another, and how he does that but to please and
satisfy her. It is a long time since I desired to tell thee this Faustine, but
I have deferred it until this present hour, hoping thou would not give
occasion to tell it thee: For amongst wise men those words ought chiefly to
be esteemed, which fitly to the purpose are declared.

I remember that it is six years past since Antonius Pius (thy Father) chose
me to be his Son in law, and that thou chosest me for thy Husband, and I
thee for my wife: all the which things were done, my woeful adventures
permitting it, and Adrian (my Lord) commanding it.

The good Anthonius Pius gave his only daughter in marriage unto me, and gave
me likewise his Noble Empire with great treasures: He gave me also the
gardens of Vulcanali, to pass the time therein. But I think on both sides we
were deceived: He in chosing me for his Son in law, and I, in taking thee
for my wife.

Oh Fanstine, thy Father, and my Father in law, was called Anthontus Pius,
because to all he was merciful, save only to me, unto whom he was most
cruel: For with a little flesh he gave me many bones. And I confess the truth
unto thee, that now I have no more teeth to bite, nor heat in my stomach to
digest: and the worst of all is, that many times I have thought to rage on my
self. I will tell thee one word, though it does displease thee, (which is)
that for thy beauty thou art desired of many, and for thy evil conditions,
thou art despised of all. For the fair women are like unto Women compared to
golden pills.
the golden pills: the which in sight are very pleasant, and in eating very
noisome.

Thou know well Faustine, and I also, that we saw on a day Drusio, and
Braxille his Wife, which were our neighbors, and as they were brawling
together, I spoke unto Drusio such words;

What means this, (my Lord Drusio?) that being now the Feast of Berecinthia,
and being as we are adioyuing to her house, and present before so honorable an
assembly, and furthermore, thy wife being so fair as she is, How is it
possible there should be any strife between you?

Men which are married to deformed persons, to the end that they might kill
them quickly, should always fall out with their Wives: but those that are
married to fair women, they ought always to live together, in joy and
pleasure, to the end they may live long.

For when a fair woman dies, although she have lived an hundred years, yet
she dies too soon, and on the contrary, though a deformed woman lives but
a small time, yet notwithstanding she dies too late.

Drusio as a man being vexed, lifting up his eyes unto the heavens, fetching a
grievous sigh from the bottom of his heart, said these words as follows

The Mother Berecinthia pardon me, and her holy house also, and all the
company besides, forgive me: for by the immortal The speech of Drusio,
gods I swear unto thee, that I had rather have been Married with a Moore of
Chalde that is so foul, then being married as I am, with a Roman being very
fair: For she is not so fair and white, as my life is woeful and black.

Thou know well Faustine, that when Drusio spoke these words, I did wipe
the tears from his eyes, and I gave him a word in his ear, that he should
proceed no further in this matter: For such women ought to be chastened in
secret, and afterward to be honored openly.

Oh thou art most unfortunate Faustine, and the Gods have evil divided with
thee, giving thee beauty and riches to undo thy self: and denying thee the
best, which is wisdom and good conditions to keep thy honor. O what evil
luck comes unto a man, when God sends him a fair daughter, unless
furthermore the Gods do permit that she be sage, and honest: for the woman
which is young, foolish, and fair, destroys the Commonwealth, and defameth
all her parentage.

I say unto thee again Faustine, that the gods were very cruel against thee
since they swallowe thee up by the goulfes, where all the evil perishes,
and took from thee all the sails and What inconvenience follow those that are
discontented in marriage.
owers, whereby the good do escape. I remained xxxviij. years unmarried, and
these vj. years only which I have bin married, me thinks I have passed vj.
hundredth years of my life: for nothing can be called a torment, but the evil
that man does suffer, that is evil married. I will assure thee of one thing
Faustine, that if I had known before, that which now I know, and that I had
felt that which now I feel, though the Gods had commanded me, and the Emperor
Adrian my Lord desired me, I had not changed my poverty for thy riches,
neither my rest for thy Empire: But since it is fallen to thine and mine evil
fortunes, I am contented to speak little, and to suffer much.

I have so much dissembled with thee Faustine, that I can no more: but I
confess unto thee, that no Husband does suffer his wife so much, but that he
is bound to suffer her more, considering that he is a man, and that she is a
woman. For the man which willingly goes into the briars, he must think before
to endure the pricks.

The Woman is too bold that does contend with her Husband: but that Husband
is more fool, which openly quarrelleth with his wife. For if she be good, he
ought to favor her, to the end that she may be better: if she be unhappy, he
ought to suffer her, to the end she be not worse. Truly when the woman thinks
that her husband takes her for eulll, it is a great occasion to make her to be
worse: For women are so ambitious, that those who commonly are evil, will make
us believe that they are better then the others. How every man and woman ought
to behave themselves.


Believe me Faustine, that if the fear of the gods, the infamy of the person,
and the speech of men, do not restrain the woman, all the chastisements of the
world, will not make her refrain from vice: for all things suffers
chastisement and correction, the woman only except, the which must be won by
entreaty.

The heart of the man is very noble, and that of the woman very delicate,
because for a little good, he will give a great reward: and for a great
offense he will give no punishment.

Before the wise man marieth, it behooves him to beware what he does, and when
he shall determine to take the company of a Woman, he ought to be like unto
him that enters into the war, that determines with himself to suffer all
that may happen, be it good or evil. I do not call that life a war without
a cause, which the evil married man leads in his house: For women do more
hurt with their tongues, then the enemies do with their swords. It is a great
simplicity for a wise man to make account, or esteem What hurt comes by
misgouerning the tongue.
the simplicity of his wife at every time: For if they would mark, and take
heed to that which their wife does, or says. I let them know that they shall
never have an end.

O Faustine, if the Roman women would always one thing, that they would
procure one thing, that they would be resolved in one thing, although it were
to our great charges, we should have pleasure to condescend unto their
desires: but what shall we do? since that which now pleases you, a while
after displeases you? that which you ask in the morning, ye will not have at
noone: that which you enjoy at noone days, does trouble you in the night:
that which in the night you love, ye care not for in the morning: that which
yesterday ye greatly esteemed, to day as much ye despise.

If ye desired to see a thing the last year, this year ye will not hear
talk of it: that which before made you to rejoice, does now make you to be
sad: that which ye were wont and ought tolament, at the self same thing, a
man sees you laugh.

Finally, ye women are as children, which are appeased with an apple, and
casts the gold to the earth, as not weyghing it. I have diverse times thought
with my self, if I could say, or write any good Rule, in keeping the which I
might teach men to be quiet in their houses: And by my account I find
(having experimented it also with thee Faustine,) that it is impossible to give
a rule to Married men: and if a man could give them, they should scarcely
profit therewith, since their Wives live without rule.

But yet notwithstanding that, I will declare some Rules, how the married folks
should keep themselves in their houses: and how they shall, (if they list),
avoid strifes and debates between them. For the Husbands and the Wives having
wars together, it is impossible there should be peace in the Commonwealth.
And though this present writing has not profited me, unlucky and unfortunate
man: yet it may profit others, which have good wives. For often times the
Medicin How married folks ought to carry themselves.
which profits not for the tender Eyes, suffices to heal the hard heels.

I know well Faustine, that for that I have said, and for that I will say unto
thee, thou and others such like, shall greatly envy me. Ye will mark the
words that I speak, more then the intention that I mean: but I protest before
the Gods, that in this case my end is for no other intent, but to advertise
the good, whereof there are a great many: and to punish the evil, which are
many more. And although perchance neither the one nor the other will believe
that my intention in speaking these things was good: yet therefore I will not
cease to know the good from the evil, and to choose the evil from the good.
For in my fantasy the good-wife is as the Feasaunt, whose feathers we little
esteem, and regard much the body: but the evil woman is as the Marterne,
whose skin we greatly esteem, and utterly despise the Flesh.

I will therefore declare the Rules, whereby the Husbands may live in peace
with their own proper wives.

The Rules are these.
THe first, the husband must needs have patience, and suffer his wife Rules for
every man to follow that means to live in peace,
when she is displeased: for in Lybia there is no Serpent so spitefulll, as an
evil woman when she is vexed.

The second, the Husband ought to provide for his wife (according to his
ability) all that is necessary for her, as well for her person, as for her
house: for often times it chances, that women seeking things necessary, find
things superfluous, and not very honest.

The third, the Husband ought to provide that his wife do keep good company:
for women often times are more troubled, with the words that their evil
Neighbors speak against them, then for any occasion that their Husbands give
them.

The fourth, that the husband ought to use a mean, that his Wife be not too
much a subject, nor that she stray too much abroad: for the Woman that gaddeth
much in the streets, both loses her good name, and spends his goods.

The fifth, the Husband ought to take heed, that he strives not so with his
wife that she be brought past shame: for the woman that toward her Husband is
shameless, has no respect what dishonestie she commits.

The sixth, the Husband ought to let his wife understand that he does trust her:
for the woman is of such condition, that that which a wise man would not she
should do, she will do soonest: and that wherein she should take pains, she
will do nothing.

The seventh, the Husband ought to be circumspect, that he do not wholly
trust his Wife with the goods and treasours of the house, nor yet utterly
distrust her: For if the wife have the charge of the goods of the house, truly
she will augment little, and if the Husband do suspect her, she will steal
much.

The eight, the Husband ought to look upon his wife merrily, and at other
times again sadly: For women are of such condition, that when their Husbands
show them a merry countenance they love them: and when they show themselves
demure, they fear them.

The ninth, the husband ought (if he be wise,) in this to take good
aduisement, that his wife quarrel not with his neighbors: For we have ofttimes
seen in Rome, that for the quarrel of his Wife against his neighbors, the
Husband has lost his life, she has lost her goods, and a slander has risen
throughout the Commonwealth.

The tenth, the Husband ought to be so patient, that if he saw his wife commit
any fault, that in no wise he should correct her openly, but in secret: For the
husband that corrects his wife before witness, does as he which spitteth into
the element, and the spittle falls again into his eyes.

The eleventh, the Husband ought to have much temperance, lest he lay hands on
his wife to punish her: For truly the wife that with sharp words does not
amend, with all the chastisements of the world will never be good.

The twelfth, if the Husband will be quiet with his wife, he ought to praise
her before his neighbors and strangers: For amongst all other things, women
have this property, that of all they would be praised, and of none corrected.

The thirteenth, the Husband ought to beware to praise any other then his own
Wife, she being present: For women are of this condition, that the same day
that her Husband commends any other Woman, the same day his wife will cast
him out of her heart, thinking that he loves another and despises her.

The foureteenth: The husband ought to make his wife believe that she is fair,
though indeed she be foul: for there is between them no greater strife,
then to think that her husband forsakes her for being foul.

The fifteenth: The husband ought to put his wife in remembrance of the infamy
that they speak of them that be evil in the City: for women are glorious;
and because they would be loath that men should talk such things by them as
they talk of others, peradventure they will refrain from those vices that
others commit.

The sixteenth: the husband ought to take heed that his wife accept no new
friends: for through accepting of new friends, there grow commonly between
them great discention.

The seventeenth: The husband ought to take heed that his wife believe that he
loves not them whom she hates: for women are of such a condition, that if
the husbands loves all them that they hate, immediately they will hate all
those which they love.

The eighteenth: The husband ought sometime in matters, which are not
prejudicial unto him, confess himself to be overcome: for women desire
rather to be counted the best in reasoning, (though it be of no value) then to
have otherwise a greater Jewel given them.

In this sort, Faustine, I will say no more to thee, but wish, that thou
should see what I see, and feel what I feel: and above all, that my
dissimulation should suffice to amend thy life.

CHAP. XVII. The Emperor answers more particularly concerning the Key of his
Study.
NOw Faustine, since I have the old venom from my heart expelled, I will
answer to thy present demand: for unto demands and answers that passes
between the Sages, the tongue ought never to speak word, but that first he ask
the heart license. And it is a general rule amongst the Physicians, that the
medicines do not profit the sick, unless they first take away the
opilations of the stomach, I mean by this, that no man can speak to his
friend (as he ought) unless before he shows what thing grieueth him: for it
is better to repair the roufes of the houses that be old, then to go about to
build them new.

Thou requirest, Faustine, that I give thee the key of my Study, and thou do
threaten me, that if I give it not unto thee, that thou shall forthwith be
delivered. I marvel not at that thou say, neither am I abasht of that thou
demaundest, nor yet of that that thou would do: for you women are very
extreme in your desires, Women extreme in their demands.
very suspicious in your demands, very obstinate in your wills, and as
impatient in your sufferings. I say not without a cause that women are extreme
in their desires: for there are things whereof women are so desirous, that it
is wonder though never living creature saw them, nor heard speak of them. I
have not said without a cause that women are suspicious in their demands: for
the Roman women are of such a condition, that as soon as a woman desires any
thing, she forthwith commands the tongue to ask it, the feet to seek it, the
eyes to see it, the hands to feel it, and likewise the heart to love it. I say
not without a cause that women are obstinate in their wills: for if a Roman
woman bears any malice to any man, she will not forbear to accuse him for
any slander, nor fail to pursue him for any poverty, nor fear to kill him
for any Justice. I say not without a cause that women are impatient to suffer:
for many are of such condition (I say not all) that if a man give not speedily
that which they desire, they change their color, their eyes look read, their
tongues run A froward Woman described.
quick, their voices are sharp, they frette with themselves, they trouble
their neighbors abroad, and are so out of order, that no man dare speak unto
them within. You have this good trade among ye women, that under color of
being with child, you will that your husbands grant ye all your desires. When
the sacred Senate, in the time of the valliant Camillus, made a law in the
favor of the Roman Matrons with child, the women at that time longed not so
much as they do at this present: but I cannot tell what this presently
means, that all ye are anointed with that that is good, and that ye are all
desirous of that that is evil.

I will tell thee, Faustine, the occasion why this law was made in Rome, and
thereby thou shall see if thou deseruest to enjoy the privilege thereof or no:
for the laws are but as yokes under the which the evil does labor, and the
wings wherewith the good do fly. The case thereof was such, that Camillus,
the valiant Captain, went forth to the wars, he made a solemn vow to the
mother Berecinthia, that if the Gods gave him the victory, he would offer unto
her an Image of silver: and after Camillus wanne the victory, and that he would
have accomplished his vow to the mother Berecinthia, neither had he any riches,
nor Rome had any silver: for at that time Rome was rich of virtues, and poor
of money. Rome in ancient times rich in virtues.


And know thou, Faustine, that our ancient Fathers were devout toward the
Gods, and curious in repayring the Temples, the which they esteemed to be great
devotions: and they were in such sort observed of their vows, that neither for
sloth nor poverty they would omit their promises toward their Gods. And in
these things they were so precise, that they granted to no man any triumph,
unless he did swear that he had unto the Gods made a vow, and afterward also
proved how he performed it.

At that time flourished in Rome many virtuous Romans, and many Greek
Philosophers, many hardy Captains, and many sumptuous Buildings: and above
all things, Rome was unpeopled of malicies, and adorned with virtuous Ladies.

The Historiographers made (and not without a cause) great account of these
virtuous Matrons: for the Commonwealth has as much need of virtuous Women, as
the Wars have of valiant Captains. They being therefore (as they were) so
virtuous and so Noble Matrons, (without the motion of any woman) determined all
to go into the high Capitol, and there to offer all their Jewels and
Treasures that they had, their Chains, their Rings, their Garments, their
Bracelets, their Girdles, their Buttons, and Hangers of Gold, Silver, and
precious Stones of all sorts, with all their Tablets.

The Annals of this time say, that after the Roman women had laid so great a
multitude of riches at the feet of the sacred Senate, in the name of of them
all, one of them spoke, whose name was called Lucina, and said in this sort:
Fathers conscript, esteem not much these our Jewels, which we give you to make
the Image of the mother Berecinthia: but esteem much this, that we willingly
put in ieopardie our husbands and children, to win you the victory. And in
this case you accept our poor service, have no respect to the little which we
do offer: but to the great which (if we were able) we would give.

Truly, the Romans, though the treasure which their wives offered was great:
yet notwithstanding, they did more esteem the good will wherewith they gave
it, then they did the gifts themselves: for there was so much, indeed, that
sufficed both to make the Image of the Goddess Berecinthia, and also for a
long time to maintain the Wars. Therefore from that day that those Matrons
presented their Jewels in the high Capitol, the Senate forthwith in
remembrance of the gentleness, granted them these five things as a
privilege: for at that time Rome never received service or benefit of any
person, but She rewarded it with double payment.

The first thing that the Senate granted the Roman Women was; That in the day
of their burial, the Oraters Five things granted to the Matrones of Rome.
might openly make Orations in the praise of their lives: for, in old time men
used neither to exalt them when they were dead, nor yet to accompany them to
their graves.

The second thing that was granted unto them was; That they might sit in the
Temples: for, in the old time, when the Romans did offer Sacrifices to their
Gods, the aged did always sit, the Priests kneel, the married men did lean;
but the women, though they were of Noble and high lineage, could neither be
suffered to talk, sit, nor lean.

The third thing that the Senate granted the women of Rome was; That every one
of them might have two rich Gowns, and that they should not ask the Senate
leave to wear them: for, in the old time, if any woman were apparelled, or did
buy any new Gown without asking license of the Senate, she should immediately
lose her Gown; and because her husband did condescend unto the same, he was
banished the Commonwealth.

The fourth thing which they granted them was; That they should drink Wine
when they were sick: for there was in Rome a custom inviolable, that though
their life was in hazard, they durst not drink wine, but water: for, when Rome
was well corrected, a woman that drunk wine was as much slandered among the
people, as if she had committed Adultery toward her husband.

The fith thing granted by the Senate unto the women was; That a man might not
deny a Roman, being with child, any honest and lawful thing that she
demanded. I cannot tell why the Ancients of Rome esteemed more of women with
child, then others that had no children.

All these five things were justly granted to the Matrons and Noble Roman
Ladies. And I can tell thee, Faustine, that they were of the Senate most
willingly granted: for it is reason that women, which in virtues do excel,
should with all means be honored.

I will tell thee, Faustine, the especial cause that moved the Romans to
grant unto you Matrones this last privilege: that is to say, That a man cannot
deny them any thing being with child.

Thou ought to know, that the others (as well Greeks as Latins) did never
give Laws nor Institutions unto their people without great occasions: for the
great multitude of laws are commonly evil kept; and on the other part, are
cause of sundry troubles. We cannot deny, but that the Ancients did well avoid
the great number of Institutions: for it is better for a man to live as reason
commands him, then as the law constrains him.

The case therefore was, that in the year of the foundation of Rome, 364.
Fuluius Torquatus then being Consul, in the war against the Volces, the
Knights of Mauritania brought to Rome an huge Monster with one eye, called
Monoculus, which he had found in the Deserts of Aegipt, at the time the wife of
Torquatus, called Macrina, should have been delivered of child; for the
Consul did leave her great.

This Macrina amongst all was so honest, that they spent as much time in Rome
to praise her for her virtues, as they did set forth her husband for his
Victories.

They read in the Annalles of that time, That the first time that this Consul
Torquatus went into Asia, he was eleven years out of his Country; and his
found for a truth, that in all The commendation of a virtuous woman.
the time that Torquatus was absent, his wife was never seen to look out at
the window, which was not a thing smally esteemed: for though it was a custom
in Rome to keep the door shut: it was lawful notwistanding to speak to
women at the windows. Though men at that time were not so bold, and the women
were so honest, yet Macrina, wife to Torquatus, lived so close and solitary to
her self, that in all these eleven years there was never man that saw her go
through Rome, or that ever saw her door open, neither that she consented at
any time (from the time that she was eight years of age) that any man should
enter into her house: and moreover, there was never man saw her face wholly
uncovered. This Roman Lady did this, to leave of her a memory, and to give
example of her virtue.

She had also three children, whereof the eldest was but five years old: and
so when they were eight years of age, immediately she sent them out of her
house toward their Parents, lest, under the color to visit the children,
others should come to visit her.

O Faustine, how many have I heard that have lamented this excellent Roman!
and what will they think that shall follow her life? Who could presently
restrain a Roman woman from going to the window eleven years, since things
now adays are so dissolute, that they do not only desire to see them, but
also run in the Streets, to babble of them?

Who should cause now adays a Roman woman, that in the eleven years she
should not open her doors, since it is so, that when the husband commanded her
to shut one door, she will make the whole house to ring of her voice? He that
now would command his wife to tarry at home, and let her of her vagaries into
the Town, shall perceive that there is no Basiliske nor Viper that carries
such poison in her tail, as she will spit with her tongue.

Who could make a Roman woman to be eleven years continually without showing
her face to any man, since it is so, that they spend the most part of their
time in looking in a Glass, setting their Ruffes, brushing their Clothes, and
painting their faces?

Who would cause a Roman woman to keep her self eleven years from being
visited of her Neighbors and Friends, since it is true, that now women think
them greatest enemies which visit them most seldom?

Returning therefore to the Monster. As they led this Monster before the door
of Torquatus his house, she being great with child, and her husband in the
war, by chance a Maid of his told her how that this Monster passed by,
wherefore so great a desire took her to see the Monster, that for to keep
that she had begun, suddenly for this desire she dyed.

Truly, I tell thee, Faustine, that this Monster had passed many times by the
Street where she dwelt, and she would never notwithstanding go to the window,
and much less out of her door to see it.

The death of this Roman of many was lamented: for it was a long time that
Rome had never heard of so honest and virtuous a Roman; wherefore at the
petition of all the Roman people, and by the commandment of all the sacred
Senate, they set on her Tomb these verses.

The worthy Macrine rests here in grave,
Whom wise Torquatus lodged in Iunos bed, The Epitaph of Macrine.

Who reckoned not a happy life to have:
So that for aye her honest name was spread.
BEhold therefore, Faustine, In my opinion, the law was not made to remedy the
death of this Noble Roman, since she was already dead; but to the end, that
you Princesses should take example of her life, and that through all Rome there
should be a memory of her death. It is reason, since the law was ordained for
those women which are honest, that it should be observed in none, but upon
those that are virtuous: let the women with child mark the words of the law,
which command them to ask things honest. Wherefore I let thee know, Faustine,
that in the seventh Table of our laws are written these words: We will, that
where there is corruption of manners, the man shall not be bound to observe
their liberties.

CHAP. XVIII. That Princesses and Noble Women ought not to be ashamed to give
their children suck with their own breasts.
ALl Noble men that are of hauty courage watch continually to bring that to
effect which they covet, and to keep that which they have: for, by slrength
one comes to honor: and by wisdom, Honor and life are both preserved.

By these words I mean, That she that has born nine months (through travail)
the creature in her womb, with so much pain, and that afterward is delivered
with so great peril, and by the grace of God, from so many dangers escaped, me
thinks it is not well, that in this point (which for the nourishment of the
babe is most expedient) the Mothers should show them so negligent: for that
wants no folly, that by extreme labor is procured, and with much lightness
afterward despised. The things that women naturally desire are infinite, among
the which, these are four chiefly.

The first thing that women desire, is Four things which women naturally
desire.
to be very fair: for they had rather be poor and fair, then to be rich and
foul.

The second thing which they desire, ^ is to see themselves married: for until
such time as the woman do see her self married, from the bottom of her heart
she always sigheth.

The third thing that women desire, is to see themselves great with child, and
herein they have reason: for until such time as the woman has had a child,
it seems that she takes him more for a Lover then for a Husband.

The fourth thing that they desire, is to see themselves delivered; and in this
case, more then all the rest, they have reason: for it is great pity to see
in the prime time a young tree laden with blossoms, and afterward the fruit
to be destroyed through the abundance of Caterpillars.

Then since God sussereth that they are borne fair, that they see themselves
married, that they be with child, and that they are delivered; why be they so
unkind, as to send them out of their houses, to be nourished in other rude
Cottages?

In my opinion, the woman that is virtuous, ought as soon as she is delivered,
to lift up her eyes, and with her heart to give God thanks for her fruit: for
the woman, that from her delivery is escaped, ought to acount her self as one
newly borne. The woman likewise, seeing her self delivered of her creature,
ought to give it suck with her own breasts: for it is a monstrous thing, that
she that has brought forth the creature out of her own proper womb, should
give it to be nourished of a strange dugge. In speaking more plainly, (it is
all one to me whether she be a Noble woman, or a woman of mean condition) I
say and affirm, that GOD Women bound by Gods Law to give her children suck.
has delivered her of all her travail, she her self ought with her own
pappes to nourish and give suck to their babes: for nature did not only make
women able to bear men, but also besides that, provided milk in their breasts,
to nourish their children. We have neither read until this present, nor seen,
that any beasts (wild or tame) after they had young, would commit them to any
other to be nourished.

This which I have spoken is not so worthy of noting, as that which I will
speak; and it is, That many beasts newborn, before they open their eyes to
know their fathers, have now already taken nourishment in the teates of their
mothers: and more then that, to see some of those little beasts have ten
little whelps, the which, without the aid of any others, nourished them all
with the substance of their own teates: and the woman that has but one child
disdayneth to give it suck. The example of dumb creatures may teach women to
bring up their own children.


All that shall read this writing shall find it true, and if they will, they
may see as I have seen it by experience, that after the she Ape has had her
yonglings, she always has them in her arms so long as they suck, so that
ofentimes there is such strife between the male and the female, which of them
shall have the younglings in their arms, that the beholders are enforced to
part them with bats.

Let us leave the Beasts that are in the Fields, and talk of the Birds that
are in the nests, the which do lay eggs to have young, yet have they no milk
to bring them up. What thing is so strange to see, as a small Bird that has
under her wings five or six little naked Birds, the which when he has
hatched, she has neither milk to nourish the^, nor corn to give them; they
have neither wings to fly, feathers to cover them, nor any other thing to
defend them: yet in all this weakness and poverty, their mother forsakes
them not, nor commits them to any other, but brings them up all her self.

That which nature provided for the Swannes is no less marvelous, in
especially when they nourish their young Signets in the water: for as much as
during the time that they cannot swim, the mothers always in the day are
with their young Signets in these nests, and in the night the fathers carry them
under their proper wings (to refresh them) unto the water. It is therefore to
be thought, since these Swannes so lovingly bear their younglings under their
wings, that they would carry them in their arms if they were men, and also
give them suck with their own breasts if they were women. Aristotle says, in
his fifth book De animalibus, that the Lions, Arist. de Animal.
the Bears, the Wolves, the Eagles, and Griffins, and generally all Beasts,
never are, were, nor shall be seen so fierce nor so cruel, as when they have
younglings: and this thing seems to be true: for at that time, we see that
many beasts might escape the hunters, yet to save their younglings they turn
back and put their proper lives in danger. Plato says in his book of Laws,
that the children are never so well beloved of their mothers, as when they are
nourished with their proper breasts, and that their fathers danceth them on
their knees. The which thing is true: for the first love in all things is the
truest love.

I was willing to show the bringing up of bruit beasts, to show the women with
child how pitiful parents they are in nourishing their younglings with their
own breasts: and how cruel Mothers Women are, in committing their children to
strangers. It is a marvelous thing to hear the mothers say, that they love
their children; and on the contrary side to see how they hate them. In this
case I cannot tell whether they love more, either the child or the money: for
I see that they covet greatly to hourd up riches into their Chests; and
likewise, they desire as much to cast out their children out of their houses.
There are diverse reasons whereby the mothers ought to be moved to nourish
their children (which they bare in there wombs) with their own proper breasts.

The first reason is, that the mother ought to have respect how the young babe
was borne alone, how little he was, how poor, delicate, naked, tender, and
without understanding: and since that the mother brought it forth so weak and
feeble, it is neither meet nor convenient, that in time of such necessity she
should forsake it, and commit it into the hands of a strange Nurse. Let women
pardon me, whether they be Ladies, brought up in pleasures, or other of meaner
estate, accustomed with travels, I force not: but I say, that those which
forsake their children in such extremities are not pitiful mothers, but
cruel enemies. The description of children in their infancy.
If it be cruelty, not to cloth him that is naked, who is more naked then
the child newborn? if it be cruelty not to comfort the sad; who is more
sad, desolate and sorrowful, then the child which is borne weeping? If it be
ungentleness not to succor the poor needy; who is more needy, or more poor
then the innocent child newly borne, that knows not as yet neither to go,
nor to speak? If it be cruelty to do evil to the innocent that cannot
speak; who is more innocent then the infant that cannot complain of that
which is done unto him? The mother that casts out of her house the children
borne of her own body, how can we believe that she will receive in any other
of strangers? when the infant is now great, when he is strong, when he can
speak, when he can go, when he can profit himself, and get his meat, the
mother makes much of him, and leads him about with her: but is little thank
unto her: for then the mother has more need of the child to be served, then
the child has of the mother to be cherished. If the children were born of the
nails of the fingers of the feet, or of the hands, it were a small matter
though their mothers sent them forth to nourish: but I cannot tell what heart
can endure to suffer this, since the child is borne of their proper intrailes,
that they do commit it (to be brought up) into the hands of a stranger. Is there
(peradventure) at this day in the world any Lady, that has so great confidence
in any of her friends, parents, or neighbors, that she durst trust any of them
with the key of her coffer, wherein her lewels, money, and riches lies? truly,
I think none. O unkind mothers! my pen had almost called you cruel
stepmothers, since you lay up in your heart the cursed mucke of the ground, and
send out of your houses that which sprang of your blood. And if women should
say unto me that they are weak, feeble, and tender, and that now they have
found a good Nurse: to this I answer, that the Nurse has small love to the
child which she nourishes, when she sees the ungentleness of the mother that
bare it: for truly, she alone does nourish the child with love, that
heretofore has borne it with pain.

The second reason is, that it is a What love women ought to bear their
children.
thing very just, that women should nourish their children, to the end they
may be like unto their conditions: for otherwise they are no children, but are
enemies: for the child that does not reverence his mother that bare him,
cannot enjoy a prosperous life. Since the intention of the parents, in bringing
up their children, is for none other purpose, but to be served of them when
they are old: they shall understand, that for this purpose there is nothing
more necessary then the milk of the proper mother: for where the child
sucketh the milk of a stranger, it is unlikely that it should have the
conditions of the mother. If a Kid suck a Sheep, they shall perceive, it
shall have the wool more fair, and the nature more gentle, then if he had
sucked the Goat, which has the wool more hard, and of nature is more wild;
wherein the Proverb is verified, Not from whence thou come, but whereof
thou feedest.

It avails a man much to have a good inclination: but it helps him much
more, from his infancy to be well taught: for in the end we profit more with
the customs wherewith we live, then we do by nature from whence we came.

The third reason is, that women ought to nourish their own children, because
they should be whole mothers, and not imperfect: for the woman is counted but
half a mother that bears it, and likewise, half a mother that nourishes
it: but she is the whole mother, that both bears it, and nourishes it. After
the duty considered unto the Father, that has created us, and unto the
Son, that has redeemed us, me thinks next we owe the greatest duty unto
the Mother, that has borne us in her body: and much more it is that we
should bear unto her, if she had nourished us with her own breasts: for when
the good child shall behold his mother, he ought more to love her because she
nourished him with her milk: then because she has borne him in her body.

CHAP. XIX. The Author still persuades women to give their own children
suck.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome, five hundred and two, after the
obstinate and cruel war between Rome and Carthage, where the renowned
Captains were, Hanibal for the Carthaginians, and Scipio for the Romans:
Soon after that war followed the war of Macedonia, against King Philip.
The which, when it was ended, that of Syria began; against Antiochus, King of
Syria: for in six hundred and thirty years the Romans had always continual
wars in Asia, in Afric, or in Europe. The noble Romans sent the Consul
Cornelius Scipio (brother to the great Scipio the Affrican) for Captain of
that war. And after many battles, Fortune showed her force in a City
called Sepila, the which is in Asia the great, where King Antiochus was
overcome, and all his Realm discomfited: for trees that have their roots
plucked up, must needs within short time lose their fruits.

After that King Antiochus was overcome, and his Land spoiled, Cornelius The
reward of the Roman Captain.
Scipio came into Rome triumphing, for the victory that he had of Asia: so
that his brother (for the victory that he had of Africa) was called
Affricane: so he was called Scipio the Asian, because he vanquished Asia. The
Captains of Rome loved honor so much, that they would no other reward nor
recompense of their travel, but that they should give them the renown of the
Realm which they had overcome. Truly they had reason, for the noble hearts
ought little to esteem the increase of their riches, and ought greatly to
esteem the perpetuity of their good name. As Sextus Cheronensis says, in his
third book De ambigua iustitia, that Cornelius Scipio had a long time the
government of the people, for as much as he was Consul, Censor, and Dictator
of Rome: for he was not only hardy and courageous, but also he was sage and
wise, which thing ought greatly to be esteemed in a man: for Aristotle does
not determine it, which of these two is most excellent; either stoutnes, to
fight in the wars; or policy, to rule in peace. Scipio therefore being
Dictator (which was an office then as the Emperor is now) it chanced, that the
ten Captains which had been with him in the wars, violently fought to have
entered into the Monastery of the Virgins Vestals: wherefore the Dictator
commanded their heads to be cut off: for the Romans punished more cruelly
those, that only required the Virgins vestalls, then those that forced the
married Matrons.

Cornelius Scipio was besought of many in Rome, that he would moderate and
change his so cruel sentence. And he which most in this case did importune
him, was his brother Scipio, the Affrican, whose prayer was not accepted.
Howbeit, in the end the said Captains were pardoned, by the request of a
Sister of the said Dictator Scipio the Affrican. And because The speech of
Scipio the Affrica^.
he blamed his brother Scipio, that he had done more for the daughter of his
Nurse, then for the son of his proper mother, he answered: I let thee know,
brother, that I take her more for my Mother that brought me up, and did not
bear me: then she which has borne me, and in my infancy has forsaken me:
And since I have had her for my true mother, it is but reason that I have this
for my dear and well beloved sister.

These were the words which passed between these two brethren.

I have diligently read in holy and profane Writings, that many Tyrants have
caused their own mothers to be killed which bare them: but I could never find
that they have done any discourtesie or disobedience to the Nurses which gave
them milk. For the cruel Tyrants do thirst after the blood of others; but
they fear them whose milk they suck.

The fourth reason that binds Women to nourish their children is, to keep
them in more obedience: for, if the Fathers live a long time, they must of
force come into the hands of their children. And let not old Fathers make their
accounts, saying, that during the time that they shall have the government of
the house, their children shall be kept in obedience: for in so doing they
might abuse themselves: for young men in their youth, feel not the travails
of this life, not know not as yet, what it means to make provision for
household: for to the stomach that is full, and cloyed with eating, all meats
seem both unsavory and noisome.

It may well be, that since the children are not nourished in the house, that
they know not their servants, that they love not their Parents, that they come
not near their brethren nor talk with their sisters, that they are ignorant
of their fathers, and do disobey their mothers: wherefore, since little fear
does abound, and good will fail, one day they commit some mischievous offense,
whereby they do lose their life worthily, and the fathers lose the riches, and
likewise their honor deservedly, to the intent that the fathers always What
duty is required between the Parents and the child.
keep their proper children under obedience, there is no better mean then to
bring them up in their own houses, the mother to give them suck, and the
father to teach them: for when the mother desires any thing of her child,
she should not show him the belly from whence he came, but the dugges which
he did suck: for all that which is asked us, by the milk which we did suck,
truly there is no heart so hard that can deny her.

The Historiographers say, that Antipater among all the Grecians was the most
renowned tyrant: and among the Romans, Nero. And these two wicked Princes were
not great tirants because they had committed many tyrannies; but because they
did commit one which was most grievous of al others: for they do not call a man
a Glutton or Cormorant, because he eats every hour, but because he
deuoureth more at one paste, then others do in one day. The case was, that
Antipater in Greece, and Nero in Rome, determined to kill their own Mothers:
And the Historiographers say, that when Nero commanded his mother to be killed,
she sent to ask of him why he would put her to death? whereunto he answered,
That he was cloyed to behold the arms wherein he was nourished, and
therefore he caused The eruelty of Nero toward his Mother.
her to be killed, to see the intrailes out of the which he came.

This case was so horrible, that it seemed to many not to speak it: but
co^cluding, I say, as unjustly as the mothers lost the mortal life, so justly
did the children get for them immortal infamy. Nothing can be more wieked and
detestable to the children, then to kill their mothers which did bear them
with pain, and did nourish them with love: but notwithstanding all this, we
do not read that ever they did kill, dishonor, or yet disobey their nurses
which gave them milk. Iunius Rusticus, in the fifth book of the bringing up of
children, says, that the two Gracchi (renowned and famous Romans) had a third
brother, being a Bastard, who showed himself as valiant and hardy in the
wars of Asia, as the other two did in the wars of Africa. The which, as he
came one day to Rome to visit his house, he found therein his Mother which
bare him, and the Nurse which gave him suck; to the which Nurse he gave a
Girdle of gold, and to his own Mother he gave a Jewel of silver. Of the which
things the mother being ashamed, considering what her son had done, she asked
him, why he had given the nurse the gold, which did but only give him suck,
and that he had not given the girdle of gold to her as well as the Jewel of
silver, since she had born, and brought him into the world. Whereunto he
answered in this manner: Marvel not thereat, mother, why I do this thing, for
thou did bear me but nine months in thy womb, and she has given me
suck, and nourished me these three years with her own proper pappes: and
when thou did cast me from thee out of thy sight, she received me and
nourished me in her proper arms.

Fifthly, Women ought to enforce themselves to nourish their children, The
reason that may move women to give their children suck.
to the end they may keep them the better, and that in their cradles they be
not changed for others.

Aristotle says, that the Cuckoo comes to the nest of another bird when she
has laid her eggs, and sucketh them, and lays in the same place her own
eggs: so that the other bird, thinking that they are her own, hatcheth and
nourishes them up as her own, until such time as they are able to fly: then
the Cuckoo kills and eats the silly bird that has nourished her; through
the which occasion the males of those birds are at so great contention (that
they have been so deceived) that the one of them kills the other, the which
they might let if every bird did nourish her own.

In the same time that Philip reigned in Macedonia, (which was the father of
Alexander the great) Arthebanus was King of the Epirotes, who in his age had a
child borne, the which was stolen out of the Cradle, and another put in his
stead. The Nurse which did nourish it, through covetousness of money, consented
to that treason: for the heart that is with couerousnes overcome, will not
fear to commit any treason. It chanced not long after that King Arthebanus
dyed, and left (as he thought) his own son for his heir: but within few
days after, the Nurse her self, which had consented unto the robbery,
discovered the theft, and said, that she could tell where the lawful child
of the good King Arthebanus was, and that that child which now was Heir, was
but the son of a mean Knight: but indeed, it had been better for those of
the miserable Realm, that the woman had never discovered the secret: for it
chances often times, that a man makes such haste off his horse, that he hurts
his leg, and through that occasion afterward falls and breaks his neck.
But what shall we say to the Plebeicall women, of base and mean estate, (I do
not mean the Noble, Gentle, and virtuous Ladies) whereof they are many, that
though in great secret their chiefest friend tells them any thing, yet before
they drink they will utter it to another.

Thus when the treason was discovered, cruel wars between these two Princes
began: so that in the end, in a great battle they were both slain, the one
in defending, and the other in assaulting.

At that time Olimpias reigned, who was the fair and worthy wife of Philip,
and mother of Alexander. She had a Brother, named Alexander, who was both
pollitike and hardy, and hearing the Epirotes were in conrouersie, and that two
Kings were slain in the field, he placed himself in the Realm, more of will,
then of right. And let no man marvel, that this King occupied the Realm; for
in the old time all the tyrrannous Princes thought, that all that which they
could obtain without resistance, did unto them belong by Justice. This King
Alexander was he which came into Italy in the favor of the Tarentines, when
they rebelled against the Romans: who afterward was slain in battle at Capua,
where his body was unburied. And truly it was a just sentence, that the tirant
which beteaueth many of their lives, should himself taste some shameful death.

I have declared this History to this end, that Princesses and great Ladies
should see, that if the wife of King Arthehanus had nourished his son, they
could not have robbed it in the Cradle, nor these two Princes had not been
slain in battle, nor the Commonwealth had not been destroyed, nor
Alexander had not entered into the Land of another, nor had not come to conquer
the Country of Italy, nor the dead corpse had not wanted his grave: for often
times it chances, for not quenching a little coal of fire, a whole Forest
and house is burned.

The divine Plato among the Greeks, and Licurgus among the Lacedaemonians,
commanded and ordained in all their laws, That all the Plebeica women; and
those of mean estate, should nourish all their children; and that those which
were Princesses and great Ladies, should at the least nourish their eldest and
first begotten.

Plutarch, in the book of The reign of Princes, says, That the sixth King of
the Lacedaemonians was Thomistes, the which, when he dyed, left two children,
of which, the second inherited the Realm, because the Queen her self had
brought it up: and the first did not inherit, becaue a strange Nurse had given
it suck, and brought it up. And hereof remained a custom in the most part of
the Realms of Asia, that the child which was not A custom of Asia.
nourished with the papps of his mother, should inherit none of his mothers
goods. There was never, nor never shall be a mother that had such a Son as
the Mother of God, which had Jesus Christ: nor there was never, nor never shall
be a son which had such a mother in the world. But the Infant would never
suck other milk, because he would not be bound to call any other mother;
nor the mother did give him to nourish to any other mother, because that no
other woman should call him son.

I do not marvel at all, that Princesses and great Ladies do give their
children forth to nourish: but that which most I marvel at is, that she
which has conceived and brought forth a child, is ashamed to give it suck
and to nourish it. I suppose that the Ladies do think, that they deserve to
conceive them in their wombs, and that they sin in nourishing them in their
arms. I cannot tell how to write, and much less how to utter that which I
would say, which is, that women are now adays come into such folly, that they
think and esteem it a state to have in their arms some little dogs: and they
are ashamed to nourish and give their children suck with their own breasts. O
cruel mothers! I cannot think that your hearts can be so stony, to endure to
see and keep fantastic all Birds in cages, unhappy Monkeys in the windows,
fisting Spaniels between your arms, and so neglect and despise the sweet
Babes, casting them out of your houses where they were borne, and to put them
into a strange place where they are unknown. It is a thing which cannot be in
nature, neither that honesty can endure, conscience permit, nor yet consonant
either to divine or humane laws, that those which GOD has made Mothers of
children, should make themselves Nurses of dogs.

Iunius Rusticus, in the third The saying of Iunius Rustious.
book of the sayings of the Ancients, says, that Marcus Porcio, whose life
and doctrine was a lantern and example to the Roman people, as a man much
offended, said on a day to the Senate. O Fathers conscript! O cursed Rome! I
cannot tell what now I should say, since I have seen in Rome such monstrous
things (that is to say) to see women carry Parrots on their fists, and to see
women to nourish dogs, giving them Milk from their own breasts. They replied
in the Senate, and said: Tell us Marcus Porcia, What would thou we should
do which live now, to resemble our Fathers which are dead?

Marcus Portio answered them. The woman that presumes to be a Romain Matrone,
ought to be found weauing in her house: and out of that, to be How men and
women ought to be stow their time.
found in the Temple praying to God: and the Noble, and stout Roman, ought
to be found in his House, reading Books, and out of his house, fighting in the
plain Field, for the honor of his country: And surely these were words
worthy of such a man.

Annius Minutius was a Noble Roman, and captain of great Pompeius, who was a
great friend to Julius Caesar after the battle of Farsalie: For he was an
Ancient, and one that could give good counsel, wherefore he never escaped, but
that he was chosen in Rome, for Senator, Consul, or Censor every year: For
Julius Caesar was so merciful to them that he pardoned, those which had been
his most enemies in the wars, were of him in peace best beloved.

This Annius Minutius then being chosen Censour within Rome, (which was an
Office having charge of Justice) by chance as he went to visit the wife of
another Friend of his, the which lay in Childbed, (because she had great
abundance of milk) he found that a little pretty Bitche did suck her: Upon
the which occasion they say he said these words to the Senate, Fathers
conscript, a present mischief is now at hand, according to the token I have
seen this day (that is to say,) I have seen a Roman woman deny her own
Children her milk, and gave suck to a filthy bitche.

And truly this Annius had reason to esteem this case as a wonder: For the
truest and sweetest loves are not, but between the Fathers and Children: and
where the mother embraces the brute beast, and forsakes her natural child
which she has brought forth, it cannot be otherwise, but there either wisdom
wants, or folly abounds: for the Fool loves that he ought to despise,
and despises that which he ought to love.

Yet though the mothers will not give their children suck, they ought to do
What profit comes to Women by giving their children suck
it for the danger which may come to the health of their persons': for as the
women which bring forth Children, do live more healthful then those which
bear none: so these which do nourish them, have more health then those which
do not nourish them.

For although the bringing up of children be troublesome to women, yet it is
profitable for their health. I am ashamed to tell it, but it is more shame for
Ladies to do it: to see what plasters they put to their Breasts to dry up
their milk: and hereof comes the just judgments of God, that in that place
often times where they seek to stop their milk, in the self same place,
they themselves pocure their sudden death.

I ask now, if women do not enjoy their children being young, what pleasure
hope they to have of them when they be old. What a great comfort is it for the
Parents to see the young Babe, when he will laugh? how he twinckleth his
little eyes: when he will weep, how he will hang the pretty lip: when he
would speak, how he will make signs with his little fingers: when he would
go how he casts forward his feet: and above all, when he begins to
babble: how he doubleth his words.

What thing is more pleasant to the Father then to see them, and to the mother
to agree to it, when the children do suck, they pluck forth the Breasts with
the one hand, and with the other they pluck their cradle, and further they
beat their feet together, and with their wanton eyes, they cast on their
Parents a thousand loving looks, what is it to see them when they are vexed
and angry, how they will not be taken of the Fathers, how they strike their
Mother: they cast away things of gold, and immediately they are appeased with a
little apple, or rushe: What a thing is it to see the innocents how they
answer, when a man asks them? what follies they speak, when they speak to
them? how they play with the dogs, and run after the Catts? How they dress
them in wallowing in the dust? how they make little houses of Earth in the
streets? how they weep after the birds when they fly away? All the which
things are not to the Eyes of the Fathers and Mothers, but as nightingales to
sing, and as Bread and meat to eat.

The Mothers peradventure will say that they will not bring up their children:
because when they are young, they are troublesome, but that after they should be
nourished and brought up, they would be glad.

To this I answer them, that the mothers shall not deny me, but that some of
these things must needs meet in their children, that when they be old they
shall be either proud, envious, covetous, or negligent: that they shall be
Lecherous, or else Thieves, that they shall be Blasphemers, or else gluttons,
that they shall be rebels, or fools, and disobedient unto their Fathers.

I believe that at this day there are many Mothers in the world, which did
hope to be honored, and served with the Children which they had brought up:
and afterward, perceiving their manners, would willingly forgo the pleasures
which they hoped for, so that they might also be delivered from the troubles,
which for their evil demeanours are like to ensue. For that time which the
Parents hoped to pass with their Children in pleasures, they consume (seeing
their unthrifty life) in sorrowful sobbes and sighs.

I counsel, admonish, and humbly require Princesses and great Ladies, to
nourish and enjoy their Children when they are young and tender: for How women
ought to spend the time about their children.
after that they are great, a man shall bring them news every day of diverse
sorts and ma^ners they use: for as much as the one shall say that her son is
in prison: and another shall say that he is sore wounded: another, that he is
hid: others, that he has played his cloak: others, that he is slaundered
with a common harlot: another, that he steals his goods from him: another,
that his enemies do seek him: another, thet he accompanies with unthrifts:
And finally, they are so slurdie, unhappy, and so far from that which is
good: that oftentimes the fathers would rejoice to see them die, rather then to
see them live so evil a life.

Me thinks that the knot of love between the mother and the child is so
great, that not only she ought not to suffer them to be nourished out of the
house one whole year: but also Pleasures that women may take in their children.
she ought not to suffer them to be out of her presence one only day. For in
seeing him, she sees that which is borne of her entrails: she sees that
which she has with so great pains delivered: she sees him who ought to
inherit all her goods: she sees him in whom the memory of their Ancestors
remains: and she sees him, who after her death ought to have the charge of
her affairs and business.

Concluding therefore, that which above is spoken (I say) that which the great
Plutarch said; from whom I have drawn the most part of this chapter: that the
mother, (to be a good Mother) ought to have and keep her Child in her arms
to nourish him, and afterward when he shall be great, she ought to have him in
her heart, to help him. For we see often times great evils ensue, to the Mother,
and to the Child, because she did not bring him up her self: and to put him
to nourish to a strange breast, there comes neither honor nor profit.

CHAP. XX. That Princesses and great Ladies ought to be very circumspect in
choosing of their Nurses. Of seven propertyes which a good Nurse should have.
THose which ordained Laws for the people to live, were The laws of the
Ancients.
these; Promotheans, which gave laws to the Egyptians: Solon Solinon, to the
Greeks, Moses to the Jews, Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, and Numa Pompilius
to the Romans: for before these Princes came, their people were not governed
by written laws, but by good ancient customs.

The intention of these Excellent Princes was, not to give laws to their
predecessors, for they were now dead: neither they gave the^ only for those
which lived in their time being wicked, but also for those which were to come,
whom they did prestippose would not be good. For the more the World increases
in years, so much the more it is laden with vices.

By this that I have spoken, I mean, that if the Princesses and great Ladies
every one of them would Nourish their own child, I need not to give them
counsel. But since, I have supposed that the women which shall be delivered
hereafter, will be as proud and vainglorious, as those which were in times
past: We will not let to declare here some Laws and aduises how the Lady
ought to behave her self with her Nurce, and how the Nurce ought to content
her self with the creature. For it is but just, that if the mother be cruel,
and hardy to forsake the creature, that she be sage, pitiful, and advised to
chose her Nurce.

If a man find great treasure, and afterward care not how to keep it, but
does commit into the hands of suspected persons, truly we would call him a
fool. For that which naturally is beloved, is always of all best kept.

The Woman ought more wisely to keep the treasure of her own body, then the
treasure of all the Earth (if she had it.) And the Mother which What care Women
ought to have of their children.
does the contrary, and that commits her Child to the custody of a
strange Nurce, not to her whom she thinks best, but whom she finds best
cheap: we will not call her a foolish beast, for that name is too unseemly)
out we will call her a sotte, which is somewhat more honester.

One of the things that does make us most believe that the end of the world is
at hand: is, to see the little love which the mother does bear to the child
being young, and to see the want of love which the Child has bear to his
Mother being aged. That which the child does to the Father and Mother, is the
just judgment of God: that even as the Father would not nourish the child in
his house, being young: so likewise that the son should not suffer the Father
in his house, he being old.

Returning therefore to the matter, that since the woman does determine to dry
and shut up the fountains of milk which Nature has given her, she ought to
be very diligent; to search out a good nurse: the which ought not only to
content herself to have her milk whole, but also that she be good of life.
For otherwise, the child shall not have so much profit by the which he
sucketh, as the nurse shall do it harm, if she be a woman of an evil life.

I do advise Princesses and great Dames, that they watch diligently to know
what their Nurses are, before they commit their children to them: for, if such
Nurses be evil, and slaundered, they are as Serpents which do A good example
for women.
byte the Mother with their mouth, and do sting the child with her tail. In
my opinion it were less evil, the Mother should suffer that her Child should
perish in delivering it: then for to keep in her house an evil woman. For the
sorrow of the death of the Child is forgotten and brought to naught in time,
but the slander of her house shall endure as long as she lives.

Sextus Cheronensis says, that the Emperor Marcus Aurelius commanded his
Son to be brought up of a woman, the which was more fair, the^ virtuous. And
when the good Emperor was advertised thereof, he did not only send her from
his Palace, but also he banished and exiled her from Rome: swearing that if
she had not nourished his Son with her pappes, he would have commanded her
to have been torn in pieces with Beasts. For the woman of an evil renown,
may justly be condemned, and put to death.

Princesses and great Ladies ought not greatly to pass, whether the nurses be
fair or foul: For if the milk be sweet, white, and tender, it little
skilleth though the face of the Nurse be white, or black.

Sextus Cheronensis says, in the book of the nurture of children, that even
as the black Earth is more fertile then is the white earth: So likewise, the
Woman which is brown in countenance, has always the most substantial milk.

Paulus Dyaconus, in his greatest History, says, that the Emperor Adocerus
did Marry himself with the daughter of another Emperor, his predecessor
called Zeno, and the Empress was called Arielna: The which in bringing forth a
Son, had a woman of Hungary, marvelous fair, to nourish it, and the case
succeeded in such sort, that the Nurse for being fair, had by the Emperor
iij. children the one after the other: and his woeful Wife never had any but
the first alone.

A man ought to believe that the Empress Arielna did not only repent her
self, for taking into her house so fair a Nurse: but also was sorry that A
good example for all sorts of women.
ever she had any at all; since the Ribalde thereby was Mistress in the house,
and she remained without husband all her life.

I do not say it, for that there are not many foul women vicious, nor yet
because there are not many fair women virtuous: but that Princesses and great
Ladies, (according to the qualities of their Husbands) ought to be profitable
and tender Nurses, to bring up their Children. For in this case there are some
men of so weak a complexion, that in seeing a little clean water, immediately
they die to drink thereof. Let therefore this be the first counsel in
choosing Nurses, that the Nurse before she enter into the house be examined,
if she be honest and virtuous. For it is a trys^e whether the Nurse be fair
or foul: but that she be of a good life, and of an honest behavior.

Secondarily, it is necessary that the Nurse which nourishes the child, be not
only good in behavior of her life: but also it is necessary that she be
whole, as touching the bodily health. For it is a rule infallible, that of the
milk which we do suck in our infancy, depends all the corporal health of
our life.

A child given to the Nurse to nourish, is as a Tree removed from one place to
another. And if it be so (as in deed it is) it behooves in all points, that if
the Earth wherein it shall be new put, were no better, that at the least it be
not worse: For this should be a great cruelty, that the Mother being whole,
strong, and well disposed, should give her Child to a lean woman to nurse,
which is feeble, sore, and diseased.

Princesses and great Ladies, do chose lean women, weak, and sick, for to
nourish their Infants. And in that they do fail, it is not for that they
would err: But it is because that such feeble and weak Nurses, (by a vain
desire they have to be Nurses in a Gentleman's house) on the one part they say
they will little money, and on the other part, they do make great suites.

What thing it is when a Princess or a Noble-woman is delivered of a Child?
to see the devises of other women among themselves, who shall be the Nurse: and
how those which never nourished their own children, do preserve the milk to
nourish the children of others? To procure this thing for women, me thinks it
proceeds of abundance of folly, and to condescend to their requests, me
thinks it is for want of wisdom.

They look not always to the manners and ability of the Nurse, how apt she
is to nurse their child: but how diligent she is to have to nourish. They
ear not greatly whether they be good or no: For if the first be not good, they
will take the second, and if the second pleases them not, they will have the
third: and so upwards, until they have found a good Nurse. But I let you to
know (you What inconuenie^ce comes by changing Nurses.
Princesses and great Ladies) that it is more danger for the Children to
change diverse milkes, then unto the old men to eat diverse meats.

We see daily by experience, that without comparison, there dies more
children of Noble-women, the^ children of women of the meaner estate. And we
will not say, that it is for that they do flatter their children more, nor for
that the wives of laborers do eat fine meats: but that it chances often
times, that the children of a poor woman does neither eat nor drink, but of
one kind of meat, or milk in two years: and the child of a Lady shall change
and alter three Nurses in two months.

If Princesses and great Ladies were circumspect in choosing their nurses, and
that they did look whether they were whole, without diseases, and honest in
their manners, and would not regard so much the importunity of their suites:
the Mothers should excuse themselves from many sorrows, and the children
likewise, should be delivered from many diseases.

One of the most renowned Princes in times past, was Titus, the Son of
Vespasian, and Brother of Domitian. Lampriains says, that this good Emperor
Titus (the most part of his life) was subject to grievous diseases, and
infirmities of his person: and the cause was, for that when he was young, he
was, give to a sick Nurse to be nourished; So that this good Emperor sucking
her Dugge but a while, was constrained to pass all his life after in pain.

Thirdly, Princesses and great Ladies ought to know, and understand the
complexion of their children: to the end that according to the same, they
might seek pitiful Nurses: that is to say, if the child were Choleric,
Flegmatcke, Sanguine, or Melancholy. For look what humor the child is of, of
the same quality the milk of the Nurse should be.

If unto an old corrupted man they minister medicines conformable to his
diseases, for to cure him, why then should not the Mother seek a wholesome
Nurse to the tender Babe, agreeable to his complexion, to nourish him? And if
thou say, it is just, that the flesh old and corrupted be sustained: I
tell thee likewise, that it is much more necessary that the Children should be
curiously and well nourished, to multiply the world: For in the end we do
not say, it is time that the Young leave the bread for the Aged: but contrary,
it is time, that the old leave the bread for the young.

Aristotle in the book De secretis secretorum, and Iunius Rusticus, in the
Arist. de secret. secretorum.
tenth book De gestis Persarum, say: that the unfortunate king Darius (who was
ouercom by Alexander the great) had a Daughter of a marvelous beauty. And they
say that the Nurse which gave suck to this daughter, all the time that she did
nourish it, did neither eat nor drink any thing but poison: and at the end
of three years, when the Child was weyned, and plucked from the dugge, she
did eat nothing but Colubers, and other venomous worms.

I have heard say many times that the Emperors had a custom to nourish their
Heirs and Children with poisons when they were young, to the intent that they
should not be hurt by poison, afterward when they were old. And this error
comes of those which presume much, and know little. And therefore I say, that
I have heard say, without saying I have read it. For some declare hystories,
more for that they have heard say of others: then for that they have read
themselves.

The truth in this case is, that as we vselat this present, to wear chains
of gold about our necks, or jewels on our fingers, so did the gentiles in
times past, a Ring on their fingers, or some jewel in their bosom,
replenished with poison. And because the Paynims did neither fear hell, nor
hoped for heaven, they had that custom: for if at any times in Battle they
should find themselves in distress, they had rather end their lives with
poison, then to receive any injury of their enemies. Then if it were true,
that those Princes had bin nourished with that Poison, they would not have
carried it about them to have ended their lives.

Further, I say, that the Princes of How children ought to be nourished and
brought up.
Persia did use when they had any child borne, to give him milk to suck
agreeable to the Complexion he had. Since this daughter of Darius was of
melancholy humor, they determined to bring her up with venom and poison:
because all those which are pure melancholy, do live with sorrow, and die with
pleasure.

Ignatius the Venetian, in the life of the five Emperors, Palleolus (which
were valiant Emperors in Constantinople,) says: that the second of that
name, called Palleolus the hardy, was after the xl. years of his age, so
troubled with infirmities and diseases, that always of the twelve months of
the year, he was in his bed sick nine months: and being so sick as he was,
the affairs and business of the Empire were but slenderly done and looked
unto. For the Prince cannot have so small a Fever, but the people in the
commonwealth must have it double,

This Emperor Palleolus had a wife, whose name was Huldonina, the which after
she had brought all the Physicians of Asia unto her Husband, and that she had
ministered unto him all the medicines she could learn to help him, and in the
end seeing nothing avail, there came by chance an old woman, a Grecian borne,
who presumed to have great knowledge in herbs, and said unto the Empress.
Noble Empress Huldouina, If thou will that the Emperor thy husband live long,
see that thou chafe, anger, Good counsel for one that would live long.
and vex him every week at the least twice: for he is of a pure melancholy
humor, and therefore he that does him pleasure, augmenteth his disease: and
he that vexes him shall prolong his life.

The Empress Huldouina followed the counsel of this Greek woman, which was
occasion that the Emperor lived afterward sound and whole many years: so
that of the nine months which he was accustomed to be sick every year, in
twenty years afterward he was not sick three months. For where as this
Greek woman commanded the Empress to anger her husband but twice in the
week, she accustomably angered him iiii. times in the day.

Fourthly, the good mother ought to take heed, that the nurse be very temperat
in eating, so that she should eat little of diverse meats, and of those few
dishes she should not eat too much. To understand the thing ye must know,
that the white milk is no other then blood which is sodden, and that which
causes the good or evil blood, comes often times of an other thing, but that
either the person in temperate, or else a glutton in^ating, and therefore it is
a thing both healthful and necessary, that the nurse that nourishes the child
do eat good meats: for among men and women it is a general rule, that in
little eating there is no danger and of too much eating there is no profit. As
all the Philosophers say, the wolf is one of the beasts that denoureth most,
and is most greedyest, and therefore he is most feared of all the Shepherds.

But Aristotle, in his third book De Animalibus says: That when the wolf
does once feel her self great with young, in all her life after she never
Aristot: De Animalib:
suffers herself to be coupled with the wolf again. For otherwise, if the
wolf should yearly bring forth vij. or viij. whelps (as commonly she does, and
the Sheep but one lamb, there would be in short space, more wolves the^
sheep. Beside all this, the wolf has an other property, which is, that
although she be a Beast most devouring and greedy: yet when she has whelped,
she feeds very temperately, and it is to the end to nourish her whelps, and
to have good milk. And besides that, she does eat but once in the day, the
which the dogwolfe does provide, both for the Bitch and whelps.

Truly it is a monstrous thing to see, and noisome to hear, and no less
slanderous to speak: that a Wolf which gives suck to viij. whelps, eats
but one only kind of meat, and the woman which gives suck but to one Child
alone, will eat of vii. or viii. sorts of meats. And the cause hereof is,
that the Beast does not eat but to sustain nature, and a woman does not eat,
but to satisfy her pleasure.

Princesses and great Ladies ought to watch narrowly, to know when and how
much the Nurses do eat, which do nourish their children: For the child is so
tender, and the milk so delicate, that with eating of sundry meats What Diet
Nurses ought to use.
they become corrupt, and with eating much they waxefat. If the children suck
those which are fat and gross, they are commonly sick: and if they suck
milk corrupted, they often times go to bed whole, and in the morn be found
dead Isidor in his etimologies says, that the men of the province of Thrace
were so cruel that the one did eat the other: and they did not only this,
but also further to show more their immanity in the sculs of those that were
dead, they drank the blood of him that was lately alive. Though men were so
cruel to eat men's flesh, and to drink the blood of the veins; yet the Women
which nourished their children, were so temperate in eating, that they did eat
nothing but netles sodden, and boiled in Goats milk. And because the women of
Thrace were so moderate in eating, the Phliosopher Solon Solynon brought some
to Athens: for the Ancients sought no less to have good women in the
commonwealth, then to have hardy and valiant Captains in the war.

CHAP. XXI. The Author adds three other conditions to a good nurse that
gives suck: that they drink no wine, that she be honest, and chiefly that
she be well conditioned.
THe Princesses and great Ladies may know by this example, what difference
there is between the women An example of the women of Thrace.
of Thrace, which are fed with nettles only, and have brought forth such
fierce men, and the women of our time, which through their delicate and
excessive eating, bring forth such weak and feeble children.

Fifthly, the Ladies ought to be very circumspect, not only that Nurses eat
not much, and that they be not greedy: but also that they be in wine
temperate, the which in old time was not called wine, but venom. The reason
hereof is apparent and manifest enough: For if we do forbid the fat meats
which lies in the stomach, we should then much more forbid the moist Wine,
which washes all the veins of the body.

And further I say, that as the Child has no other nourishment but the milk
only, and that the milk proceeds of blood, and that blood is nourished of
the wine, and that wine is naturally hot, from the first to the last.

I say, that Woman which drinks wine, and gives the child suck, Women
giving suck, ought to abstain from wine.
does as she that makes a great Fire under the pan, where there is but a
little milk: so that the pan burns, and the milk runs over.

I will not deny, but that sometimes it may chance, that the child shall be of
a strong complexion, and the Nurse of a feeble and weak nature: and then the
child would more substantial milk, when the woman is not able to give it him.

In such a case, (though with other things Milk may be conferred,) I allow
that the nurse drink a little wine: but it should be so little, and so well
watered, that it should rather be to take away the vnsauorinesse of the water,
then for to taste of any savor of the wine.

I do not speak this without a cause, for the nurse being sick, and feeble of
herself, and her milk not substantial, it oftentimes moves her to eat more
then necessity requires, and to drink wine which is somewhat nutritive: So
that they supposing to give the Nurse Triacle, do give her poison to destroy
her child.

Those excellent and Ancient Romans, if they had been in our time, and that
we had deserved to have been in their time, (although our time, for being
Christians is better) they had saved us from this travel: For they were so
temperate in eating meats, and so abstinent, in drinking wines, that they did
not only refrain the drinking thereof, but also they would not abide to smell
it. For it was counted a greater shame unto a Roman Woman to drink wine, then
to be divorced from her Husband.

Dyonisius Alicarnaseus, in his book of the laws of the Romans, said: that
Romulus was the first founder of Rome, and that he occupied himself more in
buylding fair Houses to amplifye Rome, then in constituting Laws for the
government of the Commonwealth: But amongst fifteen Laws which he made, the
seventh thereof was, that no Roman woman on pain of death should be so
hardy to drink wine, within the walls of Rome.

The same Hystorian says, that by Women prohibited to drink: wine in former
times.
the occasion of this Law the custom was in Rome, that when any Roman Lady
would drink wine, or make any solemn feast, she must needs go out of Rome,
where every one had their Gardens and dwelling place: because the smell also of
Wine was prohibited and forbidden women within the circuit of Rome.

If Pliny do not deceive us in his 24. book of his natural history, it was
an ancient custom in Rome, that at each time that Parents met, both men and
women, they did kiss the one the other in the face, in token of peace: and
this ceremony began first, for that they would smell whether the woman had
drunk any wine. And if perchance she sauored of wine, the Censor might have
bannished her from Rome.

And if her kinsman found her without Rome, he might freely and without any
danger of law put her to death: because within the Circuit and walls of Rome,
no private man by Justice, could put any Roman to death, as above is
rehearsed.

Romulus was he which ordained the pain for Drunkardes, and Ruptilius was he,
which ordained the penalty for Adulterers. And between Romulus and Ruptilius,
there was xxxii. years: So that they ordyaned this straight Law for
Drunkardes, a long time before they did the law for adulterers. For if a woman
be a drunkard, or Harlot, truly they are both great faults, and I cannot tell
whether of them is worst: For being a harlot, the woman loses her name: and
for being a drunkarde, she loses her fame, and the Husband his goods.

Then if women for, the honesty of their pesons only, are bound to be
temperate in eating and drinking the woman which nourishes and gives (...)
the Child suck, ought to be much more corrected and sober in this case. For
in her is concurrant not only the gravity of their own persons, but the health
and life also of the Creature, which she nourishes. Therefore it is meet,
that the Nurse be kept from wine: since the honor of the one, and the life of
the other is in peril.

Sixthly, the Princesses and great Ladies ought to take heed, that their Nurses
be not gotten with child. And the reason hereof is, that in that time when the
woman is with Child, her natural course is stopped, and that corruption is
mingled with the pure blood: So that she thinking to give the child milk to
nourish it, gives it poison to destroy it. And nothing can be more unjust,
then to put the child (which is already borne, and alive) in danger for that
which is as yet unborn, and dead. It is a wonderful thing, (for a man that
will curiously note and mark things) to see the brute beasts, that all the time
they bring up their little ones, they will not consent to accompany with the
Males, nor the males will follow the females. And that which is most to he
noted, it is, to see, what passes between the Byrds: for the she Sparrow will
not suffer the Male, in any wise to touch nor to come near her, until her
little ones be great and able to fly: and much less to sit upon any Eggs, to
hatche them, till the other be fled and gone.

Plutarch in the seventh of his Regiment of Princes, says, that Gneus Fuluius
(Couzin german of Pompeyus.) being Consul in Rome, fell in love with a
young maide^ of Capua being an orpha^, whether he fled for the plague.

This Maiden was called Sabina, and when she was great with child by this
Consul, she brought forth a daughter, whom they called fair Drusia: and
truly she was more commended for her beauty, then she was for her honesty.
For often times it happens that the fair and dishonest women leave their
Children so evil taught, that of their Mothers they inherit little goods, and
much dishonor This Sabina therefore being delivered (as it was the custom of
Rome) she did with her own breasts nourish her daughter Drusia. During the
which time she was gotten with child, by one of the Knights of this Consul,
to whom (as to his Servant) he had given her to keep.

Wherefore when the Consul was hereof advertised, and that notwithstanding
she gave her daughter suck: he commanded that the knight should be immediately
beheaded, and his lover Sabina forthwith to be cast into a well.

The day of Execution came, that both these parties should suffer, wherefore the
woeful Sabina sent to beseech the Consul, that it would please him before her
death to give her audience of one sole word, that she would speak unto him:
the which being come in the presence of them all, she said unto him.

O Gneus Fuluius; know thou that I did not call thee to the end thou should
grant me life, but because I would not die before I had seen thy face: though
thou of thy self should remember, that as I am a frail The speech of
Sabina.
Woman, and fell into sin with thee in Capua, so I might fall now (as I have
done) with another here in Rome.

For, we Women are so frail in this case, during the time of this our
miserable life, that none can keep herself sure, from the assaults of the
weak Flesh.

The Consul Gneus Fuluius to these words answered: The Gods immortal know
Sabina, what grief it is to my woeful heart, that I of my secret offense The
answer of the Consul Fuluius.
should be an open scourge. For greater honesty it is for men to hyde your
frailnesse, then openly to punish your offenses. But what will thou I should
do in this case: considering the offense thou have committed? By the immortal
Gods, I swear unto thee, and again I swear, that I had rather thou should
secretly have procured the death of some man, the^ that openly in this wise
thou should have slaunderd my house. For thou know the true meaning of the
common proverb in Rome, It is better to die in honor, then to live in
infamy. And think not (Sabina) that I do condemn thee to die because thou
forgotest thy Faith unto my person, and that thou gave thy self unto him
which kept thee: For since thou were not my wife, the liberty thou had to
come with me from Capua to Rome, the selfsame thou had to go with another
from Rome to Capua. It is an evil thing for vicious ^e^, to reprove the vices
of others, wherein themselves are faulty.

The cause why I condemn thee to dye, is only for the remembrance of the old
Law, the which commands that no nurse or woman giving suck; should on pain
of death be begotten with child, truly the Law is very just. For honest women
do not suffer, that in giving her child suck at her breast, she should hide
another in her entrails.

These words passed between Gneus Fuluius the Consul, and the Lady Sabina of
Capua. Howbeit as Plutarche says, in that place the Consul had pity upon
her, and showed her favor, banishing her upon condition, never to return to
Rome again

Cinna Catullus, in the fourth book of the xxij Consulls says: that Caius
Fabricius, was one of the most notable Consulles that ever was in Rome, and was
sore afflicted with diseases in his life, only because he was nourished four
months with the milk of a Nurse being great with Child: and for fear of
this, they locked the nurse with the Child in the Temple of the Vestall
virgins, where for the space of iij. years they were kept.

They demanded the Consul, why he did not nourish his children in his house?
He answered, that children being nourished in the house, it might be an
occasion that the Nurse should Wherefore the Consul would not have his
children nourished in his house.
begotten with child, and so she should destroy the children with her corrupt
milk: and further give me occasion to do justice upon her person: wherefore
keeping them so shut up, we are occasion to preserve their life, and also our
children from peril.

Dyodorus Siculus, in his librairy, and Sextus Cheronensis says, in the life
of Marc. Aurelius, that in the Isles of Baleares there was a custom, that the
nurses of young children, (whether they were their own or others) should be
severed from their Husbands, for the space of two years. And the woman which
at that time (though it were by her husband) were with child, though they did
not chasten her as an adulteress: yet every man spoke evil of her, as of an
offender.

During the time of these two years to the end that the Husband should take
no other wife, they commanded that he should take a concubine: or that he
should buy a Slave, whose company he might use as his wife: for amongst
these barbarous, he was honored most that had two Wives, the one with child,
and the other not.

By these Examples above recited, Princesses and great Ladies may see, what
watch and care they ought to take in choosing their Nurses, that they be
honest, since of them depends not only the health of their children, but
also the good fame of their houses. The seventh condition is, that Princesses
and great ladies ought to see their What is required in every good Nurse.
nurses have good conditions: so that they be not troublesome, proud, harlots,
liars, malicious, nor flatterers: for the viper has not so much poison, as the
woman which is evil co^ditioned.

It little avails a man to take wine from a woman, to entreat her to eat
little, and to withdraw her from her husband, if of her own nature she be
hateful, and evil mannered: for it is not so great danger unto the child,
that the nurse be a drunkard, or a glutton, as it is if she be harmfull and
malicious.

If perchance the Nurse (that nourishes the child) be evil conditioned. truly
she is evil troubled, and the house wherein she dwells evil co^bred. For such
one does importune the Lord, troubles the Lady, puts in hazard the child,
and above all, is not contented with her self. Finally, Fathers for giving too
much liberty to their nurses, often times are the causes of many practices,
which they do: wherewith in the end, they are grieved with the death of their
children which follows Amongst all these which I have read, I say, that of the
ancient Roman Princes, of so good a Father, as Drusius Germanicus was, never
came so wicked a son as Caligula was, being the iiij Emp: of Rome: for the
Hystoriographers were not satisfied to enrich the praise the excellencies of
his Father, neither ceased they to blame and reprehend the infamies of his
Son. And they say that his naughtines proceeds not of the mother which bare
him: but of the nurse which gave him suck. For often times it chances that
the tree is green and good, when it is planted, and afterward it becomes
dry and withered, only for being carried into another place.

Dyon the Greek in the second book of Caesar's says, that a cursed woman of
Campania called Pressilla, nourished and gave suck unto this wicked child. She
had against all nature of women her breasts as hayrie as the beardes of The
description of Pressilla.
men: and besides that, in running a Horse, handling her staff, shooting in
the Crosse-bowe, few young men in Rome were to be compared unto her.

It chanced on a time that as she was giving suck to Caligula, for that she
was angry, she tore in pieces a young child, and with the blood thereof
anointed her breasts: and so she made Caligula the young Child, to suck
together both blood and milk.

The said Dyon in his book of the life of the Emperor Caligula says: that
the women of Campania (whereof the said Pressilla was) had this custom, that
when they would give their Teat to the child, first they did annointe the
nipple, with the blood of a hedgehog, to the end their children might be more
fierce and cruel.

And so was this Caligula, for he was not contented to kill a man only, but
also he sucked the blood that remained on his Sword, and licked it off with
his tongue.

The excellent Poet Homer, meaning to speak plainly of the crueltyes of
Pyrrus, said in his Odisse of him, such words: Pyrrus was borne in Greece,
nourished in Archadie, and brought up with Tigers milk, which is a cruel
beast, as if more plainly he had said: Pyrrus for being borne in Greece was
Sage, for that he was brought up in Archadie, he was strong and courageous,
and for to have sucked Tygars milk, he was very proud and cruel. Hereof may
be gathered, that the great Grecian Pyrrus, for wanting of good milk, was
overcome with evil conditions.

The self same Hystorian Dyon says, in the life of Tiberius; that he was a
great Drunkard. And the cause hereof was, that the Nurse did not only drink
wine: but also she weyned the child with soppes dipped in Wine. What is
required of a Nurse for bringing up of children.
And without doubt the cursed Woman had done less evil, if in the stead of
milk, she had given the child poison, without teaching it to drink wine:
wherefore afterward he lost his renown.

For truly, the Roman Empire had lost little if Tiberius had dyed being a
child: and it had won much, if he had never known what drinking of Wine had
meant.

I have declared all that which before is mentioned, to the intent that
Princesses and great Ladies might be advertised, that since in not nourishing
their children, they show themselves cruel: yet at the least, in providing for
the^ good Nurses, they should show themselves pitiful: for the children often
times follow more the condition of the milk which they suck, then the
condition of their mothers which brought them forth, or of their fathers which
begot them. Therefore they ought to use much circumspection herein: for in them
consists the fame of the wives, the honor of the husband, and the wealth of
their children.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Disputations before Alexander the great, concerning the
time of the sucking of Babes.
OVintus Curtins says, that after the great Alexander (which which was the
last King of the Macedonians, and first Emperor of the Greeks) had overcome
King Darius, and that he saw himself only Lord of all Asia, he went to rest
in Babylon: for among men of war there was a custom, that after they had
been long in the wars, every one should retire to his own house. King
Philip (which was father of King Alexander) always counseled his son, that
he should lead with him to the wars What is required of a good Captain.
valiant Captains, to conquer the World: and that out of his Realms and
Dominions he should take and choose the wisest men, and best experimented, to
govern the Empire. He had reason in such wise to counsel his son: for by
the counsel of Sages, that is kept and maintained, which by the strength of
valiant men is gotten and won.

Alexander the great therefore being in Babylon, after he had conquered all
the Country, since all the City was vicious, and his Army so long without
wars, some of his own men began to rob one another, others to play their
own, some to force women, and others to make banquets and feasts: and when some
we drunk, others raised quarrels, strifes, and discentions: so that a man
could not tell whether was greater, the rust in their Armours, or the
corruptions in their customs. For the property of man's malice is, that when
the gate is open to idleness, infinite vices enter into the house.

Alexander the great seeing the dissolution which was in his Army, and the
loss which might ensue hereof unto his great Empire, commanded straightly,
that they should make a show and just through Babylon, to the How Alexander
governed his army.
end that the men of war should exercise their forces thereby. And as
Aristotle says, in the book of the Questions of Babylon, the Turney was so
much used amongst them, that sometimes they carried away more dead and wounded
men, then of a bloody battle of the enemy. Speaking according to the law
of the Gentiles, (which looked not glory for their virtues, nor feared hell to
dye) at the Turney the commandment of Alexander was very just, for that doing
as he did to the Army: he defaced the vice which did waste it, and for
himself he got perpetual memory, and also it was cause of much suertie in the
Commonweal.

This good Prince, not contented to exercise his army so, but ordained, that
daily in his presence the Philosophers should dispute, and the question wherein
they should dispute, Alexander himself would propound, whereof followed, that
the great Alexander was made certain of that wherein he doubted: and so by
his wisdom all men exercised their crafts and wits. For in this time of
idleness, the books were no less marred with dust, because they were not
opened, then the weapons were with rust, which were not occupied.

There is a book of Aristotle, entitled The Questions of Babylon, where he
said, that Alexander propounded, the Philosophers disputed, the Principalles of
Persia, replied, and Aristotle determined: and so continued in disputations as
long as Alexander did eat: for at the Table of Alexan der, one day the
Captains reasoned of matters of war, and another day the Philosophers
disputed of their Philosophy.

Blundus says, in the book entitled, Italia Illustrata, that among the
Princes of Persia there was a custom, that none could sit down at the Table,
unless he were a King that had A custom among the Persians.
overcome another King in battle; and none could speak at their table, but a
Philosopher. And truly, the custom was very notable, and worthy to be noted:
for there is no greater folly, then for any man to desire that a Prince should
reward him, unless he know that by his works he had deserved the same. King
Alexander did eat but one meal in the day, and therefore the first question
that he propounded unto them was; That the man which did not eat but once in
the day, at what hour it was best to eat, for the health of his person, and
whether it should be in the morning, noone days, or night? This question was
debated among the Philosophers, whereof every one to defend his opinion,
alleged many foundations. For no less care have the Sages in their minds,
to issue out of them disputations victorious; then the valiant Captains have
in aduenturing their persons to vanquish their enemies. It was determined, as
Aristotle makes mention in his Probleames, that the man which eats but once
in the day, should eat a little before What time it requisite for a man to
eat.
night: for it avails greatly to the health of the body, that when the
digestion begins in the stomach, a man takes his first sleep.

The second question that Alexander propounded was, What age the child should
have when he should be weyned from the dugge. And the occasion of this
question was, for that he had begotten a young daughter of a Queen of the
Amazous, the which at that time did suck: and for to know whether it were time
or not to weyne her, there was great dispurations: for the child was now great
to suck, and weak to weyne.

I have declared this History for no other purpose, but to show how in Babylon
this question was disputed before King Alexander; that is to say, how many
years the child ought to have before it were weyned from the teate: for at
that time they are so ignorant, that they cannot demand that that is good, nor
complain of that that is naught. In that case a man ought to know, as the
times are variable, and the regions and province diverse: so likewise have they
sundry ways of bringing up and nourishing their children: for there is as much
difference between the Countries of one, from the Countries of others, in
dying, and burying the dead bodies, as there has been varieties in the world,
by way of nourishing and bringing up of children.

CHAP. XXIII. Of sundry kinds of Sorceries, Charms and Witchcrafts, which
they in old time used in giving their children suck, the which Christians
ought to eschew.
IT is not much from our purpose if I declare here some old examples of those
which are past. Strabo in his book De Strabo de situ Orbis.
situ Orbis, says, that after the Assirians (which were the first that reigned
in the world) the Siconians had signorie (which long time after were called
Arcades) which were great and famous wrastlers, and Schoolemasters at the
Fence, from whom came the first and best Masters of Fence, the which the
Romans kept always for their Plays: for as Trogus Pompeius says, the
Romans found it by experience, that there were no better men in weighty
affairs, then those of Spain: nor no people apter to plays and pastimes,
then those of Arcadia. As those Siconians were ancient, so they were
maruellously addicted to follies, and superstitious in their vsages and
customs; for among other, they honored for their God the Moon: and during
the time that she was seen, they gave their children suck, imagining that
the Moon shined upon the breasts of the mother, it would do much good unto the
child. The Authous hereof is Sinna Catullus, in the book De edicandis pueris:
and as the same Historian says, the Egyptians were great enemies to the
Siconians, so that all that which the one did allow, the others did repoue, as
it appears: for, as much as the Siconians loved Olives and Akorns, they were
clothed with linen, and worshipped the Moon for their God. The Egyptians
for the contrary had no Olives, neither nourished they any Oaks, they did wear
no linen, they worshipped the Sun for their God: and above all, as the
Siconians did give their children suck whiles the Moon did shine; so the
Egyptians gave their children suck whiles the Sun did shine. Among other
follies of the Caldeans this was one, that they honored the Fire for their
God, so that he that was not married could not light Fire in his house:
because, they said, the custody of Gods should be committed to none but to
married and ancient men.

They had in Marriages such order, that the day when any children did What order
the Ancients used concerning marriage.
marry, the Priests came into his house to light new Fire; the which never
ought to be put out until the hour of his death: and if perchance, during
the life of the husband and of the wife, they should find the fire dead and
put out, the marriage between them was dead and undone, yea, though they had
been forty years together before in such sort and of this occasion came the
proverb which of many is read, and of few understood; that is to say, Pronoke
me not so much, that I throw water into the fire.

The Caldeans used such words when they would divorce and separate the
marriage: for if the woman The custom of the Chaldeans.
were ill contented with her husband, in casting a little water on the fire,
immedately she might marry with an others and if the husband in like manner,
did put out the fire, he might with another woman contract marriage.

I have not been married as yet: but I suppose there are many Christians which
wish to have at this present the liberty of the Caldes: for I am well assured,
there are many men which would cast water on the fire, to escape from their
wives: also I swear, that there would be a number of women, which would not
only put out their fire, but also the ashes, imbers, and coals to make
themselves free, and to be dispatched of their husbands, and in especially
from those which are jealous.

Therefore returning to our matter. The Caldeans made before the fire all
notable things in their law, as before their God: for they did eat before the
fire, they slept before the fire, they did contract before the fire, and the
mothers did never give the children suck, but before the fire: for the milk
(as they imagined) did profit the child when it sucked before the fire, which
was their God.

The Author of this that is spoken, is Cinna Catuilus.

The Mauritanians which at this present are called the realms of (...), were in
times past warlike men, of whom the Romans had great victories, and the more
valiant the men were in the wars: so much the more superstitious their wives
were in soceries, charms, and enchantments* (...) the husband that is long
ab^^nt from his wife, ought not to marvel though in her be found some (...).

Cicero in the book De Natura Deorum, and much more at large, Bocc^s says,
That as many men and women as were in that Realm, (...) many gods there were
among the people* for every one had one particular God to himself: so that the
god of the one, was not the god of the other. And this was to be understood in
the week days: for in the holy and festival days they had no other gods,
the which altogether they did honor.

The manner that they had in choosing gods when a woman was with child was
this: She went to the Sacrificer of the Idol, and told him that she was
great with child, and besought him to give her a God for her child. And the
sacrificer gave her a little idol of stone, gold, silver, or of wood, the
which the mother hanged at the neck of the child, And as often as the child
did suck the dugge, so often the mother puts the Idol on his face: for
otherwise she had not given him a drop of milk to suck, unless first she
had consecrated to the god the milk of her breast. That which I have spoken is
little in respect of that I will speak, which is, that if perchance the child
dyed before the time, or that any young man by some perilous mishap dyed before
he was somewhat ages: the Fathers and kinsmen of the dead did assemble, and
came to the Idol of him, and either stoned it, ^^ng it, drew it, burnt it, or
else they cast it into the deep well, saying, that since the gods did kill man
without reason, that they might lawfully kill them by justice.

The same Bocchas in the second book De Natura Deorum says, that the
Allobroges had a custom, that those which were Priests of the gods, should
from the womb of their mothers be chosen unto that dignity: And as soon as
the child was born, before he tasted the milk of the breast they earned it
into a Priests house: for they had a custom that the man, which had tasted
the things of the world, merited not to serve the Gods in the Temples.

One of the laws that they said Priests had, was that not only they could
not by violence shed any blood, nor yet see it, neither touch it: so that
immediately as the Priest should by chance touch mansbloud, even so soon he
lost his Priesthood. This law afterward was so narrowly looked unto, that the
Priests of the Allobroges did not only not shed drink, nor touch man's blood
when they were now men: but also when they were little infants (those that
should be Priests) they gave them no milk of the breast at all. And this was
their reason.

That to suck milk was no other but to drink white blood, for white milk is
but sodden blood, and read blood is but raw milk.

Pulio in the book de educandis pueris says, That the Ancients had a
certain kind of reeds, that breaking it in sunder, there issued white milk,
wherewith they accustomed to nourish their children: but let it be as it is,
that this law prohibit children their milk, which hereafter should be made
Priests of the temples: me thinks it a trick rather of superstitious
sorcerers then of religious Priests: For there is neither divine nor humane Law
that will forbid, or prohibit any such thing, without the which man's life
cannot endure. These were the manners and customs that the Ancients had in the
nourture of their children.

And indeed I marvel not at that they did, for the Gentiles esteemed this
cursed Idol as a great God: as we Christians do the true and living God. I
was willing to declare all these antiquities, to the end that Princesses and
great Ladies should have pleasure in reading them, and knowing them: but not
to that end, they should imitate and follow them in any kind of thing: For
according to the faith of our Christian Religion, as sure as we be of the
offenses that those did unto God, through following those superstitions: so
sure we are of the good services, which we do unto God in forsaking them.

How long time the mothers ought to give their children suck, and what age
they ought to weine them, not for that which I have read, nor How long women
ought to give their children suck.
for that which I have demanded in this case, I am able to answer: but
forasmuch as Aristotle says in the book above named, that the child at the
most ought to suck but two years, and at the least one year and a half: for
if he suck less, he is in danger to be sick, and if he suck more, he
shall be always tender. I will not omit that which Sextus Cheronensis says,
in the fourth book of his commonwealth.

And hereof Bocohas also makes mention in the third book De natura Deorum,
that when Alexander the Great passed into India, amongst other renowned
Philosophers, there was one with him called Arethus, who (as by chance he was
in Nissa, an ancient City of India) there came a man of the Country to show
him such antiquities as were there.

Arethus the Philosopher beheld them as a sage and wise man: for the simple man
only beholds the doings, and how they seem: but the sage man enquireth and
demands of the causes, and from whence they came.

Among other things he showed this good Philosopher a great house, being in the
end of the City, and therein were many women, whereof every one of them had a
chamber, and in every chamber there was two beds, and adjoining to the one,
herbs were sown in manner of nettles, and adioining to the other, there was
kind of twigges, as of Rosemary, and in the midst of the house, there were many
graves of small children.

The Philosopher Arethus asked Questions demanded by the Philosopher Arethus.
why that house was so great, and the Indian answered.

This house is to nourish the Children which are Orphans, when they be of
their Parents and friends abandoned: For it is a custom in this City, that
immediately when the Father of one chelde dies, the City then takes him for
her son. And from that time forward he is called the child of the City, which
nourishes him, and not the child of the Father which begot him.

Arethus the Philosopher secondarily asked him, why there were so many women in
that house, without any man among them? whereunto the Indian answered: In this
Country there is a custom, that the women are severed from their husbands, all
the time they give their children suck. For the will of our God is, that the
woman be not in company with her husband after, she is with child, and this
not only until such time as she is delivered: but also until such time as
the child be wayned from the breast.

The Philosopher Arethus thirdly demanded him, why every one had her chamber
severally? The Indian answered. Thou know that now naturally reigns so
much malice in the woman, that she always enuyeth the felicity of another,
And if they were altogether, they would have amongst them such quarrels and
debates, that they would corrupt the milk which they should give to the child.

Fourthly, the Philosopher Arethus asked; why in every chamber there was a
great bed, and a little pallet, since there was but one woman, and one child?
whereunto the Indian answered. In this India they do not consent that the
Nurses should sleep together in one bed with the young child, whom they
nourish: for when the women are heavy a sleep, not taking heed to the child,
they many times ouerlay the poor infant, and so smother it alive.

Fifthly, the Philosopher asked, why ioining to the beds, there was nettles
which are without favor in eating, and dangerous in touching. The Indian
answered. I let thee know, that in this India (against al nature) the children
weep not whiles they are young, and therefore they have growing by the beds
nettles to make them weep: for our Philosophors tell us, that if daily the
child does weep two hours, it profits him not only for the health of his
body, but also for to prolong his life.

Furthermore the Philosopher for the sixth asked, why there were so many twigges
like Rosemary by the bed side: whereunto the Indian answered. Know thou that
in India, there is an old plague, that we cannot defend our selves from
these witches, the which by their sorceries, and with the only looks of their
eyes destroy many children: and they say, that all the children which shall be
perfumed with those herbs, can take no hurt through the looks of those
witches.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of a letter which Marcus Aurelius sent to his friend Dedalus, in
the end whereof he enuaieth against those women which cure children by
sorceries charms and enchantments.
PRincesses and great Ladies ought to take heed that their nurses be not
Witches, and that they do not suffer the babes (whiles they are yet young) to
take any charms or sorceries: for the medicine puts the life of the
creature in peril, and those sorceries do not only harm to the body of the
child, but also to the soul of her self which uses it. To praise more them
that are past, and to confound more the present. I will that those which shall
read this, do read a letter of Marcus Aurelius, which he sent to a friend of
his, in the end whereof it appears how great enemies the Ancients were to
Witches, Charmers, and to all kind of Sorcerers: for truly I know not which
was greater, either the temperance that they had in nourishing their children
being Gentiles or the foolish hardiness which we have being Christians. Here
follows therefore the Letter, in the end of the which he speaks against
Witches and evil women.

The letter of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.
MArcus Aurelius the Roman Emperor, fellow with his brother Annius Verus, in
the same Empire, wishes to thee Dedalus his special friend, health to thy
person, and good fortune against all evil, Since the day that thou did
take shipping at the Haven of Ostia, I read no letter of thine, neither have I
seen as yet any man of thy house: yea, and moreover, they could not tell me,
whether thou were alive or dead. Wherefore thy friends did imagine that some
mishap had befallen thee, and thy ship, or else for the misliking of the
Country, thou should return again, because that men, which do sail, as
thou, go always in dangar to be drowned by some tempest; and if they do
escape they despair in that strange Country by Tolitarinesse: but when I saw
Fronton thy servant, I was very joyful and much more when I understood thou
were alive after thy great travel.

Truly I received great pleasure of that thou writest in thy letter, that thou
art contented with the Country: for that to me it is a strange thing, that a
man being nourished in the delitiousnesse of Rome, should find himself
contented in in an other strange Realm and nation,

When Rome was Rome, and Italy was named great Greece, thither came of all
sorts of people, and Nations to learn virtues and Nobleness, When Rome
flourished:
and others for to give themselves to vices and pleasures. Because, if Titus
Liuins deceive me not, Rome spent all her treasures in Asia, and Asia employed
all her vices and delicatenes in Rome.

Thou writest to me in thy letter of so many things, and Fronton thy servant
has told me so many news of that land, that by the immortal Gods I swear
unto thee, I cannot tell what for to write unto thee, nor what to answer thy
servant: For the more the strange news do please the ears in hearing them,
so much the more do they seem to be incredible.

The noble and stout personages, though they would be esteemed and judged true
in their saying, having seen many wonders with their eyes: yet when they come
to count them, then they ought to be very moderate in their tongues.

For it is a shame to the honest How circumspect a man ought to be to speak
the truth.
man to declare a thing, wherein may be any doubt, whether it be true or not.

I will briefly answer all the things of thy Letter, and the answer shall be,
not according to thy desire, but according to that I perceive of thee, and the
World:

And before I begin, I beseech thee, if my pen shall err in writing, that
thy heart pardon me. For thy few years as yet do not let thee know the
World: and my white hayres and hoarie beard does give me authority to
advertise thee of that which is to come, and to condemn thee of that which is
past.

Thou say that in the Sea, thou have past many perils and dangers, and that
for to lighten the ship, thou did cast much of thy goods into the sea.

In this case me thinks thou ought greatly to thank the tempestuous
waves, which having power to drown thee, contented themselves with thy
Merchandise: For they which sail upon the foming Seas, ought not to regard so
much the goods they loose, as the life which they save.

Thou say that on the Seas thou werte greatly accompanied with passengers,
and that thou have tarryed longer in thy voyage then thou thoghtest, or did
desire.

This I say unto thee my friend Dedalus, that though the days were many thou
did stay, yet notwithstanding the griefs were more which thou receyuedst.
For it is impossible that those men which sail much, should not be troubled
with the Mariners, and also in fear of tempests.

To that I answer thee, the more thou were laden with companyons, the less
thy money weighed: for it is a general rule, that where the journey is long,
and the company great, there the purse of necessity, must needs wexe thin.

Thou say that through the moisture of the sea, as soon as thou were
landed, thou did feel thy self taken with the gout.

To this I answer thee, that thou have the gout in thy feet, or else in thy
What property belongs to the gout.
hands and if thou have it in thy feet, it shall be an occasion that thou
shall keep thy house, and if thou have it in thy hands, it shall be an
occasion that thou shall play no more at Tables (as thou werte wont to do) and
also thou shall not waste (as thou have done) thy own money. And if thou have
not changed thy condition which thou had, I am assured, that only for to
increase thy goods, thou will think thy gout welcome.

Thou say in that Country, thou have found many sovereign and expert
Physicians for to remedy thy diseases.

To that I answer, as Plato says that in the Country where there is many
Physicians, there are many vices, and many vicious: for man by excessive
delicatenes comes to sickness, and by that mean travel he is healed.

As long as our ancient Fathers were without Physicians in Rome, which was
four hundred years, so long and no more they showed them selves sober in
eating and drinking: For even as by temperance health proceeds, so of
Physic proceeds gluttony.

Thou say that the Country is very fertile, and that amongst other things
there is much wood which we lack here in Rome. To this I answer that if thou
have much wood, thou have little bread: for it is an ancient Proverb, that
where the fires are great, the barnes are few. And if thou say thou art
content with the wood of that Country, I let thee know that I am not
discontented with the bread of Italy: for in the end a man shall sooner find
wood to heat the even then corn to carry to the ^^ill. Truly it is a good
thing to have wood for the winter: but it is better to have corn for the
Winter and Summer: for they call it no hunger, when wood lacked for the aged;
but when bread wants for the young.

Thou say in that Country there are many waters, and that the water is very
clear and cold: and further that the abundance thereof is such, that every
house has a fountain. To this I answer thee, that where the waters do
abound, there wants health continually.

And I do not marvel thereat, for the moist and dankish places are always
most dangerous, unhealthful, and noisome.

If this had been in the time of the Golden World, when men know not what wine
meant, but that all drank Water, without comparison that Country would have
been better then this. For the more the drunkenness of Wine is infamous, the
more sweeter and profitable is that of the water,

Thou know well, that a Fountain which I have in my gardaine (by the
street Salaria,) was occasion that at one time seven of my House dyed
together. And if I had not made a conduit to void the standing water, I think
it had made an end of me, and of my Family. Wherefore I pray thee have respect
unto the health of thy person, rather then to enjoy the freshnes of the water.

For my part I think him only happy, who has his body healthful, and his
heart at ease. Praise as much the land as they will, enjoy thou the freshnes
thereof as much as thou can, and fill thee with the fresh and cold water, and
write unto thy friends how plenty it is: in the end I swear unto thee, my
dear Friend Dedalus, that more Money shall issue out of Rome, to buy wine in
Candia, then buttes of the cold water of that country shall enter into Rome.

Again, thou say that in that country there is such abundance of fruits:
and that thou think thou shall never be satisfied therewith. To that I
answer.

That thing which I best like, is a winter fruit: yet neither seeing it, nor
eating it, I can content my self: For the country where Fruits abound in
winter, is never without fevers and sicknesses in Summer.

Octauian Augustus that Noble Emperor of famous memory, seeing that Rome in
Summer, was very much subject to diseases: gave commandment What
inconuenie^ce comes by eating too much fruit.
upon grievous penalties, that the fruits of Salon should not enter into Rome
to be sold,

And this is a marvelous thing, that the City of Rome by this means did not
only find her self sound and whole: but also the Physicians went out of Rome,
of their own wills and affections. For it is a great token that the people is
healthful, when the Physicians are poor.

Thou say that in that Country there are many Iugglers and Players: To this
I answer thee.

That their pastimes shall not be unto thee such, and so pleasant, as the
griefs and displeasures thou shall have, when they cunningly and craftily What
hurt comes by Iugglers and players.
shall pick thy purse. For most commonly Iugglers and plaiers make Plays and
sportes in jest, but they will be paid in good earnest.

Furthermore thou say: in that Country there is great abundance of Vines,
and that the wine is sauourie to smell, and very sweet and pleasant, for
their taste: whereunto I answer.

That there shall not be so many vynes in the Fields, as Drunkardes amongst
the people: For, as thou know, the day that I married Torpina, my Niece, my
uncle Getellius had but only one vine tree, and yet with the Wine that came
thereof, he made himself, his household, and all those that were at the
marriage drunk.

That which I will say is not without weeping, (in the old time) Mars was the
God most honored and esteemed, being the God of Battles: but now Bacchus,
which is God of wine, is the most honored, served, and exalted.

For the time that a Roman was wont to employ in the Martial Camp to handle
Warlike weapons: now they consume in playing and drinking in the rauernes.

Titus Liuius in his Annals, says, that those of Gallia Transalpina,
understanding, Titus Liuius.
how that the Italians had planted many vines, came to conquer the Countety. So
that if they had never planted vines in Italy, the Frenchmen had never
destrolyed the Country.

The ancient Romans (which were provided against all inconveniences)
considering that Wine was the cause of their destruction, commanded to destroy
all the Vynes of the Empire, through the which policy, they were The policy
of the ancient Romans.
delivered from all the Frenchmen: for when the Wars were ended, there
remained not one Frenchman in all Italy, when they knew that there were no
more Vynes therein. Thou say that in that Country there are many Gentlemen
and honorable Senators, with whom thou talkest, and passest away the time.

To this I answer, that if it be true, there are many idle men, and also few
true talkers: For those men which have spent their youth in the wars, when
they are aged, do not employe their time but in hearing news, and telling
lies.

Thou sayedst, that there are very fair women in that country, of gesture
seemly, and of their persons comely;

To this I answer. That if there be many which be fair, there are as many
which are dishonest. For if the woman with her beauty, has not wisdom and
honesty in her self, she puts her self in peril, and her husband in much
care,

Thou say that in that Country there are women which are Soothsayers,
Sorcerers, and Enchantours: the which do boast and vaunt themselves that they
will heal Infants, and that they can weyne them better then others can do.

To this I answer: that I would judge it much better, that Children should
never be healed by the hands of such evil women. For the profit that they do
by their experience openly, is nothing in respect of the danger wherein they put
the creatures, by their Sorceries secretly.

Torquatus Laertius my Uncle, had a Daughter of a marvelous beauty, the
which (because he had none other Child,) was heir of all his Patrimony.

The case therefore was such: that as the Daughter one day cried and wept a
little too much, the Nurse which gave her suck, to appease and still her,
thinking to give her sorceries to cast her in a sleep, gave her poison, which
destroyed her; So that when the tears of the innocent babe ceased, then the
cries of the woeful mother began.

Calligula which was the son of the good Germanicus the great (though amongst
the Caesar's he was the fourth, and amongst the Tyrants, the first) when in
Rome they used to give little scrowles written, which they said to be of such
virtue, that they could heal all manner of Agues, and diseases of young
children, he gave commandment by the consent of the sacred Senate, that
whosoever either man or woman, which should make them, should immediately by
justice be put to death: and that he which would buy them, and carry them
about to sell, or give them through the city of Rome, should be whipped and
bashed for ever,

Thy servant Fronton has told me news, that thou have a Son borne, whereof
I am very glad: and moreover, he said that a woman of Sannia did nourishit,
and gave it suck: the which (as by an evil chance) has a spice of Sorcerie.

Now by the immortal Gods I do conjure thee, and for the love which I bear
thee, again I most earnestly desire thee, that immediately thou put her away
out of thy house, and suffer not, that so wicked a woman should eat Bread
there one day: For every creature which is nourished by sorceries and Charms,
shall either have his life short, or else Fortune shall be contrary unto him.

I let thee know my friend Dedalus, that I have not marvelled a little at many
Romans, the which do permit, and also procure that their Children should be
healed and cured with charms and sorceries? For my part I take it to be a
thing certain, that the men which by the will of God fall sick, shall never
heal for any diligence that man can do. And whereas children are sick by
evil humors, or that they are not very healthful, because the gods will take
life from them: in this case if their disease proceed of any evil humor, let
them ask Physicians for natural medicines. And if their diseases come because
the Gods God the only Physician.
are provoked: then let their Fathers appease the Gods with sacrifices. For in
the end it is impossible that the diseases of the heart should be healed by the
means of any Medicines of the body.

Do not marvel (my Friend Dedalus) if I have spoken more in this article then
in others, that is to say, to persuade thee so much to keep thy children from
witches: For otherwise the cursed Women will do them more harm, then the good
milk shall profit them.

I have been moved and provoked to write thus much unto thee, for the great
love which I do bear thee: and also calling to mind that which thou (when we
were in the sacred Senate) often times toldest me: which was, that thou did
desire a son. And since now thou have thy petition, I would not thou should
provoke the Gods wrath by sorceries: For in the faith of a good man I do
swear unto thee, that when the Fathers are in favor with the Gods, there
needs no sorceries unto the Children.

I had many other things to write unto thee: Some of the which I will
communicate with thy servant Fronton, rather then to send them by letters. And
marvel not at this, for letters are so perilous, that if a man be wise, he
will write no more in a close letter, the^ he would declare openly in Rome:
Pardon me my friend Dedalus, though indeed I write not unto thee as thy
appetite would, nor yet as my will desires. For thou have need to know many
things, and I have not leave by letter to put thee in trust therewith.

I cannot tell what I should write unto thee of me, but that always the Gout
does take me, and the worst of all is, that the more I grow in years, the
more my health diminishes: For it is an old course of man's frailty, that
where we think to go most surest, there have we most lets. The mutabilitie
of man's life.


The Popinjay which thou did send me, as soon as I received it, my wife did
seize it, and truly it is a marvelous pleasure to hear what things it does
speak: but in the end the women are of such power, that when they will, they
impose silence to the living, and cause that in the graves the dead men speak.

According to that I do love thee, and according to that I owe thee, and as I
have used, that which I do send thee is very little. I say it, because that
presently I do send thee but two horses of Barbary, twelve swords of
Alexandrie, and to Fronton thy servant for a new years gift, for his good
news, I have given him an Office, which is worth to him 20. thousand Sexterces
of Rent in Cecyl.

Faustine did bid me I should send thy wife Perusa, a cofer full of
odoriferous odours of Palestine, and another cofer full of her own Apparel:
the which (as I think) thou will not a little esteem. For naturally Women are
of their own Goods niggardes: but in wasting and spending of others very
prodigal. The Almighty gods be with thee, and preserve thee from evil
fortune. The which I humbly beseech to grant, that unto thee and me, and unto
my wife Faustine, and to thy wife Pertusa, that we all meet merrily together in
Rome: for the heart never receives such joy, as when he sees himself with
his desired friend. Marcus of Mount Celio writes to thee with his own hand.


CHAP. XXV. How excellent a thing it is for a Gentleman to have an eloquent
tongue,
ONe of the chiefest things that the Creator gave to man, was to know, and be
able to speak: What difference there is between man and beast.
for otherwise (the soul reserved) the brute beasts are of more value, then
dumb men. Aristotle in his Aesconomices without comparison prayseth more the
Pythagoricall sort, then the Stoicall: saying, that the one is more conform to
reason, then the other is. Pythagoras commanded, that al men which were dumb,
and without speech, should immediately, and without contradiction be banished,
and expulsed from the people. The cause why this Philosopher had commanded such
things was, for so much as he said, that the tongue is moved by the motions of
the soul, and that he which had no tongue, had no soul: And he which has no
soul is but a brute beast, and he that is a beast, deserves to serve in the
fields among brute beasts.

It is a good thing not to be dumb as brute beasts are, and it is a greater
thing to speak as the reasonable men do: but it is much more worthy to speak
well, as the eloquent Philosophers do. For otherwise if he which speaks,
does not weigh the sentences more then the words, often times the Popingayes
shall content the^ more which are in the cage, then the men which do read in
Schools.

Josephus in the book De Bello Iudaico says, That King Herod, not only with
his person and goods, but Joseph de bello Iudaic.
also with all his friends and parents followed, and gave aid to Marcus
Anthonius, and to his lover Cleopatra, howbeit in the end Octauian had the
victory: For the man which for the love of a woman does enterprise conquests,
it is impossible that either he lose not his life, or else that he live not in
infamy,

Herod seeing that Marcus Antonius was dead, determined to go toward the
Emperor Octauian, at whose feet he laid his crown, and made a notable
Oration, wherein he spoke so pleasant words, and so high sentences, that the
Emperor Octauian did not only pardon him, for that he was so cruel an
enemy, but also he confirmed him again unto his realm: and took him for his
dear and special friend.

For among the good men, and noble hearts, many evil works are amended by a
few good works.

If Blundus, in the book entitled Roma triumphante, do not deceive me Pirrus
that great King of the Epirotes was stout and hardy, valiant in arms,
liberal in benefices, patient in adversities, and above al renowned to be very
sweet in words, and sage in his answers.

They said that this Pirrus was so eloquent, that the man with whom once he
had spoken, remained so much his, that from that time forward in his absence,
he took his part, and declared his life and state in presence.

The above named Blundus said and Titus Liuius declares the same, That as the
Romans were of all things provided (seeing that King Pyrrus was so eloquent)
they provided in the Senate, that no Roman Ambassador should speak unto him,
but by a third person: for otherwise he would have persuaded them through his
sweet words, that they should have returned again to Rome as his procurers and
soliciters: Albeit Marcus Tullius Cicero was Senator in the Senate, Consul in
the Empire, rich amongst the rich, and hardy amongst men of war: yet What
caused Cicero to be famous.
truly none of these qualities caused him eternal memory, but only his
excellent eloquence.

This Tullius was so esteemed in Rome for the eloquence of his tongue only,
that often times they heard him talk in the Senate three hours together,
without any man speaking one word. And let not this be little esteemed, nor
lightly passed over: for worldly malice is of such condition, that some man may
easily speak four hours, then another man shall have patience to hear him
one minute. Antonius Sobellicus declares that in the time of Amilcares the
Affrican, a Philosopher named Afronio, flourished in great Carthage, who being
of the years of 81, dyed in the first year of the wars of Punica: they
demanded this Philosopher, what it was that he knew? he answered, He knew
nothing but to speak well. They demanded him again what he learned? He
answered, He did learn nothing but to speak well. Another time they
demanded him what he taught? He answered, He taught nothing but to speak
well. Me thinks that this good Philosopher in fourscore years and one said,
that he learned nothing but to speak well, he knew nothing but to speak
well, and that he taught nothing but to speak well. And truly he had reason,
for the thing which most adorneth man's life, is the sweet pleasant tongue to
speak well what is it to see two men in one counsel, the one talking to the
other, the one of them has an evil grace in propounding, and the other
excellent in speaking.

Of such there are some, that in hearing them talk three hours, we would
neither be troubled nor wearied, and of the contrary part, there are others so
tedious, and rude in their speech, that as soon as men perceive they begin
to speak they avoid the place.

And therefore in mine opinion, there is no greater trouble then to hearken one
quarter of an hour a rude man to speak, and to be contrary, there is no
greater pleasure then to hear a discreet man though it were a whole week.

The divine Plato in the Book of Laws said, that there is nothing whereby a
man is known more then by the words he speaks: for of the The opinion of Plato
words which we hear him speak, we judge his intention either to be good or
evil. Laertius in the life of the Philosopher says, that a young child borne
at Athens, was brought unto Socrates the great philosopher, being in Athens, to
the end he should receive him into his company, and teach him in his School.
The young child was strange and shamefast, and durst not speak before his
Master, wherefore the Philosopher Socrates said unto him, Speak friend, if
thou will that I know thee This sentence of Socrates was very profound, I pray
him that shall read this writing, to pause a while thereat. For Socrates will
not that a man be known by the gesture he has, but by the good or evil words
which he speaks.

Though eloquence and speaking well, to every man is a cause of augmenting
their honor, and no diminisher of their goods: yet without comparison it
shines much more, and is most necessary in the Palaces of Princesses and
great Lords; for men which have common offices, ought of necessity hearken to
his natural Countrymen, and also to speak with strangers.

Speaking therefore most plainly, I say, that the Prince ought not to travel
only to have eloquence, for the honor of his person: but also it behooves him
for the Commonwealth.

For as the Prince is but one, and is served of all: so it is impossible that
he have so much as will satisfy and content them all. And therefore it is
necessary that he requite some with money, and that he content others with
good words: For the Noble heart loves better a gentle word, then a reward or
gift, with the tongue of a rude man.

Plato, Liuius, Herodotus, Vulpicius, Eutropius, Diorus, Pliny, and many other
innumerable ancient Historiographers, do not cease to praise the eloquence of
Greek princes, and Latins in their works.

Oh how blessed were those times, when there were sage Princes, and discreet
Lords: truly, they have reason to exalt them. For many have obtained, and
won the royal crowns and scepters of the Empire, not so much for the great
battles they have conquered, nor for the high blood and generation from whence
they are descended, as for the wisdom and eloquence which they had.

Marcus Aurelius was natural of Rome, borne in Mount Celio, he was poor in
patrimony, and of base lynage, little in favor, left and forsaken of his
parents; and besides all this, only for being virtuous in this life, profound
in doctrine, and of so high eloquence, the Emperor Antonius (called Pius) gave
him his daughter Faustine for wife, who being reproved of many, because he gave
his daughter to so poor a Philosopher, answered. I had rather have a poor
Philosopher then a rich fool.

Pulio in his seventh book of the Roman laws says, that in Rome there was
a law very well kept, and observed of the Consels by a custom brought in, that
the Dictators, Censor and Emperors of Rome, entered into the Senate once in the
week at the least, and in this place they should give and render account, in
what state the common wealth remained. O would to God that at this present this
Law were so kept and observed: for there is none who does minister so good
justice, as he which thinks to give account of his doings.

They say that Caligula, the fourth Emperor of Rome, was not only deformed
infamous, and cruel in his life, but also was an Idiot in eloquence, and of an
evil utterance in his communication: so that he among all the Roman Princes
was constrained to have others to speak for him in the Senate.

This wicked man was so unfortunate, that after his cruel and infamous death,
they drew him throughout Rome, and set upon his grave this Epitaph.

Caligula lies here in endless sleep,
That stretched his reign, upon the Empires head,
Unfit for rule, that could such folly heap,
And fit for death, where virtue so was dead.
I Cannot tell why Princes do praise themselves to be strong and hardy, to be
well disposed, to be runners, to just well, and do not esteem to be
eloquent, since it is true, that those gifts do profit them only for their
life, but the eloquence profits them not only for to honor their life, but
also to augment their renown: For we do read, that by that many Princes did
pacify great seditions in the common wealth, and besides that they deserved
immortal memory. Suetonius Tranquillus in the first book of Caesar's says,
that the aduenturous Julius Caesar (being as yet but 16. years of age) when
there dyed in The commendation of Julius Caesar.
Rome an aunt of his called Cornelia, at her burial he made an Oration, in
the which he (being so young,) showed marvelous great eloquence, which was
so accepted that day in all people, that in the end, every man judged him to be
a valiant Roman Captain.

And as Appianus declares, they say that Silla spoke these words. That which I
perceive of this young man Caius Caesar is, that in the boldness of his
tongue, he declares how valiant he ought to be in his person. Let therefore
Princes and great Lords see, how much it may profit them to know to speak
well and eloquently, For we see no other thing daily but that a man of base
lynage, by his eloquence comes to be exalted: and the other which of lineage
is nobly borne for want of speaking well, and being eloquent, is the first that
discendeth most vilest of all other.

The intention whereupon I wrote these things was for no other, but to
admonish, persuade, and pray all princes and great Lords, that whiles their
children are young, they should put them to wise and learned men, to the end
they should teach them: not only how they ought to live, but also how they
ought to speak: For to persons of estate, it is a great infamy to do, or to
invent to do a thing, and afterward not to know how to give a reason thereof.

Polidorus in the third book of his Commentaries says, that when the
Lacedaemonians were put to flight by the Athenians: In rota milina, it is called
Milina, because the battle was in the river of Miline, the Lacedaemonians sent
a Philosopher called Heuainus, to treat of peace with the Athenians, who made
such an eloquent Oration to the Senate of Athens, that he did nor only obtain
the Peace which he desired for his Country, but for himself also he wan
perpetual renown. At the Philosophers return the Athenians gave him a letter
which said in this sort.

CHAP. XXVI Of a Letter which the Athenians sent to the Lacedaemonians.
THe Senate, people, and Sages of Athens wishes health to the persons, and
peace to the Common wealth, of you of the Senate, and people of the
Lacedaemonians. We take the immortal Gods to record, that in the last battle
we had no less displeasure to see you overcome, then on the contrary we had
pleasure, to see us remain victorious: for in the end, the dangers and
inconveniences of the cruel wars are so great, that the evil and danger is
certain to them that are vanquished, and the profit is doubtful to them that
have ouercommed.

We would gladly, that that which now ye will, ye would have willed sooner,
and that which now ye require and demand, that before ye had required and
demanded,

But what shall we do, since it was ordained to your and our woeful destinies,
that he should lose the battle, and that we of your loss can take no
profit: For it is a rule infallible, that all that which the Gods have
ordained, no worldly wight can avoid, nor humane power resist. Ye demand
that war may leave and cease off, and that we take truce for three months,
and that duriyg this time, peace and concord may be concluded. To this we make
answer, That the Senate of Athens has not accustomed to grant peace,
afterward for to return to war: for amongst us Athenians we have an ancient
Law, that freely we do accept the cruel war, and liberally we do grant
perpetual peace.

In our Schools and Universities we travel to have Sages in time of peace,
for to help us with their counsels in the time of war. And they do counsel
us that we never take upon us truce upon suspect condition: And indeed they
counsel us well: for the feigned and dissembled peace is much more perilous,
then is the manifest war.

The Philosopher Heuxinus your Ambassador has spoken to us so highly and
eloquently in this Senate, that it seemed to us very unjust, if we should deny
him, and gainsay that he requires us.

For it is much more honesty to grant him peace; which by sweet and pleasant
words does demand it: then him, which by force and sharp sword does require
it.

Let the case therefore be, that the Senate, people and Sages of Athens have
ordained, that war do cease with the Lacedaemonians, and that all discordes,
contentions, dissentions, and debates do end, and that perpetual peace be
granted unto them:

And this thing is done to the end all the world should know, that Athens is of
such courage with the hardy, and so very a friend to the Sages: that she
knows how to punish the foolish Captains, and suffers to be commanded and
governed by sage Philosophers. Ye know right well that all our war has not
been, but only for the possession of Cities and limits of the river Milina,

Wherefore by this letter we declare unto you, and by the immortal Gods we
swear, that we do renounce unto you al our right on such condition, that you
do leave us Heuxinus your Ambassador and Philosopher.

The great Athens desires rather a Philosopher for her Schools, then a whole
Province of your Realms. And do not you other Lacedaemonians think, that that
which we of Athens do, is light or foolish, that is to say, that we desire
rather one man to rule, then to have a whole Province whereby we may command
many.

For this Philosopher shall teach us to live well, and that land gave us
occasion to dye evil: and since we now of your old enemies do become your true
friends, we will not only give you perpetual peace, but also counsel for to
keep it. For the medicine which preserves health is of greater excellency,
then is the purgation which heals the disease.

Let the counsel therefore be such, that as ye will the young men do
exercise themselves in weapons, that so ye do watch and see that your
children in time do learn good letters: For even as the war by the cruel
sword is followed: so likewise by pleasant words peace is obtained. Think not
ye, Lacedaemonians, that without a cause we do persuade you, that you put your
children to learn, when as yet they are but young and tender, and that ye do
not suffer them to run to vices? for on the one part, wise men shall want to
counsel, and on the other, fools shall abound to make debate. We Atbenians,
in like manner, will not that ye Lacedaemonians do think, that we be
friends to bablers. For our Father Socrates ordained, that the first lesson
which should be given to the Scholar of the University, The ordinances of
Socrates.
should be, that by no means he should speak any word for the space of two
years: for it is impossible that any man should be wise in speaking, unless
he have patience to be silent. We think, if you think it good, that the
Philosopher Heuxinus shall remain in our Senate, and think you if we profit
by his presence, that ye may be assuted that others shall not receive any
damage by the counsels he shall give us: For in Athens it is an ancient Law,
that the Senate cannot take upon them wars; but by the Philosophers first it
must be examined, whether it be just or not.

We write none other thing, but that we beseech the immortal gods that they
be with you, and that it please them to continue us in this perpetual peace:
for that only is perpetual, which by the Gods is confirmed.

CHAP. XXVII. That Nurses which give suck to the children of Princes ought to
be discreet and sage women.
THe Pilgrims which travel through unknown Countries and strange mountains
(with great desire to go forward, and not to err) do not only ask the way
which they have to go, but also do importune those whom they meet, to point
them the way with their finger: For it is a grievous thing to travel
doubtfully in fear and suspicion: By this comparison I mean, that since I have
much persuaded, that the Fathers do learn and teach their children to speak
well, it is but reason that they do seek them some good Masters. For the
counsel has no authority, if he which gives it, seeks not speedily to
execute the same.

It is much for a man to be of a good nature, or else to be of an evil How
every man ought to guide and govern himself.
inclination, to be rude in understanding, or else to be lively in spirit:
and this not only for that a man ought to do, but also for that he ought to
say: For it is no small thing, but a great good benefit, when the man is of a
good nature, of a good understanding, and of a clear judgment. This
notwithstanding, I say, that all the good and clear judgments are not always
eloquent, nor all the eloquentest of lively spirits and understanding.

We see many men which of a small matter can make much: and for the contrary
we see many men, which have great knowledge, and yet no mean s to utter it. So
that nature has given them high understanding, and through negligence of
bringing up it is hid.

Oftentimes I do marvel that the soul of the Babe when it is borne, for the
one part is of no less excellency, then the soul of the old man when he
dies. And on the other side I muse at the babe which has the members so
tender, (wherewith the soul does work his operations) that they little seem
to participate with reasonable creatures.

For where the soul does not show her self mistress, it wants little but
that the man remains a beast.

It is a wonder to see the Children, that as yet being two years of Age, they
lift heir feet for to go, they hold themselves by the walls for falling,
they will open their eyes to know and they form a defuzed voice to speak: So
that in that age, a creature is none otherwise then as a tree at the first
spring. For the Tree two months Children compared to Trees.
being past, bears leaves immediately: and the child after ij. years
begins to frame his words.

This thing is spoken, for that the Fathers which are wise, should begin to
teach their children at that Age: For about that time the Vynes bear grapes,
and other trees their fruit: For the perils of this life are such, that if it
were possible, the Father before he see his Son borne, ought to admonish him
how he should live.

In mine opinion, as they conueigh the water about to turn the Mill: So from
the tender youth of the Infant, they ought to show and teach him to be
eloquent and affable. For truly the Child learneth distinctly to pronounce
his words, when he does suck the milk of his Nurse.

We cannot deny, but that the children being but two or three years old, it
is too soon to give them masters or correcters, For at that Age a Nurse to
keep them clean is more necessary, then a master to correct their speech.

On the one part the children are very tender for to learn to speak well: and
on the other part it is necessary, that when they are very young and little,
they should be well taught and instructed.

I am of that opinion, that Princesses and great Ladies should take such Nurses
to give their Children suck, that they should be sound, to give How to choose
Nurses for children.
them their milk, and sage for to teach them to speak. For in so young and
tender Age they do not suffer, but that she which gives them suck, does
teach them to speak their first words.

As Sextus Cheroner sis in the book of the diversity of the Languages, says:
That the Toscanes were the first which called the natural tongue of the
country, the Mother tongue, (which is to say, the tongue of our Mother) to the
end we should take it of the Mother which brings us forth: and of the Nurse
which gives us suck. And in this case we have less need of the Mother then
of the Nurse. For the children before they know their Mothers, which brought
them into the world, do call the Nurse mother, that gave them suck.

Plutarche in the second book of the Regiment of Princes, says: that one of
the greatest things the Romans had in their Commonweal was, that of all the
Languages and manners which they spoke; thoroughout the whole earth, they had
Colleges and Schools in Rome: so that were he never so barbarous that entered
into Rome, immediately he found that understood him.

The Romans used that craft and subtlety, to the end that when Rome sent
Ambassadors into strange Countries, or that some strange Countries came to
Rome, they would that the Ent^rpretours and brokers should be of their own
Nation, and not of a strange tongue or Country.

And truly the Romans had reason: for the affairs of great importance, are
oftentimes craftily compassed by a straungetongue.

A man will marvel greatly to read, or hear this that I speak: which is,
that the Women which nourish the children of Princes be eloquent.

And truly he that at this does marvel, has seen little, and read less. For
I cannot tell which was greater, the glory that the Ancients, had to enjoy so
excellent women: or the infamy of The glory of the Ancients to enjoy virtuous
women.
them that are present, to suffer dishonest Harlots. I will not deny, when I
drew near this matter, that my spirits were not in great perplexity: First to
see in this my writing, of what women my Pen should write, (that is to say) the
dissolute vices of Women which I have s^^n, or else the prowesses and virtues
of women whereof I have read. Finally, I am determined to entreat of our
Grain, and Corn, and to leave the rotten straw on the Earth, as without
profit. For the tongue which is noble, ought to publish the goodness of the
good and honest women, to the end that all know it: for the contrary, the
frailenesse of the wicked ought to be dissembled, and kept secret, to the end
that no man follow it.

Men which are sage and noble, treating of Women, are bound to visit them, to
preserve them, and to defend them: but in no wise they have license to slander
them.

For the man which speaks of the frailenes of women, is like unto him that
takes a sword to kill a fly.

Therefore touching the matter, Princesses and great Ladies ought not to cease
to teach their young children all that they can, sons, or daughters. And they
ought not to deceive themselves, saying, that for as much as their daughters are
Women, they are unable to learn sciences: for it is not a general rule, that
all men children are of clean understanding, nor that all the daughters are of
rude spirit and wit: for if they and the others did learn together, I think
there would be as many wise women, as there are foolish men. Though the world
in times past did enjoy excellent women, there was never any Nation had such as
the Greeks had: For though the Romans were glorious in weapons, the Greeks
were of immortal memory of letters.

I will not deny that in the common wealth of Rome, there has not been
nourished and taught many women of great science: but that the difference of
the one and the other was, that the Grecian women were learned in Philosophy,
and the Roman Greece ever famous for learned women.
women in Rethoricke and Poetry.

And hereof came that in Athens, they esteemed to know how to teach well: and
in Rome they vaunted how to speak well.

Euphronius in the third book of the Roman gestes says, that in the third
year of the Consulship of Lelius Sylla, by chance a Greek Ambassador, and an
Ambassador of Rome, were at words in the Senate of the Rhodians, and the
Greek Ambassador said to the Roman Ambassador; It is true, that amongst you
other Romans, you are aduenturous in arms: but for all that, you are unable
in sciences: For truly the women of Greece know more in letters, then the men
of Rome in weapons.

As soon as the Senate of Rome understood those words, immediately hereupon
grew the cruel wars between Rome and Carthage about the possession of Sicill.

And no man ought hereat to marvel; for in the end we see more wars arise by
injurious words, then for to recover the good that is lost. The Romans and the
Grecians therefore being ready the one to defy the other, the Rhodians came in
the midst, and kept them from such debate, and in the end appointed them in
this sort.

That is to say, that as this injury should by weapons have been determined,
they ordained that by the disputations of women it should be argued.

And truly the Romans were counseled well; for it was greater shame to the
Greeks to be overcome with the tongues of women, then with the swords of men.
The cause thereof was such, that by appointment Disputation between the women
of Greece and Rome.
assembled at Rhodes ten Roman women, and ten Greek women: All women very well
learned, the which in their chairs read certain lessons, every one after other,
and afterward the one disputed against the other of sundry and diverse matters.

And finally, there was between them great difference, for the Greeks spoke
very high things, not so profound, but with an excellent style. We ought not to
marvel that such gifts were in those women: for we daily see it by
experience, that profound science and high eloquence seldom meets in one
personage.

The Greeks were very well pleased to hear the Roman women, and the Romans
remained astonished to hear the Greeks. And upon this occasion the Rhodians
judged in this sort, that every one of them should be crowned with a crown of
Laurel as vanquishers. And they judged that in grave sentences the Grecians had
the best, and in eloquent speech the Romans had the victory. As the above
named Euphronius says, the disputations being ended, the Roman women
returned to Rome: and the Greek women to Greece, where they were received with
such triumph and glory, as if they had won a battle, The Senate of the Rhodians
for the memory of those women (in the place of the disputations) caused to be
set up 20. pillars, in every one of the which were the names of the women.
Which was so sumptuous a building that in Rhodes there were none like to it,
save only the Collyseo. Those pillars stood until the time of Heliogabalus the
Emperor, who was so evil that The wickedness of Heliogabalus.
he invented new vices, and destroyed the ancient memories.

The writers which write in that time, declare yet another thing, wherein the
women of Greece were different from the women of Rome. That is to say, that the
Greek women were found more fairer then the Roman women: but the Romans had
a better grace and more rich in apparel then the Greeks. They said also that
the Greeks were more hardy and stout then the Romans: but the Romans were
more honest, pleasant, and gracious then the Greeks.

And if this be true, I do counsel Princesses and great Ladies that they have
no more envy at the honesty of the Matrones of Rome, then at the boldness of the
Ladies of Gretia. For women were not born to slay men in the war, but to
spin, sow, and live well like good housewiues in the house.

CHAP. XXVIII. That women may be no less wise then men, and though they be
not, it is not through default of nature, but for want of good bringing up.
CEasing to speak in generally, it is but reason we speak particularly, and
that we reduce to memory some ancient histories of wise and discreet women,
as well Greeks as Romans: and for that these Ladies (seeing what others were
in times past) may know what their duty is at this present.

In mine opinion, the duty that the men of this present have to follow the
courage that the Ancients had in fighting: the self same desire ought women of
this present to have, to follow the ancient women in devout living: for there
is no good thing in the world at this present day, but the like has been seen
of our ancients heretofore. When any sudden new and unaccustomed thing does
happen, men that never saw the like, use to say, that there was never the like
in the world, yet indeed they say not true: for though the thing be unto them
new, it is through their ignorance and simpleness which neither have read it
by themselves, nor heard it of others: or this excellency has the man that is
learned, that for what soever he hears or says, he is nothing abashed at.

Since women now a days are so ignorant, that scarcely any of them can read
well, he that shall read this will marvel why I do persuade them to learn:
but the truth known what the Ancients were, and what they did know: from this
time forward I believe they would greatly reprove the women of this present:
for the time which the ancient women spent in virtues and studies: The ancient
women far excelled these in our times.
These of this present consume in pleasures and vices.

Bocchas in the praise of Women says, that Lucius Sylla was a great companion
of Marius the Consul, in the time of the war of Iugurtha and was no less a
friend of Caius Caesar, in the time of the first civil wars. My pen
needs not to be occupied to write any thing of the life of Sylla: For all the
Historiographers do not only reprove the cruelties which he used to his
enemies, but also condemn him for the little faith he observed his friends.

This Consul Sylla had three daughters, the one of them was named Lelia
Sabina, the which of all the sisters was least fair, but amongst all the
Romans she was the most sagest: for she read openly in Rome in a chair both
Greek and Latin. After the wars of Mithridates, Lucius Sylla came to Rome,
where he beheaded three thousand Romans which came to salute him: although
before by his word he had assured them all: And in deed, and also justly Lucius
Sylla had been utterly undone for his fact, if his daughter had not made to the
Senate a wise Oration: for often times it chances that the wisdom of the
good child does remedy the folly of the wicked Father. The Historians say, that
this Lelya Sabina had not only a great grace in reading: but also she had
much excellency in writing: for she wrote many letters and orations with her
own hand, which her Father Lucius Sylla afterward learned by heart: and as he
was indeed quick of spirit, so he used to recite them to the Senate always
for his purpose.

And let no man marvel hereat for there are some of so gross understanding
The difference between one man and another.
that that which they write and study, they can scarcely utter: and others
again are of such lively wits, that of that only which they have heard, it
seems marvelous to hear with what eloquence they will talk. Because Sylla
had such and so excellent a daughter in his house, he was esteemed for a sage
and wise counselor throughout all the Common wealth.

He was counted very absolute in executing, strong in maintaining, and for
right eloquent in speaking. Finally, of this came this ancient proverb which
says Lucius Sylla governs his own country with the eloquence of his tongue:
and is Lord of strange nations by the force of his sword.

What the great Plato has been, and what great authority he has had amongst
his country men, and amongst the strangers it is apparent: for so much as the
Greeks do acknowledge him of all other Philosophers to be the Prince: and
likewise the Latins by one consent call him divine.

And me thinks that in doing this, they do no Philosopher injury: for as
Plato in his life time had great modesty, so truly in his writing he
exceeded man's capacity. An Historian called Hyzearchus declares that Lasterna
and Axiothea were two Greeks very well Iearned, and amongst the Scholars of
Plato chiefly renowned. The one was of so perfect a memory, and the other of so
high an understanding, that Plato often times being in the chair, and these two
not ready, he would not begin to read. And being demanded wherefore he
read not his Lecture? he answered: I will not read, for that there wants
here understanding to conceive, and also memory to retain.

Meaning that Lasterna was absent, that Axiothe was not yet come. The wisdom
of these two women ought to be much, since Plato without them would not utter
one word, unless they were present in his School. For Plato esteemed more the
understanding and memory of those two women alone: then he did the philosophy
of his other Scholars together. Aristippus the philosopher was Scholar to
Socrates, and of the most renowned of Athens. He had a daughter called Aretha,
the which was so well learned in Greek and Latin letters, that the common
renown said, the soul of Socrates was The commendation of Aretha.
entered into Aretha: and the cause that moved them to say this was, because
she read and declared the doctrine of Socrates in such wise, that it seemed to
most men she had rather write by hand, then learn by study. Bocchas in the
second book of the praise of women, says, that this Aretha was so excellent
a woman, that she did not only learn for her self, but also to teach others:
and did not only teach in diverse Schools, but also she wrote many and
sundry books, one especially in the praise of Socrates, an other of the
manner of bringing up children, an other of the Wars of Athens, an other of
the tyrannical force, an other of the Common Wealth of Socrates, an other of
the infelicity of Women, an other of the tillage of the Ancients, an other of
the Wonders of the Mount Olimpus, an other of the vain care of the Sepulcher,
an other of the care of the Antes, an other of the Workemanshippe of the Bees
in honey: and she wrote two others, the one of the vanities of youth, and the
other of the miseries of age.

This woman did read openly natural and moral Philosophy in the Schools of
Athens, for the space of five and twenty years: she made forty books, she
had a hundred and ten Philosophers to her Scholars, she dyed being at the age
of seventy and seven years, and the Athenians after her death, engraued on
her grave these words.

THe slysed stones within their bowels keep
Wise Aretha, the great and only wight, The Epitaph of Aretha.

That forces envy gentle tears to weep.
For Greeks decay, on whom the loss does light.
The eye of Fame, the heart of virtues life,
The head of Greece, lies here engraued, lo
More heavenly form then had that heavenly wife,
Which vnderminde the Phrigies toys with woe.
Within the chest of her unspotted mind
Lay Thyrmas truth, and eke her honest faith
Within her hand, as by the gods assignde
Stood Aristippus pen that virtue wayeth.
Within the dungeon of her body eke
Imprisoned was, wise Socrates his soul
That lived so well, and did so wisely speak,
That follies breast, he could to wisodome toule.
Within her head so over heapt with wit
Lay Homers tongue, to stain the Poets art,
Erst was the golden age not half so fit,
For Virtues Impes, as when her life did part.
As Marcus Varro says, the sects of the Philosophers were more then seventy,
but in the end they were reduced into seven, and in the end they were brought
into three sects chiefly. That is to say, Stoickes, Peripatetickes, and
Pythagoriques. Of these Pythagoriques, Pythagoras was the Prince, Hizearcus,
Annius Rusticus, and Laertius, with Eusebius and Boccas, all affirm one thing,
whereunto I did not greatly give credit, which is: that this Philosopher
Pithagoras had a sister, not only learned, but (if it be lawful to speak
it) excellently learned. And they say, that not she of Pythagoras, but
Pythagoras of her learned philosophy. And of a truth it is a matter whereof I
was so greatly abashed, that I cannot tell who could be master of such a
woman: since she had Pythagoras the great philosopher to her Scholar. The
name of the woman was Thecclea to whom Pythagoras her brother wrote and sent her
a letter, when he read philosophy at Rhodes, and she at Samothracia doing the
like. The Epistle was thus,

CHAP. XXIX. Of a Letter which Pythagoras sent to his sister Theoclea, he
being in Rhodes, and she in Sam othracia reading both Philosophy.
PYthagoras thy brother, and Disciple to thee Theoclea his sister, health and
increase of wisdom wishes. I have read the book which thou did send me,
of fortune and misfortune, from the beginning to the end: and now I know, that
thou art no less grave in making, then gracious in teaching. The which does
not chance very often unto us, which are men, and much less (as we have seen)
to you women. For the Philosopher Aristippus was rude in speaking, but profound
in writing: and Amenides was brief in writing, and eloquent in speaking. Thou
have studied and written in such sort, that in learning, that thou show,
thou seem to have read all the Philosophers: and in the antiquities that
thou do declare, it seems that thou have seen all the time past: Wherein
thou being a woman show thy self more then a woman, because the nature of
women is to cast The proty of women.
their eyes only in that that is present, and to forget that is past. They
tell me that thou do occupy thy self now in writing of our Country. And
truly in this case I cannot say, but that you have matter enough to write on:
For the wars and travels of our times have been such, and so great, that I
had rather read them in books, then to see them with my eyes.

And if it be so, as I suppose it is, I beseech thee heartily, and by the
immortal Gods I conjure thee, that in writing the affairs of thy Country
thou do use thy pen discreetely. I mean, that thou do not in this case
blemish thy writing, by putting therein any flattery or lesing. For often times
Historiographers, in blasing more then truth, the gifts of their Country,
cause worthily to be suspected their writing.

Thou know very well, how that in the battle past, the Rhodians were
overcome, and that ours remained victorious. Me thinks thou should not in
this case greatly magnify, extol, or exalt ours, because in the end they
fought to revenge their iuiury, neither thou ought to blame the Rhodians,
for they did not fight but in the aid of Rome, I speak this (my sister)
because for to defend their own, women show themselves Lions: and for to
defend the things of another man, men show themselus chickens: For in the end
he only may be counted strong, the which defends not his own house, but
which dies defending his, and another man's. I will not deny the natural love
of my Country, nor I will not deny but that I love them that write, and speak
well thereof: but me thinks it is not reason, that they should disprayse the
goodness and truth of other Countries: nor that they should so highly commend
the evil and vileness of their own: For there is not in the world this day
so barren a realm, but may be commended for something therein, nor there is
so perfect a nation, but in somthings may be reproved. Thou can not deny me,
but that amongst thy brethren I am the eldest, and thou can not deny but that
amongst all thy Disciples I am the youngest, and since that for being thy
Disciple, I ought to obey thee, thou likewise for that I am thy eldest brother
ought to believe me. By the faith of a people, I do counsel thee my
sister, that thou do travel much to be profound Man without truth is not
worthy to be regarded.
in thy words, upright in thy life, and honest of thy person: and besides all
this, true in thy writing: For I let thee understand, that if the body of the
man without the soul is little regarded: I swear unto thee that the mouth of
a man without truth, is much less esteemed.

CHAP. XXX. The Author follows his purpose, persuading Princesses and other
Ladies to endeavor themselves to be wise, as the women were in old time.
THis therefore was the letter, which Pythagoras sent to his sister Theoclea,
whereby is showed the great humility of him, and the hie eloquence of her,
Hierchus the Greek and Plutarch also in the book of the government of
Princes say, that Pythagaras The humility of Pythagoras.
had not only a sister, which was called Theoclea, of whom he learned so much
Philosophy, but also he had a daughter, the wisdom and knowledge of whom
surmounted her Aunt, and was equal to her Father.

I think it no less incredible which is spoken of the daughter, then that
which is spoken of the Aunt, which is, that those of Athens did rejoice more to
hear her speak in her house, then for to hear Pythagoras read in the
School.

And it ought to be believed: for the saying of the grave Authors on the one
part: and by that we daily see on the other part: For in the end it is more
pleasure to hear a man tell merry tales, having grace and comelynes in his
words, then to hear a grave man speak the truth, with a rude and rough tongue.

I have found in many writings, what they have spoken of Pythagoras, and his
Daughter: but none tells her name, save only in an Epistle that Phalaris the
Tyrant wrote, I found this word written, where he says: Polychrata, that was
the Daughter of the Philosopher Pythagoras, was young and exceeding wise, more
fair then rich, and was so much honored for the purity of her life, and so
highly esteemed for her pleasant Tongue: that the word which she spoke
spinning at her Distaffe, was more esteemed then the Phylosophie that her
Father read in the school. And he said more. It is so great a pity to see
and hear, that women at this present are so dishonest, and in their tongues so
malicious, that I have greater pleasure in the good renown of one that is
dead, then in the infamy of all them which are alive: For a good woman is more
worth with her distaffe spinning, then a hundred evil Queens, with their
royal Scepters reigning. By the words which Phalaris said in his letter it
seemed that this Daughter of Pythagoras was called Polichrate.

Pythagoras therefore made many Commentaryes, as well of his own country, as
of strangers. In the end he dyed in Mesopotamia, where at the hour of his
death, he spoke unto his Daughter Polichrate: and said these words. I see my
Daughter, that the hour wherein I must end my life approaches. The Gods gave
it me, and now they will take it from me: Nature gave me birth, and now she
gives me death: the Earth gave me the body, and now it returns to ashes.
The woeful Fatal destenyes gave me a little goods, mingled with many
trauells: So that (Daughter) of al things which I enjoyed here in this world, I
carry none with me: For, having all as I had it, by the way of borrowing: now
at my death, each man takes his own.

I die joyfully: not for that I leave thee rich, but for that I leave thee
learned. And in token of my tender heart, I bequeathe unto thee all my Books,
wherein thou shall find the treasure of all my trauells. And I tell thee that
that I give thee, is the riches gotten with mine own sweat: and not obtained
to the prejudice of another. For the love I bear unto thee (Daughter) I pray
thee: and by the immortal Gods I conjure thee, that thou be such, and so
good, that although I die, yet at the least thou may keep my memory: For
thou know well what Homer says, speaking of Achilles, and Pyrrhus: That the
good life of the Child that is alive, keeps the renown of the Father which
is dead. These were the words which the Philosopher spoke to his daughter,
lying in his death bed. And though perhaps he spoke not these words, yet at
the least this was the effect and meaning.

As the great Poet Mantuan says: King Euander was father of the grant Pallas,
and he was a great friend of king Eneas: he vaunted himself to descend of the
Lineage of the Troyans: and therefore when king Eneas, and prince Turnus, had
great Wars between them, which of them should have the Princess Lauinia in
Marriage, (the which at that time was only heir of Italy) king Euander aided
Eneas, not only with goods, but also sending him his own Son in person: For
the friends ought for their true friends willingly to shead their blood, and
in their behalf, without demanding, they ought also to spend their goods

This King Euander had a Wife so well learned, that that which the Greeks
said of her, seems to be fables: That is to say, of her eloquence and
wisdom, for they say, that if The wife of King Euander a Prophetess.
that which this woman wrote of the wars of Troy, had not been through envy
cast into the fire: the name of Homer had at this day remained obscure.

The reason hereof is, because that woman was in the time of the destruction of
Troy, and wrote as a witness of sight.

But Homer wrote after the destruction of Troy, as one affectioned unto the
Prince Achilles, as a friend of the Greeks, and enemy of the Trojans.

And truly when a Writer is affectioned to any person, his writing of force
must be suspected. The wife of this King Euander was called by her name
Nicostrata, albeit others called her Carmenta, for the eloquence she had in
her verses. For they say, that she made as easily in meeter as others do in
prose.

The Historiographers of the Gentiles say, that she prophefied the destruction
of Troy fifteen years before. She told the coming of Aeneas into Italy, and
spoke of the wars that should be before the marriage of Lauinia, and said how
Ascanius the son of Enea should build Alba longa. She said further, that of
the Latin Kings should descend the Romans, and that the revenge which Rome
should take of Greece should be greater, then that which Greece did take of
Troy. And she said also that the greatest War which Rome should have,
should be against the Princes of Affricke, and that in the end Rome should
triumph over all the Realms of the earth, and finally a nation unknown,
should triumph for ever in Rome. As Eusesebius Caesarten says: The Routaines
kept these writings in as great estimation in the high capitol, as the
Christians kept their faith unto GOD.

King Darius after he was vanquished in the first Battle, by King Alexander
the great (before he was in the second battle utterly destroyed) traveled and
sought many ways and means to the end he might be friend unto Alexander: And
in very deed King Darius was sage to seek it, but not so happy to obtain it.
For to Princes the peace is more worth that is honest, then is the victory
which is bloody.

Betwixt these two so stout Princes Truce was made for three months, and in
the mean time, the Priests of the Chaldeans treated peace, with these
conditions: that the great Alexander should marry the daughter of king Darius
and that Darius should give her a great quantity of gold: and besides this,
that he should endow her with the third part of his realm. And truly these
means were good: For, among Princes, there is nothing that sooner pacifieth
old injuries, then to make between them new Marriages.

King Alexander excused himself of this marriage, saying that he was but
xxiiij, years of age, and that he was too young to be married: because
amongst the Macedonians there was a custom, that the woman could not be married
until xxv. years of age, nor A custom among the Macedonians.
the man until xxx. The Daughter of King Darius was fair, rich, and noble:
but the best she wanted, for she was not wise And this was the cause why K:
Alexander refused her for his wife: for in those days women were not married
because they were rich, but beloved, because they were wise: And finally, the
woman that had studied best, came commonly to the highest Marriage.

Antonius Rusticus, and Quintus Seuerus say, that the great Alexander (after he
had forsaken the daughter of king Darius,) married a wife which was a poor
woman, and deformed, called Barsina, which indeed was neither with riches nor
beauty endued: but without doubt in the Greek and Latin tongue most
excellently learned, And when the Princes of Macedonie would have withdrawn him
from that marriage: asking him why he esteemed the rich less then the poor?
he answered thus.

I see my Friends, in Marriage it suffiseth K. Alexanders answer concerning his
marriage
the husband to be rich, and the woman wise: For the Office of the husband is
to win that which is lost, and the Office of the wife is to keep safe that
which is won.

Strabo de situ Orbis, says: that the fifte Queen of Lides was Mirthas, the
which of her body was so little, that she seemed to be a Dwarffe: and in
quicknes of wit so high, that they called her a giant. For the man that has a
stout stomach, and a little body, may well be called a giaunt: and he that
has a great body, and a cowards heart may justly be named a Dwarffe. For that
this excellent Queen Mirtha was such a wise wife when she was married, and
afterward also a widow very honest, and above all things in Phylosophie
excellently learned,

The Lides counted this Queen Mirtha amongst the seven Kings, of the which they
vaunted themselves to be governed, as of glorious Princes. For the Ancients
gave as much glory to Women learned in Letters, as unto the valiant and stout
men expert in Arms.

Cornificius the Poet, as Laertius says, had a sister called Cornificia, the
which in Greek and Latin letters was not only learned, but also in making
Meter and Epigrames very expert.

They write that of this Woman, which of few men the like has been heard: That
is to say, that she made verses and Epigrams better at the first sight then her
brother did with much study. And it is not too much incredible to put any doubt
in that that is spoken: for the pen has more The praise of Cornificia.
swiftness of the lively spirit, then the tongue has of the small
understanding.

This Poet Cornificius was resident a long time in Rome, and was always poor,
and void of all favor, though indeed he was better learned then others,
which were in greater estimation: the which thing daily chances in the Court
of Princes: For there is no difference, whether they be fools or wise: but
whether they be acceptable to the Princes.

Aristotle says, Vbi multum de intellectu, ibi parum de fortuna. Meaning
thereby, that men which of memory and understanding are most rich, of the goods
of this world are commonly most poor.

This Poet Cornificius therefore going through Rome little set by of any, by
chance a Roman named Calphurnius to scoff at him said. Tell The speech
between Calphurnius and Cornificius.
me Cornificius, have thou had any fortunate day since thou were borne? for in
these twenty years that I have known thee, I never saw thee in favor, and if I
be not deceived, it is fifteen years since I knew thee have this coat. The
poor Poet answered him; I let thee know my friend, that I cannot tell which is
greater thy evil luck, or my great felicity. The Roman Calphurnius
replied, Tell me Cornificius, How can thou call thy self happy, since thou
have not a loaf of bread to eat, nor a gown to put on thy back, and why
say thou that I am unhappy, since thou and thy family may be fed with that
alone, which at my table remains? To this the poet answered, I will that thou
know my friend and neighbor, that my felicity is not for that I have little,
but for that I desire less then I have.

And thy evil luck is not for that thou bast much, but for that thou desire
more, and do little esteem that that thou have. And if thou be rich, it is
for that thou never spakest truth: and if I he poor, it is because I never
told lie. For the house that is stuffed with riches, is commonly void of the
truth.

And I tell thee further, that I call my self happy, because I have a sister,
which is the best esteemed in all Italy, and thou have a Wife the most
dishonest in all Rome. And since it is so between thee and me, I refer it to
no man's judgment but to thine: which is better, either to be poor as I am
with honor, or else to be rich as thou art, and live with infamte? These
words passed between the Roman Calphurnius, and the Poet Cornificius.

I desire to declare the excellency of those few ancient women (as well
Greeks, as Latins, and Romans) to the intent that Princesses and great
Ladies may know that the ancient women were more esteemed for their sciences
then for their beauties.

Therefore the Princesses and great Ladies ought to think that if they be
women, the other were also in like manner: and if they be frail, the others
were also weak. If they be married, the others also had Husbands: if they have
their wills, the others had also what they wanted: If they be tender, the
others were not strong.

Finally, they ought not to excuse themselves, saying: that women are unmeet
for to learn. For a woman has more ability to learn Sciences in the
schools, then the Parate has to speak words in the cage.

In my opinion, Princesses and great Ladies ought not to esteem themselves
more then another, for that they have fairer hayres then others, or for that
they are better Apparrelled then another: or that they have more riches then
another.

But they ought therefore to esteem themselves, not for that they can do more
then others. To say the truth, the fair and yeallow hayres, the rich and
brave Apparel, the great treasurs, the sumptuous Palaces, and strong
Buildings: these and other like pleasures are not guydes and leaders unto
virtues, but rather Spies and Scowtewatches to vices.

Oh what an excellent thing were it that the noble Ladies would esteem
themselves, not for that they can do: How great Ladies ought to to esteem of
themselves.
but for that they know.

For it is more commendations to know how to teach two Philosophers then to
have authority to command a hundred knights.

It is a shame to write it, but it is more pity to see it, that is to say, to
read that we read of the wisdom and worthiness of the ancient Matrons
past: and to see as we do see, the frailenes of these young ladies present.

For they coueted to have Disciples both learned and experimented: and those of
this present, desire nothing but to have servants, not only ignorant, but
deceitful, and wicked And I do not marvel, seeing that which I see, that at
this present in Court she is of little value, and least esteemed among Ladies,
which has fairest Servants, and is least entertained of Gentlemen.

What shall I say more in this matter? but that they in times past striued who
should write better, and compile the best books: and these at this present do
not strive, but who shall have the richest, and most sumptuous Apparel. For
the Ladies think it a jolyer matter, to wear a Gown of a new fashion, then
the ancients did to read a lesson of Phylosophie.

The ancient Ladies striued which of them was wisest: but these of our days
contend who shall be fairest. For at this day the Ladies would choose rather to
have the face adorned with beauty, then the heart endued with wisdom.

The Ancient Ladies contended which should be best able to teach others: but
these Ladies now a days contend how they may most finely apparel themselves.
For in these days they give more honor to a Woman richly Apparrelled, then
they give to another with honesty beautified.

Finally, with this word I do conclude; and let him mark that shall What
difference there is between the women of our time and the ancients.
read it, that in the old time women were such, that their virtues caused all
men to keep silence: and now their vices be such, that they compel all men
to speak.

I will not by this word any man should be so bold in general to speak evil
of all the Ladies: for in this case I swear, that there are not at this day so
many good virtuous women in the world: but that I have more envy at the life
they lead in secret, then at all the sciences which the ancient women read in
public.

Wherefore my pen does not show it self extreme, but to those which only in
sumptuous Apparel, and vain words do consume their whole life: and to those
which in reading a good Book, would not spend one only hour. To prove my
intention of that I have spoken, the above written suffices: But to the end
Princesses and great Ladies may see (at the least) how much beter it shall be for
them to know little, then to have and possess much, and to be able to do more:
I will remember them of that which a Romain woman wrote to her children, whereby
they shall perceive how eloquent a woman she was in her sayings, and how true a
mother in her counsel. For in the end of her letter she persuades her children
to the travels of the war: not for any other cause, but to avoid the
pleasures of Rome.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the worthiness of the Lady Cornelia, and of a notable Epistle
she wrote to her two sons which served in the wars, Tiberius and Caius,
dissuading them from the pleasures of Rome, and exhorting them to endure the
travels of war.
ANNius Rusticus in the book of the Antiquities of the Romans says, that in
Rome there were five principal Iynages, that is to say, Fabritii, Torquatii,
Brutii, Fabit, and Cornelii, though there were in Rome other new lynages,
whereof Five Families in Rome chiefly were esteemed.
there were many excellent personages: yet always these which came of the five
lynages, were kept, placed and preferred to the first Offices of the common
wealth.

For Rome honored those that were present in such sort, that it was without
the prejudice of those that are gone. Amongst those v. linages the Romans
always counted the Cornelii most fortunate, that which were so hardy, and
courageous in fight, and so modest in life, that of their family there was
never found any cowardly man in the field, nor any defamed woman in the twone:
They say of this lineage of the Cornenelii, among many other there were 4.
singular and notable women, among the which the chief was the mother of
Graccht whose name was Cornelia, and lived with more honor for the sciences
she read in Rome, then for the conquests that her children had in Affrike.
Before her children were brought into the Empire, they talked of none other
thing but of their strength and hardiness, throughout the world: and therefore
a Romain one day asked this woman Cornelia, whereof she took most vain glory,
to see her self mistress of so many Disciples, or mother of so valiant
children. The Lady Cornelia answered. I do esteem the science more which I
have learned, then the children which I have brought forth. For in the end, the
children keep in honor the life: but the Disciples continue the renown after
death.

And she said further, I am assured that the Disciples daily will wax better
and better: and it may be that my children will wax worse and worse. The
desires of young men are so variable, that they daily have new inventions. With
one accord all the writers do greatly commend this woman Cornelia, in
especial for being wise and honest, and furthermore because she read
Philosophy in Rome openly.

And therefore after her death they set up in Rome a statue, over the gate
Salaria, whereupon there was graven this Epigram.

This heap of earth, Cornelle does enclose The Epitaph of Cornelia.

Of wretched Gracches, that lo the mother was
Twice happy in the scholars, that she chose,
Unhappy thrice, in the of spring that she has.
AMong the Latins Cicero was the Prince of all the Roman Rethorike, and the
chiefest with his pen enditing Epistles: yet they say, that he did not only
see the writings of this Cornelia, but read them, and did not only read them,
but also with the sentences thereof profited himself. And hereof a man ought
not to marvel: for there is no man in the world so wise of himself, but may
further his doings with the advice of an other.

Cicero so highly exalted these writings, that he said in his Rethorike these
or such other like words,

If the name of a woman had not not blemished Cornelia, truly she deserved to
be head of al Philosophers: For I never saw so grave sentences proceed from so
frail flesh Since Cicero spoke these words of Cornelia, it cannot be, but that
the writings of such a woman in her time were very liuelesse, and of great
reputation, yet notwithstanding there is no memory of her, but that an author
for his purpose declares an Epistle of this manner. Sextus Cheronensis in his
book of the praise of women, recites the letter which she sent to her
children. She remaining in Rome, and they being at the wars in Affricke.

The Letter of Cornelia to her two sons Tiberius and Caius, otherwise called
Gracchi.
Cornelia the Roman, that by the fathers side am of the Cornelii, and on the
mother side of the Fabii: to you my two sons, Gracchii, which A letter of a
Roman Lady to her two sons.
are in the wars of Affricke, such health to you I do wish as a mother to
her children ought to desire. You have understood right well my children how
my father dyed, I being but three years of age, and that this 22. years I
have remained widow, and that this 20. years I have read Rethorike in Rome.
It is 7. years since I saw you, and 12. years since your brethren, my
children dyed in the great plague. You know 8. years are past since I left my
study, and came to see you in Cicilia, because you should not forsake the wars,
to come to see me in Rome: for to me could come no greater pain then to see
you absent from the service of the Common wealth. I desire my children to show
you how I have passed my life in labor and travel, to the intent you should
not desire to spend yours in rest and idleness: For to me that am in Rome,
there can want no troubles: be ye assured that unto you which are in the wars
shall want no perils: For in wars renown is never sold but by weight, or
changed with loss of life.

The young Fabius, son of my aunt, the aged Fabia, at the third Calends of
March brought me a letter, the which you sent: and truly it was more brief
then I would have wished it: for between so dear children, and so loving a
mother, it is not suffered that the absence of your persons should be so far,
and the letters which you write so brief, By those that go from hence
thither, I always do send you commendations: and of those that come from
thence hither, I do enquire of news.

Some say they have seen you, others tell me they have spoken with you: so
that with this my heart is somewhat quieted: for between them that love greatly,
it may be endured that the fight be seldom, so that the health be certain. I
am sole, I am a widow, I am aged, and now all my kindred are dead. I have
endured many travels in Rome, and the greatest of all is (my children) of your
absence: for the pain is greater to be void of assured friends, then assault
is dangerous of cruel enemies. Since you are young, and not very rich, since
you are hardy, and brought up in the travels of Affricke, I do not doubt but
that you do desire to come to Rome, to see and know that now you are men which
you have seen when you were children: for men do not love their Country so
much for that it is good: as they doeloue it for that it is natural.

Believe me children, there is no man living that has seen or heard speak of
Rome in times past: but has great grief, sorrow and pity to see it at this
present: for as their hearts are pitiful, and their eyes tender: so they
cannot behold that without great sorrow, which in times past they have seen in
great glory. O my children, you shall know that Rome is greatly changed from
that it was wont to be. To read that we do read of it in times past, and to
see that which we see of it now present, we must needs esteem that which the
Ancients have written as a jest, or else believe it but as a dream.

There is no other thing now at Rome, but to see justice corrupted, the
commonweal oppressed, lies blown abroad, the truth kept under, the Satyrs
silent, the flatterers open mouthed, the inflamed persons to be Lords, and the
patient to be servants; and above all, and worse then all, to see the evil
live in rest and contented, and the good troubled and displeased. Forsake,
forsake (my Children that City, where the good have occasion to weep, and the
evil have liberty to laugh. I cannot tell what to say in this matter, as I
would say: truly the Common weal is at this day such and so woeful, that each
wise man (without comparison) would have greater pleasure to be in the wars of
Affricke, then in the peace at Rome: For in the good war, a man sees of whom
he should take heed, but in the The wickedness of Rome described,
evil peace, no man knows whom to trust. Therefore my children, since you
are natural of Rome; I will tell you what Rome is at this present. I let you
know that the Vestall virgins are now dissolute, the honor of the gods is
forgotten, the profit of the Common weal no man secketh, of the exercise of
chivalry, there is no memory; for the orphans and widows there is no man
does answer, to minister justice they have no regard, and the dissolute vices
of the youth are without measure. Finally, Rome that in times past was a
receite of all the good and virtuous, is now made a den of all thieves and
vicious. I fear me, I fear me, lest our mother Rome in short time will have
some sudden and great fall, for both men and Cities that fall from the top of
their felicity purchase greater infamy with those that shall come after then
the glory that they have had of them that be past.

Peradventure, my children, you desire to see the walls and buildings of Rome:
for those things which children see first in their youth, the same they love
and keep always in memory until their age. As the ancient buildings of Rome
are destroyed, and the few that are now built: So would I you should lose your
earnest affection to come to see them: For indeed the noble hearts are ashamed
to see that thing amiss, which they cannot remedy. Do not think my children,
though Rome be made worse in manners, that therefore it is diminished in
buildings: For I let you understand, if you know it not, that if a wall does
decay, there is no man that does repair it.

If a house fall, there is no man that will raise it up again. If a street
be foul, there is no man that will make it clean. If the River carry away
any bridge, there is no man that will set it up again. If any Antiquity decay,
there is no man that will amend it. If any wood be cut, there is no man that
will keep it. If the Trees wax old, there is no man that will plant them a
new: If the pauement of the streets be broken, there is no man that will lay
it again. Finally, there is nothing in Rome at this day so evil handled, as
those things which by the common voices are ordered.

These things (my children) though I do greatly lament (as it is reason) yet
you ought little to esteem them all: but this all only ought to be esteemed,
and with drops of blood to be lamented. That now in Rome, when the buildings
in many places fall down, the vices all wholly together are raised up. O woeful
mother Rome, since that in thee, the more the walls decay, the more the vices
increase. Peradventure (my children) since you are in those frontiers of
Afric, you desire to see your parents here in Rome. And there at I marvel
not, for the love which our natural Country does give, the strange country
cannot take away. All those which come from those parties do bring us no other
certain news, but of the multitude of those which die, and are slain in
Affricke, therefore since you send us such news from thence, look not that we
should send you any other then the like from hence: for death has such
authority, that it kills the armed in the wars: and slays the quiet in
peace.

I let you know that Licia your sister is dead, Drusio your uncle is dead,
Torquatus your neighbor is dead, His wise our cosen, and her 3. daughters are
dead: Fabius your great friend is dead: Euander and his children are dead:
Bibulus which read for me in the chair, the last year is also dead.

Finally, there are so many and so good with all that be dead, that it is a
great shame and pity to see (at this present) so many evil as do live: know ye
my children, that all these and many others which ye left alive full high in
Rome, are now become worms meat full low under the earth, and death also does
summon me unto the grave. If you (my children) did consider The uncertainty of
man's life.
what shall become of you hereafter, truly you will think it better to weep
a thousand years with the dead, then to laugh one hour with those that be
alive. Remembering that I bare ye in great pain, and have nourished you in
great travel, and that ye came of my proper entrails: I would have you as
children about me for the comfort and consolation of my pains: but in the end
beholding the prowesses of these that are past, that binds their heirs, I am
content to suffer so long abse^ce your persons, only to the end you may get
honor in chivalry: for I had rather hear tell you should live like knights
in Affricke, then to see you utterly lost here in Rome, My children as you are
in the wars of Affricke, so I doubt not but that you desire to see the pleasurs
of Rome: for there is no man in this world so happy, but at his neighbors
prosperity had some envy; envy not the vicious, neither desire to be among
vices: for truly vices are of such condition, that they bring not with the^ so
much pleasure, as they leave sorrow behind them, for the true delight is not in
pleasure which suddenly vanishes but in the truth which ever remains. I
thank the gods for all these things, first for that they made me wise and not
foolish: for to a woman it is a small matter to be called so frail, that indeed
she be not foolish The second I thank the gods, because in all times of my
troubles, they have given me patience to endure them: for the man only in this
life may be called unhappy, to whom the gods in his troubles gives not
patience. The 3. I thank the gods for that those 65. years which I have lived,
I never hitherto was defamed: For the Woman by no reason can complain of her
fortune, if in none of her troubles she has lost her honor.

The fourth, I thank the Gods that in this forty years I have lived in Rome,
and remained widow, there was never man nor woman that contended with me: For
since we women little profit the commonwealth, it is but reason that she
which with evil demeanors has passed her life should by justice receive her
death.

The fifth, I give the Gods thanks, that they gave me children, the which are
better contented to suffer the trauells of Affrike, then to enjoy the pleasures
of Rome. Do not count me (my Children) for so unloving a Mother, that I would
not have you always before mine eyes: but considering that many good men's
children have been lost, only for being brought up in the excessive pleasures
of Rome, I do content my self with your absence: (...)
For the man that desires perpetual renon me, though he be not banished,
he ought to absent himself from his Native country. My dear children, I
most earnestly desire you that always you accompany your selves with the
good, with the most Ancients, and with those which are grave, and most expert
in counsel, and with those that have most seen the world: and do not
understand most of the world, by those that have seen most countries For the
ripe council proceeds not from the man that has traveled in many
Countries, but from him that has selt himself in many dangers.

Since the nature of the Country (my Children) does knock with the hammer at
the heart of man, I fear that if you come and see your friends and parents,
you shall always line in care and pensiuenes, and being pensive, you shall
always live evil contented, and you shall not do that which becomes Roman
knights to do. And you not being valiant knights, your enemies shall always
rejoice over you, and your desires shall never take effect: for of those men
which are careful and heavy, proceeds always services unworthy. I desire
you heartily, and by this present letter I counsel you, that you will not in
any wise seek to come to Rome: For as I have said you shall know few of those
that did know you: for either they are dead or banished, poor, or sick, aged,
or come to naught sad, or evil contented: So that sithence you are not able to
remedy their griefs, it is best you should not come hither to see their
troubles. For no man comes to Rome but to weep with the living, or to sigh
for the^ that be dead. Truly (my children I know not what pleasure is in Rome,
that should cause any good man to come hither, and to forsake Affrike? for if
there you have any enemies, here you shall want friends. If you have the Sword
that pierces the body, we have the tongue here that destroys the renown. If
you be vexed with the Thieues of Affrike, we are wounded with the traitors,
flatterers, and liars of Italy. If you lack rest, we have here too much The
commendations of warlike men.
trouble.

Finally, seeing that I do see in Rome, and hearing that which I do hear of
Affrike, I commend your war and abhor your peace: If you do greatly esteem
that which I have said, esteem much more that which I shall say, which is, that
we always hear that you are conquerors of the Affricanes, and you shall
hear always that we are conquered by vices. Therefore if am a true mother, I
had rather see you win a perpetual memory among strangers, then to live with
infamy at home in your country.

Peradventure with hope that you shallenioy some goods, you will offer to take
occasion to come to Rome: When this thing shall come to your minds, remember
(my Children) that your father being alive had not much and that unto your
Mother, being a widow many things wanted. And remember that your father
bequeathed you nothing but weapons, and know that from me you shalll enherite
nothing but Books. For I had rather leave my Children good doctrine, whereby
they may live, then evil Riches whereby they may perish.

I am not rich, nor I never traveled to be rich: and the cause was, that I
saw many men's children undone, only through the hope they had to inherit their
parents goods, and afterward went a hunting after vices. For they seldom times
do any worthy feats, which in their Youth inherit great Treasures.

This thing therefore being true (as it is indeed) I do not say only that I
would watch, and toil as many do to get riches and treasures: but also if I
had treasor, before I would give them unto you, I would (as the Philosopher
did) cast them into the fire. For I had rather have my children poor and
virtuous in Affricke, then rich and vicious in Rome.

You know very well my Children, that there was among the Tharentines a Law
well observed, that the Sons should not inherit any thing of the fathers but
weapons to fight: and that A Law among the Tharentines.
the Daughters should inherit the goods, for to marry themselves withal.

Truly this Law was very just: for the Son that has always respect to the
inheritance: will not have to his Father any great confidence. For he ought to
be called a valiant Romain Knight, that with his life has won and by his
sword has gotten Riches. Since you are in strange Realms, I pray you
heartily that you be eonuersant with the good (as good brethren) remembering
always, that you were my children, and that I gave you both suck of mine own
proper breasts. And the day that I shall hear of your disagreement, the same
day shall be the end of my life. For the discord in one city of parents does
more harm then a whole army of enemies.

It is good for you (my Children,) to live in love and concord together: but it
is more requisite to keep you with the Romain knights. The which with you, and
you with them, if you do not love together in the wars, you shall never have
the upper hand of your enemies. For in great Armies, the discords that arise
amongst them, do more harm, then the enemies do against whom they fight.

I think well (my children) that you would be very desirous to know of my
estate (that is to say,) whether I am in health, whether I am sick, whether I
am poor, whether I am pleased, or whether I am discontented?

In this case I know not why you should desire to know it? since you ought to
presuppose, that according to the troubles which I have passed, and the
miseries, which with mine eyes I have seen, I am filled with this world: For
wise men after fifty years and vpwardes, ought rather to apply their minds
how to receive death: then How every man and women ought to spend their time.
to seek for pleasures how to prolong life.

When man's Flesh is weak, it always desires to be well kept, even unto the
grave. And as I am of flesh and Bone, so I do feel the troubles of the world,
as all mortal men do. But for all this do not think that to be poor or
sick is the greatest misery: neither think that to be whole and rich is the
chiefest felicity: for there is none other felicity of the old fathers, but
for to see their children virtuous.

In my opinion it is an honor to the country, that the fathers have such
children, which will take profit with their counsel, and contrariwise that the
children have such fathers which can give it them: For the child is happy that
has a wise father, and more happy is the father that has not a foolish son.
I do write often times unto you my children, but there is a law that none be so
hardy to write to men of war in the field, except first they inrowle the
letters in the Senate. Therefore since I write unto you more letters then they
would, they do send less then I desire. Though this law be painful to
mothers which have children: yet we must confess it is profitable for the
weal public. For if a man would write to one in the war that his family is
not well; he would forsake the wars to remedy it. If a man write unto him
that it is prosperous, he has then a desire to enjoy it.

Be not displeased (my children) though all the Letters I do send unto you
come not to your hands: for all that I do not cease to visit the temples for
your own health, nor yet to offer sacrifices for your honor, If we do please
the Gods we have not cause to fear our enemies. I say no more in this case, my
children, but but that I beseech the immortal gods, that if your lives may
profit the Common wealth, then they shorten my days, and lengthen your years:
but if your lives should be to the damage of the Common wealth, then those
immortal gods I desire, that first I may understand the end of your days
before that the Worms should eat my flesh. For rather then by your evil life
the glory of our predecessors should be blemished, it were much better both
your lives were ended.

The grace of the Gods, the good renown amongst men, the good fortune of the
Romans, the wisdom of the Greeks, the blessing of Scipio, and of all other
your predecessors be always with you my children.


CHAP. XXXII. Of the education and doctrine of children whiles they are young.
wherein the Author declares many notable histories.
AL mortal me^ which What a good traveler in this world ought to seek for.
will travel, and see good fruits of their travel, ought to do as the chief
Artificer did the painted world: For the man that makes God the head of his
works, it is impossible that he should err in the same: That which we
believe, and read by writing, is that the eternal created the world in short
space by his might: but preserved it a long time by his wisdom. Whereof a man
may gather, that the time to do a thing is short: but the care and thought to
preserve it, is long.

We see daily, that a valiant captain assaulteth his enemies: but in the end
it is God that gives the victory; but let us ask the Conqueror, what travel
it has been unto him, or wherein he has perceived most danger (that is to
say) either to obtain the victory of his enemies, or else to preserve
themselves amongst the envious and malicious. I swear and affirm, that such a
knight will swear that there is no comparison between the one and the other:
for by the bloody sword in an hour the victory is obtained: but to keep it
with reputation, the swet of all the life is required. Laertius in the book of
the life of Philosophers declares, and Plato also hereof makes mention, in
the books of his common wealth, that those of Thebes understanding that the
Lacedaemonians had good laws, (for the which they were of the Gods favored,
and of men greatly honored) determined to send (by common assent and
agreement) a wise Philosopher, the best esteemed amongst them, whose name was
Phetonius, to whom they commanded, that he should ask the laws of the
Lacedaemonians, and that he should be very circumspect, and wary to see, what
their rules and customs were. Those of Thebes were the^ very noble, valiant
and honest: so that their principal end was, to come to honor and renown, to
erect buildings, and to make themselves of immortal memory for being virtuous:
For in building they were very curious: and for virtues they had good
Philosophers.

The Philosopher Phetonius was more then a year in the realm of the
Lacedaemonians, beholding at sundry times all things therein: for simple men
do not note things, but only to satisfy the eyes: but the wise me^ beholds
them, for to know and understand their secrets. After the Philosopher had well
and plainly seen and beheld all the things of the Lacedemouians, he
determined to return home to Thebes, and being arrived, all the people came
to see him and hear him: For the vanity of the common people is of such a
quality, that it follows new inventions, and despises ancient Customs.
The vanity and foolish opinion of the common people.


All the people therefore gathered together, the good Philosopher Phetonius set
up in the midst of the market place a gibbet, hot yrons, a sword, a whippe,
and fetters for the feet; the which thing done, the Thebians were no less, as
they thought, slaundered then abashed.

To the which he spoke these words. You Thebaines sent me to the
Lacedaemonians, to the intent that I The Philosopher Phetonius his answer to
the Thebaines.
should learn their Laws and Customs. and indeed I have been there more then
a year, behelding all things very diligently: For we Philosophers are bound,
not only to note that which is done, but also to know why it is done, Know ye
Thebians that this is the answer of my Embassage.

That the Lacedemoniant hang upon this Gibet thieves, with this same sword they
beheade Traitors, with these hot Irons they torment blasphemers and liars,
with these rods they whp vacabonds, and with these Irons do keep the
rebels, and the others are for Players and unthrifts.

Finally, I say, that I do not bring you the Laws written, but I bring you the
instruments wherewith they are observed.

The Thebanes were abashed to see these things, and spoke unto him such words:

Consider Phetonius, we have not sent thee to the Lacedaemonians, to bring
Instruments to take away life: but for the good Laws to govern the Common
wealth.

The Philosopher Phetonius reply ed again, and answered:

Thebains, I let you to understand, that if you know what we Philosophers
knew, yon should see how far your minds were from the truth: For the
Lacedaemonians are not so virtuous, thorough the laws which were made of them
that be dead, as for the means they have sought to preserve them that be
alive: For the matters of justice consists more in execution, then in
commanding or ordayning.

Laws are easily ordained, but with difficulty executed: for there are a
thousand to make them, but to put them in execution there is not one. Full
little is that which men know that are present in respect of that those know
which are past. But yet according to my little knowledge, I proffer to give as
good laws to you Thebaines, as ever were observed among the Lacedaemonians: For
there is nothing more easy, then to know the good, and nothing more common
then to follow the evil: But what profits it, if one will ordain, and none
understand it: If there be that does understand them, there is none that
executes them. If there be that executes them, there is none that observes
them: If there be one that observes them, there is a thousand that reprooueth
them: For without comparison, more are they that murmur and grudge at the good,
then those which despise and blame the evil. You Thebaines are offended,
because I have brought such Instruments, but I let you know, if you will have
neither gybet nor Sword to keep that which shall be ordained, you shall have
your Books full of laws, and the common wealth full of vices. Wherefore I
swear unto you, that there are more Thebaines which follow the delitiousnesse
of Denis the tyrant, then there are virtuous men that follow the laws of
Lycurgus.

If you Thebaines do desire greatly to know, with what laws the Lacedaemonians
do preserve their Commonwealth: I will tell you them all by word, and if you
will read them, I will show you them in writing: but it shall be upon
condition, that you shall swear al openly, that once a day you shall employ
your eyes to read them, and your persons to observe them: for the Prince has
greater honor to see one only law to be observed in deed, then to ordain a
thousand by writing.

You ought not to esteem much to be virtuous in heart, nor to enquire of the
virtue by the mouth, nor to seek it by labor and travel of the feet: but
that which you ought greatly to esteem, is to know what a virtuous law
means, and that known, immediately to execute it, and afterward to keep
it.

For the chief virtue is not to do one virtuous work, but in a swet and
travel to continue in it.

These therefore were the words that this Philosopher Phetonius said to the
Thebaines: the which as Plato says, esteemed more his words that he spoke,
then they did the Laws which he brought. The Philosophers counsel acceptable
to the Thebanes.


Truly in mine opinion, those of Thebes are to be praised and commended: and
the Philosopher for his word is worthy to be honored. For the end of those
was to search laws to live well, and the end of the Philosopher was to seek
good means for to keep them in virtue. And therefore he thought it good to
show them and put before their eyes the gibbet, and the sword, with the other
Instruments and torments: for the evil do refrain from vice, more for fear
of punishment, then for any desire they have of amendment.

I was willing to bring in this history, to the end that all curious and
virtuous men may see and know how little the Ancients did esteem the
beginning, the mean, and the end of virtuous works, in respect of the
perseverance and preservation of them.

Coming therefore to my matter, which my pen does toss and seek: I ask
now presently, what it profits Princesses and great Ladies that God do give
them great estates, that they be fortunate in marriages, that they be all
reverenced and honored, that they have great treasures for their inheritances,
and above all, that they see their wines great with Child, and that afterward,
in joy they see them delivered: that they see their mothers giving their
children suck: and finally, they see themselves happy in that they have found
them good nurses, health full and honest.

Truly all this avails little, if to their children when they are young they
do do not give masters to instruct them in virtues: and they also if they do
not recommend them to good guides, to exercise them in feats of Chiualry.

The Fathers which by sighs penetrate the heaven, by prayers importune the
living God only for to have children, ought first to think why they will
have children: for that justly to a man may be denied, which to an evil end is
procured. In mine opinion, the Father ought to desire to have a child, for that
in his age he may sustain his life in honor, and that after his death he may
cause his fame to live. And if a Father desires not a son for this cause, at
the least he ought to desire him, to the end in his age he may honor his
hoary head: and that after his death he may enherite his goods: but we see few
children do these things to their fathers in their age, if the fathers have
not taught them in their youth: For the fruit does never grow in the harvest,
unless the tree did bear blosoms in the spring.

I see oftentimes many Fathers complain of their children, saying that they
are disobedient and proud unto them; and they do not consider that they
themselves are the cause of all those evils. For too much abundance and liberty
of youth is no other, but a prophecy and manifest token of disobedience in
age. I know not why Princes and great Lords do toil, and oppress so much, and
scratch to leave their children great estates, and on the other side we see
that in teaching them, they are and show themselves too negligent: for Princes
and great Lords ought to make account, that all that which they leave of their
substance to a wicked heir is utterly lost.

The wise men, and those which in their consciences are upright, and of their
honors careful, ought to be very diligent to bring up their children, and
chiefly that they consider whether they be meet to inherit their estates.
And if perchance the fathers see that their children be more given to folly
then to noblenes and wisdom; then should I be ashamed to see a father that is
wise, travel all the days of his life, to leave much substance to an evil
brought up child after his death.

It is a grief to declare, and a monstrous thing to see the cates which the
Fathers take to gather riches, and the diligence that children have to spend
them. And in this case I say, the son is fortunate for that he does
enherite, and the Father a fool for that he does bequeath.

In my opinion, Fathers are bound to instruct their children well for two
causes, the one for that they are nearest The reason why parents are bound to
instruct then children.
to them, and also because they ought to be their heirs: For truly with great
grief and sorrow I suppose he does take his death, which leaves to a fool
or an unthrift the toil of all his life.

Hyzearchus the Greek Hystorian in the book of his Antiquities, and
Sabellicus in his general hystory says, that a father and a son came to
complain to the famous Philosopher and ancient Solon Solinon: the Son
complained of the father, and the father of the son.

First, the son informed the quarrel to the Philosopher, saying these words.
I complain of my Father, because he being rich has disinherited me, and
made me poor, and in my stead has adopted another heir, the which thing my
father ought not, nor cannot do: for since he gave me so frail flesh, it is
reason he give me his goods to maintain my seeblenes.

To these words answered the father: I complain of my son, because he has
not been as a gentle son, but rather as a cruel enemy: for in all things
since he was borne, he has been disobedient to my will, wherefore I thought
it good to disinherite him before my death. I would I were quit of all my
substance so that the gods had quit him of his life: for the earth is very
cruel that swalloweth not the child alive, which to his father is disobedient.
In that he says, I have adopted another child for mine heir, I confess it
is true: and for so much as he says, that I have disinherited him, and
abiected him from my heritage, he being begotten of my body, hereunto I
answer.

That I have not disinherited my son, but I have disinherited his pleasure,
to the intent he shall not enjoy my travel: for there can be nothing more
unjust, then that the young and vicious son should take his pleasure of the
swet and drops of the aged father.

The son replied to his Father How children ought to be brought up.
and said I confess I have offended my Father, and also I confess, that I
have lived in pleasures: yet if I may speak the truth, though I were
disobedient and evil, my Father ought to bear the blame: and if for this
cause he does dishenherite me, I think he does me great injury: for the
father that instructs not his son in virtue in his youth, wrongfully
disinheriteth him, though he be disobedient in his age.

The Father again replyeth, and says. It is true my son, that I brought
thee up too wantonly in thy youth, but thou know well that I have taught
thee sundry times, and besides that I did correct thee when thou came to some
discretion.

And if in thy youth I did not instruct thee in learning: it was for that thou
in thy tender age did want understanding, but after that thou had age to
understand, discretion to receive, and strength to exercise it; I began to
punish thee, to teach thee, and to instruct thee. For where no understanding
is in the child, there in vain they teach doctrine.

Since thou art old (quoth the son) and I young: since thou art my Father,
and I thy son: for that thou have white hayres on thy beard, and I none at
all: it is but reason that thou be believed, and I condemned. For in this world
we see often times, that the small authority of the person, makes him to loose
his great justice.

I grant thee (my Father) that when What mischief comes by giving children
their own will in their youth.
I was a child, thou did cause me to learn to read: but thou will not
deny, that if I did commit any fault, thou would never agree I should be
punished. And hereof it came, that thou suffering me to do what I would in my
Youth, have bin disobedient to thee ever since in my age. And I say unto thee
further, that if in this case I have offended, truly me thinks thou can
not be excused: for the fathers in the youth of their children, ought not
only to teach them to dispute of virtues, and what virtue is: but they ought
to enforce the^ to be virtuous in deed. For it is a good token, when Youth
(before they know vices) have been accustomed to practice virtues.

Both parties then diligently heard the good Philosopher Solon Solinon speak
these words: I give judgment that the Father of this child be not buried
after his death: and I command that the Son, because in his youth, he has
(not obeyed his Father who is old) should be disinherited whilst the Father
lives, from all his substance, on such condition, that after his death, his
sons should inherit the Heritage: and so return to the heirs of the Son,
and live of the Father. For it were unjust, that the innocence of the Son
should be condemned for the offense of the Father.

I do command also, that all the goods be committed unto some faithful
person, to the end they may give the Father meat and drink during his life:
and to make a grave for the Son after his death:

I have not without a cause given such judgment, the which comprehends life
and death: For the Gods will not that for one pleasure the punishment be
double, but that we chastise and punish the one in the life, taking from him
his honor and goods, and that we punish others after their death, taking from
them memory and buryall.

Truly the sentence which the Philosopher gave, was very grave: and would to
GOD we had him for a judge of this world presently. For I swear, that he
should find many Children now a days for to disinherite, and more Fathers to
punish. For, I cannot tell which is greater: The shame of the children to
disobey their Fathers, or the negligence of the Fathers in bringing up their
children.

Sextus Cheronens. in the second book of the sayings of the Philosophers
declares, that a Citizen of Athens said unto Dyogenes the Philosopher, these
words.

Tell me Dyogenes: What shall I do, to be in the favor of the Gods, and not
in the hatred of men? For, often times amongst you Philosophers I have heard
say, that there is a great Questions demanded of Dyogenes the Philosopher.
difference between that that the gods will, and that which men love.

Dyogenes answered: Thou speak more then thou ought to speak, that the
Gods will one thing, and men another: for the Gods are but as a center of
mercy, and men are but as a den of malice, if thou will enjoy rest in thy
days, and keep thy life pure and clean: thou must observe these three
things. 2. Things to be observed of all men.


The first, honor thy Gods deuoutely: for the man which does not serve and
honor the Gods, in all his enterprises he shall be unfortunate.

The second, be very diligent to bring up thy children well: for the man has
no enemy so troublesome, as his own son, if he be not well brought up.

The third thing be thankful to thy good benefactors and friends, for the
Oracle of Apollo says, that the man who is unthankful, of all the world
shall be abhorred.

And I tell thee further, my friend, that of these three things the most
profitable (though it be more troublesome) is for a man to teach, and bring up
his children well.

This therefore was the answer that the Philosopher Diogenes made to the
demand of the Citizen. It is great pity and grief to see a young child how
the blood does stir him to see how the flesh does provoke him to accomplish
his desire, to see sensuality go before, and he himself to come behind, to
see the malicious World to watch him; to see how the Devil does tempte him, to
see how vices bind him, and in all that which is spoken, to see how the Father
is negligent, as if he had no children; whereas in deed the old man, by the
few virtues he has had in his Youth: may easily know the infirmityes and
vices, wherewith his Son is encompassed.

If the expert had never been ignorant: if the Fathers had never been
children: if the virtuous had never been vicious: if the fine wits had never been deceived: it were no marvel if the Fathers were negligent in teaching
their children. For the little experience excuses men of great offenses: but
since thou art my Father, and that first thou were a Son, since thou art old,
and have bin young, and besides all this, since that pride has inflamed thee,
lechery has burned thee, wrath has wounded thee, Negligence has hindered
thee, Covetousness has blinded thee, and Glotonie surfetted thee: Tell me
cruel Father, since so many vices have reigned in thee; why have thou not an
eye to thy child whom of thy own blood thou have begotten? And if thou do
it not because he is thy child, thou ought to do it, because he is thy
nearest. For it is impossible that the child which with many vices is assaulted
and not succored, but in the end he should be infamed, and to the dishonor
of the father most wickedly overcome.

It is impossible to keep Flesh well sauoured, unless it be first salted. It
What comfort parents may look for of their children.
is impossible that the Fish should live without water. It is impossible but
that the Rose should wither, which is of the thorn ouergrowne. So like it is
impossible that the Fathers should have any comfort of their children in their
age, unless they have instructed them in virtue in their youth.

And to speak further in this matter (I say) that in the Christian catholic
Religion, where in deed there is good doctrine, there always is supposed to
be a good conscience.

Amongst the Writers it is a thing well known, how Eschines the Philosopher
was banished from Athens, and with all his family came to dwell at Rhodes: The
occasion was, because that he and the Philosopher Demosthenes were in great
contention in the commonwealth. Wherefore the Athenia^s determined to banish
the one, and to keep the other with them.

And truly they did well: for of the contentions and debates of Sages, Wars
most commonly arise amongst the people.

This Philosopher Eschines being at Rhodes banished, amongst others made a
solemn Oration, wherein he greatly reproved the Rhodians, that they were so
negligent in bringing up their children, saying unto them these words: I let
you understand (lords of Rhodes) that your Predecessors advanced themselves
to descend, and take their beginning of the Lides: the which above all other
Nations, were curious and diligent to bring up their Children: and hereof came
came a Law that was among them, which said:

We ordeine and command, that if a Father have many Children, that the most
virtuous should inherit the goods and riches: and if there were but one
virtuous, that he alone should inherit the whole. And if perchance Ordinances
and customs of the Rhodians.
the Children were vicious, that then all should be deprived from the heritage.
For the goods gotten with travel of virtuous Fathers, ought not by reason to
be inherited by vicious children.

These were the words that the Philosopher spoke to the Senate of the Rhodes,
and because he said in that oration many other things which touch not our
matter, I will in this place omit them: For among excellent Writers, that
writing loses much authority, when the Author from his purpose digresseth into
an other matter. To say the truth, I do not marvel that the children of
Princes and great Lords be adulterers and bellygods: for that on the one part
youth is the mother of idleness, and on the other, little experience is the
cause of great offenses.

And furthermore, the fathers being once dead, the children enherite their
goods as quietly, being laden with vices: as if in deed they were with all
virtues endued. If the young children did know for a certain that the laws of
the Lydes should be observed (that is to say) that they should not inherit,
unless they be virtuous: it is impossible but that they would lead a virtuous
life, and not in this wise to run at large in the world. For they do abstain
more from doing evil, fearing to lose that which they do possess, then for
any love to do that which they ought.

I do not deny, but according as the natures of the Fathers is diverse, so the
inclination of the children is variable. For so much as some following their
good inclinations, are good: and others, not resisting evil sensualities, are
evil.

But yet in this matter I say, that it lies much in the Father that does
bring them up, when as yet they are young: so that the evil which nature gave,
by good bringing up is refrayned. For often times the good custom does overcome
all evil inclination.

Princes and great Lords that will be diligent in the instruction of their
children, ought to inform their masters and tutors that shall teach them, to
what vices and virtues their Children are most inclined: And this ought to
be, to encourage them in that that is good, and contrary, to reprove them in
all that is evil. For, What youth ought to obstaine from.
men are undone for none other cause when they be old: but for that they had
so much pleasure when they were young.

Sextus Cheronensis, in the second book of the ancients says: that on a day,
a citizen of Athenes was buying things in the market, and for the quality of
his person, the greatest part of them were superfluous, and nothing
necessary. And in this case the poor are no less culpable then the rich, and
the rich then the poor. For that is so little, that to sustain manslife is
necessary, that he which has least, has thereunto superfluous. Therefore at
this time, when Athens and her commonwealth was the Lantern of all Greece,
there was in Athens a Law long used, and of a great time accustomed, that
nothing should be bought before a Philosopher had set the price. And A Law
among the Athenians.
truly the law was good, and would to God the same law were at this present
observed: For, there is nothing that destroieth a commonwealth more, then to
permit some to sell as tyrants, and others to buy as fools. When the Theban
was buying these things, a philosopher was present, who said unto him these
words. Tell me, I pray thee, thou man of Thebes, Wherefore do thou consume
and wast thy money in that which is not necessary for thy house, nor
profitable for thy person? The Thebane answered him.

I let thee know, that I do buy all these things for a son I have of the
age of xx. years: the which never did any thing that seemed unto me evil, nor
I never denied him any thing, that he demanded. This Philososopher answered;

Oh how happy were thou, if as thou art a Father, thou were a son? and that
which the Father says unto the son, the son would say unto the father:
but I am offended greatly with that thou have told me. For until the child be
xxv. years old, he ought not to gainesay his father, and the good father ought
not to condescend unto the appetites of the son.

Now I may call thee cursed father, since thou art become subject to the will
of thy son: and that thy son is not obedient to the will of his Father, so
that thou alterest the order of nature: For so much as the father is become
son of his son, and the son is become father of his father. But in the
end, I swear unto thee, by the immortal Gods, that when thou shall become
old and aged, thou shall lament and weep by thy self, at that which with thy
Son thou did laugh, when he was young.

Though the words of this Philosopher were few: yet a wise man will judge the
sentences to be many.

I conclude therefore that Princes and great Lords ought to recommend their
children to their Masters, to the end they may teach them to change their
appetites, and not to follow their own will: so that they withdraw them from
their own will, and cause them to learn the advice of another. For the more a
man gives a Noble man's son the bridle, the more harder it is for them to
receive good doctrine.

CHAP. XXXIII. Princes ought to take heed that their Children be not brought
up in pleasures and vain delights. For often times they are so wicked, that
the Fathers would not only have them with sharp discipline corrected: but
also with bitter tears buried.
BY experience we see that in War (for the defense of men) Rampires and Forts
are made according to the quality of the enemies: and those which sail the
dangerous Seas, do choose great Ships, which may break the waves of the
raging Seas: So that all wise men, according to the quality of the danger, do
seek for the same in time some remedy.

Often times I muse with my self, and think if I could find any estate, any
age, any Land, any Nation, any Realm, or any World, wherein there has
been any man that has passed The miserable estate of man.
this life, without tasting, what adversity was? For, if such an one were
found, I think it should be a monstrous thing throughout all the earth, and
by reason both the dead and living should envy him.

In the end, after my count made, I find that he which but yesterday was rich,
to day is poor: he that was whole, I see him to day sick: he that yesterday
laughed, to day I see him weep: he that had his hearts ease, I see him now
sore afflicted: he that was Fortunate, now I see him unlucky. Finally, him
whom lately we knew alive in the town, now we see buried in the grave: And
to be buried, is nothing else but to be utterly forgotten: For, man's friendship
is so frail, that when the Corpse is covered with earth, immediately the dead is
forgotten.

One thing me thinks to all men is grievous, and to those of vnderstandng no
less painful: which is, that the miseries of this wicked world are not
equally divided; but that often times all worldly calamityes lies in the neck
of one man alone. For we are so unfortunate, that the world gives us
pleasures in sight, and troubles in proof.

If a man should ask a Sage man now a days, who has lived in mean estate,
and that he would be contented to tell him what he has past, since three
years that he began to speak, until fifty years that he began to wax
old: what things think you he would telvs, that has chanced unto him? truly
all these that follow.

The griefs of his Children, the assaults of his enemies, the importunities of
his wife, the wantonness of his What misfortunes are incident to man in this
life.
daughters, sickness in his person, great loss of goods, general famine in the
city, cruel plagues in his country, extreme cold in winter, noysom heat in
Summer, sorrowful deaths of his friends: and envious prosperities of his
enemies. Finally, he will say, that he passed such, and so many things, that
often times he bewailed the woeful life, and desired the sweet death.

If the miserable man has passed such things outwardly, what would he say of
those which he has suffered inwardly? the which though some discrete men may
know, yet truly others dare not tell. For the trauells which the body passes
in 50. years, may well be counted in a day: but that which the heart
suffers in one day, cannot be counted in a hundred years. A man cannot deny,
but that we would count him rash, which with a reed would meet another that
has a sword: and him for a fool, that would put off his shoes to walk upon
the Thorns. But without comparison, we ought to esteem him for the most
fool, that with his tender flesh thinks to prevail against so many evil
fortunes: for, without doubt, the man that is of his body delicate, passes his
life with much pain.

Oh how happy may that man be called, which never tasted what pleasure
means. For men which from their infancy have bin brought up in pleasures,
for want of wisdom know Men ought to fly the pleasures and vanities of this
life.
not how to choose the good, and for lack of force cannot resist the evil:
which is the cause, that Noble-mens children often times commit sundry heinous
offenses. For it is an infallible rule, that the more a man gives himself to
pleasures, the more he is entangled in vices.

It is a thing worthy to be noted, and woeful to see, how polliticke we be to
augment things of honor, how bold we be to enterprise them: how fortunate to
compass them: how diligent to keep them: how circumspect to sustain them:
and afterward what pity it is to see, how unfortunate we are to loose all
that, which so long time we have searched for, kept, and possessed. And that
which is most to be lamented in this case is, that the goods and Honors are
not lost for want of diligence and travel of the father, but for the
abundance of pleasures and vices of the son. Finally, let the Rich man
know, that that which he has won in labor and toil waking, his Son
(being evil brought up) shall consume in pleasures sleeping.

One of the greatest vanities that reigns at this, day amongst the children
of vanity is, that the Father cannot show unto his Son the love which he
bears him, but in suffering him to be brought up in the pleasures and
vanities of this life. Truly, he that is such a one, ought not to be called a
pitiful father, but a cruel step-father: for no man will deny me this, but
that where there is Youth, liberty, pleasure, and Money, there will all the
vices of this world be resident.

Lycurgus the great King, giver of laws, and sage Philosopher, ordained
Wholesome and wary laws of the Lacedaemonians.
to the Lacedaemonians, that all the children which were borne in Cities and
good Towns, should be sent to be brought up in villages, till they were xxv.
years of age. And Liuius says, that the Lygures were, which in old time were
confederates with those of Capua, and great enemies to the people of Rome,

They had a Law amongst them, that none should take wages in the wars,
unless he had bin brought up in the fields, or that he had bin a heard man in
the Mou^tains: so that through one of these two ways, their flesh was hardened,
their joyntes accustomed to suffer the heat and the cold, and their bodies
more meet to endure the trauells of the wars. In the year of the foundation
of Rome 140. the Romalnes made cruel wars with the Lygures, against whom
was sent Gneus Fabritius: of the which in the end he triumphed; and the day
following this triumph, he spoke unto the Senate, in these words. Worthy
Senators, I have been these five years against the Ligures, and by the
immortal Gods I swear unto you, that in all this time there passed not one
week but we had either battle or some perilous skirmish. And that which The
speech of (...) concerning the profess of the Lygures
a man ought most to marvel at is, that I never perceived any fear or
cowardlinesse to be in those barbarous people, whereby they were constrained
to demand peace of the people of Rome.

These Lygures pursued with such fierceness the wars, that often times they
took away from us all hope to win the victory: for between Armies, the
great might of the one, does put always the others in fear. And I will tell
you (Fathers conscript,) their bringing up, to the end the Roman youth
should take hereby example.

When they are young, they are put to be Sheapheardes, because they should
accustom their flesh in those mountains to endure travel: by the which
custom they are so much masters of themselves (the country being always full
of snow and Ise in the winter, and also noysom through the extreme heat in
the Summer) that I swear by the God Apollo, in all this time of five years,
of those we have not seen one prease to the Fire in the winter, nor covet the
shadow in the Summer.

Do not ye think worthy Senators, that I was willing to declare unto you
these things in the Senate, for any desire I have, that you should esteem any
thing the more my Triumph: but I do tell it you to this end, that you may
have an eye, and take heed to your men of war, to the end they may always
be occupied, and that you suffer them not to be idle. For it is more perilous
for the Roman Armies to be overcome with vices, the^ to be discomfited with
their enemies.

And to talk of these matters more at large, me thinks they should provide
and command, that Rich men should not be so hardy to bring up their
children too delicately: for in the end, it is impossible that the delicate
person should win with his hands the honor of many victories.

That which moved me to say so much as I have said (worthy Senators) is to the
end you may know, that the Lygures were not overcome by the power of Rome:
but because Fortune was against them. And since in nothing Fortune shows her
self so variable, as in the things of the war: me thinks that though the
Ligures are now vanquished and overcome, yet notwithstanding you ought to
entertain them in love: and to take them for your confoederates: For it is not
good counsel, to hazard that into the hands of Fortune, which a man may
compass by friendship.

The Author of this which is spoken, is called Iunius Pratus, in the Book of
the concord of Realms: and he says in that place, that this captain Gneus
Fabritius, was counted no less sage for that he spoke, then esteemed valiant
for that he did.

In the old time, those of the Isles Balleares, (which now are called
Maiorque, and Minorque) though they were not counted wise; yet at the least in
bringing up their Children, they showed rhemselues not negligent.

Because they were brought up in hardness in their youth, and could endure all
painful exercises of the wars. Those of Carthage gave five prisoners of
Rome, for one slave of Maiorque.

Dyodorus Siculus says, in those Isles, the mother did not give the children
bread with their own hands: but they did put it on a high poale, so that they
might see the Bread with their eyes, but they could not reach it with their
hands. Wherefore when they would eat they should first with hurling of stones,
or slinges win it, or else fast. Though the work were of children, yet the
invention came of a high wit: And hereof it came, that the Baleares were
esteemed for valiant me^, as well in wrestling, as in slinges for to hurl: for
they did hurl with a sling to hit a white, as the Lygures shoot now in a
Crosse-bow to hit the prick. Those of Great Britain, which now we call
England, amongst all the barbarous, were men most barbarous: but you ought to
know, that within the space of few years, the Romans were vanquished of them
many times: for time in all things brings such change and alteration, that
those which once we knew great Lords, within a while after we have seen
themslaues.

Herodian in his history of Seuerus Emperor of Rome says, That an
Ambassador of Britain being one day in Rome (as by chance they gave him a
froward answer in the Senate) spoke stoutely before them all, and said these
words. The stout answer of the English Ambassador to the Romans.


I am sorry you will not accept peace, nor grant Truce, the which thing shall
be for the greater justification of your war. For afterward none can take
but that which fortune shall give: For in the end the delicate flesh of Rome
shall feel if the bloody swords of Britain will cut. The English history
says, and it is true, that though the country be very cold and that the water
freezeth often; yet the women had a custom to carry their children where the
water was frozen, and breaking the Ice with a stone, with the same Ise they
used to rub the body of the Infant, to the end to harden their flesh, and to
make them more apter to endure travels. And without doubt, they had reason, for
I wish no greater penance to delicate men, then in the Winter to see them
without fire, and in the Summer to want fresh shadow.

Since this was the custom of the Britains, it is but reason we credit
Julius Caesar, in that he says in his Comentaries, that is to say, that he
passed many dangers before he could overcome them: for they with as little
fear did hide themselves, and diued under the cold water, as verily a man
would have rested himself in a pleasant shadow.

As Lucanus and Appianus Alexandrinus say, amongst other Nations which came to
succor the great Pompey in Pharsalia, were the Messagetes, the which (as they
say) in their youth did suck no other but the milk of Camels, and eat bread
of akorns. These barbarous people did these things to the end to harden their
bodies, to be able to endure travel, and to have their legs lighter for to
run.

In this case we cannot call them barbarous, but we ought to call them men of
good understanding: for it is impossible for the man that eats much to run
fast. Viriatus a Spaniard, was King of the Lusitaines, and a great enemy of the
Romans, who was so aduenturous in the war, and so valiant in his person, that
the Romans (by the experience of his deeds) found him invincible: for in the
space of 13. years they could never have any victory of him: the which when
they saw, they determined The prowess of Viriatus, and his untimely death.
to poison him, and did so indeed. At whose death they more rejoiced, then if
they had won the Sgniorie of all Lusitania: For if Viriatus had not dyed,
they had never brought the Lusitanians under their subjection. Iunius Rusticus
in his Epitomie says, that this Viriatus in his youth was a Heard-man, and
kept cattle by the river of Guadiana, and after that he waxed older, used to
rob, and assault men by the high ways. And after that he was forty years of
age, he became King of the Lusitaines and not by force, but by election: for
when the people saw themselves environed and assaulted on every side with
enemies, they chose rather stout, strong and hardy men for their Captains,
then noble men for their guides.

If the ancient Historiographers deceive me not, when Viriatus was a thief,
he led with him always at the least a hundred thieves, the which were shod
with leaden shoes so that when they were enforced to run, they put off their
shoes. And thus although all the day they went with leaden shoes, yet in the
night they ran like swift buckes: for it is a general rule, that the looser
the joints are, the more swifter shall the legs be to run.

In the book of the jests of the Lumbardes, Paulus Diaconus says, An ancient
Law observed by the inhabitants of Capua,
that in the old time those of Capua had a Law, that until the children were
married, the fathers should give them no bed to sleep on, nor permit them to
sit at the table to eat: but that they should eat their meat in their hands;
and take their rest on the ground.

And truly it was a commendable law, for rest was never inverted for the young
man which has no beard; but for the aged, being lame, impotent and crooked.

Quintus Cincinatus was second Dictator of Rome, and indeed for his deserts was
the first Emperor of the earth.

This excellent man was brought up in so great travel, that his hands were
found full of knots, the plough was in his arms, and the swette in his face
when he was sought for to be Dictator of Rome. For the Ancients desired
rather to be ruled of them that knew not, but how to plough the ground; then
of them that delighted in nothing else, but to live in pleasures among the
people.

Caligula which was the fourth Emperor of Rome (as they say) was brought up
with such cost and delicateness in his his youth, that they were in doubt in
Rome, whether Drusius Germanicus his father employed more for the Armies then
Caligula his son spent in the cradle for his pleasures.

This rehearsed again, I would now know of Princes and great lords what part
they would take, that is to say, whether with Cincinatus, which by his
stootenes wan so many strange Countries, or with Caligula, that in his filthy
lusts spared not his proper sister.

In mine opinion, there needs no great deliberation to answer this question
(that is to say) the goodness of the one, and the wickedness of the other:
for there was no battle but Cincinatus did overcome, nor there was any vice
but Caligula did invent. Suetonius Tranquillus in the second Book of Caesar's
says; That when the children of the Emperor Augustus Caesar entered into the
high Capitol, where all the Senate were assembled, the Senators rose out of
their places, and made a reverence to the children: the which when the Emperor
Augustus saw, he was much displeased, and called them back again. And on a
day being demanded why be loved his children no better, he answered in this
wise. If my children will be good, they shall sit hereafter where I sit now:
but if they be evil, I will not their vices should be reverenced The answer
of the Emperor Augustus Caesar.
of the Senators: For the authority and gravity of the good ought not to be
employed in the service of those that be wicked.

The 26 Emperor of Rome was Alexander, the which though he was young, was as
much esteemed for his virtues amongst the Romans, as ever Alexander the great
was, for his valiantnes amongst the Greeks.

We cannot say, that long experience caused him to come to the Government of
the commonwealth: for as Herodian says in his sixth book: The day that the
Senators proclaimed him Emperor, he was so little, that his own men bare
him in their arms, That fortunate Emperor had a Mother called Manea, the
which brought him up fowel and diligently, that she kept always a great guard
of men to take heed, that no vicious man The providence of a careful mother.
came unto him. And let not the diligence of the Mother to the child be little
esteemed. For Princes often times of their own nature are good, and by evil
conversation only, they are made evil. This worthy woman keeping always such
a faithful guarde of her child, that no Flatterers should enter in to flatter
him, nor malicious to tell him lies: By chance on a day a Roman said unto
her these words.

I think it not meet (most excellent princess) that thou should be so
diligent about thy Son, to forget the affairs of the commonwealth: for
Princes ought not to be kept so close, that it is more easy to obtain a suite
at the Gods, then to speak one word with the Prince. To this the Empress
Manea answered, and said.

They which have charge to govern those which do govern, without comparison
ought to fear more the vices of the King, then the enemies of the realm. For
the enemies are destroyed in a Battle, but vices remain during the life: and
in the end, enemies do not destroy but the possessions of the Land, but the
vicious prince destroieth the good ma^ners of the commonwealth. These words
were spoken of this worthy Roman. By the Hystories which I have declared, and
by those which I omit to recite, all virtuous men may know, how much it
profits them to bring up their children in travels, or to bring them up in
pleasures.

But now I imagine, that those which shall read this, will praise that which
is well written: and also I trust they will not give their children so much
their own wills: for men that read much, and work little, are as belles which
do found to call others, and they themselves never enter into the church. If
the fathers did not esteem the service they do unto God, their own honor,
nor the profit of their own children: yet to preserve them from diseases,
they ought to bring them up in virtue, and withdraw them from vices: for truly
the children which have been brought up daintily, shall always be diseased
and sickly.

What a thing is it to see the son of a Labourer, the coat without points,
the shirt tattered and torn, the feet bare his head without a cap, his body
without a girdle, in summer without a hat, in winter without a The
commendations of the laboring man.
cloak, in the day plowing, in the night driving his heard, eating bread of Rye
or Otes, lying on the earth, or else on the straw: and in this travel to see
this young man so holy and virtuous, that every man desires and wishes that
he had such a son. The contrary comes of Noble men's sons, the which we
see are nourished and brought up between two fine Holland sheets, laid in a
costly cradell, made after the new fashion: they give the Nurse what she will
desire; if perchance the child be sick, they change his Nurse, or else they
appoint him a diet.

The father and the mother sleep neither night nor day, all the house
watches, they let him eat nothing but the broth of chickens, they keep him
diligently that he fall not down the stayres; the child asks nothing but it
is given him immediately. Finally, they spend their time in serving them, they
wast their riches in giving the^ their delights, they occupy their eyes but to
behold them, and they employ not their hearts but to love them.

But I swear that those Fathers, (which on this wise do spend their riches to
pamper them) shall one day water their eyes to bewail the^: what it is to see
the waste, that a vain man makes in bringing up his child? specially if he
be a man somewhat aged, and that at his desire has a Child borne. He spends
so much goods, in bringing him up wantonly, whiles he is young, that often times
he wants to marry him when he comes to Age. And that which worst of all
is, that that which he spends and employeth; he thinks it well bestowed,
and thinks that too much that he gives for Gods sake.

Though the Fathers are very large in spending, the mothers very curious, and
the Nurses full of pleasant, and the servant very diligent and attentive:
yet it follows not that the children should be more hole then others. For the
more they are attended, the more they be diseased: the more they eat, the more
they are weak: the more they rejoice, the worse they prosper: the more they
waste and spend, The more te^derly children are brought up the more diseased
they prove.
so much less they profit. And all this is not without the secret permission
of God. For God will not that the clowtes of children be of greater value then
the garments of the poor.

GOD without a great mystery took not in hand the custody of the poote, and
does not suffer that the children of the rich men should prosper: For the good
brings up his children with out the prejudice of the Rich, and to the profit
of the Commonwealth: but the Rich brings up his children with the sweat of
the poor, and to the damage of the commonwealth Therefore if this thing be
true (as it is) it is but reason that the Wolf which deuoureth us do die: and
the sheep which clotheth us do live.

The Fathers often times for tenderness will not teach nor bring up their children
in doctrine, saying: That as yet he is too young; and that there remains
time enough for to be learned, and that they have leisure enough to be taught:
And further, for the more excuse of their error, they affirm, that when the
child in his youth is chastned, he runs in danger of his health. But the
evil respect which the Fathers have to their Children, God suffers
afterward, that they come to be so slanderous to the commonwealth, so
infamous to their Parents, so disobedient to, their fathers, so evil in their
conditions, so unadvised and light in their behavior, so unmeet for
knowledge, so incorrigible for discipline, so inclined to lies, so envying the
truth: that their Fathers would not only have punished them with sharp
correction: but also they would rejoice to have them buried with bitter tears.

An other thing there is in this matter worthy to be noted, and much more
worthyer to be commended, that is: that the Fathers and Mothers under the
color that their Children should be somewhat gracious, they learn them to
speak, to babble, and to Children the dishonor of their parents when they be
not well brought up.
be great mockers and scoffers: the which thing afterward redoundeth to the
great infamy and dishonor of the Father, to the great peril of the Son,
and to the greatest grief and displeasure of the Mother. For the Child that
is brought up wantonly, without doctrine in his youth: of necessity must be a
fool, when he is old. If this which I have said be evil, this which I will
say is worse, that the Fathers and Mothers, the Governors, or Nourses, do
teach them to speak dishonest things, the which are not lawful: and therefore
ought not to be Distasteful things unfit for either young or old.
suffered to be spoken in that tender Age: nor the gravity of the Ancients
ought not to listen unto them: For there are no men (unless they be
shameless) that will permit their children to be great bablers.

Those which have the charge to govern good men's Children ought to be very
circumspect, that they keep them in awe, fear, and subjection, and that they
ought not to be contented, although the Fathers say they are pleased. For the
disordinate love that the Fathers have to them, is the cause that they can not
see whether they be mockers, or evil brought up. And if it chances (as often
times it does) that the Father should come to the Master, to cause him to
withdraw correction: In this case (if the Master be a wise man) he ought no
less to reprove and admonish the Father, then to correct the son. And if
this did not avail, I counsel him to forsake, and leave his charge. For the
man of an honest nature, after he has taken any charge in hand; will either
bring it to pass, or else he will dye in the same.

I will not deny, but that it is reason, Noble men's Sons be more gently
brought up, handled, and honored, then the Sons of the Plebeians: For more
delicately is the palm tree, which brings forth Dates, cherished, then the
Oak which brings forth Akornes, wherewith the hogs are fed.

Let Princes and great Lords beware, that the pleasures which they gave their
children their Youth, be not so excessive, nor of so long continuance, that
when they would withdraw them, the world had not already festered them. For,
the Children brought up with too much delicatenes, are disobedient to their
Fathers and Mothers: or else they are sick in their Bodies, or worse then
that, they are vicious in their behauiours: so that their Fathers should be
better to bury them quick, then to bring them up vicious.

CHAP. XXXIIII. How that Princes and great Lords ought to be careful in
seeking wise men to bring up their Children: Of x. conditions that good
Scholemaisters ought to have.
WHen (He) that is without end, gave beginning to the world, in this sort he
began: Vide Genes: etc.
The Sunday he created Heaven and Earth: the Monday he created the Element,
the Tuesday he created the Planettes, the Wednesday he created the Sun and
the Moon, the Thursday he created the Birds in the Air, and the Fishes in
the Sea, the Friday he created Adam, and Eve his wife: and truly in that he
created, and how he created, he showed himself as GOD: For, as soon as the
house was made, he furnished and peopled it with that that was necessary, as
he could well do.

Omitting therefore the Creator: and talking of creatures: we see by
experience, that a Householder in planting Excellent comparison and forewarning,
etc.
a vine-yarde, immediately makes a hedge, to the end that the beasts do not
spoil it, and eat it up. And when it is well grown, he hireth some poor
labourer to watch, that travelers do not gather nor eat the grapes thereof.
The rich man that traffiqueth by Sea, after he has made a great ship, and
bestowed vj. or vij. thousand ducates, if he be wise, he will first provide a
man that may govern her, before he will seek Merchandise for to freight her:
For in perilous Tempests, the greatness of the ship little avails, if the
Pylote be not expert.

The Householder that has many Cowes and sheep, and likewise has fair
fields, and pleasant pastures for his cattle, does not only seek Heardmen to
keep the cattle, but also dogs to fear the wolves, and cabbaines to lodge
the Heardsmen. For the cabbaine of the Shepherds, and the baying of the dog,
is but as a salueguard of the sheep, from the ravening of the wolf.

The mighty and valiant Princes, which in the Frontieres of their enemies
keep strong fortresses, seek always stout and hardy captains to defend their
walls: for otherwise it were better the Fort should be battered to the ground,
then it should come into the power of the enemies.

By the comparisons aboue-named, there is no discreat man but does understand
to what end my pen does write them: that is, to know, to keep, and prove,
how that men which love their Children well (adding this unto it,) have great
need of good masters and governors, to teach and bring them up. For whilst
the Palm tree is but little, a frost does easily destroy it. I mean whiles
the child is young if he have no tutour, he is easily deceived with the world.

If the Lord be wise and of understanding, there is no Fortress so esteemed:
neither ship so fair: nor Heard so profitable: nor Vine so fruitful: but that
he better esteems to have a good son then all these things together: or
any other thing in this world. For the Father ought to love his children as
his own proper: and all residue, as gifts of fortune. If it be so (as it is
indeed,) since that for to keep and watch the Heard they seek a good
Shephearde. If for the Vine, they seek a good Labourer. If for to govern the
ship they seek a good Pylot, and for to defend a Forte, they seek a good
captain: why then will not the wise Fathers seek for good masters, to teach
and to bring up their Children?

Oh Princes and great Lords, I have told you, and again do say: That if you
travel one year to leave your Advised caueats for the bringing up of tender
youth.
children goods, you ought to sweat 50. years to leave them well brought up.
For it avails little to carry much corn to the Mill, if the mill be out of
frame. I mean that in vain Riches and treasures are gathered: when the child
that shall inherit them, has no wit to use them.

It is no small matter to know how to choose good governors. For the Prince
is sage that finds such a one: and much more happy is he, that of him shall
be taught. For in my opion, it is no small charge for one man to bring up a
Prince, that shall govern many.

As Seneca says: The wise man ought to confer all things with his Friend.
But first he ought to know, who is he that is his Friend? I mean that the
wise Father ought for his Children to seek one good master, and to him he
should recommend them all: but first he ought to know what he is? For, that
man is very simple, which will buy a Horse, before he see and prove him, whether
he be whole or lame. He ought to have many good conditions and qualityes that
should bring up the children of Princes and great Lords: for by one way they
nourish the tender trees in the Orchard, and after another sort they plant the
wild trees in the mountains.

Therefore the case shall be this, that weewill declare here what conditions and
behauiours the Masters and governors of Noblemens sons ought to have, which
may bring them to honor: and their disciples to be well taught and brought
up. For the glory of the disciple always redoundeth to the honor and praise
of his master.

The first condition is, that he which ought to be a Tutor to Noble men's What
conditions belong to a good schol master.
children should be no less then 40. years of age, and no more then 60.
because the master that is young, is ashamed to command, and if he be aged, he
is not able to correct.

The second, it is necessary that Tutors be very honest, and that not only in
pureness of conscience, but also in the outward appearance, and cleanenes of
life: For, it is impossible the child be honest, if the Master be dissolute.

The third, it is necessary that Tutors and governors of Princes and great
Lords be true men, not only in their words, but also in then Couenauntes. For
to say the truth, that mouth which is always full of lies, ought not by
reason to be a teacher of the truth.

The fourth condition, it is necessary that the governors of Princes and great
Lord (of their own nature) be liberal: For often times the great covetousness
of Masters, makes the hearts of Princes to be greedy and covetous.

The fifth, it is necessary that the masters and governors of Princes and
great Lords be moderate in words and very resolute in sentences: so that they
ought to teach the Children to speak little, and to harken much. For it is the
chiefest virtue in a Prince, to hear with patience, and to speak with
wisdom.

The sixth condition is, it is necessary that the masters and tutors of
Princes etc. be wise men and temperate: so that the gravity of the Master,
may restrain the lightness of the Scholars: For, there is no greater plagues in
Realms, then for Princes to be young, and their teachers to be light.

The seventh, it is necessary that the masters and tutors of Princes and great
Lords be well learned in divinity and humanity: in such sort, that that which
they teach the Princes by word, they may show it by writing, to the end that
other Princes may execute and put the same in ure: For men's hearts are sooner
moved by the examples of those which are past, then by the words of them that
are present.

The eight condition: it is necessary that the Masters and tutors of Princes,
be not given to the vice of the flesh: For as they are young, and naturally
given to the flesh, so they have no strength to abide chaste, neither wisdom
to beware of the snares. Therefore it is necessary that their masters be pure
and honest: for the disciples shall never be chaste, if the master be vicious.

The ninth: it is necessary that the masters and tutours of Princes and great
Lords have good conditions, because the children of Noblemen, (being
daintily brought up) always learn evil conditions, the which their Masters
ought to reform; more by good conversation, then by sharp correction. For often
times it chances Like master like scholar
that whereas the Master is cruel, the scholar is not merciful.

The tenth: it is necessary that the masters and tutours of Princes and great
Lords, have not only seen and read many things: but also that they have
proved changeable fortune. For since Noble men's sons (by the gift of GOD,)
have great Estates, they ought therefore to provide to speak to many, to answer
to many, and to entreat with many: and it is very profitable for them to be
conversant with expert men, for in the end the approved man in counsel has
pre-eminence. I was willing to bring in these rules in my writing, to the end
that fathers may keep them in their memory, when they do seek Masters to
teach their children; for in my opinion, the father is more in fault to seek
an evil master, then the Master is to make an evil Scholar; For if I choose
evil Taylers to cut my gown, it is my fault that the cloth is lost, and my
gown marred. Albeit the Romans were in all their doings circumspect, yet for
this one thing I must envy the good doctrine which they gave to noble men's
children: for without doubt it is impossible that in any City there be a good
Common-welth unless they are very circumspect to bring up young children.

Sabellicus in his rapsodies says, that in the 425. years of the foundation
of Rome, Quintus Seruilius, and Lucius Germinus then Consuls, being What is
required in a well governed Common wealth
in the war against the Volces, the stout aduenturous Captain Camillus there
rose a great strife and contention in Rome amongst the people, and the Knights:
and that contention was upon the provision of offices: for in great
Commonwealths it has been an ancient quarrel that in Knights and
Gentlemen, there surmounteth pride in commanding: and among the people, there
wants patience in obeying.

The Kinghtes and Gentlemen would they should choose a Tribune Militare in the
Senate, to speak in the name of all the Knights, that were absent and present:
for they said, that since they were always at the war, the whole Common
wealth remained in the power of the people.

The Commons on the other part importuned and desired, that a new Officer
should be created, the which should have the charge to examine and take account
how the youth of Rome were brought up: because the common people did accuse the
Knights and Gentlemen, that the longer they remained in the wars, the more
sensually their children lived in Rome.

It was decreede then that a Tribune Militare should be erected, the which in
authority and dignity should be equal with the Senators, and that he should
represent the state of Warlike Knights: but the office continued no longer
then 4. years in Rome, (that is to say) til the time that Camillus returned
from the wars: for things that are grounded of no reason, of themselves they
come to naught.

All the Knights and Gentlemen sought to the uttermost of their power to
maintain their pre-eminence: and on the other side, all the Comminalty of Rome
were against it. In the end the good Captain Camillus called all the Knights
and Gentlemen together, and said unto them these words.

I am greatly ashamed to see that the stoutness should be so little of the
Roman knights, that they should The speech of Camillus
condescend to the will of the Plebeians: for indeed the mighty do not get so
much honor to overcome the little, as the little do to strive with the great.
I say that the strife and debate amongst you in Rome, does displease me much:
therefore (you knights) if you will not lose your honors, you must either kill
them, or overcome them. You cannot overcome them, because they are many: and
kill them you ought not, for in the end they are yours, and therefore there is
no better remedy then to dissemble with them, For things which suffer no
force, nor observe not justice, ought always, until convenient time, to be
dissembled.

The immortal Gods did not create Roman knights to govern people, but to
conquer Realms. And I say further, that they did not create us to teach laws
to ours: but to give laws to strangers. And if we be the children of our
fathers, and imitators of the ancient Romans: we will not content our selves
to command in Rome, but to command those which do command in Rome. For the
heart of a true Roman does little esteem to see himself Lord of this world:
if he know that there is another to conquer. You others did create this Tribune
Militare, we being in the war: whereof now there is no necessity, since we
are in peace. And the cause why I was willing there should be none in the
Common wealth, was for that there was not riches in Rome sufficient to acquit
the deserts of the Roman chivalry. And if you esteem an honorable office to
be a Tribune Militare, since you cannot all have it, me thinks you should
all want it. For among the Noble men and Plebeians it is not meet, that one
alone should enjoy that, which many have deserved.

This History Sabellicus declares, and alleges Pulio for his author, and
recites that for this good work that Camillus did in Rome (that is to say) to
set the great and the small at one. He was as well beloved of the Romans, as
he was feared of the enemies.

And not without a just cause; for in my opinion, it is a greater virtue to
pacify his own, then to rob strangers. As touching the office Camillus
loved of the Romans, and feared of his enemies.
of this Tribune, whereupon this great contention rose in Rome, I cannot tell
which was greater, the foolish rashness of the Knights to procure it, or the
wisdom of Camillus to abolish it: For to say the truth, the art of Chiualry
was invented more to defend the common wealth, then to bide at home, and have
the charge of justice: For to the good Knight, it seems better to be laden
with weapons to resist enemies, then to be environed with books to determine
causes.

Returning therefore to that which the people said against the Soldiers: It
was ordained by consent of all, that in Rome an office should be erected, and
that he which should have it; should have the charge to go through Rome, to see
what they were in Rome that did not instruct their children in good doctrine:
and if perchance he found any neighbors A good law in Rome, fit to be used
all the world over.
child that was evil taught, he chastised and banished the Father. And truly
the punishment was very just, for the father deserves more punishment, for
that he does thereunto consent, then the child deserves more the offenses which
he does commit. When Rome was Rome, and that of all the world the Common wealth
thereof was commended, they chose for an officer therein the most ancient and
virtuous Roman, who was called the General visiter of the children of Rome:
and it seems to be true, for so much as he which had this office one year,
hoped to be Consul, Dictator or Censor the next; as it appeared by Marcus
Porcio, who desired to be corrector of the children, and afterward succeeded
to be Censor of the Roman people: for the Romans did not offer the office of
justice to any man, unless he had experience of all Offices. Patricius
Seuensis in the book of the Commonwealth says, that before the wars were
between Carthage and Rome, the Common wealth of Carthage was very well
governed, and as it beseemed such a noble City: but it is an ancient privilege
of the war that it kills the persons, consumes the goods, and above all,
engenders a new passion and misery; and in the end destroys all good ancient
customs.

The Carthagenians therefore had a custom that the children, and especially A
custom of the Carthagenians.
those which were of honest men, should be put in the Temples from three years
till twelve, and so from twelve till twenty they learned crafts, sciences and
occupations, and from 20. til 25. they instructed the^ in the feats of war,
and at the end of 30. years they gave themselves to marriage: for amongst them
it was a Law inviolable, that no man should marry until he were thirty years
of age, and the woman 25. And after that they were married, the month
following they ought to present themselves before the Senate, and there to
choose what kind of estate they would take upon them to live in and what their
minds most desired (that is to say) if they would serve in the Temples, follow
the war, or travel the seas, or get their living by land, or follow their
occupation which they had learned. And look what estate or office that day
they chose, the same they kept and occupied during their life: and truly the
law was very good, because such change of estates and Offices in the World, are
occasion that presently so many come to destruction. All the excellent and
ancient Princes had many great Philosophers for their Masters: and this seems
to be true by this, that king Darius had Lichanins the philosopher for his
master: the great Alexander had Aristotle the Philosopher for his Master, King
Artaxerces had Pindarus the philosopher for his Master. The aduenturous and
hardy captain of the Athenians Palemo had Xenocrates the philosopher for his
master. Xemaides (only king of the Corinthians) had Chilo the philosopher for
his Master, and tutour to his Children.

Epamynundus Prince of the Thebanes had for his master and counselor Maruchus
the Philosopher.

Ulysses the Greek (as Homer says) had for his master and companion in his
travels, Catinus the philosopher.

Pirrus (which was King of the Epirotes, and a great defendor of the
Tharentines) had for his Master and Chronicler Arthemius the philosopher, of
whom Cicero speaks ad Atticum, that his sword was sharper to fight then his
pen ready for to write.

The great King Ptholomeus Philodelphus was not only Scholar of the most
singular Philosophers of Greece: but also after he was King, he sent for 72.
Philosophers, which were Hebrews. Cirus King of the Persians, that destroyed
the great Babylon, had for his Master Pristicus the Philosopher. Traian the
Emperor had Plutarch for his Master, who did not only teach him in his youth:
but also wrote him a book how he ought to govern himself and his
commo^wealth. By these few examples which I have expressed, and by many other
which I omit, Princes at this present may see, how careful princes were in
times past, to give their children wise and learned men. O princes and great
Lords, since you at this present do presume and take upon you that which your
Forefathers did, I would that now you would consider, who brought them to so
high estate: and who leaves them eternal memory? for without doubt noble men
never The carefulnes of Princes in times past to bring up their chidren.
wan renown for the pleasurs they had in vices, but for the travels they had in
virtues. Again I say, that Princes in times past were not famous for their
stoutnes, and apt disposition of their bodies, nor for descent of noble lynage,
nor for the possession of many Realms: or heaping up of great treasures: but
they wanne and obtained immortal renown, for that their Fathers in their
youth put them under the tuition of wise and learned tutours, which taught them
good doctrine; and when they were of age, gave them good counselors, to
govern the commonwealth. Laertius in the life of the Philosophers: and
Bocchas in the Book of the lineage of Gods, say thus;

That among the Philosophers of Athens there was a custom, that no strange
Philosopher should read in their Schools, before he were first examined in
natural and moral Phylosophie: For among the Greeks it was an ancient
Proverb: That in the school of Athens, no vicious man A custom among the
Athemans.
could enter, nor idle word be spoken: neither they did consent that any
ignorant Philosopher should come in, to read there.

Now as by chance many philosophers were come from the Mount Olympus: amongst
the refidue, there was one came to see the philosophers of Athens, who was
native of Thebes, a man (as afterward he declared himself) in Moral and
natural phylosophie very well learned: And since he desired to remain in
Athens, he was examined: and of many and diverse things demanded. And amongst
the others, these following were some of them.

First, they asked him, what causes women to be so froward, since it is true
that nature made them shamefaste, Questions demanded by the philosophers of
Athens.
and created them simple?

The Philosopher answered. A woman is not froward, but because she has too
much her will, and wants shame.

Secondarily, they asked him, why young men are undone? he answered: because
Time abounds them for to do evil, and Masters wants to enforce them to
do good.

Thirdly, they asked him, why are Wise men deceived, as well as the simple? he
answered: The wise man is never deceived, but by him that uses fair words,
and has evil conditions.

Fourthly, they asked him, of whom men ought most to beware? he answered: That
there is to a man no greater enemy, then he which sees that thing in thee,
which he desires to have in himself.

Fifthly, they asked him, why many princes begun well, and ended evil? he
answered: Princes begin well, because their nature is good: and they end
evil, because no man does gainsay them.

Sixthly, they asked him, why do princes commit such follyes? he answered:
Because Flattterers abounds that deceive them: and true men are wanting,
which should serve them.

Seventhly, they asked him, why the Ancients were so sage, and men at this
present were so simple? he answered: Because the Ancients did not procure,
but to know: and these present, do not travel, but for to have.

Eighthly, they asked him, why so many vices were nourished in the palaces of
princes? he answered: Because pleasures abound, and counsel wants.

The ninth, they asked him, why the most part of men lived without rest, and
few without pain? he answered: No man is more without, and suffers more
pain: then he that dies for the goods of another, and little esteems his
own.

The tenth, they asked him, whereby they might know the Commonwealth to be
undone? he answered: There is no Commonwealth undone, but only, where the
young are light, and the old vicious.

The 11. they asked him wherewith the Commonwealth is maintained? he answered:
The common wealth cannot decay where justice remains for the poor,
punishment for the tyrants, weight and measure plentiful: and chiefly if there
be good doctrine for the young, and little covetousness in the old.

Affro the Historiographer declares this in the tenth book De rebus Affro. de
rebus Atheniensium.
Atheniensium. Truly in my opinion the words of this philosopher were few, but
the sentences were many. And for none other cause I did bring in this history,
but to profit me of the last word, wherein for answer he says, that all
the profit of the Common wealth consists, in that there be princes that
restrain the avarice of the aged, and that there be Masters to teach the
youthful. We see by experience, that if the brute beasts were not tied, and
the corn and seeds compassed with hedges or ditches, a man should never gather
the fruit when they are ripe. I mean, the strife and debate will rise
continually among the people, if the young men have not good fathers to correct
them, and wise masters to teach them.

We cannot deny, but though the knife be made of fine steel, yet sometimes it
has need to be whet: and so in like manner, the young man during the time of
his youth, though he do not deserve it, yet from time to time he ought to be
corrected. O Princes and great Lords, I know not of whom you take counsel when
your son is borne, to provide him of a Master and governor whom you choose
not as the most virtuous, but as the most richest, not as the most sagest, but
as the most vile and evil taught. Finally, you do not trust him with your
children that best deserves it, but that most procures it. Again I say, O
princes and great Lords, why do you not withdraw your children from their
hands which have their eyes more to their own profit then their hearts unto
your service. For such to enrich themselus do bring up princes viciously. Let
not Princes think, that it is a trifle to know, how to find and choose a good
Master, and the Lord which herein does not employ his diligence is worthy of
great rebuke. And because they shall not pretend ignorance, let them beware of
that man whose life is suspicious and extreme A great thing for parents to
choose good Tutors to their children.
covetous.

In my opinion, in the palace of princes the office of Tutorshippe ought not
to be given as other common offices, that is to say, by requests or money, by
priuities or importunities, either else for recompense of services: for it
follows not, though a man has been Ambassador in strange Realms, or
captain of great Armies in war, or that he has possessed in the royal
palace Offices of honor, or of estimation, that therefore he should be able
to teach, or bring up their children: For to be a good Captain suffices
only to be hardy, and fortunate: but for to be a Tutour and governor of
Princes, he ought to be both sage and virtuous.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the two children of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, of the which
the best beloved dyed. And of the Masters he provided for the other named
Comodus.
MArcus Aurelius the 17. Emperor of Rome, in the time that he was married
with Faustine, only daughter of the Emperor Antonius Pius, had only two
sons, whereof the eldest was named Comodus, and the second Verissimus. Of
these two children, the heir was Comodus, who was so wicked in the 13. years
he governed the Empire, that he seemed rather the Disciple of Nero the cruel,
then to descend by the mothers side from Antonius the merciful, or son of
Marcus Aurelius.

This wicked child Comodus was so light in speech, so dishonest in person and
so cruel with his people, that ofttimes he being alive, they laid wagers
that there was no virtue in him The descrip of a cruel and wicked Prince.
to be found, nor any one vice in him that wanted. On the contrary part, the
second son named Verissimus, was comely of gesture, proper of person, and in
wit very temperate, and the most of all was, that by his good conversation of
all he was beloved: For the fair and virtuous Princes by their beauty draws
unto them men's eyes: and by their good conversation they win their hearts.

The child Verissimus was the hope of the common people, and the glory of his
aged Father: so that the Emperor determined that this child Verissimus should
be heir of the Empire, and that the Prince Commodus should be dishenherited.
Whereat no man ought to marvel, for it is but just since the child does not
amend his life, that the father do dishenherite him.

When good will does want, and vicious pleasures abound, the children often times
by perverse fortune come to naught: So this Marcus Aurelius being 52. years
old, by chance this child Verissimus, which was the glory of Rome, and the
hope of the Father, at the gate of Hostia, of a sudden sickness dyed.

The death of whom was as universally lamented, as his life of all men The
death of the Prince Verissimus greatly bewailed.
was desired. It was a pitiful thing to see, how woefully the Father took the
death of his entirely beloved son: and no less lamentable to behold how the
Senate took the death of their Prince, being the heir: for the aged Father
for sorrow did not go to the Senate, and the Senate for a few days enclosed
themselves in the hie Capitol.

And let no man marvel, though the death of this young Prince was so taken
through Rome; for if men knew what they lose when they lose a virtuous Prince,
they would never cease to bewail and lament his death. When a Knight, a
Gentleman a Squire, an Officer, or when any of the people dies, there dies
but one: but when a Prince dies, which was good for all, and that he lived to
the profit of all, then they ought to make account that all do dye, and they
ought all greatly to lament it: for often times it chances that after 2. or 3.
good Princes, a foul flock of Tyrants succeed. Therefore Marcus Aurelius the
Emperor, as a man of great understanding, and of a princely person, though the
inward sorrow from the roots of the heart could not be plucked: yet he
determined to dissemble outwardly, to bury his grieves inwardly.

For to say the truth, none ought (for any thing) to show extreme sorrow,
unless it be that he has lost his honor, or that his conscience is burdened.

The good Prince, as one that has his vineyarde frozen, wherein was all his
hope, contented with himself, with that which remains, his so deerly beloved
son being dead: and commanded the Prince Comodus to be brought into his
palace, being his only heir.

Julius Capitolinus, which was one of those that wrote of the time of Marcus
Aurelius, said upon this matter: that when the Father saw the disordinate The
tenderness of the Emperor toward his son.
frailenesse, and lightness, and also the little shame which the prince Comodus
his Son brought with him: the aged man began to weep, and shed tears from
his eyes. And it was because the simpleness and virtues of his dear beloved
Son Verissimus, came into his mind.

Although this Noble Emperor Marcus Aurelius, for the death of his son was
very sorrowful: yet notwith standing this, he provided how his other son
Comodus should be governed: and this before that either of age or body he were
greater. For we cannot deny, but when Princes are men, they will be such as
in their youth they have been brought up.

The good Father therefore knowing that the evil inclinations of his should
do him damage, and the Empire in like manner: he sent throughout all Italy,
for the most sagest and expert men, to be governors and tutours of Comodus
the Prince. He made them seek for the most profoundest in learning, the most
renowned of good fame, the most virtuous in deeds, and the most deepest in
understanding: For as the dust is not swept with fine cloth, but with dry
broomes: so the lightness and follyes of young men are not remedyed but by the
hard discipline of the aged.

This commandment being published and proclaimed in Rome, and the brute
scattered through Italy: there came, and ran thither diverse kind of Sages,
whom he commanded to be examined.

He being truly informed of the blood of their predecessors, of the age of
their persons, of the government of their houses, of the spending of their
goods, of their credit among their neighbors, of the sciences they knew: and
above all, they were no less examined of the pureness of their How every man
ought to examine their tutors.
lives, then of the gravity of their persons: for there are many men which are
grave in open words, and very light in secret works.

Speaking therefore more particularly, he commanded they should examine the
Astronomers of astronomy, the Philosophers of Phylosophie, the Musicians in
music: the Orators in orations: and so forth, of other Sciences in order,
wherein every one said he was instructed.

The good Emperor was not so contented to do this once, but sundry times:
and not all in one day, but in many: and not only by another man, but also by
himself.

Finally, they were all examined, as if they had been all one, and that the
same one should have remained, and been kept for all, to be the only Master
and Tutour of the young child, and prince Comodus.

To acquire a perfect knowledge, and to be sure not to err in choice of
things, in my opinion is not only required experience of himself, and a
clear understanding: but also the advice of another: For the knowledge of
things wholly together is easy: but the choice of them particularly is hard.

This thing is only spoken because the good Emperor sent and commanded to
choose governors and Masters of his children.

Of many he chose few, and of few the most wisest, of the most wisest, the How
circu^spect the Emperor was in choosing teachers for his son.
most expert, of the most expert, the best learned, of the best learned, the
most temperate, of the most temperate, the most ancient, and of the most
ancient the most noble.

Certainly such election is worthy praise, because they be true masters and
teachers of Princes, which are noble of blood, ancient in years, honest in
life, men of little folly, and of great experience.

According to the seven liberal Sciences, two masters of every one were
chosen, so that the Prince was but one, and the others were 14. but this
notwithstanding, the works of this Prince Comodus were contrary to the
expectation of his father Marcus Aurelius, because the intention of the good
father was to teach his son all sciences, and the study of the son was to
learn all vices.

At the brute of so great a thing as this was, that the Emperor sought to
provide tutors for the Prince Comodus, and that they should not be those which
were best favored, but those which were found the most wisest: In short space
there came so many Philosophers to Rome, as if the divine Plato had been
revived again in Greece. Let us not marvel at all, if the Sages desired the
acquaintance of familiarity of this good Emperor.: for in the end there is no
man so sage, nor so virtuous in his life, but sometime will seek after the
favors of the world. Since there were many Sages, and that of those he chose
but fourteen. It was necessary he should honestly and wisely dispatch and
give the others leave, as did behoue him.

And herein the good Emperor showed himself so wise, that showing to some a
merry countenance, to others speaking gently, and to others by a certain hope,
and to others by gifts and presents, and all the good company of the Sages
departed, and the good Emperor dispatched them, not one being sadd which
departed, but very well pleased: For it is not comely for the magnificence of a
Prince, that the man which comes to his Palace only for his service, should
return murmuring, or without reward.

This good Emperor showed him self Sage to seek many Sages, he showed
himself wise in the choice of some, and of a good understanding in dispatching
others, and in contenting them all: for as we see daily by experience, though
the election be good, commonly great affections thereupon engender: for those
for not being chosen are sorry, and to see that others chosen are shamefast.
In such case likewise, let it not be esteemed little to search a good remedy:
for the Goldsmith often times demands more for the workemanshippe then the
silver is worth: I mean that sometimes Princes do deserve more honor for the
good With what virtues Princes ought to be adorned.
means they use in their affairs, then for the good sucesse whereunto it
comes: for the one adventure guides, but the other wisdom aduanceth.

The good Emperor not contented with this, provided that those foureteen
Philosophers which should remain in his Palace, should sit at the table and
accompany his person: the which thing he did, to see if their life were
comformable to their doctrine, and if their words did agree to their works:
for there are many men which are of a goodly tongue, and of a wicked life.
Julius Capitolinus, and Cinna Catullus which were writers of this History say,
that it was a wonder to see how this good Emperor did mark them, to know if
they were sober in feeding, temperat in drinking, modest in going, occupied in
studying, and above all, if they were very sage in speaking, and honest in
living.

Would to God that Princes of our time were in this case so diligent and
careful: and that in committing in trust their affairs, they would not How
princes should give credit to their servants.
care more for one then for others. For speaking with due reverence, there
abounds no wisdom in that Prince, which commits a thing of importance to
that man whom he knows not, whether he is able to bring it to pass or not.
Many talk evil, and marvel that Princes and great Lords in so many things do
err: and for the contrary I marvel how they hit any at all. For if they
committed their weighty affairs to skillful men, though perhaps they err
once, yet they hitt it a hundred times; but when they commit their business to
ignorant men, if they hit once, they miss a thousand times again.

In this case, I say, there is nothing destroys young Princes more, then for
that they commit not their affairs to their old and faithful servants: for in
fine the unfeigned love is not, but in him that eats the Princes bread daily.
It is but reason that other Princes take example by this Prince, to seek good
masters for their Children: and if the Masters be good, and the Scholars
evil, then the Fathers are blameless: For to Princes and great Lords, it is a
great discharge of conscience, to see though their children be lost, yet it is
not for want of doctrine, but for abundance of malice.

The Roman Prince had a custom to celebrate the feast of the god Genius, who
was god of their birth, and that feast was celebrated every year once, which
was kept the same day of the birth of the Emperor, ioifully throughout all
Rome; for at this day all the prisoners were pardoned, and delivered out of the
prison Mamortina.

Yet notwithstanding you ought to know, that if any had sowed sedition among
the people, or had betrayed the Armies, or robbed or Three of offenses never
pardoned in Rome.
done any mischief in their temples: those three offenses were never pardoned
nor excused in Rome.

Even as in Christian Religion, the greatest oath is to swear by God; so
amongst the Romans there was no greater oath then to swear by the God Genius.

And since it was the greatest oath none should swear it, but by the license
of the Senate, and that ought to be betwixt the hands of the priests of the God
Genius. And if perchance such an oath were taken of light occasion, he which
swear it was in danger of his life. For in Rome there was an ancient Law, that
no man should make any solemn oath, but that first they should demand license
of the Senate.

The Romans did not permit that liars nor deceyuers should be credited by
their oaths: neither did they permit them to swear. For they said, that
perjured men do both blaspheme the gods, and deceive men.

The above named Marcus Aurelius was borne the 27. day of April, in Mount
Celio, in Rome. And as by chance they celebrated the Feast of the god Genius,
which was the day of his birth, there came masters offense Iuglers, and common
players, with other loyterers, to walk and solace themselves: For the Romans
in their great feasts occupied themselus all night in offering sacrifices to
the gods, and afterward they consumed all the day in pastimes. Those iuglers
and players showed so much pastime that all those which beheld them were
provoked to laugh, and the Romans (to say the truth) were so earnest in
matters of Pastime, and also in other matters of weight, that in the day of
pastimes no man was sad, and in the time appointed for sadness no man was
merry. So that in public affairs they used all to mourn, or else all to
rejoice. Sinna Catulus says, that this good Emperor was so well beloved, that
when he rejoiced, all rejoiced: and when the Roman The great love of the
Romans to the Emperor.
people made any great feast, he himself was there present, to make it of more
authority, and showed such mirth therein, as if he alone and none other had
rejoiced. For otherwise if the Prince look sadly, no man dare show himself
merry. The Historiographers say of this good Emperor, that in joyful feasts
and triumphs they never saw him less merry, then was requisite for the feast:
nor they ever saw him so merry, that it exceeded the gravity of his person.
For the Prince which in virtue presumes to be excellent, ought neither in
earnest matters to be heavy, nor in things of small importance to show himself
light.

As Princes now adays go environed with men of arms: so did the good
Emperor go accompanied with sage Philosophers. Yea and more then that, which
ought most to be noted, is, that in the days of feasts and pleasures, the
Princes at this present go accompanied with hungry flatterers: but this noble
Emperor went accompanied with wise men. For the Prince that uses himself
with good company, shall alwaie avoid the evil talk of the people.

Sextus Cheronensis says, that a Senator called Fabius Patroclus seeing that
the Emperor Marcus went always to the Senate and Theaters, accompanied and
environed with Sages: said one day to him merrily.

I pray thee (my Lord) tell me, why A question demanded of the Emperor, and
his answer.
thou go not to the Theater as to the Theater, and to the Senate as to the
Senate. For the Senate Sages ought to go to give us good counsel: and to the
Theaters, fools to make us pastime. To this the good Emperor answered: My
friend, I say thou art much deceived. For to the sacred Senate, wherein there
are so many sages, I would lead all the fools to the end they may become
wise: and to the Theaters where all the fools are, I would bring the sages, to
the end to teach them wisdom. Truly this sentence was fit for him that spoke
it.

I admonish princes and great Lords, that in steed to keep company with
fools, flatterers and parasites, they provide to have about them wise and sage
men, in especially if the fools be malicious: for the noble hearts with one
malicious word are more offended, then if they were with a venomous arrow
wounded.

Therefore returning to our matter, as the Emperor was in the feast of the god
Genius, and that with him also were the fourteen Sages (Masters of the prince
Comodus) a iugler more cunning then all the rest, showed sundry tricks, as
commonly such vain loyterers are wont to do, for he that in like vanities
shows most pastime, is of the people best beloved.

As the Emperor Marcus Aurelius was sage: so he set his eyes more for to
behold these fourteen Masters, then he did stay at the lightness of the fools.

And by chance he espied that five of these laughed so inordinatly at the folly
of these fools, that they clapte their hands, they bette their feet, and lost
the gravity of Sages by their inordinate laughter, the which was a very
uncomely thing in such grave persons: for the honest modesty of the body, is a
great witness of the wisdom and gravity of the mind: The lightness and
inconstancy of the Sages seen by the Emperor, and that all the grave Romans
were offended with them, he took it heavily, as well to have brought them
thither, as to have been deceived in electing them.

Howbeit with his wisdom then he helped himself as much as he could, in not
manifesting any grief in his heart; but he dissembled, and made as though he
saw them not: For Sage Princes must needs feel things as men, but they ought
to dissemble them as discreet.

The Emperor presently would not admonish them, nor before any reprove them,
but let the feast pass on, and also a few days after, the which being passed,
the Emperor spoke unto them in secret, not telling them openly, wherein he
showed him self a merciful Prince: for open correction is unjust, where
secret correction may take place.

The things which Marcus Aurelius The wisdom of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius.
said to those five Masters when he put them out of his house, he himself did
write in the third book, and the first Chapter, under the title, Adstultos
Pedagogos. And said that he said unto them these, and such other like words.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to five of the
fourteen Masters which he had chosen for the Education of his son, and how
he sent them from his Palace for that they behaved themselves lightly at the
feast of God Genius.
Friends, my will was not to foresee that which cannot The speech of the
Emperor to the philosophers.
be excused, nor I will not command you that, which I ought not to command:
but I desire that the Gods of their grace do remain with me, and that with
you the same just gods may go, and that likewise from me, and from you, the
unlucky and unfortunate chances may be withdrawn: For the unlucky man were
better to be with the dead, then remain here with the living. Since that now I
had received you, and with great diligence sought you, to the end you should
be tutors to my Son (the Prince Comodus) I protest to the immortal Gods
that I am sorry, and that of your shame I am ashamed, and that of your pain
the greatest part is mine. And it can be no otherwise, for in the world there
should be no friendship so straight, that a man therefore should put his good
name in danger.

The Sages that I have sought, were not provided only to learn the Prince
Comodus: but also to reform all those that lived evil in my Palace. And now I
see the contrary, for where I thought the fools should have been made wise, I
see that those that were wise, are become fools. Know you not that the fine
gold defends his pureness among the burning coals? that the man endued with
wisdom shows himself wise, yea in the midst of many How a wiseman is
discerned from a fool.
fools? for truly as the gold in the fire is proved, so among the lightness of
fools, is the wisdom of the wise discerned.

Do not you know, that the Sage is not known among the Sages, nor the fool
among the fools? but among fools wise men do shine, and that among the sages
fools are darkened: for there the wise shows his wisdom, and the fool
shows his folly. Do not you know that in the sore wounds the Surgian shows
his cunning, and that in the dangerous diseases, the Physician shows his
science? And that in the doubtful battles the Captain shows his stoutness?
and that in the boisterous storms the Master shows his experience? So in
like manner, the Sage man, in the place where there is great joy and solace of
people, ought to show his wisdom and discretion. Do not you know that of a
moderate wit there proceeds a clear understanding, a sharp memory, a
grave person, a quiet mind, a good name, and above all, a temperate tongue:
for he only ought to be called wise, who is discreet in his works, and
resolute in his words. Do not you know that it little avails to have the
tongue expert, the memory lively, the understanding clear to have great
science, to have profound eloquence, a sweet style, and ample experience, if
with all these things you be as masters, and in your works as wicked men:
certainly it is a great dishonor to a virtuous Emperor that he should have for
masters of young Princes those which are Scholars of vain iuglers. Do not you
know, that if all the men of this world are bound to lead a good life, that
those which presume to have science, are much more bound then others are, which
by their eloquence presume to confound the world? For it is a rule certain,
That always evil works take away the credit from good words.

And to the end it seem not unto you that I speak of favor, I will here
bring into your memory an ancient Law of Rome, the which was made in the time
of Cinna, which said An ancient Law among the Romans worthy observation.
We ordain and command, that more grievous punishment be given unto the Sage
for one folly only committed by him openly, then to the simple man for a
greater offense committed secretly.

O just, and very just law, O just and happy Romans, I say unto all those that
together did find and ordain the Law: for the simple man slays but one man
with his sword of wrath; but the sage man kills many by the evil example of
his life: For (according to the saying of the divine Plato) The Princes and
Sage men sin more by the evil examples which they give, then in the fault
and offense they commit.

All the ancient Writers affirm, that the triumphant Rome never began to
decay, until the Senate was replenished with sage serpents, and destitute of
simple doves: for in the end there is nothing that sooner destroys Princes,
then thinking to have about them wise men that should counsel them, when indeed
they are malicious, that seek to deceive them.

What a thing it was in old time to see the policy of Rome before that Silla
and Marius did alter it, before that Catilina and Catullus did troble What Rome
was in ancient time.
it, before that Julius Caesar and Pompeius slaundered it, before that Augustus
and Marcus Antonius destroyed it, before that Tiberius and Caligula did defame
it, and before that Nero and Domitian did corrupt it? For, the most part of
these, although they were valiant, and wanne many Realms: yet notwithstanding
the vices which they brought us, were more then the Realms they wanne us. And
the worste of all is, that all our Kingdoms are lost, and our vices abide
still.

If Liuius and the other Hystoriographers do not deceive us, in old time they
might have seen in the sacred Senate, some Romans so ancient, with hayres
so honorable: others so expert men: others aged, so modest, that it was a
wonder to see the majesty they did represent, and a comfort to hear that
which they said.

I speak not that without tears, which I will say; that instead of those
grave and ancient aged persons, there sprang up other young bablers; the
which are such, and so many, that all the Commonwealth is altered, and Rome
her self slaundered.

For that Land is cursed, and with much misery compassed, where the
governance of the young is so evil, that all wish for the reviving of the
dead. If we credit that which the Rome in ancient times ^^iled, the Mother
of good works.
ancients wrote, we cannot deny, but that Rome was the mother of all good
works: as the ancient Greece, was the beginner of all sciences. So that the
effect of the Greeks was to speak, and the glory of the Romans was to
work. But now, through our woeful destinies, it is all contrary: For Greece
has banished from it all the speakers to Rome, and Rome has banished from it
all the Sages to Greece.

And if it be so (as it is indeed) I had rather be banished to Greece, with the
Sages: then to take part with Rome, among the fools.

By the faith of a Christian I swear unto you (my friends) that I being
young, saw an Orator in Rome which was brought up in the palace of Adrian my
Lord, whose name was Aristonocus: of his body he was of mean stature, lean
of face, and also he was of an unknown country, but he had such a pleasant
tongue, that though he had made an oration in the Senate of three hours long,
there was no man but willingly were desirous to hear him. For in the old
time, if he that made an Oration in the Senate were eloquent in his speech, he
was heard no less, then if god Apollo had spoken himself.

This Philosopher Aristonocus was on the one part so gentle in his speech, and
on the other part so dissolute in his life: that he never spoke word to the
Senate, but it deserved One badde work marres many good speeches.
eternal memory: and out of that place they never saw him do good works,
but it merited grievous punishment. As I have said, though in that time I was
young, yet I remember, that to see this philosopher so lost, all the people did
pity: and the worst of all was, that they never hoped for his amendment;
since daily more and more, he lost his honor. For there is no man, that by is
Eloquence may have such renown, but in the end he may lose it again, by his
evil life.

Now I ask you (my Friends) since you are in the reputation of Sages, which
was better, or to say better, which had been less enuyed? that this
Philosopher had been a simple man, and of good life, then to be (as he was) a
man of high eloquence, and of evil condition? It was impossible, if he had
once heard of me that, which many times I have heard say of him, that he had
not counseled me, yea, and further to do it, he had constrained me, rather to
choose the grave, then to live in Rome with infamy. For he is unworthy to live
amongst men, whose words of all are approved, and his works of all condemned.

The first Dictator in Rome was Largius, and the first Lord of the knights, was
Spurius. And from the time of the first Dictatour, until the time of Sylla and
Julius (which were the first tyrants) were four hundred and fifty years: in
the which space, we never read that any philosopher spoke any vain words nor
yet committed any sclaunderous deeds. And if Rome had done any otherwise, it
had bin unworthy of such praise and estimation as it had: for it What is
required in a sage Philosopher.
is impossible that the people be well governed, if the Sages which govern
them, are in their lives dissolute.

I protest to the immortal Gods, and swear by the faith of a Christian, that
when I consider that which at this present with mine eyes I see: I cannot but
sigh for that is past, and weep for that which is present. That is to say, to
see then how the Armies fought: to see how the young men traveled to be good:
to see how well Princes governed: to see the obedience of the people: and above
all, it was a marvelous thing to see the liberties and favors which the sages
had: and the subjection and small estimation, that the simple people were in.
And now by our evil fortune, we see the contrary in these our woeful times: so
that I cannot tell, whether first I should bewail the virtues and Nobleness of
them that are past, or the vices and infamies of these which are present. For,
we never ought to cease from praising the goodness of the good: nor to cease
from reproving the wickedness of the evil.

Oh that I had been in that glorious world, to see so honorable and ancient
Sages, to govern in pleasure: and for the contrary, what grief and pity,
shame, and dishonor is it, to see now so many dissolute Sages, and so many
young and busy heads, the which (as I have said) do destroy all Rome, and
slander all Italy, and dishonor themselves? For the want of virtue which in
them abounds, and endamageth the Commonwealth: and as the other vices
wherewith they are replenished, corrupts the people in such sort, that the
weal public is more dishonored through the dissolute life of them, then it
is anoyed by the weapons When Rome flourished in virtue.
of their enemies. I say again, and repeat my friends, that the prosperity
of Rome endured 400. and xv. years: in the which time there was a great
majesty of works, and a marvelous simplicity of words: and above all, that
the best that it had, was, that it was rich of the good and virtuous men, and
poor of evil and vicious loyterers.

For in the end, that City cannot be called prosperous, which has in it
many people: but only that which has in it few vices.

Speaking therefore more particularly, the cause that moved me to put you from
me is, because in the day of the great feast of the god Genius, you showed (in
the presence of the Senate) your little wisdom, and your great folly: For so
much as all men did behold more the lightness of your person, then they did the
follyes of the jugglers.

If perchance you showed your folly, to the intent men should think that you
were familiar in my Royal Palace, I tell you, that the error of your thought
was no less then the evil What moved the Emperor to put away the
Philosophers.
example of your work: For no man ought to be so familiar with princes, but
(whether it be in sport or in earnest) he ought to do him reverence.

Since I gave you leave to depart, I know you had rather have to help you in
your journey a little money, the^ many counsels: But I will give you both, that
is to say, money for to bring you to your journeys end, and also councils, to
the end ye may live: and marvel not that I give counsel to them that have an
office to counsel others, for it chances often times that the Physician does
cure the diseases of others, and yet indeed he knows not his own.

Let therefore the last word and counsel be, when you shall be in the
services of Princes and great Lords, that first you labor to be counted honest
rather then wise. That they do choose you rather for quiet men, then for busy
heads, and more for your few words then for your much The counsel of the
Emperor
babbling: for in the palace of Princes, if the wise man be no more then wise
it is a great hap if he be much esteemed, but if he an honest man, he is
beloved, and well taken of all.

CHAP. XXXVII. That Princes and other noble men ought to ouersee the Tutours of
their Children, lest they conceal the secret faults of their Scholars.
We have before rehearsed what conditions, what age, and what gravity Masters
ought to have, which should bring up the children of princes. Now reason would
we should declare, what the counsels should be that princes should give to the
Masters and Tutors of their children, before they ought to give them any
charge. And after that it is meet we declare, what the counsel shall be
which the Master shall give to his Disciple, having the government of him.

For it is impossible there should happen any misfortune, where ripe counsel
is ever present. It shall seem unto those that shall profoundly consider this
matter, that it is a superfluous thing to treat of these things: for either
princes choose the good, or else they choose the evil. If they choose not good
masters, they labor in vain to give them good counsel: for the What is
required in good Tutors.
foolish master is less capable of counsel then the dissolute scholar is of
wholesome admonition. If perchance princes do make elections of good Masters,
then those Masters both for themselves, and also for others ought to minister
good counsels. For to give counsel to the wise man, it is either a superfluous
deed, or else it comes of a presumptuous man. Though it be true, that he
which dare give counsel to the Sage man is presumptuous, I say in like manner,
that the Diamond being set in gold, loses not his virtue, but rather
increases in price and value: I mean, that the wiser a man is, so much the
more he ought to desire to know the opinion of another; certainly, he that
does so, cannot err: For to none his own counsel abounds so much, but that
he needs the counsel and opinion of another.

Though Princes and great Lords do see with their eyes, that they have chose^
good masters and tutors to teach their children, yet they ought not therefore
to be so negligent of themselves, but that sometimes they may give the masters
counsel: for it may be, that the masters be both noble and stout, that they be
ancient, sage, and moderate: but it may be also, that in teaching children they
are not expert: For to masters and tutors of princes, it is not so much
necessary that sciences do abound, as it is shame that experience should want.
When a rich man lets out his farm or manor, to a farmor, he does not only
consider with himself before what rent he shall pay him, but also he
couenanteth with him that he shall keep his grounds well fenced and ditched,
and his houses well repaired. And not contented to receive the third part of
the fruit of his vine: but also he goes twice or thrice in a year to visit
it: And in seeing it he has reason, for in the end the one occupies the
goods as a Tenant, and the other does view the ground as chief Lord. Then if
the father of the family with so great diligence does recommend the trees, and
the ground to the Labourer: how much more ought the Father to recommend his
children to the Masters: for the father giving counsel to the Master is no
other, but to deliver his child to the Treasurer of Science.

Princes and great Lords cannot excuse themselves of an offense, if after that
they have chosen a knight or Gentleman for to be Master, or else a learned and
wise man to be tutour, they are so negligent as if they never had had children,
or did remember that their children ought to be their Heirs: certainly this
thing should not be so lightly passed over. But as a wise man (which is
careful of the honor and profit of his child) he ought to be occupied, as
well in taking heed to the master, as the master ought to be occupied, in
taking heed to the child: For the good fathers ought to know, whether the
master that he has chosen can command, and whether his child will obey.

One of the noblest Princes among the Ancients, was Seuleucus, King of the
Assyrians, and husband of Estrabonica (the daughter of Demetrius, King of
Macedony) a Lady for her beauty in all Greece the most renowned of her fame,
though indeed she was not very fortunate. This is an old disease, that happens
always to beutiful women, that there be many that desire them, and more that
slander them. This King Seuleucus was first married with another woman, of
whom he had a son called Antigonus, 'the which was in love with the second
wife of his Father, that is to say, with the Queen Estrabonica, and was almost
dead for love. The which the father understanding, married his son with her: so
that she that was his stepmother, was his wife; and she that was a fair wife,
was a fair daughter, and he which was his Son, was made his son in law,
and he which was Father, was stepfather.

The Author hereof is Plutarch in his lives, as Sextus Cheronensis says, in
the third book of the sayings of the Greeks.

The king Seuleucus labored diligently to bring up his son Antigonus well,
wherefore he sought him two notable masters: the one a Greek, the other a
Latin. The K: Seuleucus herewith not contented, provided secretly (by the
means of a servant of his named Parthemius) that he should have no other office
in the Palace, but that what the masters taught or did to his son Antigonus
in the day, he should secretly come, and tell him in the night.

But by the diligence of Parthemius, it came to the knowledge of the Tutors,
that they had ouer-seers: for in the end there is nothing accustomablie, but
at the last will be revealed.

Since the two Philosophers knew the secret, one day they said unto the The
Philosophers speech to K. Seleucus.
King Seuleucus these words:

Most mighty Prince Seuleucus, since thou have of trust committed thy Son
Antigonus into our hands, why do thou appointe thy Servant Parthemius as
accuser of our lives? If thou accountest us evil, and him good, thou shall
show us great favor, if thou will discharge us, and commit to him the
^u^tion of thy Son? For we let thee to know, that to men of honor it is
intolerable evil to shame them, and no dishonor to license them. Thou have
appointed Parthemius, to go and dog us, to see what we do, or say openly, and
afterward to make relation unto thee secretly: And the worst is, that by
relation of the simple, we should be condemned, being Sages: For triacle is
not so contrary to poison, as ignorance is to wisdom. And truly (most Noble
Prince) it is a great matter, that daily inquisition is made of man: for there
is no Beard so bare shaven, but it will grow again.

I mean, that there is no man of so honest a life, but if a man make
inquisition, he may find wherewithal to detect.

The K: Seuleucus answered them thus. Consider my Friends, that I know right
well, that neither the authority of the person, nor the good credit of
renown would be stained for any other Friend in this world: and if the rude
men do it not, much less ought the Sages to do it. King Seuleucus his answer.
For there is nothing that men travel for so much in this life, as to leave of
them a good renown after their death. Since you are Sages, and Masters of my
Son, and likewise counselors of my house, it is not meet that you should
with any be offended: For by all good reason he alone ought to be esteemed
in the Palaces of Princes, that will give unto Princes good counsel.

That which I have said to Parthemius, was not for the doubt of your faith,
neither to think any danger in your authority. And if the thing be well
considered, it goes well for you, and not evil for me: and the reason hereof
is, that either you are good, or else you are evil: If you be good, you ought
to be glad that daily your good services be reported unto me,

For the continual beating into the Princes ears of the good services of his
Servants, must needs cause at the last their good services to be well
rewarded.

If you be evil, and in teaching my Son negligent: it is but reason that I
be thereof advertised. For if the Father be deceived in his opinion, the Son
shall receive poison in his doctrine, and also because you shall not undo my
Realm, nor slander me by your evil council.

If the fatal Destinies permit that my Son be evil: I am he that loses
most thereby; for my Realm shall be destroyed, and my renown utterly
abolished, and in the end, my Son shall not enjoy the Heritage. And if all
pass so, you will care little: For you will say you are not in fault since the
child would not receive your doctrine, Wherefore me thinks it not evil done
to ouer-see you, as you ouersee him: For my duty is to see that you be good,
and your duty is to travel, that your Disciples be not evil.

This King Seuleucus, was an honorable man, and died aged (as Plutarche
says, and Patroclus more plainly declares, in the third book of the war
of the Assyrians) and for the contrary his son Antigonus, came to be a
wicked prince in all his doings.

And this a man may well perceive, that if he had not been of his Father so
much corrected, and of the Schoolmaisters so well instructed: without doubt he
would have proved much more wicked then he was. For young men on the one part
being evil inclined, and on the other part evil taught, it is impossible
but in the end they should grow to be most vicious, and defamed.

In my opinion, though children be What profit comes to children by good
counsel.
not evil inclined, yet the fathers thereof ought not to cease to corect them:
for in time to come those that write, will commend the diligence of the
fathers, in correcting the vices of their children.

I have declared this example, to counsel that the Father be not so negligent,
that he should utterly forget to look unto his Son, thinking that now the
Master has charge of him. And of my counsel, that Father ought in this thing
to be so advertised, that if at the first he beheld the Child with two
Eyes: that then he should look unto him with sower eyes. For often times it is
more requisite that the Masters be punished then the Scholars. Though Princes
are not daily informed of the life of the Masters as King Seleucus was: yet at
the least ofttimes they ought to enquire of the state, of the life, and of the
behauior both of the Masters, and also of the children.

And this thing they ought not to do only once, but also they ought to call
the Masters, and counsel them likewise, that they have great respect to the
doctrine of their children, thinking always to give them good counsel, to
show unto their Scholars afterward: for otherwise the master immediately is
discouraged, when he sees the Father to be negligent, and nothing careful
for the bringing up of his children.

Princes in one thing ought to have great respect (that is to say) least the
Masters bear with the secret vices Tutors ought not to bear with the vices of
their scholars.
of children. And he ought not to do thus, but also to call them unto him, to
advise them, to warn them, to pray them, to counsel and command them, that
they have great respect to the bringing up of his children: and further, that
he give them some notable counsel, to the intent that the Masters afterward
may make relation thereof to their scholars: for there is no man so weak, nor
child so tender, but the force which he has to be vicious, is enough (if he
will) to be virtuous.

I would now demand the Masters and Tutors which do govern the children of
noble and virtuous men, what more strength is required to be a glutton then to
be a soberma^? to be a babbler, or to be silent? to be diligent, or to be
negligent? to be honest, then to be dissolute? and as of these few I speak, so
I could recite many others. In this case I will not speak as a man of science,
but as one of experience: and that is, that by the faith of a Christian I
swear, that with less travel of the Master, and more profit of the
scholar, he may be sooner virtuous then vicious. For there is no more
courage required in one to be evil, then strength in an other for to be good,

Also the Masters commonly have an other evil property, worse then this, which
is, they bear with their Scholars in some secret vices when they are young,
from the which they cannot be withdrawn afterward when they are old. For it
chances often times that the good inclination Custom in sinning is hardly to be
reclaimed.
is overcome by evil custom: and certainly the Masters, which in such a case
should be apprehended, ought to be punished as Traitors perjured. For to the
Master it is greater treason, to leave his Disciple among vices, then to
deliver a Fort into the hands of the enemies. And let no man marvel, if I call
such a Master a Traitor, for the one yields the Fort which is but of stones
builded: but the other aduentureth his son, who is of his proper body
begotten.

The cause of all this evil is, that as the children of Princes ought to
enherite Realms, and the children of great Lords hope to enherite the great
estates: so the Masters are more covetous then virtuous. For they suffer their
puples to run at their own wills when they be young, to the end to win
their hearts when they shall be old: so that the extreme covetousness of the
Masters now a days is such, that it causes good men's sons commonly to be
evil and vicious. O Tutors of princes, Schoolemasters ought not to be
covetous.
and Masters of great Lords, I do admonish you, and besides that I counsel
you, that your covetousness deceive you not, thinking you shall be better esteemed
for being clokers of vices, then lovers of virtues. For, there is none (old or
young) so wicked, but knows that good is better then evil.

And further, I may say to you in this case, that often times God permits,
(when those that were children become old) their eyes to be opened, whereby
they know the harm that you have don them, in suffering them to be vicious in
their youth: at what time your duty had been to have corrected their vices.

You thought (as it should seem) by your goods to be honored for your
flattery: but you find the contrary, that you are despised worthily. For it
is the just judgment of GOD, that he that commits evil, shall not escape
without punishment: and he that concealeth the evil committed, shall not live
vndefamed.

Diadumius the Hystoriographer, in the life of Seuerus the xxj. Emperor,
declares; that Apuleius Rufinus, who had been Consul twice, and at that time
was also Tribune of the people (a man who was very aged, and likewise of great
authority throughout Rome) came one day to the Emperor Seuerus, and said
unto him in this sort;

Most inuict Prince, always (Augustus,) know that I had two children, the The
complaint of Apuleius Rufynus to the Emperor Seuerus.
which I committed to a Master, to bring up: and by chance the oldest
increasing in years, and diminishing in virtues, fell in love with a Roman
Lady, the which love came too late to my knowledge: For to such unfortunate
men as I am, the disease is always past remedy, before the danger thereof
comes to our knowledge.

The greatest grief that herein I feel, is, that his Master knew and
concealed the evil, and was not only not a means to remedy it: but also was
the chief worker of Adultery between them to be committed. And my Son made
him an obligation, wherein he bound himself, if he brought him that Roman
Lady, he would give him (after my death) the house and Heritages, which I
have in the gate Salaria, and yet heerewith not contented, but he and my Son
together, robbed me of much money. For love is costly to him that maintains
it, and always the loves of the Children, are chargeable to the Fathers. Judge
you now therefore, Noble Prince, this so heinous and slanderous cause: For it
is too much presumption of the subject to revenge any injury, knowing that the
Lord himself will revenge all wrongs.

When the Emperor Seuerus had understood this so heinous a case: as one that
was both in name and deed severe, commanded good inquisition of the matter to
be had: and that before his presence they should cause to appear, the Father,
the Son, and the Master, to the end each one should allege for his own
right: For in Rome none could be condemned for any offense, unless the
plaintiff had first declared the fault before his presence, and that the
accused should have no time to make his excuse.

The truth and certainty (upon due examination then known,) and the Offenders
confessing the offenses, the Emperor Seuerus gave judgment thus. I command
that this Master be cast The sentence of the Emp: Seuerus.
alive among the beasts of the park Palatine.

For it is but meet that Beasts devour him, which teaches others to live
like beasts: Also I do command, that the Son be utterly disinherited of all
the goods of his Father, and banished the Country, into the Isles of Baleares
and Maiorques.

For the Child which from his youth is vicious, ought justly to be banished
the Country, and be disinherited of his Fathers goods.

This therefore (of the Master, and the Son,) was done by the complainte of
Apuleius Rufynus.

O how unconstant fortune is, and how often, not thinking of it, the thread of
life does break. I say it, because if this Master had not been covetous, the
Father had not been deprived What evil followed covetousness.
of his son, the child had not been banished, the mother had not been
defamed, the common weal had not been slaundered, the master of wild beasts
had not been devoured, neither the Emperor had been so cruel against them,
nor yet their names in Histories, to their infamies, had always continued,

I do not speak this without a cause, to declare by writing that which the
evil do in the World: for wisemen ought more to fear the infamy of the
little pen, then the slander of the babbling tongue. For in the end, the wicked
tongue cannot defame but the living: but the little pen does defame them that
are, that were, and that shall be.

To conclude this, my mind is, that the Master should endeavor himself that
his Scholar should be virtuous, and that he do not despair, though
immediately for his pains he be not rewarded.

For though he be not of the creature, let him be assured that he shall be
of the Creator. For God is so merciful, that he often times taking pity of
the swette of those that be good, chasteneth the unthankful, and takes upon
him to require their services.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of the determination of the Emperor, when he committed his
child to the Tutors, which he had provided for his education.
CInna the Historian in the first book of the times of Comodus declares that
Marcus Aurelius the Emperor chose fourteen Masters learned and wise men, to
teach his son Comodus, of the which he refused five, not for that they were not
wise, but for that they were not honest. And so he kept these nine only which
were both learned in the Sciences, and also expert in bringing up the children
of the Senators, though indeed they were very unlucky in the bringing up of
the Prince Comodus: for this cursed Prince had nine Masters which instructed
him, but he had above nine thousand vices which undid him.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius made five books of declamations, and in the third
book the 6. Chapter under the title Adsapientes Pedagogos, he brought in
these nine Masters, and persuaded them greatly that they should be diligent
and attentive to teach his son Comodus. And in this matter he spoke unto
them many and grave sentences, the words whereof do follow.

The matter is manifest in Rome, The speech of the Emperor to the nine Masters
of his son Comodus.
and no less published through out all Italy, what pains I took to search out
so many Sages to instruct my son Comodus: the which all being examined, I
kept only the wisest and the best, and though in very deed, I have done much,
yet I have not done so much as I am bound.

For Princes in doubtful matters ought not only to demand counsel of all
the good that be alive: but also to take pain to talk with those which are
dead. That is, to read the deeds of the good in their writings: You were
fourteen masters chosen, whereof I have put out five: so that presently you
are but nine, and if indeed you be Wise men, you shall not be offended with
that I have done: for the grief of evil things proceeds of wisdom, but the
admiration of good things comes of small experience. I do not deny, but the
wise men do feel in them passions as men: but in the end, there is no art
nor science that does excuse us from the miseries of men.

But that whereat I marvel is, how it is possible that a wise man should
marvel at any thing in this world: For if the wise man should be astonished at
every thing of the world, it appears that there is little constancy or virtue
in him at all.

Returning therefore to our particular talk, I have taken you to be masters
of my son, and you see, of many I chose a few, to the end that with few my
son should be taught: For as it is the Fathers duty to search out good
masters; so it is the masters duty to be diligent about his Scholar.

The Nurse of my son Comodus gave him suck two years with her teates, at
the gate of Hostia, and his mother Faustine other two years brought him up
wantonly in Capua. Howbeit this was a sufficient excuse, I would as a pitiful
father (if I could) give him correction at the least this twenty years: For I
swear by the immortal gods, that to a Prince that shall be an enheritor, one
years punishment is more worth then twenty years of vain pleasure.

Since the Nurses which gives the Children suck knows little: and since the
Mothers that bare them, do love them much, and since the child peradventure
(as yet) is but of a weak understanding, they are occupied about the things
that are present: considering that chastiseme^t is much more better for him,
then pleasure. But the wise man which has understanding ought to think of
that, that The duty of every good Father to provide good instructors for their
children.
is past, and by much wisdom to provide for that which is to come: For he
cannot be counted wise, tha^ ^^ely in one thing is careful. (...) Comodus was
borne the last (...) of August, in a City by Danuby. (...) shall not forget
the day that the Gods gave him unto me: nor yet this day in the which I commit
him unto you.

Of greater reason I should remember that day wherein I put him to be taught:
then the day which I saw him to be borne. For the Gods gave him me, as I gave
him to you mortal, since he is a man: but you shall restore him again unto
me; and I likewise him to the Gods, as immortal, if he be wise.

What will you I say more unto you, but if you regard that any thing at all
which I say, you will regard much more this, which I will say. When the Gods
determined that I should have a child of my wife, and that my woeful destenies
deserved, that I should have such a child, truly the Gods made me a man in the
spirit: and I begote him a beast, among the beasts in the flesh. But if you
will, you may make him a God among the Gods, by science. For Princes win
infamy, for being fierce and self willed: but they get good renown, for
being wise and pacient. I would you should apply this business well, and
therefore it is necessary that you examine him often. For it is a general rule,
that the precious jewel is little regarded, when he which has it knows not
the value thereof.

I require, that you answer me in this one thing. What did I give unto my
son Comodus, when the Gods gave him me, but frail and mortal flesh? by the
corruption, whereof his life shall end: but you shall give him high doctrine,
whereby he shall always deserve perpetual memory: For the good renown is
not gotten by that the weak flesh does, but by that the high understanding
imagines, and by that the curious heart executes. O if this tender age knew
what I gave to his weak flesh, and if Good tutors compared to natural Fathers.
his dull understanding could come to the true wisdom which you may give him:
he would call you his right fathers, and me but his step father: For he is
the true Father that gives us doctrine to live: and he is but an unjust
stepfather that gives us flesh to die.

Certainly, the natural Fathers of children, are but their own open enemies,
and cruel stepfathers; since we give them such dull understanding, so weak a
memory, a will so froward, life so short, flesh so frail, honor so costly,
health so uncertain, riches so troublesome, prosperity so scarce, and death so
fearful. Finally, we give them a Nature subject to infinite alterations, and
great misfortunes.

Reason would not you should little regard that which I commit unto your
judgment, that is to say, that you have the charge of Comodus my son: For
the thing that Princes ought chiefly to foresee, is to whom they ought to
recommend the government of their children.

To be a Master and Tutour of a Prince in the earth, is to have an office of
the Gods which are in heaven: because he governs him that ought to govern
us: he teaches him that ought to teach us, he chastneth him that ought to
chasten us. Finally, he commands one, that ought to command all.

What will you that I say more unto you. Truly, he that has What is required
in a good instructor of children.
the charge to teach the children of Princes and great Lords, is as the
Governor of the ship, Standard of a Battle, a defense of the peovle, a
guide of the Ways, a father of the Orphans, the hope of Pupils, and a
Treasurer of all: For there is no other true Treasure in the Common wealth, but
the prince which does maintain and keep it in good peace, and perfect justice.

I will tell you furthermore, to the end you shall esteem it more, that when I
do give you my son to teach, I give you more then if I gave you all the
riches of the Realm. For in him that has the reformation of the Childs life,
depends the fame of the Father after that he is dead.

So that the Father has no greater renown, then to see his Child lead an
honest life. I pray the gods that they may be so merciful, and the fatal
destinies so fortunate, that if till this time you have watched to teach the
children of others, that from hence forward you watch to teach this my son
Comodus, which I trust shall be to the comfort of all.

For the thing which is universally good to all, ought for to be preferred
before that which tends but to the profit and commodity of some. You see my
friends, that there is a great difference to teach the children of Princes,
and to teach the children of the people, and the cause hereof is, the greatest
part of those come to schools and universities to learn to speak, but I do
not give Difference between the Teachers of Princes children and others.
you my son Comodus, to the end you should teach him to speak many words,
but that you should learn him to do good works.

For all the glory of the Princes is, that in the works which he does, he be
upright, and in the words that he speaks he be very discreet. After that the
children have spent many years in Schools, after their fathers have spent
much money upon them if perchance the child can dispute in Greek or Latin any
thing at all, though he be light and vicious, the Father thinks his goods
well employed: for in Rome, now a days they esteem an Orator more, which can
naught but babble, then a Philosopher which is virtuous.

O woeful men, that now live in Rome, and much more woeful shall those be,
which hereafter shall succeed: for Rome is no more that Rome, which it was
wont to be, that is to say, that the Fathers in old time sent their children
to Schools and studies to learn them to be silent: and now they send them to
learn to speak too much.

They learned them then to be sage and temperate: and now they learn them to
be dissolute. And the worst of all is, that the Schools where the sage and
patient were wont to be, and from whence issued the good and virtuous works,
are now full of babbling Orators, and none issue out from thence at this present,
but the evil and vicious. So that if the sacred Roman laws are exalted once
in a week with their tongs: they are broken ten times in the day, in their
works.

What will you I say more, since I cannot tell you any thing (without hurting
my mother Rome) but that at this present all the pleasures of vain men, is to
see their children overcome others by disputing: but I let you understand that
all my glory shall be, when my son shall surmount others, not in words, but
in What is required in a Scholar.
silence, not to be troublesome, but to be patient: not in speaking subtle
words, but in doing virtuous works. For the glory of good men is in working
much, and speaking little. Consider my friends, and do not forget it, that
this day I commit my honor unto you, I put into your hands the estate of
Comodus my son, the glory of Rome, the rest of the people, which are my
subjects, the government of Italy, which is our Country, and above all, I
refer unto your discretion, the peace and tranquillity of the whole common
wealth.

Therefore he that has such a charge, by reason ought not to sleep: for as
the wise men say, To great trust is required much diligence. I will say no
more, but that I would my son Comodus should be so well taught, that he should
have the fear of God, and the science of Philosophers, the virtues of the
ancient Romans, the approved counsel of the aged, the courage of the Roman
youth, the constancy of you, which are his Masters.

Finally, I would, that of all the good, he should take the good, as of me he
ought to take the heritage and succession of the Empire; For he is the true
prince, and worthy of the Empire, that with his eyes does behold the great
Signiories he ought to inherit, and does employ his heart how to govern it,
whereby he shall live to the great profit of the Common wealth.

And I protest to the immortal Gods, with whom I hope to go, and to the
goodness of my predecessors whose faith I am bound to keep. I protest to the
Roman laws, the which I did swear to observe in the conquest of Asia,
wherein I am bound my self to continue, and to the friendship of the
Rhodians, the which I have offered my self for to keep, to the enmity of the
Affricanes, the which not for me, but for the oath of my predecessors, I bound
my self to maintain. And I protest unto the vessel of the high Capitol,
where my bones ought to be burnt, that Rome do not complain of me, being
alive, nor that The earefulnes of the Emperor for the Commonwealth.
in the world to come she curse me after my death.

If perchance the prince Comodus my son (by his wicked life) should be
occasion of the loss or hinderance of the Commonwealth.

And though you which are his Masters undo it, for not giving him due
punishment, and he through his wicked government destroy it, yet I discharge
my self by all these protestations that I have made, which shall be witnesses
of my will.

For the Father is bound no more toward his Child, but to banish him from
his pleasures, and to give him virtuous Masters. And if he be good, he shall
be the glory of the Father, the honor of himself, the wealth of you, and the
profit and commodity of the whole Common wealth.

CHAP. XXXIX. The Tutors of Princes and Noble men's children ought to be very
circumspect that their Scholars do not accustom themselves in vices whiles
they are young, and specially they must keep them from four vices,
THe good and expert Surgeons unto great dangerous wounds, do not only apply
medicines and ointments which do resolve and stop: but also minister other
good playsters for to restrain and heal them. And verily they show themselves
in the one no less sage, then in the other expert: for as great diligence
ought to be had to preserve the weak flesh, and to purge the rotten wound, to
the end it may be healed: so likewise the wise Travelers learn diligently the
way before they take upon them any journey; that is to say, if there be any
dangers in the way, either of robbing or slaying, wherein there is any by-path
that goes out of the highway.

Truly, he that in this point is circumspect, is worthy to be counted a Sage
mam: for according to the multitude of the perilles of the world, none can be
assured, unless he know first where the danger is, wherein he may fall. To
show therefore that which by these parables I mean, I say, that the Tutours and
Master of Princes and great Lords, ought not to be contented only to know
what science, what doctrine, and what virtue they ought to show, and teach
their Scholars: but also with greater care and diligence they ought to know
from what euilles or wicked customs they ought to withdraw them: For when the
trees are Children in their youth apt to entertain all vices.
tender and young, it is more necessary to bow them, and cut off the
superfluous branches with knives, then to gather their fruits with baskets.

Those which take upon them to govern Moyles of great price and value, and
those that tame and break horses of a good race, take great pains that such
beasts be light, that they leap well, and be well made to the spur and
bridle: but they take much more pains that they be gentle, familiar and
faithful; and above all, that they have no evil qualities. Then since it is
so, Masters ought diligently to watch (if they be good) that in young Princes
there be no appearance of any notable vices: for the virtues which the young do
learn, does not them so much profit, as one only vice does them hurt, if they
do thereunto consent, knowing that thereby they may be hereafter blamed or
despised: For if any man knew a beast that is wild and stubborn, and not
gentle, and will buy him at a great price: such a one has his head more full
of follies then of wisdom.

Albeit that Masters ought to withdraw their Scholars from many evil
customs, amongst all there are four principals, in any of the which, if the
Prince be defamed, the master which has taught him should deserve great
punishment: For according to the humane Laws and Customs, all the damage and
harm, that the beasts do to the vineyarde the keeper that has charge
thereof, shall (as he is bound) recompense.

First, the Master ought to reform in such sort the tongus of their scholars,
that neither in sport nor in earnest, they permit them to tell lies: for the
greatest fault that is in a good and virtuous man, is to be brief in the
truth, and the greatest villainy, that is in a vicious man, is to be long in
lies. Merula in that 5. book of Caesar's What is required in the master toward
his Scholars.
says, that the first war that Vlpius Traianus made, was against the
Romans, and with no small victory overcame the Emperor Domitian in a battle
which they fought together: for as Nafica said, the pleasures that Rome had to
see many victories were not so great: as the displeasure was which she took,
to see her self once overcome.

The good Vlpius Traianus gave battle to king Cebalus, wherein Cebalus was not
only overcome, but also taken, and afterward brought before the Emperor
Traianus, which said unto him these words. Speak Cebalus, Why did thou
rebel against the Romans, since thou know that the Romans are
invincible: King Cebalus answered him, If the Romans could not be overcome,
how then did I overcome the Emperor Domitian?

Traian the Emperor said unto him again: Thou art greatly deceived (King
Cebalus) to think that when thou ouercamest the Emperor, thou had overcome
the Romans: For when that Romulus founded Rome, the Gods ordained, that though
their Emperor dyed in any battle, yet notwithstanding it is not to be
thought, that the Empire is overcome.

The Historiographers made a great matter of the words that this Vlpius
Traianus spoke: for therein he showed, that the Rom: Empire was invincible.

After that this King Cebalus was dead, and that (for his deserts) he was
deprived: as the Emperor Traian was a merciful Prince, so he provided that a
little child that Cebalus had, should be brought up in his Palace, with
intention, that if the Child became good, they would give him the Realm which
his Father, (through treason) had lost.

For in Rome there was an ancient Law, that all which the Father lost, by
reason the son should recover by his faithful acts An ancient Law in Rome.
.

It chanced that the good Traian taking his pleasure in the garden of Vulcan,
saw the son of King Cebalus and many other young children of Rome, stealing
fruit forth of an Orchard; and it is no wonder, for the Locustes did not so
much harm to the corn, as the children do to the fruits, when they enter
into the Orchards.

When the Emperor afterward demanded him from whence he came? he
answered, from his study hearing Rethorike, but indeed he came from stealing
of fruit. The Emperor Traian was so angry and displeased that the child was a
liar, that he commanded he should utterly be deprived and made void of all
hope, to recover the Realm of his Father.

The Emperor Traian was greatly importuned, as well of strange Ambassadors, as
of his own countrymen that he would change that cruel sentence, For Princes
in a fury do command that, which when they are patient they do undo. The A
cruel sentence upon a liar.
Emperor Traian answered them, if the Father of this child which was King
Cebalus had been a true Prince, he had not lost his life, neither his Realm,
nor had not put me, and the Empire so many times in danger: but since the
Father was a liar, and the son is not true, it were too unjust a thing to
render him the Realm. For to me it should be great reproach, and to our mother
Rome, as much dishonor, that she being the mother of truth, should give
Realms to children being liars,

This was it that Vlpius Traian spoke unto the son of King Cebalus. Marcus
Aurelius the 17. Emperor of Rome had two sons, as before we have rehearsed,
the eldest of the which was called Comodus, and his father procured greatly to
dishen herite him of the Empire: for he would that the second son named
Verissimus should have enherited it: and he did not only determine it, but
also spoke it often times openly: For that thing is with great difficulty
dissembled, that excessiuely is beloved.

By chance an old Senator, and friend of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor one day,
both going out of the Senate house, said unto him: I marvel at thee, most
Excellent Prince Why thou do dishenherite thy son The speech of a Senator
to the Emperor.
which is eldest, to make thine Heir the youngest, knowing that they are both
thy sons, and that the gods have given thee no other but them: For the good
Fathers are bound to chasten their children but they have not license to
dishenherite them.

The Emperor Marcus Aurelius answered him, If thou were a Greek Philosopher,
as thou ort a Roman Citizen, and if thou know tke fathers The Emperors
answer.
love toward the child, thou would not take pity on my son which undoes
the Empire: but thou should have compassion on me his Father, which does
dishenherite him: For the child scarcely knows what he loses, but I that
am his Father do bewail the damage which I do unto him. For in the end,
there is not in the world so cruel a Father, but if his son should be hurt
with the pomell of the sword in the hand, the Father would feel
(incontinently) the dent of his blade at his heart.

In this case I swear unto thee by the immortal Gods, that I do that which I
would not do: and I take that from him which I would not take, For Anthonius
my Lord, and Father in law, gave me the Empire for no other cause, but because
he never found in me any lie: and for this occasion I do deprive my son
from it, for that I never found in him any truth. For it is not meet that the
Empire being given unto me for that I was true: should be left in heritage to
him that is a liar: For in the end it is better that the son do loose the
heritage, then the father should loose his renown.

By these two examples, those How careful masters ought to be to refrain
their scholars from lying and gaming.
which are the tutors and masters of Princes and great Lords may see, how to
be diligent to keep them from lies, whilst they are young, and it ought to be
in such sort, that neither in pastime, neither in earnest answering they should
be suffered to tell a lie: For those that for their pleasures were accustomed
to lie in their youth, will not fail for their profit to lie in their age.

Secondarily, the Tutours and Masters ought to keep their Disciples, that they
be no gamesters, and that they do not accustom themselves in their youth to
be unthrifts: for it is a great token of the decay of the Empire, when the
Prince in his youth is affectionated to play.

Experience shows us, that to play is a vice, as Seneca says, which has
the property of a raging dog: with whom if a man be once bitten, (unless
he has present remedy) forthwith he runs mad, and the disease also
continues with him incurable until the hour of his death:

Players not without a cause are compared to mad dogs: for all those that
use it, hurt their conscience, loose their honor, and consume their substance.

It chances often that in that wherein Masters should be most circumspect,
they for the most part, are most negligent: that is to say, that under the
color of some honest recreation, they agree to their Scholars to use some
pastime, which if therein be contained no commendable exercise, the children
ought not to use it, nor yet the tutors to suffer it: for vice is of such a
property, that if a child in his youth dare play a point, it is to be feared
when he comes to years, he will play his coat.

Waying the matter more deeply, and aggravating this vice, I say further, and
affirm, that when the children of Princes and great Lords play, a man ought
not to make account of that which they may win or loose: for that of all
miseries were most misery, if therefore my pen should forbid them play.
For play ought not to be forbidden to young children, for the money that they
lose; but for the vices which they win thereby, and for the corrupt manners
which therein they do learn.

Octauian, who was the second Emperor of Rome, and one of the fortunatest
Emperors that ever was, among all his virtues was noted of one thing only,
which is, that from his youth he was much given to play at tennis. Of the which
vice he was not only admonished secretly, but also was forbidden it openly.
For as Cicero says in his book of Laws, when the Emperor was noted of any
open vice, they might boldly reprove him in the open Senate.

When Octauian was for this vice reproved by the Senate, they said he spoke
these words: You have reason (O Fathers conscript) in taking from me my
pastime: for it is The speech of the Emperor Octauian.
necessary that the virtues of Princes should be so many, that al men might
praise them, and their vices so few, that no man might reprove them.

These words were notable, and worthy of such a rare and excellent Prince. For
in the end, considering their delicate and wanton bringing up, together with
the liberty that they have: We ought to thank and commend them for the good
works which they do, and most of all to rejoice for the vices which they want.

To our matter therefore, amongst the other wicked vices that children get in
their youth, when they are players: This is one: that they learn to be
thieves and liars: For the money that they play, to demand it their Fathers
they are afraid and ashamed: and of their own proper goods, as yet they have
none in their hands.

Wherefore a man may easily conclude, tha^ if children play, of necessity they
must steal.

The six and thirtieth Emperor of Rome, was Claudius Luganus, a man very
temperate in eating, moderate in apparel, upright in justice, and very
fortunate in chiualry: for he did not only repulse the Goths from Illyria,
but also vanquished in a batrell the Germans, wherein were slain above a
hundred thousand.

This battle was near unto the Lake Verucus, in a place called Luganus, and
for a memory of that great battle and victory, they called him Claudius
Luganus.

For it was a custom among the Romans, that according to the good or evil
works that Princes did, so they were judged, and know by such surnames,
whether it were good or evil.

This Emperor had but one only son, which was a prince of comely personage,
and lively of understanding: but above all things given to play; so that these
good gifts which nature gave him to work in virtue, he misused always in play.
And amongst young men he desired rather to haunt vice, then among the
Philosophers to learn virtue.

And hereat a man ought not to marvel, for all men of great courage (unless
they be compelled to do virtuous acts) do exercise of themselves many
detestable vices.

It chanced when this young prince had no more to play nor gage, he robbed out
of his Fathers chamber a rich Jewel of gold, whereof also his Master was
privy. And when the knowledge thereof came to the Emperors eats, he
immediately dishenherited his son of the Empire, and caused the head of the
Master The sentence of the Emperor upon the Prince and his master.
to be cut off his body, and all those likewise that played with him to be
banished the Country. This act made every man afraid, for correction executed
after a good sort, has this property, that it encourages the good to be
good, and fears the wicked from their wickedness.

Merula in the tenth book of Caesar's (whereas at large he mentions this
matter) says, that the Romans esteemed more the banishment of those players
from Rome, then to have drouen out the Goths from Illyria, and to say the
truth, they had reason: For a prince deserves a greater grown of glory to
banish the vicious from his palace, then he does for chasing the enemies out
of his dominion.

CHAP. XL. Of two other vices, perilous in Youth, which the Masters ought to
keep them from: and that is to be shameless in countenance, and addicted to
wickedness, and the lusts of the Flesh.
Thirdly; Tutours ought to travel, that that the Children which they have in
charge, be not light and worldly: nor that they do consent that they be bold
or shameless. And I say, that they do not suffer them to be light or
unconstant: For of young men unconstant and light, comes oftentimes an old
man, fond, and unthrifty. I say, that they do not suffer them to be too
rash: For of too hardy young men, comes rebellious and seditious persons. I
say that they do not consent they be shameless: For, of the unshamefastness,
comes slanderous persons.

Princes and great Lords ought to have much care and circumspection, that their
Children be brought up in shamefastnes with honesty. For, the What is
required in great men's Children
crown does not give so much glory to a King, nor the head does more set
forth the man, nor the precious jewel more adorn the breast, nor yet the
regal Scepter more become the hand, then shamefastnes with honesty, beautifieth
a young man. For, a man of what estate soever he be, the honesty which he
shows outwardly, does most commonly hyde many secret vices, wherewith he is
endued inwardly.

In the time of the reign of the Emperor Helyus Pertinax, (the nineteenth
Emperor of Rome) two Consulls governed the Commonwealth: the one was named
Verut, and the other Mamillus.

One day they came unto the Emperor, and were humble suitors to his Highness:
beseeching him, that it would please him to accept, and receive their two
children into his service, the eldest of the which passed not as yet twelve
years of age: the which request, after the Emperor had granted, the Fathers
were not negligent to bring them unto him; and being come before his presence,
each of them made an oration, the one in Latin, and the other in Greek.
Wherewith the Emperor was greatly pleased, and all the residue amazed: For at
that time none served the Roman Princes, but he that was very apt to
Chivalry, or very toward in Sciences.

As these two Children in the presence of the Emperor made their orations, the
one of them beheld the Emperor in such sort, that his eyes never went off
him, neither once moving his head, to look down to the earth: and the other
contrary, beheld the earth always, and never lift up his head during his
oration.

Wherewith the Emperor (being a grave man) was so highly pleased with the
demeanours of this Child, that he did not only admit him for to serve him at
his Table, but also he suffered him to enter into his Chamber; and this was a
preferment of great estimation: For Princes did not The reward of shamefastnes.
use to be served at their Tables, nor in their chambers with any, unless they
were of his own Kindred, or ancient Servants.

And concerning the other child, which was his companion, the Emperor
returned again to his father, saying: That when hereafter he should be more
shamefaste, he would receive him into his service. And certainly, the
Emperor had great reason: for good and grave Princes ought not to be served
with light and shameless children.

I would now demand Fathers which love their children very well, and would
they should be worthy: what it avails their children to be fair of
countenance, well disposed of body, lively of spirit, white of skin, to have
yellow hayres, to be eloquent in speech, profound in science: if with all
these graces that nature gives them, they be too bold in that they do, and
shameless in that they say: The Author hereof is Patritius Senensis, in the
first book De Rege et regno.

One of the most fortunate princes was the great Theodosius, the which amongst
all other virtues, had one most singular, the which was, that Commendation of
the Empeperour The odosius.
he was never served in his palace with any young man that was unshamefast,
or seditious nor with any old man which was dishonest: for he said often times
that Princes shall never be well beloved, if they have about them liars or
slaunderers.

This good Emperor spoke as a man of experience, and very sage: for if the
Councellers and familiars of Princes be evil taught and impatient, they
offend many: and if they be liars, they deceive al, and if they be dishonest
they slander the people. And these offenses be not so great unto them that
commit them, as they be unto the Prince which suffers them.

The Emperor Theodose had in his palace two Knights, the one called Ruffinus,
and the other Stelliconus, by whose prudence and wisdom the Common wealth was
ruled and governed. And as Ignatius Baptista says, they two were the Tutours
and Governors of the children of Theodose, whose names were Archadius and
Honorius: for as Seneca says, When good Princes do die, they ought to be
more careful to procure Masters and Tutours which shall teach their children,
then to procure realms or kingdoms for to enrich them.

The two Masters Stelliconus and Ruffinus had in the palace of Theodose each of
them a son, the which were marvelous well taught, and very shamefast: and
for the contrary, the two Princes Honorius and Arcadius were evil mannered,
and not very honest. And therefore the good A memorable thing of the Emperor
Theodosius.
Emperor Theodose took these children often times, and set them at his Table:
and contrary, he would not once behold his own.

Let no man marvel though a Prince of such a gravity, did a thing of so small
importance: for to say the truth, the shamefast children, and well taught are
but robbers of the hearts of other men.

Fourthly, the Tutors and Masters of Princes ought to take good heed, that when
the young princes their Scholars wax great, that they give not themselves
over to the wicked vice of the flesh, so that the sensuality and evil
inclination of the wanton child, ought to be removed by the wisdom of the
chaste Master. For this cursed flesh is of such condition, that if once by
wantonness the wicket be opened, death shall sooner approach, then the gate shall
be shut again.

The trees which budde and cast leaves before the time, our hope is never to
eat of their fruit in season. I mean, that when children haunt the vice of
the flesh, whiles they be young: there is small hope of goodness to be looked
for in them when they be old.

And the elder we see them wax, the more we may be assured of their vices.
And where we see that vice increases, there we may affirm that virtue
diminishes.

Plato in his second book of laws ordayneth and commands, that young men
should not marry before they were 25. years of age, and the The ordinances of
Plato.
young maidens at 20. becaust at that age their fathers abide less dangers in
begetting them, and giving of them life, and the children also which are borne,
have more strength against the assaults of death. Therefore if it be true (as
it is true indeed) I ask now, if to be married and get children (which is the
end of marriage) the Philosophers do not suffer until such time as they be
men: then I say, that Masters ought not to suffer their scholars to haunt the
vices of the flesh when they be children. In this case, the good fathers ought
not alone to commit this matter to their Tutors, but also thereunto to have an
eye themselus. For often times they will say, they have been at their devotions
in the Temples, when in deed they have offered veneriall sacrifice to the
Curtezan.

The vice of the flesh is of such condition, that a man cannot give Young me^
ought to abstain from the vice of the flesh.
himself unto it, without grudge of Conscience, without hurt of his renown,
without loss of his goods, without shortning of his life, and also without
offense to the Commonwealth: for often times, men inclined to such vice, do
rebel, trouble and slander the people. Seneca satisfied me greatly, in the
which he writes in the second book De Clementia to Nero, where he says
these words: If I knew the Gods would pardon me, and also that men would not
hate me: yet I ensure thee for the vileness thereof, I would not sin in the
flesh.

And truly Seneca had reason, for Aristotle says, That all Beasts after the
act of Venerie are sorry, but the Cock alone.

O Governors, and Masters of great Princes and Lords, by the immortal Gods I
swear, which created us, I conjure you, and for that you owe to the Nobility I
desire you that you will bridle with a sharp snafle your charge, and give them
not the reine to follow vices: for if these young children live, they will have
time enough to search, to follow, to attain, and also to cast off those yokes:
for through our frailety, this wicked vice of the flesh, in every place, in all
ages, in every estate, and at all times (be it by reason, or not) is never out
of season. What shall I say to you in this case? if the children pass the
furiousnes of their youth without the bridle, then they be void of the love
of God, they follow the trumpet of sensuality, after the sound whereof they
run headlong into the yoke, and loose that that profits, to win that which
hurts? For in the carnal vices he that has the least of that which
sensuality desires, has much more thereof then reason wills. Considering
that the Masters are negligent, the children bold, their understandings
blinded, and seeing that their appetites do accomplish beastly motions, I ask
now what remains to the child, and what contentation has he of such filth
and naughtiness? Truly, since the fleshly and vicious man is overcome with his
appetite, of those that What inconuenie^ce follows the fleshly minded man.
escape best, I see none other fruit, but that their bodies remain diseased,
and their understanding blinded, their memory dulled, their sense corrupted,
their will hurted, their reason subverted, and their good fame lost, and worst
of all, the flesh remains always flesh.

O how many young men are deceived, thinking that for to satisfy and by once
engaging themselves to vices, that from that time forward they shall cease to
be vicious, the which thing not only does not profit them, but also is very
hurtful unto them: For fire is not quenched with dry wood, but with cold
water.

But O God, what shall we do, since that now a days, the Fathers do as much
esteem their children for being fine, and bold minions among women, as if
they were very profound in science, or hardy in feats of Arms? and that
which is worst, they often times make more of their bastards gotten in adultery,
then of their legitimate child conceived in matrimony.

What shall we say then of mothers? Truly I am ashamed for to A good lesson
for Parents.
speak it, but they should be more ashamed to do it, which is, because they
would not displease their husbands, they hide the wickedness of their
children; they put the children of their harlots to the Nurse, they redeem
their gages, they give them money to play at dice, they reconcile them to their
fathers when they have offended, they borrow them money to redeem them when
they are indebted.

Finally, they are makers of their bodies, and vndoers of their souls. I
speak this insidently, for that the masters would correct the children, but
the Fathers and mothers forbid them. For it little avails for one to prick
the horse with the spur, when he that sits upon him holds him back with
the bridle. Therefore to our matter, what shall we do to remedy this ill in the
young man: which in his flesh is vicious? Truly I see no other remedy, but
with the moist earth to quench the flaming fire, and to keep him from the
occasions of vice.

For in the war, honor, by tarrying is obtained: but in the vice of the
flesh, the victory by flying is obtained.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE DIAL OF PRINCES, WITH THE FAMOVS BOOK OF MARCUS
AURELIUS, WHERE HE entreats of the virtues which Princes ought to have, as
Justice, Peace, and Magnificence.
CHAP. I. How Princes and great Lords ought to travel to administer to all
equal justice.
EGidius Frigulus, one of the most famous and renowned Philosophers of Rome,
said, that that between two of the Zodaicall signs (Leo and Libra) is a
Virgin named Justice: the which in times past dwelled among men in earth, and
after that she was of them neglected, she ascended up to Heaven.

This Philosopher would let us understand, that Justice is so excellent a
virtue, that she passes al men's capacity: since she made heaven her mansion
place, and could find no man in the whole earth that would entertain her in
his house.

During the time they were chaste, gentle, pitiful, patient, embracers The
excellency of virtue.
of virtue, honest and true: Justice remaining in the earth with them: but
since they are converted unto adulterers, tyrants, given to be proud,
impatient, liars, and blasphemers, she determined to forsake them, and to
ascend up into heaven. So that this Philosopher concluded, that for the
wickedness that men commit on earth, Justice has leapt from them into Heaven.

Though this seem to be a Poetical fiction, yet it comprehends in it high
and profound doctrine, the which seems to be very clear, for where we see
justice, there are few thieves, few murderers, few tirants, and few blasphemers.

Finally, I say, that in the house or Common wealth where Justice remains, a
man can not commit vice, and much less, dissemble with the vicious.

Homer desirous to exalt justice, could not tell what to say more, but to call
Kings, the children of the great God Jupiter: and that not for that naturalty
they have, but for the office of justice, which they minister. So that Homer
concludes, that a man ought not to call just Princes other, but the children
of God.

The diuiue Plato, in the fourth book of his commonwealth, says: that the
chiefest gift God gave to men is, that they being (as they be) of such vile
clay, should be governed by justice.

I would to GOD, all those which read this writing, understood right well
that which Plato said: For, if men were not endued with reason, and governed by
justice: amongst all beasts none were so unprofitable.

Let reason be taken from man, wherewith he is endued, and justice whereby he is
governed: then shall men easily perceive in what sort he will lead his life.
He cannot fight as the Elephant, nor defend himself as the Tygre, nor he can
hunte as the Lion, neither labor as the Ox: and that whereby he should profit
(as I think) is, that he should eat Bears and Lions, in his life, as now he
shall be eaten of worms after his death.

All the Poets that invented fictions, all the Orators which made Orations,
How vile man were if Justice were wanting.
all the Philosophers which wrote books, all the Sages which left us their
doctrines, and all the Princes which instituted Laws, meant nothing else, but
to persuade us to think how brief and unprofitable this life is, and how
necessary a thing justice is therein. For the filth and corruption which the
body has without the soul: the self same has the commonwealth without
justice.

We cannot deny but that the Romans have been proud, envious, adulterers,
shameless, and ambicious: but yet with all these faults, they have been
great obseruers of justice. So that if God gave them so many Triumphs, being
laden and environed with so many vices: it was not for the virtues they had,
but for the great justice which they did administer.

Pliny in his second book says, that Democrites affirmed, there were two
gods, which governed the universal world: that is to say: Reward, and
Punishment. Whereby we may gather, that nothing is more necessary, then true
and right justice. For, the one rewards the good, and the other, leaves not
unpunished the evil.

Saint Austine, in the first Book De Ciuitate Dei, says these words: Justice
taken away, what are Realms, but dens of Thieves? Truly he had great
reason. For, if there were no Nothing mor profitable to the Commonwealth then
true lustice.
whips for vagabonds: gags for blasphemers: fines for perjury: fires for
heretics: sword for murderers: galowes for thieves: nor prisons for Rebels:
we may boldly say, there would not be so many Beasts on the mountains, as
there would be thieues in the Commonwealth.

In many things, or in the greatest part of the commonwealth, we see that
Bread, Wine, Corn, Fish, Wool, and other things necessary for the life of the
people wants: but we never saw but malicious men in every place did abound.
Therefore I swear unto you, that it were a good bargain to change all the
wicked men in the commonwealth, for one only poor sheep in the field.

In the Commonwealth we see naught else but whipping daily, beheading,
slaying, drowning, and hanging: but notwithstanding this, the wicked which
remain still, are so many in number, that if all those should be hanged that
deserve it by Justice; a man could hardly find hang-men sufficient, nor
gallows to hang them upon.

Admit according to the variety of realms and provinces, that diverse laws
and customs have been instituted therein: yet for a truth there was never,
nor shall be found any nation or Common wealth in the No nation so barbarous,
but it founded of instice.
world so barbarous, but has been founded of justice: For to affirm that men
can be preserved without justice, is as much as to say, the fish can live
without water. How is it possible that a Common Wealth may live without
justice, since without her cannot be ruled one only person?

Pliny in an Epistle says, that he himselffe having the charge of a province
in Affricke, demanded an old man, and in government expert, what he might do
to administer justice? the aged man answered: Do justice of thy self, if thou will be a minister thereof: For the good judge, with the right yeard of his
own life, ought to measure the whole state of the commonwealth. And he said
further, If thou will be right with men, and clean before God, beware of
presumption in thine office: For the proud and presumptuous Judges oftentimes
do contrary to their words, and also exceed in their deeds.

Pliny also says, that he profited more with the counsel this old man
gave him, then with all that ever he had read in his books. O to how much is
he bound that has taken upon him to administer Justice? For if such a one be
an upright man, he accomplisheth that where unto he is bound: but if such a
one of himself be unjust, justly of God he ought to be punished, and likewise
of men to be accused.

When great Princes command their servants or Subjects any thing, and that
they cannot accomplish them in such sort as they had charge to do: then he
ought to have them excused, those excepted, which govern realms and provinces:
for no man leaves to administer justice, but for want of knowledge or
experience: or else through abundance of affection or malice If a Captain
lose a battle he may excuse himself saying, his men were fled when they should
have assaulted their enemies. A poast may excuse himself for that the waters
were so high. A hunter may say that beast is escaped another way, and others
such like: but a governor of a Common wealth, what excuse can he have that he
does not justice? Conscience ought to burden him, and also he ought to be
ashamed to take upon him the charge of any thing, if he doubt to bring it to
effect: for shamefast faces and haughty courages, either ought to put that in
execution which they take upon them, or else they ought to show a lawful cause
why it took no effect. Let us know what justice is, and then we shall know
what is meet for the administration thereof? The office of a good Judge is to
defend the common wealth, to help the innocent, to aid the simple, to The
office of every Magistrate.
correct the offender, to help the orphans, to do for the poor, to bridle
the ambitious: finally, by justice he ought to give each one his own, and to
dispossess those which hold any thing wrongfully of others.

When a prince commands any man to take the charge of justice, and such one
does not seek it of himself, if perchance he did not in all points uprightly
in the administration thereof, he might have some excuse saying that though he
has accepted it, it was not with intent to err, but because he would obey:
what shall we say of many, which without shame, without knowledge, experience,
and without conscience do procure the office of justice? O if Princes knew what
they give, when they give the charge to any to govern the Common-welth, I
swear unto you, that they were better to give them goods to find them for
twenty years, then for to trust them with the charge of justice twenty days.

What a thing is it to see some men shameless, dishonest great talkers,
gluttons, ambitious, and covetous, What a great thing it is to do justice
uprightly.
the which without any reasonable cause, authority or knowledge, demand of
Princes an office of justice, as if by justice they did demand their own?
Would to God the giver would have an eye to those which in this case do
demand. But what shall we say of those that do solicit them, procure them,
importune them, beseech them, and more then that, even as without shame they
do demand it, so without conscience likewise they buy it? There remains in
this case more as yet, that is, that if those cursed men do not attain to
that which they demand, and if those, (having no conscience) do not give it
them, then they blaspheme and complain of those which are in favor with
princes, as if they had done them great injury.

O what trouble is it to good men to accomplish the desires of the evil: For
the covetous and ambitious persons do but desire that the good me^ had the
like pain in giving that they have in demanding. Many times I have thought
with my self, wherein so many damages of the Commonwealth should consist, such
disobedience, such contrarieties, and so many thefts: and in the end I find,
that all or the most part proceed in that, that they provide for ministers of
justice, not for conscience sake, but for covetousness only.

Admit that it appertain to all to desire and procure justice: yet to none it
appertains so much to procure and defend it, as to the royal person, which
the subjects ought sometime to fear, but princes are bound to minister it
equally to all. It is a great matter that princes be pure in life, and that
their houses be well ordered, to the end that their justice be of credit and
authority: For he which of himself is unjust, gives no hope that another at
his hands should He that in his life is un just, cannot do justice to another.
have justice. He which cannot govern his own house, can evil govern the
commonwealth. Those princes which are true in their words, clean in their
lives, and just in their works, though sometime they err in the administration
of the Common wealth, all excuse them, saying, that they err not thorough the
malice of themselves, but rather through the evil counsel of others. So that
all which the good prince does, they commend, and all the evil that chances,
they excuse.

Plutarch in the second Book of his Common wealth, says, That herein some
Princes differ from others: For the evil Prince is only obeyed, but the good
Prince is obeyed, feared and loved. And moreover, he that is good, makes
heavy things light with his goodness: and the Tyrant that is evil, makes
things which are light to be very heavy through his naugh tinesse.

Happy is the prince which is obeyed: but much more happy is he which is
obeyed, feared and loved: for the body is weary oftentimes to obey: but the
heart is never constrained to love.

Titus the Emperor was once demanded of these two things, that is to say,
Whether to reward the good, or to punish the evil, were for a Prince more
natural? He answered, As natural as both the right and left arm is in a
man: so necessary is reward and punishment in a Prince. But as we help our
selus more with the right arm then with the left: so the Prince ought more to
endeavor himself to reward then to punish. For punishment ought to be by the
hands of a stranger, but reward ought to be with his own proper hands.

When we persuade Princes to be just, and that they do justice, it is not to
be understood, that they should be head murderers, banish rebels, and
seditious persons, hang thieves, and bury felons alive: For such or other like
things, rather appertain to bloody Hangmen, then to pitiful Kings. All the
profit of justice is, in that the Prince be honest of person, careful for his
householde, zealous of the Commonwealth, and not large of his Conscience: For
Princes ought not to be commended for murdering many cruelly: but for
reforming the common wealth lovingly.

Plutarch in the comfortable Oration that he wrote to Appoloni, speaking of
the Laws which Promotheus gave to the Egyptians, amongst the residue he
recited these three that follow.

We ordain and command that Laws given to the Egyptians.
Princes lay not hands on others for any crimes or offenses done unto himself:
For Princes ought not to use their hands to revenge their own injuries: but
rather by justice to defend other that be iniuried.

We ordain and command, that all times when they shall be in their Common
wealth, and not in wars, they shall not wear weapons defensive, and much less
offensive: For good Princes neither ought to be hasty, to the end they may
kill: nor yet to have vices, whereby they may be killed.

We ordain and command, that the Prince do not only not kill with his
hands, but also that do not see them do justice with his eyes.

For how much noble and worthy a thing it is before the presence of a Prince,
that al should receive honor: so slanderous a thing it is that any in his
presence should lose their lives.

CHAP. II. The way that Princes ought to use in choosing their Judges and
Officers in their Countries.
SParthianus in the lives that he wrote of thirty tyrants said, that Ciriacus
the Tirant, had a memorial made of certain of the Senators, whom he would
have killed: and when the thing was discovered they slew him, They found in the
hands of another tyrant named Regilius, after he was dead, a memorial of
those which with his own hands he had deprived of their lives, wherefore they
afterward deprived him of his burial. O how many Judges are there in this
world, that do as much advance themselves of those, whom they have caused to
be whipped, to be slain, to be beheaded, to be hanged, quartered, and slain,
as others do, which have redeemed many captives, or have married Orphans.

Those Judges which according to the order of Laws, customs, and
jurisdictions to punish the evil. I do well allow, but to rejoice and advance
themselves of them whom they have condemned, I utterly abhor: for the What is
required in a virtuous Judge.
virtuous and Christian Judge ought rather to shed tears in the Churches, then
by affection to shed blood of men in the seat of judgment.

And for the confirmation of that which I have said, I affirm, that the good
judge and governor of the commonwealth, ought not to bear in mind, the
murders and slaughters done by others: but to record the iniuryes which they
have done themselves. For in other men's offenses, we ought to be silent, and
for our own iniquities we ought to be penitent.

Judges execute some punishments, which men disallow, and God does aproue: an
other time God condemns them, though the world do allow them: Therefore the
surest thing for Judges is, not to rejoice of their brethren whom they have
corrected, but what they themselves for their own offenses have deserved. In
judging others, by false witness, the Judges many times against their wills do
err: but in their own matters they can never err (unless they will) since
the offenses which we commit are always certain.

Therefore it grieueth me much, that there be some so evil: which being
accused before GOD: would excuse themselves before men: yet their own
breethren with false witnesses, they dare condemn, How circu^spect Princes
ought to be in choosing Judges


Great care ought Princes to have, to examine them whom they will make Judges,
and governors. For the judge which daily makes not an account with his
Conscience in secret, shall commit every hour a thousand evils in the
Commonwealth.

Oh poor and miserable commonwealth; where the governors and judges thereof
do not cast their eyes but unto them whom they ought to chastise, where they
do not think in their hearts, but how they may enrich their Coffers, where
they do not occupy their hands but to take bribes: and do not pass the
time, but in feastings and Bankettes.

And I said not without a cause bankets. For there are too many judges, which
employ their studyes more to get them Friends, to maintain their state
proudly, then for to read good books, and to judge men's causes uprightly.

The judge which never reads: the judge which never studyeth: the judge which
never opens book: the judge which is never in his house: the judge which day
and night robs; How is it possible that he should execute one true justice?

There can be no greater fear in a man, nor slander more great in the
commonwealth, then when the judge (who ought to judge and chastise the offenses
of others,) is always overwhelmed with vices. How Judge, ought to bestow
their time.


The judge which presumes to be good, and will be good, and which desires to
be good: a man should find him no where, unless he be studying in his house,
or else sitting in the place of Justice, etc.

Let not Noble Princes trust upon this, when they provide Judges, and
Governors, saying: That if they find any evil, they will soon cut him off:
For such are so evil, that if they want no means to get to those Offices,
they shall want no cautils, nor corrupt Friends, to suborne them therein.

When Noble Princes, and great lords shall find any judge evil, I counsel
them to avoid him immediately, or that they show themselves not contented with
his doings: For such a one shall forthwith enforce himself to do justice; with
intention, that those of the commonwealth might desire him to be their judge.
Although my pen does reprove these judges which are extreme and cruel, yet my
intention is not to commend the others which are negligent and careless, the
which neither by knowledge can judge, nor with stoutnesse punish. The Judges
which judge and govern, they ought not to be with all so familiar, that all
dare take upon them to ask him: for in this case, if some commend his gentle
conversation, others will blame his partial Justice.

I counsel, admonish, and require Princes, that they content themselus not
only to be true, pitiful, honest, and virtuous, nor yet to be just: but that
it is as well necessary they be obseruers of justice: For let them know, that
there is great difference, between him that is just, and another Difference
between him that is just, and him that administreth justice
that does minister justice: for to the Prince that is good, comes honor to
his person: but from him that ministers justice, comes profit to the
Commonwealth.

Peradventure, it is no wonder to see the Prince that will tell no lie, and to
see his Ministers not to speak one truth? Peradventure I do not think my
self slaundered, to see the Prince temperate in eating, and to see all his
servants distempred both with eating and drinking? peradventure, and it is no
cause to muse upon, to see the Princes chaste and honest, and to see their
servants in flesh, filthy and dissolute? peradventure it is no cause to marvel
to see the Prince just, and to love justice, and that very few of his ministers
do minister it.

The end why all these things are spoken, is to advertise Princes that they be
not so careful to be chaste, sober, true and just, but that they know, whether
their Governors and Judges are corrupted, covetous, greedy, unshamefast, liars
or bribers: for if it touches us much that our Princes be good, so much more
it touches us that the Ministers be not evil. One of the things wherein
Princes ought to provide with their Judges and governors is, that by no means
they suffer their laws and and ancient customs to be broken in their common
wealth, and that in their steads strange customs be not introduced: for the
Comminalty is so variable in that Ancient Laws and customs ought nor to be
broken.
they say, and so light in that they ask that they would daily see a new king,
and hourly change a new law. Pliny in an Epistle that he writes to Escario
says, Optime apud Persius capitalem per legem fuit prohibitum, nouos aut
perigrinos mores inducere. As if he spoke more plainly. Amongst the Persians
it was a Law inviolable, that no man should bring into the Commonwealth any
strange custom: and for such an offense they should pay none other ransom but
the loss of their heads.

As men daily do diminish in virtue (unless by force they be withholden) and
augment in vanity: so they would invent new devises and strange customs,
wherewith men should be decayed, and the Common wealth destroyed: for strange
meats do alter men's stomachs. When those of Creta were ungently used of the
Rhodians, they did not pray to their gods to send them pestilence, war,
famine, or sedition among their enemies: but that they would suffer some evil
manners to be brought in amongst the people. Let not those think that shall
read this, that it was a small curse that those of Creta desired, and that it
was a small revenge which God gave them of their enemies, if he gave them that
which they did require, for from war famine and pestilence, some may escape but
with devises we see all perish. Of many things the historia^s do reprove the
Emperor Sergius Galba, and for one alone they praise him, That he never
consented that in Rome any new law should be made, nor any old custom broken.
And he commanded that those should be grievously punished which brought in any
new law, and he rewarded those which put him in mind of any old custom, the
which be commanded to be observed.

It is a mockery, yea (better to say) a slander, to see that some young Judges
will do that of the Commonwealth, which a Taylour does of a gown: (that is
to say) to turn him, within and without, before and behind, which they ought
not to do, nor the people to consent thereunto. For the Prince does not send
them to make laws, nor to bring in new orders, but to the end that they do
only preserve the commonwealth in their good customs.

Princes ought also to take great care that unto little and great, rich and
poor, they minister equal justice: since there Princes ought not to be partial
in judgment.
is no divine nor human law, that gives them power and authority to
corrupt it: For, if a Prince cannot without reason d pose of his own goods,
much less he can make laws, and sell Justice.

We do not deny a Prince, but that he is lord of Beasts, of Fysh, of
Byrds, of Mines, of Mountains, of servants, and of fields. Finally, that he is
lord of the sea and land: but therefore we will not grant him that he is lord
of justice. For there is none other true Lord of Justice, but GOD: which is
the self same Justice.

When a Prince dies, and makes his will, he says: I bequeath all my Realms
and Seigniories to the Prince my son and legitimate heir, and do leave unto
my second son, such an Estate and dowrey, and to my daughter such Lands, and
to all I recommend Justice, to the end they do observe it, and cause it to be
observed, every one in his own Country.

It is much to note, that the Father does not say, that he leaves unto his
Son Justice, but that he does recommend it unto him: so that the good
Princes ought not to think that they have inherited Justice of their
predecessors, in form of a patrimony, but that God gave it unto the^ of trust

Princes of all things may be called Lords, save only of Justice, whereof they
are but only ministers. We dare boldly say, that the Prince, or Princes the
ministers of God, for Justice.
great Lord, which judges causes not according to the Divine will, but
according to their own affection: we will not call him a just judge, but a
rouing Thief. For the Prince is much worse, which robs God of Justice: then
the Thief which steals the goods from men.

Suetonius Tranquillus recites much wickedness of Domitian: and the greatest of
al was, the poor, the Orphans, and those which could do little, he always
punished: and the other that were rich, and of authority he pardoned. He
compounded with some for money, and with others he dissembled for favor.

Lampridius said of Alexander Seuerus, the 25. Emperor of Rome, that An
excellent saying of Alexander Seuerus.
he never kept in his Court any evil man, or suffered any of his parents to
be vicious. And when he was demanded on a time, why he banished one of his
cousines: since he was young, and a Child? He answered them, which entreated
for him, and alleged. That though he was young and his Cousin: yet Charior
est mihi Respub: as if more plainly he had said, I have none other nearer of
kin to me in my Palace, then the Commonwealth.

O high, and much more higher words, worthy for a truth to be written in
princes hearts; whereby they ought to be advertised, that he said not, I take
for my kin one part of the Commonwealth:

For, the Prince which fears GOD, and desires to be found just, as he will
indifferently be obeyed of al, so ought he equally to administer justice to
all. If they will not credit me nor my pen, let them credit Plato in the books
of his commonwealth: who gives liberty and license to all the Plebeyans, to
the end that every one do love his wife, his children, and his Parents. And
this sort of love he will not that Princes have, to whom he persuades that
first above all things, they love their commonwealth: For if the prince do
love any thing above his Commonwealth, it is impossible but that one day, for
the love of that he will wring Justice.

When Plato gave not license unto Princes not to enlarge their love on The
Laws of Plato, concerning princes.
diverse things, peradventure he would counsel them, least they should do some
wrongs. It chances often times that Princes do omit justice: not for that they
will not administer it, but because they will not be informed of things, which
they ought to remedy, and look unto. And this is inexcusable, where he
hurts his honor, burdeneth his conscience. For, at the day of judgment
(though he be not accused for malice, yet he shall be condemned for
negligence.)

The Prince which is careful to see, and to enquire the damages of his
Realms: we may say that if he does not provide for them, it is because he can
do no more: but he which is negligent to see them, and know them, we cannot say
but if he leave to provide, it is for that he will not.

The Prince or great Lord, which dare take upon him such things; what name or
renown may we give him? I would not we should call such a one father of the
commonwealth: but destroyer of his country. For there can be no tyranny
greater, nor more unequal, then for the physician to ask his duty for his
cure, before he has begun to minister the medicine.

That Princes and great Lords desire to know their revenues, I allow them: but
in that they care not to know the da^mages of their commonwealths, I do
discommend them. For the people pay tribute to their Princes, to the end they
should deliver them from their enemies, and defend them from tyraunts. For the
Judges which will be evil, though I say much, it will profit little: but unto
those which desire to be good, that which is spoken (as I think) suffices:
Notwithstanding that which is spoken I say, that Judges and governors ought to
consider well with themselves, and see if they will be counted for just ministers
or cruel tirants. For, the office of a Tyrant is, to rob the Commonwealth:
and the Office of the good Prince is, to reform the people.

Noble Princes and great Lords, have more business then they think they
have: to see all those which will see them, and to hear all those which will
complain unto them. And the cause hereof is, admit that which the Subject
demands, he presently cannot give: nor that whereof he The difference
between a tyrant and a good prince
complains, he cannot remedy; yet notwithstanding they remain after a sort
contented: saying, that they have now showed all their complaynts and injuries
unto their princes. For, the wounded hearts oftentimes utter their inward pains
which they feel, without any hope to receive comfort of that which they
desire.

Plutarche in his Apothegmes says: that a poor and aged woman, desired king
Philippe of Macedonie, (which was father of king Alexander the great) that he
would hear her with justice: and since she was very importunate upon him, K:
Philip said on a day unto her. I pray thee woman be contented: I swear by
the gods, I have no leisure to hear thy complaint. The old woman answered the
king: Behold, K: Philippe, if thou have not time to hear me with justice,
resign thy Kingdom, and another shall govern thy Commonwealth.

CHAP. III. Of an oration which a villain dwelling near to the river of
Danuby, maae before the Senators of Rome, concerning the tyrannies and
oppressions which their officers used in his country, And the Oration is
divided into three Chapters.
IN the tenth year of the reign of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, A great
pestilence in Rome in the time of M: Aurelius
there happened in Rome a general pestilence: the which being so outrageous,
the good Emperor went into Campaigne, which at time was very healthful, and
without diseases, though it was very dry, and wanted much of that which was
necessary: yet notwithstanding the good Emperor was there with all the
principal Senators of Rome: for in the time of pestilence men do not seek
where they should rejoice their persons, but where they may save their lives.

Marcus Aurelius being there in Campagnia was sore vexed with a Fener: and as
his condition was always to be amongst sages: so at that time his sickness
required to be visited by Physicians. The resort that he had in his Palace was
very great, as well of Philosophers for to teach, as of Physicians for to
dispute: For this prince ordered his life in such sort, that in his absence
things touching the war were well provided: and in his presence was nothing
but matters of knowledge argued.

It chanced one day as Marcus Aurelius was environed with Senators,
philosophers, physicians, and other Sage men, a question was moved among them,
how greatly Rome was changed, not only in buildings which almost were utterly
decayed: but also in manners, which were wholly corrupted: the cause of this
evil grew, for that Rome was full of flatterers and destitute of those which
durst say the truth.

These, and such other like words heard, the Emperor took up his hand and
blessed him, and declared unto them a notable example, saying: In the first
year that I was Consul, there came a poor villain from the river of Danuby,
to ask justice of the Senate against a Censor which did sore oppress the
people, and in deed he did so well propound his complaint, and declare the
folly and injuries, which the Judges did in his Country, that I doubt whether
Marcus Cicero could utter it better with his tongue, or the renowned Homer have
written it more eloquently with his pen.

This villain had a small face, great The description of the villain.
lips, hollow eyes, his color burnt, curled hair, bare-headed, his shoes of
Porpyge skin, his coat of goats skin, his girdle of bul-rushes, a long
beard and thick, his eye brows covered his eyes, the stomach and the neck
covered with skins, heared as a Bear, and a clubbe in his hand.

Without doubt, when I saw him enter into the Senate, I imagined it had been a
beast in form of a man: and after I heard that which he said, I judged him to
be a God (if there be Gods among men.) For it was a fearful thing to behold
his person, it was no less monstrous to hear his words.

At that time there was great prease at the door of the Senate, of many and
diverse persons, for to solicit the affairs of their Provinces: yet
notwithstanding this villain spoke before the others for two causes. The one,
for the men were desirous to hear what so monstrous a man would say: The
other, because the Senators had this custom, that the complaints of the poor
should be heard before the requests of the rich. Wherefore this villain
afterward in the midst of the Senate, began to tell his tale, and the
cause of his coming thither, in the which he showed himself no less bold
in words, then he was in his attire strange, and said unto them in this sort.
The oration of the villain to the Senators of Rome.


O Fathers Conscript, and happy people, I Mileno a Ploughman, dwelling near
unto the river of Danube, do salute you worthy Senators of Rome, which are
conuented here in this Senate; and I beseech the Immortal Gods my tongue this
day so to govern, that I may say that which it convenient for my Country, and
that they help you others to govern well the Commonwealth: for without the
help of God, we can neither learn the good, nor avoid the evil. The fatal
Destenies permitting it, and our wrathful Gods forsaking us, our mishappe was
such, and to you others fortune showed herself so favorable, that the proud
Captains of Rome, by force of arms took our Country of Germany. And I say
not without a cause, that at that time the Gods were displeased with us: for if
we Germans had appeased our Gods, ye Romans might well have excused your
selves for ouercomming of us.

Great is your glory, O Romans, for the victories you have had, and triumphs
which of many Realms you have conquered: but notwithstanding greater shall
your infamy be in the world to come, for the cruelties which you have
committed: for I let you know, if you do not know it, that when the wicked
went before the triumphant chariots saying, Live, live, invincible Rome: On the
other side, the poor Captives went saying in their hearts, Justice, justice.
My predecessors enhabited by the river of Danuby, for when the dry earth
annoyed them, they came to recreat themselves in the fresh water, and if
perchance the unconstant water did annoy them, then they would return again to
the maine land. And as the appetites and conditions of men are variable, so
there is a time to fly from the land, to refresh our selves by the water.

And time also when we are annoyed with the water to return again to the
land. But how shall I speak Romans, that which I would speak? your
covetousness of taking other men's goods has been so extreme, and your pride
of commanding strange Counties has been so disordinate, that neither the sea
can suffice you in the deepenesse thereof, neither the land assure us in the
fields of the same.

Oh how great comfort it is for the troubled men to think and be assured that
there are just Gods, the which will do justice on the unjust: For if the
oppressed men thought themselves not assured, that the gods would wreake their
injury of their enemies, they with their own hands would destroy themselves.
The end why I speak this is, for so much as I hope in the just Gods, that as
you others without reason have cast us out of ourhouses, so by reason shall
others come after us, and cast you others out of Italy, and Rome both. There in
my Country of Germany, we take it for a rule infallible, that he which by
force takes the good of another, by reason ought to lose his own proper right.

And I hope in the Gods that that which we have for a proverb in Germany, you
shall have for experience here in Rome. By the gross words I speak, and by
the strange apparel which I wear, you may well imagine that I am some rude
villain or barbarian borne: but yet notwithstanding, I want not reason to
know, who is just and righteous in holding his own: and who is a tyrant in
possessing of others. For the rude men of my profession, though in good style
they cannot declare that which they would utter: yet notwithstanding, We are
not ignorant of that which ought to be allowed for good; nor which ought to be
condemned for evil.

I would say therefore in this case, that that which the evil with all their
tyranie have gathered in many days, the Gods shall take from them in one
hour: and contrariwise, all that which the good shall loose in many years,
the Gods will restore it them in one minute: For speaking the truth, the evil
to prosper in riches, is not for that the gods will it, but that they do
suffer it, and though at this hour we complain, dissembling we suffer much,
but the time shall come that will pay for all.

Believe me in one thing, O Romans, and doubt not therein, That of the
unlawful gains of the Father, follows after the just undoing of their
children.

Many oftentimes do marvel in my Country, what the cause is, that the gods
do not take from the wicked that which they win, immediately as soon as
they win it, and as I think the reason hereof is, for the dissembling with
them by little and little they gather together diverse things, and afterward
when they think least thereon, it is taken from them all at once: for the just
judgment of the Gods is, that since without reason they have done evil to
others, others by reason should come in like manner which do evil unto them.
It is vpossible that the valiant and Sage man, who in his deeds presumes to
be wise, should take any taste in in any other man's good: for if he did, he
would never content himself with any thing, since he has not a conscience in
that which is evil gotten. I know not Romans, whether you understand me, but
because you shall understand me better, I say, that I marvel, and I should
rather wonder, how the man keeping another man's goods, can sleep, or rest one
hour, since he knows he has done injury to the gods, slaundered his
neighbors, pleased his enemies, lost his friends, and endamaged those that he
robbed; and worst of all, that he has put his person in peril.

And I say that he has put his person in peril: for the day that any man
determines to take my goods, he will also the same day (if He that takes
away another man's goods, puts his life also in peril.
he can) take my life. It is an odious thing to the Gods, and very slanderous
among men, that men should have so much (through their fleshly desires) virtue
bound, and the reine of their evil works so much at liberty, that another man's
misery seems to him riches, and that his own riches seems to himself
poverty. I care not whether he be Greek, Barbarian Roman, present or absent,
I say, and affirm that he is, and shall be cursed of the Gods, and hated of
men; which without consideration will change his good fame into shame, justice
into wrong, right into tyranny, truth into lies, the certain for the
doubtful, hating his own proper, and sighing for that of other men's. He that
has his chief intention to gather goods for his children, and seeks not a
good name among the renowned: it is just that such a one do not only loose the
goods which he has gathered, but also that without good name he remain
shameful among the wicked.

Since you other Romans naturally are proud, and pride does blind you, you
think your selves happy, that for having so much as you have more then others,
that therefore you should be more honored then all, the which truly is not so:
For if presently you will not open your eyes, and confess your own errors,
you shall see, that whereas you auant your selves to be Lords of strange
Countries, you shall find yourselus made slaves with your own proper goods.

Gather as much as you will, let them do all you do command them: yet as I
think, it little avails to have Plebeians houses with goods, and
contrariwise the hearts to be possessed with covetousness: for the riches
which are gotten with covetousness, and are kept with. Avarice, do take away
the good name from the possessor, and do nothing avail to maintain his life.

It cannot be suffered many days, and much less hid many years, that one
man should be counted both for rich among the rich, and for honored among the
honorable: for it is impossible that he which is a great lover of temporal
goods, should be a friend of his good name. O if the covetous men were of their
own honor as greedy, as they are of the goods of another desirous: I swear
unto you by the immortal Gods, that the little worm or moth of covetousness
would not gnaw the rest of their life, nor the canker of infamy should destroy
their good name after their death.

Hearken ye Romans, hearken what I will say, and I beseech the gods that you
may understand it: for other wise I should loose my labor, and ye others
should take no fruit of my words. I see that all the World hates pride, and
yet there is none that will follow humanity. Every man Every man given to one
sin or other.
condemns adultery, and yet I see no man that lives chaste. Every man
curses excess, and I see no man live temperately. Every man prayseth
patience, and I see no man that will suffer. Every man blames sloth, and I see
no man but those that are idle. Every man blames avarice, and yet every man
robs.

One thing, I say, and not without tears in this Senate, openly I do declare
it, which is, that with the tongue every man prayseth virtue, and yet they
themselves with all their lims are servants unto vices.

Do not think that I say this only for the Romans which be in Illyria, but
for the Senators which I see here in the Senate.

All you Romans in your devises about your Arms, have this for your word,
Romanorum est debellare superbos, et parcere subiectos. Truly you should
better have said, Romanorum est spoliare innocents, et reddere subiectos: For
you Romans are but destroyers of the people that be peaceable, and robbers of
the swette and labors of strangers.

CHAP. IIII. The villain argues against the Romans, which without cause or
reason conquered their Country, and proved manifestly that they through
offending of their Gods, were vanquished of the Romans.
I Ask ye Romans, what occasion ye The villain continues his Oration
wherein he lays open the tyranny and oppression of the Romans against the
Germans.
have, that are brought up nigh to the river of Tiber, against us that live in
peace, nigh to the river of Danuby. Peradventure you have seen us friends to
your foes, or else we have showed our selves your enemies? peradventure you
have heard say, that forsaking our own land, we should go conquer foreign
realms? peradventure you have been advertised, that we rebelling against our
own Lords should become obedient to the cruel Barbarians? peradventure ye have
sent us some Ambassador to desire us to be your friends, or else there came
some from us to Rome, to defy you as our enemies? peradventure some King dyed
in our realm, which by his Testament made you heirs unto our Realm? whereby
you claim your Title, and seek to make us your subjects? peradventure by some
ancient law or custom ye have found that the noble and worthy Germany, of
necessity is subject to the proud people of Rome? peradventure we have
destroyed your Armies, we have wasted your fields, sacked your Cities, spoiled
your subjects, or favored your enemies? so that to revenge these injuries ye
should destroy our land: If we had bin your neighbors, or you ours, it had
been no marvel though one should have destroyed the other. For it chances
oftentimes, that through controversy of a little piece of ground, tedious
wars between people arise.

Of a truth none of these things which I have named, has chanced between ye
Romans and us Germains. For in Germany we felt your tyranny, as soon as we
heard of your renown.

If ye be grieved with that I have said, I pray you be not offended with
that I will say, which is, that the name of Romans, and the cruelty of tyrants
arrived together in one day upon our people. And what more to say, I know not
Romans, of the little care the Gods do take, and of the great audacitie that
men have: For I see that he which possesses much, does oppress him which
has but little, and he that has but little, wayeth not him that has much.

So disordered covetousness strives with secret malice, and secret malice
gives place to open theft and open robbery no man resists, and thereof
comes, that the covetousness of a malicious man is accomplished, to the
prejudice of a whole state.

Hearken ye Romans, hearken, by the Immortal Gods I do conjure you, give
care to that I will say, which is, consider well what you have done: for the
good words be in vain, or else men must have an end, the world in time must
needs fall, or else the world shall be no world. Fortune must needs make sure
the pin of the wheel, or else that shall be seen which never was seen,
which is, that which in eight years ye have won, ye shall within eight
days lose: For nothing can be more just, since ye by force have made your
selves tyrants: then the Gods by justice should make you slaves. And do not
think you Romans though you have subdued Germany, and be Lords thereof, that
it was by any warlike industry: for ye are no more warlike, no more courageous,
nor more hardy, ne yet more valiant then we Germans: but since through our
offenses we have provoked the Gods to wrath, they for the punishment of our
disordinate vices ordained, that ye should be a cruel plague and scourge to our
persons, Do not take your selves to be strong, neither repute us to be so
weak, that if the Gods at that time had favored the one part, as much as the
other: it might perchance have happened, ye should not have enjoyed the
spoil. For to say the truth, ye wanne not the victory through the force of
weapons that you brought from Rome, but through the infinite vices which ye
found in Germany.

Therefore since we were not overcome for being cowards, neither for being
weak, nor yet for being fearful, but only for being wicked, and not having
the Gods favorable unto us: what hope ye Romans to become of you, being as
you are vicious, and having the Gods angry with you?

Do nor think Romans to be the more victorious, for that ye assemble great
Armies, or that ye abound in treasures, neither for that you have greater Gods
in your aid, or that ye build greater temples, nor yet for that ye offer such
great sacrifices: For I let you know, if you do not know it, that no man is in
more favor with the Gods, then he which is at peace with virtue.

If the triumphs of the Conquerours consists in nothing else but in subtle
wits, politic captains, valiant Soldiers, and great Armies, without doubt,
it would little avail to carry all this to the War, since afterward we
see by experience, Man may give the battle, but God must give the victory.
that men can do no more but give the battles, and the Gods themselves must
give the victories.

If I be not deceived, I think that for our offenses we have sufficiently
satisfied the Gods wrath. But truly I believe that the cruelties which ye
have done unto us, and the unthankfulness which you have showed the Gods
(though as yet ye have not paid it) yet once ye shall pay it.

And hereafter it may chance, that as presently ye count us for slaves: so in
time to come ye shall acknowledge us for Lords. Since the traveling by the
way, I have seen the high mountains, diverse Provinces, sundry Nations,
Countries so savage, people so barbarous, such and so many miles as Germany is
distant from Rome.

I muse what fond toye came into the Romans heads, to send to conquer Germany?
If covetousness of treasures caused it, I am sure they spent more money to
conquer it, and at this present do spend to keep it, then the whole revenues
of Germany amounts, or may amount in many years: and perchance they may
lose it, before they recover that they spent to conquer it.

And if ye say unto me Romans, that Germany is not conquered of Rome for
ever, but that only Rome should have the glory to be Mistress of Germany:
This also, I say is vanity and folly: For little avails it have the Forts
and Castles of the people, when the hearts of the Inhabitants are absent.

If ye say, that therefore ye conquered Germany, to amplify and enlarge the
limits and bounds of Rome: also me thinks this is a foolish enterprise. For
it is not the point of wise and valiant men to enlarge their dominions, and
diminish their honors. If ye say ye sent to conquer us, to the end we should
not be barbarous, nor live like Tyrants, but that you would we should live
after your good laws and customs: if it be so, I am well content. But how is
it possible ye should give laws to strangers, when ye break the Laws of
your own predecessors? Great shame ought they to have which take upon them to
correct others, when they have more need to be corrected themselves: For the
blind man ought not to take upon him to lead the lame. If this be true, (as
presently it is) what reason, or occasion had proud Rome, to take and conquer
the innocent Germans? Let us all go therefore to rob, to kill, to conquer,
and to spoil, since we see the world so corrupt, and so far from the love of
God, that every man (as we may perceive) takes what he can, kills whom he
will, and that which worste of all is, that neither those which govern will
remedy so many evils as are committed, neither those which are offended dare
complain.

Ye chief judges at this day are so hard to be entreated, ye take so little
Injury done where justice is neglected
regard unto the poor oppressed: that they think it more quiet, to remain in
trouble at home, then to come and put up their complaints before you, here at
Rome.

And the cause hereof is, that there in their Country they have but one which
pursues them: and here in this Senate they are evil willed of all, and that
is; because he which complains is poor, and the other which is complained on
is rich.

Therefore since Fortune would it, and the fatal Destinies permit it, that the
proud Rome should be mistress of our Germany, it is but reason ye should
keep us in justice, and maintain us in peace. But you do not so, but rather
those which come thither, do take from us our goods: and ye that are here,
do rob us of our good name, saying: That since we are a people without law:
without reason: and without a king, (as unknown barbarous) ye may take us for
slaves.

In this case ye Romans are greatly deceived: For me thinks with reason, ye
cannot call us without reason: since we being such as we are, and as the Gods
created us, remain in our proper countries, without desiring to seek or
invade foreign Realms. For with more reason we might say, that ye were men
without reason: being not contented with the sweet and fertile Italy; but
through shedding of blood, you should desire to conquer all the earth. In that
ye say we deserve to be slaves, because we have no Prince to command us, nor
Senate to: govern us, nor Armey to defend us to this I will answer:

That since we had no enemies, we needed no Armeys: and since every man is
contented with his lotte and Fortune, we had no necessity of a proud Senate
to govern us, and we being as we are all equal, it need not An Apology of
the viilaine.
we should consent to have any Princes amongst us. For the office of princes
is, to suppress tyrants, and to maintain their people in peace.

If ye say further, that we have not in our Country a Commonwealth, nor
policy, but that we live as the beasts in the Mountains: in this also you
have but small reason. For we in our Country did suffer no liars, neither
rebels, nor seditious persons: nor men that brought us (from strange Countries)
any apparel for to be vicious: so that since in apparel we were honest, and in
meat very temperate, we needed no better behavior. For though in our
country there are no merchaunts of Carthage, oils of Mauritania, merchants of
Tire, steel of Cantabria, Odours of Asia, Gold of Spain, Silver of Britain,
Amber of Sidonie, Silk of Damasco, Corn of Scicill, Wine of Candie, Purple of
Arabia: yet for all this we are not brutish, neither cease for to have a
Commonwealth.

For these and such other the like things, give more occasion to stir up many
vices, then for virtuous men to live according unto virtue. Blessed and happy
is the Commonwealth, not where great riches abounds, but where virtues are
highly commended: not where many light and angry men resort, but where the
patient are resident: therefore it follows, that of the Common wealth of Rome
for being rich, we should have pity: and of the Commonwealth of Germany for
being poor, ye ought not to have envy.

Would to God that the contentation we have with our poverty, ye others had
the same with your riches. For then neither ye had robbed us of our Countries,
nor we had not come hither now to complain in Rome of your tyranny.

I see Romans, that the one differs much from the other: For ye others,
though ye hear our oppressions, yet thereby you lose not your pastime: but
we others can never dry the tears of our eyes, nor ceale to bewail our
infinite misfortunes.

CHAP. V. The Villain concludes his Oration against the Judges, which
minister not justice, and declares how prejudicial such wicked men are unto
the public weal.
Ye would think I have said that I Conclusion of the villains speech wherein
he reproves the Roman Magistrates.
can say, but certainly it is not so: For there remains many things to
speak, which to hear ye will be astonished, yet be ye assured that to speak
them I will not be afraid, since you others in doing them are not ashamed. For
open offense deserves not secret correction. I marvel much at ye Romans,
what ye meant to send us (as you did) such ignorant Judges, the which, by the
immortal God I swear, can neither declare us your Laws, and much less they
can understand ours. And the cause of all this evil is, that ye sent not
those which be best able to minister to us justice in Germany, but those which
have best friends with you in Rome, presuppose that to those of the Senate,
ye give the office of Censor-ship, more for importunity then for ability. It
is little that I can say here, in respect they dare do there: That which ye
command them here, I know not: but of the which they do there: I am not
ignorant, which is; Your Judges take al bribes that are brought unto them
openly: and they powle and shave as much as they can secretly. They grievously
punish the offenses of the poor, and dissemble with the faults of the rich:
they consent to many evils, to have occasion to commit greater thefts, they
forget the government of the people to take their pleasure in vice. And being
there to mittigate sclaunders, they are those which are most sclaunderous: and
without goods, it avails to man to ask justice. And finally, under the
color that they be Judges of Rome, they fear not to rob all the land of
Germany: What means this ye Romans: shall your pride never have end in
co^ma^ding, nor your couetise in robbing Say unto us what ye will in words, but
oppress us not so in deeds. If you do it for our children, load them with
yrons, and make them slaves. For ye cannot charge them with more then they are
able to carry: but of commandments and tributs ye give us more the^ we are
either able to carry or suffer. If you do it for our goods, go thither and
take them all. For in our country we do not use as ye Romans do, nor have
such conditions as ye have here in Rome, For ye desire to live poor, that ye
may die rich. If ye say that we will rebel, I marvel what ye should mean to
think so, since ye have spoiled us, robbed us, and handled us ill. Assure me
ye Romans, that ye will not unpeople us, and I will assure you we will not
rebel. If our service do not content ye, strike off our heads, as to the
evil men. For (to tell ye the truth) the knife shall not be so fearful to our
necks, as your tyrannies be abhorred The tyranny of the Romans to the
Germans.
in our hearts.

Do ye know what you have done ye Romans, ye have caused us of that
miserable realm to swear, neither to dwell with our wives, and to sley our
own children, rather then to leave them in the hands of so wicked and cruel
tirants as ye be. As desperate men we have determined to suffer, and endure
the beastly motions of the flesh during the time we have to live, to the end
we will not get our wives with child. For we had rather live chaste 20 or 30.
years, then to leave our children perpetual slaves. If it be true that the
children must endure, that which the miserable fathers do suffer? It is not
only good to sley them, but also it should be better, not to agree they should
be borne. Ye ought not to do this Romans, for the la^d taken by force ought
the better to be governed: to the intent that the miserable captives seeing
justice duly administered presently, should thereby forget the tyranny passed,
and content themselves with per petuall servitude. And since it is true, that we
are come to complain of the oppressions which your Officers do, here upon the
river of Danuby, peradnenture ye which are of the Senate, will hear us: and
though you are now determined to hear us, yet you are slow to remedy us: so
that before ye began to reform an evil custom, the whole commonwealth is
already undone. I will tell you of some things thereof, to the intent you may know
the^, and then to reform them. If there come a right poor man to demand
Justice, having no money to give, nor wine to present, nor Oil to promise, not
friends to help him, nor revenues to succor him, and maintain him in
expenses: after he has complained, they satisfy him with words, saying unto
him, that speedily he shall have Justice.

What will you I should say, but that in the mean time, they make him spend
that little which he has, and give him nothing though he demand much, they
give him vain hope, and they make him waste the best of his life, every one of
them does promise him favor, and afterward they all lay hands upon him to
oppress him. The most of them say his right is good, and afterward they give
sentence against him, so that the miserable person that came to complain of
one, returns home complaining of all, cursing his cruel destinies, and
crying out to the just and merciful Gods for reuengement. It chances also
that often times there comes to complain here in the Senate, some flattering
man more for malice, then by reason of right or justice: and ye Senators
crediting his double words and his fained tears, immediately ordain a
Censor, to go, and give audience on their complaints who being gone and
returned, ye seek more to remedy, and give ear to the complaints of the
judge, then to the slanders which were among the people. I will declare unto
you my self, O ye Romans, and thereby you shall see how they pass their life
in my country. I live by gathering akorns in the winter, and reaping corn in
the summer, sometime I fish as well of necessity, as of pleasure, so that I
pass almost all my life alone in the fields or mountains. And if you know not
why, hear me, and I will show you. I see such tyranny in your judges, and such
robberies as they commit among the poor people, and there are such dissentions
in the realm, such injuries committed therein, the poor common wealth is so
spoiled, there are so few that have desire to do good, and also there are so
few that hope for remedy in the Senate, that I am determined (as most unhappy)
to banish my self out of mine own house, and to separate my self from my
sweet company, to the end my eyes should not behold so miserable a change: for
I had rather wander solitary in the fields, then to see my neighbors hourly
to lament in the streets. For there the cruel beasts do not offend me,
unless I do assault them: but the cursed men though I do serve them, yet daily
they vex me: without doubt it is a marvelous pain to suffer an overthrow of
fortune: but it is a greater torment when one feels it without remedy. And
yet my greatest grief is, when my loss may be remedied, and he which may,
will not: and he that will, cannot by any means remedy it. O cruel Romans, ye
feel nothing that we feel, specially I that speak it, ye shall see how I
feel it, only to reduce it to memory, my tongue will wax weary, my ioints
shiuer, my heart trembles, and my flesh consumes. What a woeful thing is it, in
my country to see it, with my eyes, to hear Here the villain lays open the
miserable estate of his Country.
with my ears, and to feel it with my hands? Truly the griefs which woeful
Germany suffers are such, and so many: that I believe yet the merciful gods
will have pity upon us. I desire you not to think slander of my words: but I
desire you that you would understand well what I say: for you imagining (as you
presume to be discreet) shall see right well the troubles that come to us from
men, and among men, with me^ and by the hands of men: it is a small matter that
we as men do feel them speaking: for according to truth, and also with
liberty, if I should declare every other just advertisement which came from the
Senate, and the tirannie which your judges commit in the miserable Realm: one
of these two things must ensue, either the punishment of men, or the
deprivation of your Officers, if I say true.

One thing only comfort me, whereof I with other unfortunate people have had
experience, in that I do think my self happy, to know, that the just plagues
proceed not from the just Gods, but through the just deserts of wicked men:
And that our secret fault does waken those to the end that they of us may
execute open justice. Of one thing only I am sore troubled, because the Gods
cannot be contented, but for a small fault they punish a good man much: and for
many faults they punish evil men nothing at al, so that the Gods do bear
with the one, and forgive nothing unto the other.

O secret judgments of God, that as I am bound to praise your works, so
likewise if I had license to condemn them, I durst say, that ye cause us to
suffer grievous pains, for that ye punish and persecute us by the hands of
such Judges, the which (if justice take place in the World) when they chastise
us with their hands, they do not deserve for to have their heads on their
shoulders,

The cause why now again, I do exclaim on the immortal Gods, is to see,
that in these 15. days I have been at Rome, I have seen such deeds done in
your Senate, that if the least of them had been done at Danuby, the Gallows
and gibbets had been hanged thicker of thieves, then the vineyard is with
grapes. I am determined to see your doings, to speak of your dishonesty in
apparel your little temperance in eating, and your disorder in affairs, and
your pleasures in living: and on the other side, I see, that when your
provision arriueth in our Country, we carry into the temples, and offer it to
the Gods, we put it on their heads: so that the one meeting with the other,
we accomplish that which is commanded, and accurse those that commanded, And
since therefore my heart has now seen that which it desires, my mind is at
rest, in spitting out the poison which in it abides: If I have in any thing
here offended with my tongue, I am ready to make recompense with my head. For in
good faith, I had rather win honor, in offering my self to death, then you
should have it in taking from me my life.

And here the villain ended his talk, immediately after Marcus Aurelius
said to those which were about him: How think ye my friends, what kernel
of a nut, what The commendation that the Emperor gave of the Oration of the
villaint.
gold of the mine, what corn of straw, what rose of briars, what mary of
bones, and how noble and valiant a man has he showed himself? What reasons so
hie, what words so well couched, what truth so true, what sentences so well
pronounced, and also what open malice has he discored? By the faith of a good
man I swear, as I may be delivered from this fever which I have, I saw this
villain standing boldly a whole hour on his feet, and all we beholding the
earth as amazed, could not answer him one word: For indeed the villain
confuted us with his purpose, and astonyed us; to see the little regard he bad
of his life.

The Senate afterward being all agreede, the next day following, we
provided new Judges for the river of Danuby, and commanded the villain to
deliver us by writing, all that he said by mouth, to the end it might be
registered in the book of good saying of strangers, which were in the Senate.

And further, it was agreede, that the said villain (for the wise words he
spoke) should be chosen Senator, and of the Free men of Rome he should be one:
and that for ever he should be sustained with the common treasure. For our
mother Rome has always been praised and esteemed not only to acquit the
seruices' which have been done unto her, but' also the good words which were
spoken in the Senate.

CHAP.. VI. That Princes and Noble men ought to be very circumspect in choosing
Judges and Officers, for therein consists the profit of the public weal.
ALexander the great (as the Historiographers say) in his youth used hunting
very much specially of the mountains, and that which is to be marueled at, he
would not hunt Dear, Goats, Hares, nor Partridges; but Tigers, Leopardes,
Elephants, Crocodils, and Lions. So that this mighty Prince, did not only show
the excellency of his courage in conquering proud Princes, but also in chasing
of cruel and savage beasts.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that the great Alexander had a familiar
servant, named Crotherus, to whom oftentimes he spoke these words:

I let thee to understand Crotherus, That the valiant Princes ought not only
to be upright in their realm which they govern: but also to be The speech of
King Alexander the great.
circumspect in pastimes which they use, that the authority which in the one
they have woune, in the other they do not lose.

When Alexander spoke these words, truly he was of more authority then of
years: But in the end he gave this example, more to be followed, and
commanded, then to be reproved or blamed, I say to be followed, not in the
hunting that he exercised, but in the great courage which he showed. To the
Plebeians and men of discretion, it is a little thing, that in one matter they
show their might, and in other things their small power is known: but to
princes and great Lords, it is a discommendable thing, that in earnest matters
any man should accuse them of pride, and in things of sport, they should count
them for light. For the Noble and valiant Prince, in things of importance,
ought to show great wisdom, and in mean things great stoutenes.

The case was such, that Alexander the Great, hunting on the wild mountains,
by chance met with a cruel Lion, and as the good Prince The great courage of
Alexner
would win his honor with the Lion, and also the Lion preserve his own life,
they were in griepes the one of the other so fast, that both fell to the earth,
where they striued almost half an hour, but in the end the Lion remained
there dead, and the hardy Alexander escaped all bloody.

This hunting of Alexander and the Lion through all Greece was greatly
renowned: I say greatly renowned, because the Grauers and Painters drew a
portrait forthwith in stoneworke, of this hunting, and the grauers hereof were
Lisippus and Leocarcus marvelous grauers of anticke works, which they made of
metal, where they lively set forth Alexander and the Lion fighting, and also
a familiar servant of his named Crotherus, being among the dogs beholding
them. So that the work seemed not only to represent an ancient thing: but
that the Lion, Alexander, Crotherus, and the dogs, seemed also to be alive
in the same chase.

When Alexander fought with the Lion, there came an Ambassador from Sparthes
to Macedonie, who spoke to Alexander these Words.

Would to God, (Immortal prince) That the force you have used with the lion,
in the mountain, you had employed against some Pr: for to be lord of the earth.

By the words of the Ambassador, and the deeds of Alexander, may easily be
gathered: That as it is comely for Princes to be honest, valiant, and stout:
so to the contrary, it is unseemly for them to be bold and rash: For though
Princes of their goods be liberal, yet of their life they ought not to be
prodigal.

The divine Plato in the tenth book of his laws, says: that the two renowned
Philosophers of Thebes, whose names were Adon and Clinias, fell at variance
with themselves, to know in what thing the Prince is bound to adventure his
life?

Clinias said, that he ought to The philosophers speech concerning the honor
of Princes.
die, for any thing touching his honor, Adon said the contrary. That he
should not hazard his life, unless it were for matters touching the affairs
of the commonwealth. Plato says, those two philosophers had reason, in that
they said: but admit that occasion to dye should be offered the Prince: for the
one, or the other:: he ought rather to die for that thing touching justice,
then for the thing touching his honor: For there is no great difference, to die
more for the one, then for the other.

Applying that we have spoken, to that we will speak: I say, that we do not
desire, nor we will not, that Princes and great lords do destroy themselves
with Lions in the chase, neither adventure their persons in the wars, nor
that they put their lives in peril, for the co^mon-weale: But we only
require of them, that they take some pains and care to provide for things
belonging to justice. For it is a more natural hunting for Princes, to hunt
out the vices of their commonweales, then to hunt the wild boares, in the
thick woods. To the end Princes accomplish this which we have spoken we will
not ask them time when they ought to eat sleep, hunt, sport, and recreate
themselves: but that of the 24 hours that be in the day and night, they take
it for a pleasure and commodity one hour to talk of justice. The government
of the comonweale consists not, in that they should travel until they
sweat and molest their bodies, shead their blood, shorten their lives, and
loose their pastimes: but all consists, in that they should be diligent to
foresee the damages of their commonwealth, and likewise to provide for good
mimisters of justice.

We do not demand Princes and great Lords to give us their goods; Nor we
forbid them not to eat, to forsake sleep, or sport, to hunt, or put their
lives in danger: but we desire and beseech them, that they would provide good
ministers of justice for the commonweal.

First, they ought to be very diligent to search them out, and afterward, to
be more circu^spect to examine them: For if we sigh with tears, to have good
Princes, we ought much more to pray that we have not evil officers.

What profits it the knight to be nimble, and if the horse be not ready? What
avails it the owner of the ship to be sage and expert, if the Pilot be a
fool and ignorant? What profits the king to be valiant and stout, and the
captain of the war to be a coward? I mean by this I have spoken, what
profits it a prince to be honest if those which minister justice be
dissolute? What profits it us that the Prince be true, if his Officers be
liars. what profits it us that the Pr: be sober, if his ministers be
dru^kards? what profits it that the P: be gentle, and loving, if his officers
be cruel and malicious? what profits it us, that the Pr: be a giver,
liberal, and an almes-man, if the judge which ministers justice, be a briber,
and an open Thief?

What profits it the prince to be careful and virtuous, if the Judge be
negligent and vicious? Finally, I say, that it little avails, that the prince
in his house be secretly just, if adjoining to that he trust a tirant and open
thief with the government of the Commonweal.

Princes and great Lords, when they are within their palaces at pleasure,
their minds occupied in high things, do not receive into their secret company
but their entire friends.

Another time they will not, but occupy themselves in pastimes and pleasure:
so that they know not what they have to amend in their persons, and much less
that which they ought to remedy in their commonweals: I will not be so eager
in reproving, neither so Satyricall in writing, that it should seem I would
persuade princes, that they live not according to the highness of their
estates, but according to the life of the religious: for if they will keep
themselves from being tyrants, or being outragiously vicious, we cannot deny
them sometimes to take their pleasures. But my intention is not, so straightly
to command Princes to be just, but only to show them how they are bound to do
justice. Commonwealths are not lost, for that their princes live in pleasure:
but because they have little care of justice. In the end, people do not murmur
when the Prince does recreate his person, but when he is too slack to cause
justice to be executed.

I would to God, that Princes took an account with God in the things of their
conscience, touching the common wealth, as they do with men The saying of
Plutarch to Traian the Emperor.
touching their rents and revenues. Plutarch in an Epistle he wrote to Traian
the Emperor says. It pleases me very well, most: puissant prince, that the
Prince be such one, as al may say that in him there is nothing worthy of
reprehension: but adding thereunto, It displeases me much more, that he should
have so evil Judges, that all should say, in them were nothing worthy of
commendation: For the faults of Princes very well may be excused: but the
offenses of the officers can by no means be endured. Many princes and great
Lords deceive themselus, in thinking that they do their duty in that they be
virtuous in their persons, but it is not so: for it suffices not a prince to
draw unto him all virtues, but also he is bound to root all vices out of the
common wealth. Admit that princes will not, or of themselves cannot govern the
commonwealth; yet let us desire and admonish them to seek good Officers to
do it for them: For the poor Plebeian has no account to render but of his
good or evil life: but the prince shall render account of his vicious life
which he has led, and of the little care that he has had of his common
wealth. Seneca in an Epistle he wrote to Lucilla, says. My dear friend
Lucilla, I would gladly thou Good admonitions of Seneca to his friend Lucilla.
would come and see me here in Rome,: but I pray thee recommend to good
Judges the Isle of Scicile; for I would not desire to enjoy thy sight, if
through my occasion thou should leave the Commonwealth out of order. And to
the intent thou may know what conditions they ought to have, whom thou
should choose for Governors or Judges: I will let thee understand, that they
ought to be grave in their sentences, just in their words, honest in their
works, merciful in their justice; and above all, not corrupted with bribes.
And if I do advertise thee of this, it is because if thou did take care to
govern thy Commonwealth well, thou should now be circumspect to examine
them, unto whom presently thou must recommend the government thereof. I would
say afterward, that all that which the ancient philosophers have written in
many books, and have left by diverse sentences.

Seneca did rehearse in these few words: the which are so grave and
necessary, that if Princes retained them in their memory, to put them in
execution, and Judges had them Grave sentences of Seneca.
before their eyes for to accomplish them, they would excuse the common wealth
of diverse slanders, and they should also deliver themselves from a great
burden of their conscience.

It is not a thing voluntary, but necessary, that the ministers of justice be
virtuous, well established, and very honest: For to Judges nothing can be more
slanderous and hurtful, then when they should reprove young men of their
youth: others may justly reprehend them of their lightness.

He which has a public Office in the Common wealth, and sits openly to
judge therein, ought to observe a good order in his person, lest he be noted
dissolute in his doing: For the Judge which is without honesty, and
consideration ought to consider with himself, that if he alone have
authority to judge of other men's goods, that there are a thousand which will
judge of his life.

It is not only a burden of Conscience to princes, to commit the charge of
governance of the people to dissolute persons: but also it is a great contempt,
and disprayse of Justice: For the sentence given of him who deserves to be
judged, is among the people little esteemed.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that Philip King of Macedonie, Father of
the Great Alexander, created for Judge of a province, a friend of his, who
after he saw himself in such office, occupied himself more in kemming his
head, then in working or studying his books,

King Philip being informed of the vanity and insolency of this Judge, revoked
the power which he had given him, and when he complained to all of the wrong
and grief which was done unto him, taking his office from him, K. Philip said
unto him: If I had given the office to thee for none other cause but being my
friend; believe me The speech of King Philip.
that nothing in the world could have sufficed to have taken it from thee,
because I loving thee so entirely as I did, reason would not I should have
deprived thee of this office, wherewith I honored thee, I gave thee this
office, thinking that thou werte virtuous, sage, honest, and also a man well
occupied, and me thinks thou rather occupiest thy self in beholding thy
person, the^ in governing well my Commonwealth: which thou ought not to
consent unto and much less do in deed: for the Judge ought to be so
occupied, in the administration of the Common wealth, that he should have no
leisure at any time for to comb his head.

These words the good Philip spoke unto the Judge, whom he displaced of his
office, for being too fine and diligent in combing his head, and trimming his
person. It is not only decent for ministers of Justice to be grave and
honest, but also it behooves them to be true and faithful: For to Judge,
whose office is to judge the truth, there can be no greater infamy, then to
be counted a liar.

When two Plebeyans be at variance together for one thing, they come before
the judge for naught else, but that he should judge, who has right and justice
thereunto. Therefore if such a Justice be not counted true, but a liar, all
take his judgment for false: so that if the plaintiff has no more power, he
will obey justice, yet at the least he will blaspheme him that gave sentence.

There are some Judges, that presently to get more money, to draw unto them
more friends, and to continue also in their Offices, use such shameful shifts
with the poor plaintifes, and take such large bribes of the defendant: that
both parties are by himself assured of the Sentence, in their favor, before
he come unto the Bar.

Many go to the houses of Judges, some to demand, others to give
instructions, others to work deceyte, others to win them, others to importune
What ma^ter of men Judges and Officers ought to be
the^, but few to go to visit them: so that for those and such semblables, I
do advise, and admonish Officers, that they be just in their sentences, and
upright in their words.

The ministers of Justice ought to be such, and so good, that in their life
nothing be worthy of rebuke: neither in their words any thing worthy of
reproach. For, if herein they be not very circumspect, oftentimes that shall
happen, which the Gods would not, which is: that to the prejudice of the
justice of another, he shall deny the words of himself.

It suffices not Judges to be true in their words: but it is very necessary
that they be upright in their sentences. That is to say, that for love they
be not too large, neither for covetousness they should be corrupted, nor for
fear drawn back, nor with prayers to be flattered, nor with promises
blinded: For otherwise, it were a great shame and inconvenience, that the Yard
which they carry in their hands should be straight, and the life which they
lead should be very crooked. To the end Justices be upright, they ought much to
travel to be liberal: I mean in things wherein they ought to give sentence.

It is impossible that those which have respect in their sentences to favor
their Friends, should not accustomably use to be revenged of their enemies.
Truly, such a Judge ought not to be called just: but a private tyrant. He
that with affection judges, and passion punishes, is greatly deceived.

Those in like manner, which have authority to govern, and do think that for
borrowing a little of Justice, they should thereby increase and multiply
friends in the common wealth, are much abused: For this act before men is so
heinous, and before GOD so detestable, that though for a space he refrain his
hands, yet in the end he will extend his power. For, the Redeemer of the
world, only Father of Truth, will not permit that such do take upon them
the title of Justice, which in their Offices do show so extreme wrong.

Helius Spartianus, in the life of Anthonius says: that the good Emperor
going to visit his Empire (as he was in Capua,) and there demanding of the
state of the Censours, whether they were unjust or rightful? A man of Capua
said in this wise: By the immortal Gods, most noble Prince, I swear, that
this Judge who presently governs here, is neither just, nor honest: and
therefore me thinks it necessary that we deprive him of his dignity, and I
will recount unto thee, what befell between him and me: I besought him that
for my sake, he would grant me four things, which were all unjust, and he
willingly condescended thereunto: whereof I had no less marvel in my heart,
then vexation in my body. For, when I did desire him, I thought nothing less
then to obtain them, but only for the contentation of those which instantly
desired me to do it.

And further, this Capuan said; By the God Genius, I swear likewise, that I
was not the more friendly unto him, for that he said he did it for my sake,
more then for another: For he that to me would grant these four, it is to
be believed, that unto others he would grant them four hundredth: What is
required in an upright judge.
For the which, thou ought to provide most noble Prince, because good Judges
ought to be patient to hear, and just to determine.

By this notable example, Judges ought to have a great respect, not to those
which do desire them: but to that which they demand. For in doing their duty,
their enemies will proclaim them just: and contrary wise, if they do that
they should not do, their nearest friends will account them as tyrants.

Judges which pretend favor unto the commonwealth; and to be careful of
their consciences, ought not to content themselves simply to do Justice: but
that of themselves they should have such an opinion, that none durst presume
to come and require at their hands, any vile or dishonest thing. For otherwise,
if we note the demaunder to be unshamefast, we must needs somewhat suspect
the Judge in his justice.

Princes ought also to be very circumspect that the Judges be not only
contented to be just, honest, and true: but also in them there ought to
remain no avarice, nor covetousness. For Justice and Avarice can seldom dwell
in one house.

Those that have the charge of the government of the people, and to judge
causes ought to take great heed, that with bribes and presents they be not
corrupted: For it is impossible, but that the same day that Riches and
Treasures in the houses of Judges begin to increase, that the same day, the
true administration of Justice, should not decay.

Lycurgus, Prometheus, and Numa Pompylius did prohibit nothing in their Law so
much, neither for any other cause they ordained so many punishments: but to the
intent Judges should not be so covetous, nor yet thieues. And of truth they
had great consideration, to foresee and forbid it: For the judge that has
received part of the Theft, will not give sentence against the stealers
thereof.

Let not judges be credited for saying they receive no silver nor gold,
neither silks, nor jewels: but that they take only small presents, as
fruits, fowls, and other trifles.

For oftentimes it chances, that the judges do eat the fruit, and the
poor Suter does feel the morsel: Cicero in the book of laws says, that
Cato the Censor being very aged, the Senators said unto him one day in the
Senate. Thou know now Cato, that presently we are in the Calendes of
January; wherein we use to divide the Offices among the people. Wherefore we
have determined to create Manlius and Calidanus Censors, for this year:
wherefore tell us (as thou think) if they be able and sufficient to supplye
the rowme? Cato the Censour answered them in this wise.

Fathers conscript, I let you know, The wise answer of Cato.
that I do not receive the one, nor admit the other: For, Manlius is very rich,
and Calidanus the citizen extreme poor, and truly in both there is great
peril. For we see by experience, that the rich Officers are too much subject
to pleasures: and the poor Officers are too much given to avarice. And
further, he said in this case, me thinks that your Judges whom ye ought to
choose, should not be so extreme poor, that they should want wherewith to
care: neither so rich, that they should surmount in superfluity, to give
themselus too much to pleasurs: For men by great abundance become vicious, and
by great scarcity become covetous.

The Censor Cato being of such authority, it is but reason that we give
credit to his words, since he governed the Roman Empire so long space,
though in deed all the poor be not covetous, nor all the rich vicious: yet
he spoke it for this intent, because both those Romans were noted of these two
vices: For the poor they desire to scrape, and scratch: and the rich to enjoy
and keep.

Which of those two sorts of men Princes should choose: I cannot, nor dare not
rashly determine. And therefore I do not counsel them, either to despise the
poor, or to Cato his advise in choosing Officers.
choose the rich: but that they give the authority of justice to those, whom
they know to be of good conscience, and not subject to covetousness. For the
judge, whose Conscience is corrupted, it is impossible he should minister
equal justice.

A man may give a shrewde guess of suspicion in that judge, whether he be of
brittle conscience, or no, if he see him procure the office of justice for
himself: For that man which willingly procures the charge of conscience of
another: commonly little regards the burden of his own.

CHAP. VII. Of a Letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to Antigonus
his friend, answering another which he sent him out of Scicile, wherein he
advertised him of the cruelty of the Roman Judges, and this Letter is divided
into v. Chapters.
MArcus Aurelius, companion in the Empire, Tribune of the people, presently A
Letter of Marcus Aurelius to his friend Antigonus.
being sick wishes unto thee Antigonus health and comfort in the banishment.
To fly the extreme heat of Rome, and to read some books which are brought
me from the realm of Palestine; I am come hither to Capua: and for the haste
I made to ride great iourneyes, the Ague has overtaken me, which is more
troublesome then perilous: For it takes me with cold, and plucketh my
appetite from me.

The 20, day of January I received thy second letter, and it happened that thy
letter and my fever took me both at one instant: but the fever grieeued me in
such wise, that I could not long endure to read thy letter: Me thinks we
have no stay nor mean, thou being so brief, and I so long: for my long
letter has taken thy grievous sorrows from me, but thy short letter could not
take my fever from me: now that my mind is beating of thy travel, the desire
that I have to remedy it, is enflamed: I would tell thee one thing, and succor
thee with some counsel, but I find that the consolation which thou want, I
cannot give thee, and that which I can give thee, thou need not.

In this letter shall not be written that which was in the first: but herein I
will travel the best I can to answer thee. I will not occupy my self to
comfort thee, because I am so out of course with this disease, that I have
neither will to write, ne yet any favor in any pleasant things. If perhaps
this letter be not sauoury, nor compendious, neither so comfortable as those
which I was wo^t to write unto thee: attribute not the blame unto my good will,
which desires to serve thee, but to the sickness that gives no place
thereunto. For it suffices the sick to be contented with medicines, without
satisfying their friends.

If thy comfort consisted in writing many letters, and offering thee many
words: truly I would not stick to do that for my fever: but it neither
profits thee, nor satisfies me, since I have little, to proffer thee much.
Talking now of this matter, I do remember, that the ancient laws of the
Rhodians said these words.

We desire and admonish all men, to visit the Captives, the Pilgrims, and the
comfortless: and further we Ancient laws observed among the Rhodians.
ordain and command that none in the Common wealth be so hardy to give
counsel, unless therewith he give remedy: For to the troubled heart words
comfort little, when in them there is no remedy. Of a truth, the Law of the
Rhodians is good, and the Roman which shall observe them much better. Assure
thy self that I am very desirous to see thee: and also I know that thou
would as gladly speak unto me, to recount me all thy griefs.

Truly I do not marvel, because the wounded heart quieteth himself more,
declaring his own griefs, the^ hearing another man's consolations. Thou
writest unto me of sundry things in thy letter, the effect whereof, that thou
certifiest me is, that the Judges and Officers in that Realm be very rigorous
and extreme: and that therefore the Cicilians are greatly displeased with the
Senate.

Hitherto thou have never told me lie, the which moves me to believe all
that thou writest now in thy letter. Wherefore I take it for a thing most true,
that forasmuch as all those of Cicill are malicious and envious, they give the
Judges fit occasion to be cruel, For it is a general rule, where men are
out of order, the Ministers of justice ought to be rigorous. And though in
other realms, it chanced not, it is to be believed, that it is true in this
Realm: whereof the ancient Proverb says, All those which inhabit the Isles
are evil: but the Cicilians are worst of all. At this day the wicked are so
mighty in their malice, and the good are so much diminished in their virtues,
that if by Justice there were not a bridle, the wicked would surmount all the
world, and the good should vanish immediately.

But returning to our matter, I say, that considering with what, and how many
evils we are environed, and to how many miseries we are subject: I do not
marvel at the vanities that men commit, but I am ashamed of the cruelty which
our judges execute, so that we may rather call them tyrants which kill by
violence, then Judges which minister by justice.

Of one thing I was greatly astonished, and almost past my sense, which is, that
justice of right pertayneth to God the only true judge.
the Gods, and they being offended, will be called pitiful: and we others
borrow justice, and not being offended, do glorify our selves to be called
cruel. I know not what man will hurt another, since we see that the Gods
forgiving their proper injuries, have obtained the renown of merciful, and
we others punishing the injuries done unto another do remain with the name
of the tirants.

If the punishment of the Gods were so severe, as our sins are filthy, and
that they should measure us with this measure, the only desert of one offense
is sufficient to take life from us. With reason he cannot be called a man
amongst men, but a savage amongst the savages, that forgetting to be of feeble
flesh, tormenteth the flesh of his brother. If a man he held himself from
top to toe, he shall find not one thing in him to move him to cruelty: but
he What may move one man to be merciful to another.
shall see in him many instruments to exercise mercy. For he has his eyes
wherewith he ought to behold the needy and indigent: he has feet to go to
the Church and Setmons, he has hands to help all: he has his tongue to
favor the Orphans, he has a heart to love God: And to conclude, he has
understanding to know the evil, and discretion to follow the good. If men owe
much to the Gods, for giving them these Instruments to be pitiful, truly,
they are bound no less unto them for taking from them all occasions to be
cruel. For he has not given them horns as to bulls, neither nails as to the
cat, nor yet he has given them poison, as to the Serpent. Finally, he has
nor given them so perilous feet, as to a horse to strike, nor he has given
them such bloody teeth, as to the Lions to bite, Then since the Gods be
pitiful, and have created us pitiful, and commanded us to be pitiful:
why do our Judges desire then to be cruel. O how many cruel and severe Judges
are there at this day in the Roman Empire, which under the color of good
zeal to justice, adventure to undo the common wealth: For not for the zeal of
justice, but for the desire to attain to renown: they have been overcome
with malice, and denied their own proper Nature.

I do not marvel that a Roman Censor should envy my house, will evil to my
friends, favor mine enemies, despise my children, with evil eyes behold my
daughters, covet my goods, speak evil of my person: but that which I am
ashamed of is, that diverse Judges are so greedy to tear men's flesh, as if they
were Bears, and man's flesh were nointed with honey.

CHAP. VIII. The Emperor continues still his letter speaking against cruel
Judges, and recites two examples the one of a pitiful king of Cypres, and the
other of a cruel judge of Rome,
BY the says of a good man I swear unto thee friend The Emperor continues
still his letter concerning cruel Magistrates.
Antigonus, that I being young, knew a Judge in Rome whose name was Licaronicus a
man of high stature, his flesh neither too fat, nor too lean, his eyes were
somewhat bloody and red, he was of the lineage of the Senators, and on his face
he had but a little bearde, and on his head he had many white hayres.

This Lycaronicus of long time was Judge in Rome, in the Roman Laws he was
very well learned, and in Customs and policies very skillful and expert, of
his own Nature, he spoke little, and in the aunsweres he gave, he was very
resolute.

Amongst all those which were in Rome in his time, he had this excellency,
which was: That to all he ministered equal justice: and to suitors with great
speed he gave brief expedition, and dispatched them immediately. They could
never withdraw him by requests, never corrupt him with gifts, nor beguile him
with words, nor fear him with threatenings: neither would he receive a bribe
of any man, that would offer it him: And besides this, he was very severe in
condition, churlish in words, vnflectible in requests, cruel in punishments,
suspicious in affairs, and above all, he was hated of many, and feared of
all. How much this Lycaronicus was hated, it cannot be reported: and of how
many he was feared, no man can think. For in Rome when any man was iniuried,
he said: I pray God that Lycaronicus may live long. When the children did
cry, the mothers said unto them, Take heed of Lycaronicus, and straight way
they held their peace: so that with the only name of Lycarcnicus, people were
The commendations of Lycaronicus for equal justice.
astonyed, and children kept silence.

Thou ought also to know Antigonus, that when any commotion did arise in a
City, or in any other Province, or that any sclaunder arose and increased
therein, they were assured, and they said that none other should go thither,
but only Lycaronicus: And to say the truth, when he was arrived at that City
or province, the rebels were not only fled: but also diverse innocents were
for fear of his cruelty hid.

For Lycaronicus was so resolute a person, that some for evil factes: others
for consenting: Some for that they favored not the good right: others, for
that they kept them secret: none escaped to be tormented of his person, or
punished in goods.

Think thou Antigonus, that they have bin few whom this Judge has caused
to be whipped, and carted, cast into deep wells, beheaded, taken, banished, and
put in the stocks, during the time that the Romans had him with them?

By the immortal Gods, I swear unto thee, and as god Genius the God of nature
may help me, that the Gallows and Gibbettes were so furnished with feet,
hands, and heads of men: as the shambles were, with Oxen, Sheep, and Kyddes.

This Lycaronicus was so fleshly, to shead human blood, that he was never so
conversant, nor he never had so merry a countenance, as the same The cruelty
of Lycaronicus.
day when he should cause any man to be drowned in the river of Tyber, hanged
in Mount Celio, beheadded in the street Salario, tormented, or cast into the
prison Marmortina.

Oh cruel: Oh fierce: and unspeakable condition, that this Judge Lycaronicus
had. For it was not possible that he should be brought up between the
delicate arms of the Romans: but in the vile entrails of you venomous
Serpents.

I return once more to say: that it is impossible he should be nourished with
the delicate milk of women, but with the cruel blood of Tygres.

If this Lycaronicus were cruel, why did they give him such authority? I
curse such authority. If he did for that he had great zeal to Justice: I
curse such zeal of justice.

If he did it to win more honor, I curse that honor: For, that man shall be
cursed of the Gods, and hated of men, which takes life from others, although
it be by justice, only to increase his renown.

The Gods are much offended, and the people greatly damaged, where the Senate
of Rome called the Judge gentle, which is corrupted: and him that is cruel,
just. So that now amongst the Roman people, those which heal with oil are
not credited, but those only which cure with fire. If any man think it, at the
least I do not think it, that when Licaronicus dyed, all the cruel Judges
did end with him: For through all the Roman Empire there was no more but one
Lycaronicus; and at this present there is above three or four in every Common
wealth.

Not without tears I speak that which I will speak, which is, that in those
days as all the Judges that ministered were pitiful, so was this Licaronicus
renowned for cruel. But now since all are cruel, we hope in a Judge which is
pitiful. In the The pity and mercifulnes of Romulus. the first Roman King.
12. year of the foundation of our mother Rome, the first king thereof was
Romulus, who sent a commandment to all the neighbors and inhabitants
therabouts, to the end that all banished men, al those which were afflicted,
all those which were persecuted, and all those which were in necessity should
come to Rome, for they should be defended from their enemies, and succored in
their necessities.

The fame being spredde throughout Italy, of the pity and clemency which
Romulus showed in Rome (if the Annalles of the Ancients do not deceive us:)
Rome was more peopled with inhabitants in ten years then Babylon or Carthage in
a hundred. O noble heart of Romulus, which such things invented: blessed be
that tongue which commands, that the famous Rome with clemency and pity
should be founded, In the original books, which were in the high Capitol,
once I found diverse letters written to the sacred Senate, and Roman people,
and in the beginning of the letters, the words said thus.

We the King of Parthes in Asia, to the Fathers conscript of Rome, and to the
happy Roman people of Italy, and to all those which with the Roman Senate are
confederate, which have the name of Romans, and the renown of clemency,
health and tranquillity to your persons, we do send you, and desire the same
of the gods for our selves.

Behold therefore Antigonus, what titles of clemency had our first Romans, and
what example of clemency did the Emperor leave for them to come: so that since
the barbarous strangers called them pitiful: it is not to be believed, that
to their subjects or natural countrymen they were cruel.

And as the Ancients have traveled of all to be well beloved, so they at this
present through their cruelties, seek nothing but to be feared. If the gods
perhaps should revive the dead, and should compare the living before them in
judgment: I suppose they would say these are not their children but their
enemies, not encreasers of the Commonwealth but destroyers of the people.

I being thirty seven years of The virtue of an herb called Ilabia.
age, lay in Winter season in an Isle called Chetyn, which now is called
Cypres, wherein is a little mountain as yet full of Wood, which is called the
mount of Archadia, where grows an herb called Ilabia, which the Ancients
say, that if it be cut, it droppeth blood: and the nature of it is, that if
one do rub any man, with the blood thereof hot, although he would not) yet
he shall love him, and if they do anoint him with the blood that is cold,
he shall hate him.

Of this herb we need not doubt any thing at all, for I did prove it, and
anointed one with that blood, who would sooner loose his life, then that love
which he bare me. There was a Kingin that Isle of great example of life, and
greatly renowned of clemency, though in deed, neither by writing, nor by words
I could never know his name: but that he was buried under four pillars in a
Tomb of Marble, and about the Tomb were engraven these Greek and ancient
letters, where amongst other things these words were engraven.

The mighty gods whiles they drew out the length
Of my weak years to pass the flood of life, An Epitaph of a virtuous King:

This rule I had my Common wealth to strength,
To nourish peace and stint vain blasts of strife.
By virtues way if ought I could obtain,
By vices path I never sought to get,
By dreadles peace if I could right attain,
By clattering arms blind hazard could not let.
By courteous means if I could overcome,
By raging threats I heaped up no dread,
By secret shifts if I might guide my dome
By open force, I nowlde the pain were spread.
By gentle read, if I could chastise eke
By sharp ways no further proof I sought
In outward sight I never thought to stricke
Before I had to couerte chekes them brought,
My free consent could never vainly hear,
My tongue to tell one sweet entising lie,
Nor yet my hollow ears would ever hear,
Their crooked tales that flatter often awry.
My schooled heart was always taught to stay,
From eager lust of others heaped good
I forced my self his proper wealth to way,
And stand content as fortune judgment stood.
My friends decay, I always watched to aid,
And recked not for bent of enuies bow,
In huge expense I never lavish paid,
My glittring gold, nor spared yet to low.
For grievous faults I never punished wighi,
With mind appeased, but erst I would forgive,
My grief did grow when just revenge did hight,
And eke I ioyed to pardon men to live.
A mortal man amongst blind heaps of men,
Nature my mother produced me here:
And therefore lo enclosed in this den,
The eagre worms my senseless carcass tear.
Amongst the Wights that virtue did enhaunce,
A virtuous life I freely passed on,
And since that death his kingdom did advance,
My heavenly sprite to haunt the Gods is gone.
HOw think thou Antigonus, what Epitaph was this, and what prince ought he
to be, of whom I should say, his life ought to be glorious, and his memory
eternal? I swear unto thee by the law of a good man: and as the Gods may
prosper me, I took not so much pleasure in Pompey with his Jerusalem: in
Semiremis with her India: in king Cyrus with his Babylon: in Caius Caesar, with
his Gawles: in Scipio with his Affrike: as I have in the king of Cypres in his
grave. For more glory has that king there in that sharp mountain being
dead: then others have had, in proud Rome, being alive.

CHAP. IX. Marcus Aurelius continues his Letter against cruel Judges. Of the
words which the Emperor Nero spoke concerning Justice: and of the instructions
the Emperor Augustus gave to a Judge, which he sent into Dacia.
NEITHER for that which I write in this Letter, nor yet for that king Cirus had
in his Grave: my intention is not to defend the evil, to the end that for
their evil deeds, and outragiousnesse they should be punished: for by this
means it should be worse for me to favor them, then for them to be evil:
for they The Emperor continues his letter against evil Judges.
through debility do offend, and I by malice do err. But in this case it
seems unto me, and to all others which are of good judgment, that since
frailety in men is natural, and the punishment which they give is voluntary:
Let Judges therefore in ministering justice show, that they do it for the weal
of the Commonwealth, and not with a mind for to revenge. To the end the faulty
may have occasion to amned the faults past, and not revenge injuries present,
the divine Plato in the books of his Commonwealth said, that Judges ought to
have two things present before their eyes, that is to say, that in judging
things touching the good of others, they show no covetousness, and in punishing
any man, they show no revenge: For Judges have license to chastise the body:
but therefore they have no license to hurt their hearts.

Nero the Emperor was greatly defamed in his life, and very cruel in his
justice: And withal his cruelties it chanced, that as one in a day brought him
a judgment for to subscribe, to behead certain murderers: He fetching a
great sigh, said these The cruelty of Nero. with one of his pitiful sayings.
words: O how happy were I, if I had never learned to write, only to be
excused to subscribe this sentence.

Certainly, the Emperor Nero, for speaking such a pitiful word at that
time, deserved immortal memory: but afterward his so cruel life perverted so
notable a sentence.

For speaking the truth, one evil word suffices to deface many good words.
O how many realms and countries have bin lost, not so much for the evils
which in those the wicked have committed, as for the disordinate Justices which
the ministers of justice therein have executed.

For they thinking by rigor to correct the damages past, have raised up
present slanders for ever. It is known to all men who and what the Emperor
Augustus has bin, who in all his doings was exceeding good: For, he was noble,
valiant, stout, fierce and a lover of justice, and above all, very pitiful.
And for so much in other things he showed his pity and clemency, he ordained
that no prince should subscribe judgments of death with his own hand: neither
that he should see justice done of any with his own eyes. Truly the law was
pitifully ordained, and for the cleannes and pureness of Emperors very
necessary.

For, it seems better for Princes to defend their Lands with the sharp
sword, then to subscribe a sentence of death with the cruel pen.

This good Emperor Augustus was very diligent to choose ministers of justice,
and very careful to teach them The carefulnes of Augustus in choosing Judges.
how they should behave themselves in the Commonwealth: admonishing them not
only of that they had to do, but also of that they ought to fly. For the
ministers of justice, oftentimes fail of their duty.

In Capua there was a governor named Escaurus, who was a just judge, though
he were somewhat severe: whom the Emperor Augustus sent to the realm of
Dace, to take charge of that province. And amongst diverse other things he
spoke these words unto him, to retain them in his memory.

Friend Escaurus, I have determined to pluck thee from Capua: and to put into
thy custody the government of the province of Dace: where thou shall
represente the Royal majesty of my person: and thou ought also to consider
well, that as I make thee better both in honor and goods: So thou in like case
should make thy self better in life, and more temperate in justice, thou
have been a little too rigorous, and in thy life somewhat too rash.

I counsel thee therefore, I do desire thee, and furthermore, I do strictly
command thee, that thou change thy trade, and course of life: and have a great
respect to mine honor and good name.

For thou know right well, that the only profit and honor of the
Commonwealth of Roman Princes consists in having good or evil ministers
of their justice.

If thou will do that I would wish thou should: I let thee understand, that
I do nor commit mine Honor in thy trust, neither my justice, to the intent
thou should become an enuyer of the innocent, and a scourge of
transgressors: but that only with the one hand thou help to sustain the
good, and with the other, thon endeavor to help to amend the evil.

And if thou will more particularly know my intention: I do send thee, to the
end thou should be graundfather What is required in an upright judge.
to the Orphans, an advocate for the widows, a plaster for the grieved, a
staff for the blind, and a father to all. Let therefore the resolution of all
be, to rejoice mine enemies, to comfort my friends, to lift up the weak,
and to favor the strong: So that thou be indifferent to all, and partial to
none: to the end, that thorough thy upright dealing, mine may rejoice to dwell
there, and strangers desire to come, and serve me here.

This was the instruction which the Emperor Augustus gave to the Gonernour
Escaurus: And if a man will consider and weigh his words well, he shall find
them compendious enogh, that I would they were written in our Judges hearts.

By thy letter thou declarest that the Judges whom the Senate sent to that
Isle, are not very honest, nor yet without some suspicion of covetousness: Oh
woeful commonwealth, where the Judges thereof are cruel, dishonest, and
covetous? For the cruel Judges seek naught else, but the blood of innocents,
they covet the goods of the poor, and they slander the good, to such and so
wicked a commonwealth. I would say that it were better to remain in the
mountains among the bruit beasts, then by such unjust Judges to be governed
in a Commonwealth: for the fierce Lions (which of all beasts are most cruel)
if in his presence the hunter prostrate himself on the earth before him, the
Lion will neither touch him nor his garment. O my friend Antigonus, do thou
think, that if the Commonwealth be unhappy which has such Judges, that
therefore Rome may rejoice which provided them? By the faith of a good man I
swear unto thee, that I count the Senators worse which sent them, then the
Judges which went thither. It is a great grief to a noble and stout heart to
demand Justice of a man, which neither is true, nor yet observes Justice: but
it is a greater grief to see a Judge, that to many has executed tyranny, and
to many poor men has done sundry wrongs, afterward not with the life he
leads, but with the authority he has, presumes to correct diverse judges.

He that has the office to punish the vicious, ought himself to be void of
all vices: otherwise, he that has that Office, by tyranny executes justice:
and furthermore, he is a traitor to the Commonwealth. It is impossible that
any Judge should be good, unless he has the authority of his office for
accessory, and his pure life for principal.

The end why a Judge is sent in provinces, is to define doubtful causes, to
reform their manners, to favor those that can little, and by violence The
reason why Judges are ordained.
to enforce those that can do much. And for the most part there is no
Commonwealth so weak, but may well hang a thief upon the gallouse, though
there came no Judge from Rome to give sentence.

O how many Judges are there now a days in Rome, which have caused diverse to
be hanged, regarding nothing but the first thief: and they remain free,
having robbed all the people. Which ought to think themselves assured; that
though punishment be deferred, yet in the end the fault shall not be pardoned:
for the offenses which men in their life time do dissemble, the Gods after
their death do punish.

It is much good for the Common wealth, and no less honor for the Prince,
which has the charge thereof, that the Judge be honest of person, and
diligent in justice, and that in no vice (for the which he punishes other) he
be noted or defamed himself. For much is the office of justice perverted, when
one thief hangs another on the gallows.

CHAP. X. The Emperor follows his purpose in his letter against cruel
Judges, and declares a notable Embassage which came from Judea to the Senate
of Rome, to complain of the Judges that governed that Realm.
IN the third year The Emperor continues still his letter concerning cruel
Magistrates.
after Pompeius took the City of Helya, which now is called Jerusalem:
Valerius Gracchus a Roman borne, was sent at that time into that Region for
the Romans, This Gracchus was very stout of courage, subtle in affairs, and
honest in life: but notwithstanding all this, in conversation he was
unbridled, and in the administration of justice exceeding rigorous: when the
Jews saw themselves not only subject to the Romans, but besides that evil
handeled: they determined to send their Ambassador to Rome, to the intent to
inform the Senate of the tyrannies and oppressions which were committed in the
land: And for to accomplish the same, they sent a very aged man (as by the
hairs of his head did appear) who was learned in the Hebrewe, Greek, and
Latin letters. For the Hebrews are very apt to all Sciences, but in weapons
great Cowardes. This Hebrewe came to What the ancient Hebrews were and their
conditions.
Rome, and spoke to the Senate in this wise.

O Fathers conscript, O happy people, your good Fortune and fatal destenyes
permitting it, or to say better: We forsaking our GOD, Jerusalem which of all
the Cities was Lady and mistress: and of all the Hebrews in Palestine
mother, we see it now presently servant and Tributarie to Rome: whereof we
Jews ought not to marvel, neither ye Romans to be proud. For the highest
Trees by vehement winds are soonest blown down.

Great were the Armies which Pompeyus had, whereby we were vanquished: but the
greater has our offenses bin, since by them we do deserve to be forsaken of
our God. For we Hebrews have a GOD, which does not put us under the good or
evil fortune: but does govern us with his mercy and justice.

I will that ye hear one thing by mouth, but I had rather ye should see it by
experience: which is, That we have so merciful GOD, that though among fifty
thousand evil, there was of us but ten thousand good: yet he showed such
effectual tokens of great mercy, that both the Egyptians and the Romans
might have seen how our GOD can accomplish and perform more alone, then all
your gods together.

So it is, we Hebrews (agreeing in one Faith and unity) have one only God:
and in one God only we put our whole trust and belief; and him we desire to
serve, though we do not serve him, neither should serve him, on such condition
to offend him. He is so merciful, that he would not let us prove what his
powerful hand can do, neither would he put our woeful people in Captivity,
as he has, nor also our GOD can deceive us, neither can our wrytings lie.

But the greater offenders we be, the greater Lords shall ye be over us. And
as long as the wrath of God shall hang over us, so long shall the power How un.
happy that Realm is, that is forsaken of God.
of ye Romans endure.

For our unhappy chance has not given ye our Realm for your deserts: nor yet
for that ye were the rightful heirs thereunto: but to the end ye should be
the scourgers of our offenses, etc.

After the will of our God shall be fulfilled: after that he has appeased his
wrath and indignation against us, and that we shall be purged of our offenses,
and that he shall behold us with the eyes of his clemency: Then we others
shall recover that which we have lost, and you others shall loose that which
ye have evil won. And it may so chance, that as presently of ye Romans we
are commanded: so the time shall come that of ye others we shall be obeyed.

And for as much as in this case the Hebrews feel one, and ye Romans feel
another: neither ye can cause me to worship many Gods, and much less should I
be sufficient to draw ye to the faith of one only God: I refer all to GOD,
the creator of all things, by whose might we are created and governed.

Therefore touching the effect and matter of my Embassage, know ye now, that
in all former times past, until this present, Rome has had peace with Judea,
and Judea has had friendship with Rome: so that we did favor you in the
wars, and you others preserved us in peace. Generally, nothing is more
desired then peace, and nothing more hated then war. And further, all this
presupposed, we see see it with our eyes, and also do read of our predecessors:
that the world has been always in contention, and rest has always been
banished: For indeed, if we see many sigh for peace, we see many more employe
themselves to war. If ye others would banish those from you, which do move
you to bear us evil will, and we others knew those which provoke us to
rebel, neither Rome should be so cruel to Judea, nor yet Judea should so much
hate Rome.

The greatest token and sign of peace, is to dispatch out of the way, the
disturberbers thereof: for friendship often times is lost, not so much for the
interest of the one, or of the other, A token of peace if the disturbers
thereof be taken away
as for the vndiscreetnes of the Mediators.

When one commonwealth strives against another, it is impossible that their
controversies endure long: if those come between them (as indifferent
Mediators) be wise. But if such a one which takes upon him those affairs, be
more earnestly bent then the enemy wherewith the other fights; we will say,
that he more subtly casts wood on the fire, then he draws water to
quench the heat.

All that which I say (Romans) is because that since the banishment of
Archelaus from Judea (son of the great King Herod) in his place you sent us
Pomponius, Marcus Rufus, and Valerius to be our Judges, who have been four
plagues, the least whereof suffices to poison all Rome.

What greater calamity could happen to our poor Realm of Palestine, then
Judges to be sent from Rome to take evil customs from the evil, and they
themselves to be inuentors of new vices? What greater Where Judges are unjust,
there the commo^wealth goes to ruin.
inconvenience, can chance to Justice, then when the Judges which ought to
punish the lightness of youth, do glorify themselves to be Captains of the
light in their age? What greater infamy can be unto Rome, then when those
which ought to be just in all justice, and to give example of all virtues: be
evil in all evils, and inuentors of all vices? Wherein appears your little
care, and much tyranny.

For all said openly in Asia, that the thieves of Rome do hang the thieves of
Iewrie. What will ye I shall say more, Romans, but that we little esteem
the thieves which keep the woods, in comparison of the judges which rob us in
our own houses.

O how woeful were our fatal Destinies, the day that we became subject to the
Romans? we fear no thieues, which should rob in the high way, we fear no
fire, which should burn our goods, nor we fear no Tyrants, which should make
war against us, neither any Assyrians, which should spoil our country: we
fear not the corrupt air, that should infect us, neither the plague, that
should take our lives from us: but we fear your cruel judges, which oppress
us in the commonwealth, and rob us of our good name.

I say not without a cause they trouble the Common wealth: for that laid a
part which they say, that laid a part which they mean, and that laid apart
which they rob, immediately they write to the Senate to consent unto them,
not of the good which they find in the Ancients, but of the lightness which
they see in the young. And as the Senators do hear them here, and do not see
them there: so you give more credit to one that has been but three months
in the Province, then to those which have governed them common wealth thirty
years.

Consider Senators, that you have made and appointed Senators, in this place,
for that you were the wisest, the honestest, the best experimented, and the
most moderate and virtuous.

Therefore in this above all, shall be seen if ye be virtuous, in that you do
not believe all: For if those be many, and of diverse Nations, which have to
do with you: much more diverse and variable are their ententions and ends, for
the which they entreat. I lie if your Judges have not done so many wrongs in
justice and forsaken their discipline, that they have taught the youth of Judea
inventions of vices, which neither have been heard of our Fathers, neither
read in our books, nor yet seen in our time. You other Romans, The counsel
of the poor ought not to be despised.
since you are noble and mighty, you disdain to take counsel of men that be
poor, the which ye ought not to do, neither counsel your friends to do
it: For to know, and to have little, seldom times goes together: As many
counsels as Judea has taken of Rome, so many let now Rome take of Judea. You
ought to know, though our Captains have won many Realms by shedding blood,
yet notwithstanding your Judges ought to keep them, not with rigorous shedding
of blood, but with clemency and winning their heats.

O Romans, admonish, command, pray and advertise your Judges, whom you send to
govern strange Provinces, that they employ themselves more to the
Commonwealth of the Realm, then their hands to number their fines and
forfeites.

For otherwise they shall slander those which send them: and shall hurt those
whom they govern. Your Judges in just things are not obeyed for any other
cause, but for as much as first they have commanded marry unjust things.

The just commandments make the humble hearts, and the unjust commandments
do turn and convert the meek and humble men, to severe and cruel persons.
Humane malice is so given to command, and is troublesome to be commanded,
that though they command us to do good, we do obey evil: the more they
command us evil, the worse they be obeyed in the good.

Believe me Romans, one thing: and doubt nothing therein, that of the great
lightness of the Judges, is sprung the little fear and great shame of the
people. Each Prince which The (...) that Princes ought to have in (...)
Magistrates.
shall give to any Judge the charge of Justice, whom he knows not to be able,
does it not so much for that he knows well how to minister Justice: but
because he is very crafty to augment his goods. Let him be well assured, that
when he least thinks on it, his honor shall be in most infamy, his credit
lost, his goods diminished, and some notable punishment light upon his house.
And because I have other things to speak in secret, I will here conclude that
is open: and finally, I say, that if ye will preserve us and our Realm, for
the which you have hazarded your selves in many perils, keep us in Justice,
and we will have you in reverence: command us Romans, and we will obey as
Hebrews; give a pitiful president, and ye shall have all the Realm in
safeguard.

What will ye, I say, more, but that if you be not cruel to punish our
weakness, we will be very obedient to your ordinances, before ye provide for
to command us, think it well to entreat us: for by praying with all
meekness, and not commanding with presumption, ye shall find in us the love
which the fathers are wont to find in their children: and not the treason
which the Lords have accustomed to find in their servants.

CHAP. XI. The Emperor concludes his letter against the cruel Judges, and
declares what the Grandfather of King Boco spoke in the Senate.
ALL that which above I have spoken, the Hebrews said, and not without great
admiration The conclusion of the Emperors letter concerning cruel Judges.
he was heard of all the Senate. O Rome without Rome, which now have ought but
the walls, and art made a common Stews of vices. What did dest thou tell me,
when a stranger did rebuke and taunt thee in the midst of thy Senate? It is a
general rule, where there is corruption of custom, liberties are always lost,
which seems most true here in Rome. For the Romans, which in times past went
to revenge their injuries into strange Countries: now others come out of
strange Countries to assault them in their own houses. Therefore since the
justice of Rome is condemned, what think thou that I believe of that Isle of
Cicile?

Tell me (I pray thee, Antigonus,) from whence comes think thou so great
offense to the people, and such corrupton to justice in the Common wealth? If
peradventure thou know it not, harken, and I will tell thee.

It is an order whereby all goes without order, Thou ought for to know that
the Counselors of Princes being importunate, and the Prince not resisting
them, but suffering them they deceive him, some with covetousness, other with
ignorance, give from whom they ought to take, and take from whom they ought to
give, they honor them who do dishonor them, they withhold the just, and
deliver the covetous, they despise the wise, and trust the light. Finally, they
provide not for the offenses of persons, but for the persons of offices.

Hark Antigonus, and I will tell thee more. These miserable Judges after they
are provided and invested in the authority of their Offices (where of they were
unworthy) seeing themselves of power to command, and that the dignity of their
offices is much more, then the desert of their persons: immediately they make
themselves to be feared, ministering extreme justice.

They take upon them the estates of great Lords, they live of the sweat of the
poor, they supply with malice The property of evil Judges and Officers.
that which they want in discretion: and that which is worst of all, they
mingle another man's justice with their own proper profit. Therefore hear more
what I will say unto thee, that these cursed Judges, seeing them selves
pestered with sundry affairs, and that they want the ears of knowledge, the
sails of virtue, and the ancors of experience, not knowing how to remedy such
small evils, they invent others more greater, they distribute the common
peace, only for to augment their own particular profit.

And finally, they bewail their own damage, and are displeased with the
prosperity of another. Nothing can be more just, that since they have fallen
into offices not profitable for them, they do suffer (although they would not)
great damages, so that the one for taking gifts remain slaundered, and the
other, for giving them remain undone. Hearken yet, and I will tell thee more.

Thou ought to know, that the beginning of these Judges are pride and
ambition, their means envy and malice, and their endings are death and
destruction: for the leaves shall never be green where the roots are A Cave at
for Judges and all other Magistrates.
dry: If my counsel should take place in this case, such Judges should not
be of counsel with Princes, neither yet should they be defended of the
private, but as suspect men they should not only be cast from the common
wealth, but also they should suffer death.

It is a great shame to those which demand offices of the Senate, but greater
is the rashness and boldness of the Counselors, which do procure them: and
we may say both to the one, and to the other, that neither the fear of God
does with draw them, nor the power of Princes does bridle them, nor shame does
trouble them, neither the Common wealth does accuse them: and finally, neither
reason commands them, nor the Law subdueth them. But hark and I will tell
thee more. Thou ought always to know, what the form and manner is, that
the Senators Offices given more for friendship then for desert.
have to divide the offices: for sometimes they give them to their friends in
recompense of their friendship, and other times they give them to their
servants, to acquit their services, and sometimes also they give them to
soliciters, to the end they should not importune them, so that few offices
remain for the virtuous, the which only for being virtuous are provided.

O my friend Antigonus, I let you to understand, that since Rome did keep her
renown, and the Comwealth was well governed, the diligence which the Judges
used toward the Senate, to the end they might give them offices, the self same
ought the Senate to have to seek virtuous men, to commit such charge into
their hands. For the office of justice ought to be given not to him which
procures it, but to him that best deserves it.

In the year of the foundation of Rome, 642. years the Roman people had many
wars throughout all the world: That is to say, Caius Celius against those of
Thrace, Gneus Gardon his brother against the Sardes, Iunius Scilla against the
Cimbres; Minutius Rufus against the Daces, Seruilius Scipio against the
Macedonians, and Marius Consul against Iugurtha King of the Numedians: and
amongst all these, the war of the Numidians was the most renowned, and also
perilous. For if Rome had many Armies against Iugurtha to conquer him:
Iugurtha had in Rome good friends, which did favor him. King Boco at that time
was king of the Mauritans, who was Iugurthas friend: in the end, he was
afterward the occasion that Iugurtha was overthrown, and that Marius took
him.

These two Kings Marius the Consul brought to Rome, and triumphed The triumph
of Marius the Roman Consul.
of them, leading them before his triumphant chariot, their necks laden. with
yrons, and their eyes full of tears The which unlucky fortune all the Romans
which beheld lamented, and took great pity of the strangers who^ they heard.
The night after the triumph was ended, it was decreede in the Senate, that
Iugurtha should be beheaded, leaving king Boco alive, deprived of his Country.
And the occasion thereof was this: The Romans had a custom of long time to
put no man to execution before that first with great diligence they had looked
the ancient books, to see if any of their predecessors had done any notable
service to Rome, whereby the poor prisoner might deserve his pardon.

It was found written in a book, which was in the high Capitol, that the
Grandfather of King Boco was very sage, and a special friend to the Roman
people, and that once he came to Rome, and made diverse orations to the Senate,
and amongst other notable sentences, there was found in that book, that he had
spoken these words: Woe be to that realm where all are such, that neither the
good amongst the evil, The speech of the Grandfather of K. Boco.
nor the evil amongst the good are known. Woe upon that realm, which is the
entertainer of all fools, and a destroyer of all Sages. Woe is that Realm
where the good are fearful, and the evil too bold: Woe on that realm where
the patient are despised, and the seditious commended. Woe on that Realm which
destroys those which watch for the good, and crowns those that watch to do
evil. Woe to that realm, where the poor are suffered to be proud: and the
rich tirants. Woe to that realm, where all know the evil, and no man does
follow the good. woe to that realm where so many evil vices are openly
committed, which in another country dare not secrrtly be mentioned. Woe to
that realm, where all procure that they desire, where all attain to that they
procure, where all think that this is evil, where al speak that they think,
and finally, where all may do that which they will. In such and so unfortunate
a realm where the people are too wicked, let every man beware he be not
inhabitant: For in short time they shall see upon him, either the ire of the
Gods, the fury of the men, the depoputation of the good, or the desolation of
the Tirants.

Diverse other notable things were contained in those Orations, the which are
not (at this present touching my letter, But forasmuch as we thought it was a
very just thing, that they should pardon the folly of the The Nephew pardoned
for the good desert of the Grandfather.
Nephew for the deserts of the wise grandfather.

Thou shall read this my letter openly to the Pretours and Judges, which are
resident there, and the case shall be, that when thou shall read it, thou
shall admonish them, that if they will not amend secretly, we will punish them
openly.

I wrote unto thee the last day, that as touching thy banishment, I would be
thy friend: and be thou assured, that for to enjoy thy old friendshipp, and to
perform my word, I will not let to danger my person.

I write unto Panutius my Secretary to succor thee with two thousand
Sesterses, wherewith thou may relieve thy poverty: and from hence I send
thee my letter, wherewith thou may comfort thy sorrowful hear. I say no
more to thee in this case, but that thorough the Gods thou may have
contentation of all that thou enioyest, health of thy person, and comfort of
thy friends: the bodily evils, the cruel enemies, the perilous destenies, be
far from me.

Mark, In the behalf of thy Wife Rufa, I have saluted my wise Faustine: she
and I both have received with joy thy salutations, and with thanks we sent
them you again, I desire to see thy person here in Italy, and wish my fever
quartens there with thee in Scicilie.

CHAP. XII. An exhortation of the Author to Princes and Noble men, to embrace
peace, and to eschew the occasions of war.
OCtauian Augustus, second Emperor of Rome, is commended of all, for that The
vertous life of Augustus second Emperor of Rome described.
he was so good of his person, and so well beloved of all the Roman Empire.
Suetonius Tranquillus says, that when any man dyed in Rome in his time, they
gave great thanks to the Gods for that they took their life from them, before
their Prince knew what death meant. And not contented only with this, but in
their Testaments they commanded their heirs and children, that yearly they
should offer great sacrifices of their proper goods in all the Temples of Rome,
to the end the Gods should prolong the days of their Prince. That time indeed
might be called the golden age, and the blessed land, where the Prince loved
so well his subjects, and the subjects so much obeyed their prince: for seldom
times it happens that one will be content with the services of all, neither
that all will be satisfied with the government of one.

The Romans for none other cause wished for the good Prince (more then for
themselves) life, out because he kept the commonwealth in peace. The virtue of
this Prince deserved much praise, and the good will of the people merited no
less commendation: he for deserving it to them, and they for giving it to him:
for to say the truth, there are few in number that so heartily love others,
that for their sakes will hate themselves.

There is no man so humble, but in things of honor will be content to go
before, save only in death, where he can be content to come behind. And this
seems to be very clear, in that that now dies the father, now the mother,
now the husband, now the wife, now the son, and now his neighbor, in the end
every man is content with the death of an other, so that he with his own life
may escape himself.

A Prince which is gentle, patient, stout, sober, honest and true, truly he of
right ought to be commended: but The virtues of a godly prince described.
above all, and more then all, the Prince which keeps his Common wealth in
peace, has great wrong if he not of all beloved? What good can the Common
wealth have, wherein there is war and dissension? Let every man say what he
will, without peace no man can enjoy his own, no man can eat without fear,
no man sleeps in good rest, no man goes safe by the way, no man trusts his
neighbor. Finally, I say, that where there is no peace, there we are
threatened daily with death, and every hour in fear of our life. It is good
the Prince do scour the realm of thieves, for there is nothing more unjust,
the^ that which the poor with toil and labor get, should with vagabonds in
idleness be wasted. It is good the Prince do weed the realm of blasphemers,
for it is an evident token that those that dare blaspheme the king of heaven,
will not let to speak evil of the princes of the earth. It is good the prince
do clear the common wealth of vagabonds and players: for play is so evil a
mothe, that it eats the new gown and consumes the dry wood. It is good that
the Prince do forbid his subjects of prodigal banquets, and superfluous
apparel: for where men spend much in things superfluous, it chances
afterward that they want of their necessaries. But I ask now, What avails
it a Prince to banish all vices from his Commonwealth, if otherwise he keeps
it in war. The only end why Princes are Princes; is to follow the good, and
to eschew the evil. What shall you say therefore, since that in the time of
wars, Princes cannot reform vices, nor correct the vicious.

Oh, if Princes and Noble men knew what damage they do to their countries,
the day that they take upon them war: I think and also affirm, that they
would not only not begin it, nor yet any private person durst War ought to
be eschewed, and peace entertained.
scarely remember it. And he that does counsel the Prince the contrary, ought
by reason to be judged to the Commonwealth an enemy. Those which counsel
Princes to seek peace, and to keep peace, without all doubt they have wrong
if they be not heard: if they be loved: and if they be not credited, For the
counselor which for a light ocasion counsels his Prince to begin war:
I say unto him either choler surmounteth, or else good Conscience wants.

It chances often times that the prince is vexed and troubled, because one
certifieth him, that a province is rebelled, or some other prince has invaded
his country, and as the matter requires, the Council is assembled.

There are some too rash counselors, which immediately judge peace to be
broken as lightly, as others do desire that Wars should never begin.

When a Prince in such a case asks counsel: they ought forthwith not to
answer him suddenly. For things concerning the Wars, ought with great
wisdom first to be considered, and then with as much aduisement to be
determined.

King David never took any war in hand, though he were very wise, but first
he counseled with GOD; The good Judas Machabeus, never entered into Battle,
but first he made his K, David a pattern for Princes, how to stain war.
prayer unto Almighty GOD.

The Greeks and Romans durst never make war against their enemies, but
first they would do sacrifice to the Gods, and consulte also with their Oracles.

The matters of Justice, the recreations of his person, the reward of the good,
the punishment of the evil; and the dividing of rewards, a Prince may
communicate with any private man: but all matters of War, he ought first to
counsel with GOD: For, the Prince shall never have perfect victory over his
Enemies, unless he first commit the quarrel thereof unto GOD.

Those which counsel Princes, (whether it be in matters of war, or in the
affairs of peace) ought always to remember this Sentence: That they give him
such counsels always when he is alone in his Chamber, as they would do if
they saw him at the point of death very sick. For, at that instant, no man
dare speak with Flattery, nor burden his conscience with bryberie.

When they entreat of war, they which move it ought first to consider, that
if it came not well to pass, all the blame will be imputed to their counsel.
And if that his substance be not presently able to recompense the loss, let
him assure himself, that here after his soul shall suffer the pain.

Men ought so much to love peace, and so much to abhor war, that I believe
that the same preparation that a Priest has in his Conscience with GOD before
he presume to receive the holy Communion: even the same ought a counselor to
have, before that unto his Prince he gives counsel concerning war. Since
princes are men, it is no marvel though they feel iniuties as men, and that
they desire Howmuch every ought to prefer peace before war.
to revenge as men. Therefore, for this cause they ought to have wise men of
their counsel, whereby they should mittigate and assuage their griefs and
troubles. For, the Counselors of Princes, ought never to counsel thing, they
being angry, wherewith after they may justly be displeased, when they be
pacified.

Following our matter, in counting the goods which are lost, in loosing peace:
and the evils which increase in winning wars: I say, that amongst other
things the greatest evil is, that in time of War they lock up closely all
virtues, and set at liberty all vices,

During the time that Princes and great Lords maintain war, though they be
Lords of their Realms and dominions by right, yet for a truth they are not
to indeed.

For, at that time the Lords desire more to content their Soldiers and
subjects, then the Souldyers and subjects seek to content the Lords. And this
they do, because they through power might vanquish their enemies, and further,
through the love of their money, relieve their necessities.

Either Princes are governed by that whereunto by sensuality they are moved,
or else by that wherewith reason is contented. If they will follow reason, they
have too much of that How vnsat^able a covetous man is.
they possess: but if they desire to follow the sensual appetite, there is
nothing that will content them For, as it is impossible to dry up all the
water in the Sea: so it is hard to satisfy the heart of man that is given to
covetousness.

If Princes take upon them wars, saying: that their right is taken from them:
and that therefore they have a conscience: Let them beware that such conscience
be not corrupted. For, in the world there is no War justified: but for the
beginning thereof, the Princes at one time or an other, have their Consciences
burdened.

If Princes take upon them War, for none other cause, but to augment their
state and dignity. I say that this is a vain hope: For, they consume and lose
(for the most part,) more in one or two years wars, then ever they get
again during their life.

If Princes take upon them War, to revenge an injury: as well for this also
it is a thing superfluous: For, many go to the wars being wronged only
with one thing, and afterward they return iniuried with many.

If Princes take upon them Wars for none other cause but to win honor: me
thinks also that that is an unprofitable conquest: For, me thinks that
Fortune is not a person so famous, What inco^ueniences are incident to Wars.
that into her hands a man may commit his honor, his goods, and his life.

If Princes take upon them war to leave of them in the world to come some
memory: this no less them the other seems to me vain. For without doubt,
if we examine the hystories that be past, we shall find those to be more in
number which have bin defamed: then those which for vanquishing of their
enemies, have bin renowned.

It Princes take upon them wars, supposing that there are in an other
country more pleasures and delights then in their own; I say, that to think
this, proceeds of little experience, and of less conscience. For, to a
Prince there can be no greater shame, nor conscience, then to begin wars
in strange Realms, to maintain his own pleasures and vices at home.

Let no Princes deceive themselves, in thinking that there are in strange
Countries more things then in their own: For in the end, there is no Land nor
nation in the world, where there is not Winter, and Summer, night and day,
sickness and health, riches and poverty, mirth and sadness, friends and
enemies, vicious, and virtuous, alive and dead. Finally, I say, that in all
parts all things What may move Princes to lo^^ peace, and ^ate war.
agree in one, save only the dispositions of men, which are diverse. I would
ask Princes and great Lords, the which do and will live at their pleasure,
what they want in their Realms, yea though they be little? If they will hunt,
they have mountains and Parkes: if they will fish they have pondes: if they
will walk, they have rivers, if they will refresh themselves they have baynes:
if they will be merry, they have Musicians: if they delight in apparrelling
them selves, they have rich clothes: if they will give, they have money: if
they desire women, they have wives: if they will take their rest, they have
their Gardens: if Winter annoye them, they have hot Countries: and if they
will eat, they want no meats. He that with peace has all these things in his
own Dominion, why then with war do he seek them in a strange Country?

Men oftentimes fly from one Country to another, not to be more devout, nor
more virtuous, but to have greater liberty and opportunity to haunt vices. And
afterward when they see the ends of their deeds, they cannot refrain their
hearts from sighs, since they might have enjoyed that at home with peace,
which in strange Countries, they sought with troubles.

There are so few things wherewith we are contented in the world, that if
perchance a man find in any one place, any one thing, wherewith to content
him, Let him beware that the Devil do not deceive him, saying: That in such
another place he may receate himself better: For whether soever we go, we
shall find such penury, and want of true pleasures, and comforts, and such
plenty and copious abundance of troubles and torments that for to comfort us,
in an hundred years we scarcely find one, and to torment us, we find at
every foot a thousand.

CHAP. XIII. The Author recites the commodities which come of peace, declaring
how diverse Princes upon light occasions, have made cruel wars.
Dimo an ancient king of Ponto, said unto Questions demanded by King Dimo, and
answered.
a Philosopher that was withhim: Tell me Philosopher, I have health, I have
honor, and I have riches, Is there any thing more to be desired amongst men,
or to be given of the Gods in this life?

The Philosopher answered him: I see that I never saw, and I hear that I
never heard: For health riches, and honor, the Gods seldom times do thrust
in one person, his time is so short that does possess them, that they have
more reason for to pray that they might be quieted of them, then for to be
proud for that they possess them.

And I tell thee further King Dimo, It little profits that the Gods have
given thee all these things, if thou dooest not content thy self therewith,
the which I think they have not given thee, nor never will given thee: For the
Gods are so just in dividing their gifts, that to them, to whom they give
contentation, they take from them their riches, and those whom they give
riches, they take their contentation. Plutarch in the first of his pollitikes
puts this example, and he declares not the name of this Philosopher.

O how great a benefit is that which the Gods give to Princes and great Lords,
in giving them their health, in giving them riches, and in giving them honor:
but if besides those he gives them not contentation, I say that in giving
them the goods, he gives them travel and danger: for if the travel of the
poor be greater then the travel of the rich: without comparison, the
discontentation of the rich is greater then the discontentation of the poor.

Men little regarding their health become sick, little esteeming their riches
become poor, and because they know not what honor is; they become
dishonored. I mean, that the rash Princes until such time as Commodities
that follow peace.
they have bin well beaten in the wars, will always little regard peace. The
day that you Princes proclaim wars against your enemies, you set at liberty
all vices to your subjects: Yet you say your meaning is not they should be
evil. I say it is true. Yet all this joined together, ye give them occasion
that they be not good. Let us know what thing war is, and then we shall see,
whether it be good or evil to follow it.

In wars they do naught else but kill men, rob the Temples, spoil the
people, destroy the Innocents, give liberty to thieves, separate friends, and
raise strife: all the which things cannot be done without great hurt of
justice, and scrupulosity of conscience.

The seditious man himself cannot deny us, that if two Princes take upon them
wars between them, and that both of them seem for to have right, yet the
one of them only has Wars unjustly taken in hand, never come to good end.
reason: So that the Prince which shall fight against Justice, or defend the
unjust cause, shall not escape out of that war justified: Not issuing
out-iustified, he shall remain condemned: and the condemnation shall be,
that all the losses, murders, burnings, hangings, and robberies, which were
done in the one, or other commonwealth, shall remain upon the account of him,
which took upon him the unjust war, Although he does not find another Prince
that will demand an account of him here in this life, yet he shall have a
just Judge that will in another place lay it to his charge.

The Prince which is virtuous, and presumes to be a Christian, before he
begin the war, ought for to consider what loss or profit will ensue
thereof. Wherein if the end be not prosperous, he loses his goods and honor:
and if he perchauce attain to that he desired, peradventure his desire was to
the damage of the Commonwealth, and then he ought not to desire it. For the
desire of one should not hurt the profit of all.

When God our Lord did create Princes for Princes, and people accepted them for
their Lords, It is to believe that the Gods did never command such things,
nor the men would ever have excepted such if they had thought that Princes would
not have done that they were bound: but rather that whereunto they were
inclined. For if men follow that whereunto their sensuality enclineth them, they
always err: therefore if they suffer themselus to be governed by reason they
are always sure. And besides that, Princes should not take upon the^ wars,
for the burdening of their consciences, the mis-spending of their goods, and
the loss of their honor: they ought also to remember the duties that they owe
to the Commonwealth, the which they are bound to For what reason wars ought not
to be taken in hand.
keep in peace and justice. For we others need not governors to search us
enemies, but good Princes, which may defend us from the wicked.

The divine Plato in his 4. book De Legibus says: that one demanded him why
he did exalt the Lydians so much, and so much dispraise the Lacedaemonians, etc?

Plato answered: If I commend the Lydians, it is for that they never were
occupied but in tylling the Field: and if I do reprove here the
Lacedaemonians, it is because they never knew nothing else but to conquer
realms. And therefore I say, that more happy is that realm, where men have
their hands with laboring full of blysters: then where their arms in fighting,
are wounded with Swords. These words which Plato spoke are very true, and
would to GOD that in the gates and hearts of Princes they were written.

Plinius in an Epistle says: that it was a Proverb, much used amongst the
Greeks: That he was king, which never saw king. The like may we say, that he
only may enjoy peace, which never knew what wars meant.

For, simple and innocent though a man be, there is none but will judge him
more happy, which occupies his hand kerchiefe to dry the sweat off his
brows: then he that breaks it to wipe the blood off his head.

The Princes and great Lords which are lovers of wars, ought to consider,
that they do not only hurt in general all men, but also especially the good:
and the reason is, that although they of their own wills do abstain from
Battle, do not spoil, do not rebel, nor slay: yet it is necessary for them
to endure the iniuryes, and to suffer their own loss and damages: For none
are meet for the war, but those which little esteem their life; and much
less their consciences.

If the war were only with the evil against the evil, and to the hurt and
hinderance of the evil, little should they feel, which presume to be good.
But I am sorry the good are persecuted: the good are robbed: and the good are
slain. For, if it were otherwise (as I have said,) the evil against the
evil, we would take little thought both for the vanquishing of the one, and
much less for the destruction of The war, destruction, of the good and godly
men.
the other. I ask now, what fame, what honor, what glory, what victory, or
what Riches in that war can be won, wherein so many good, virtuous, and wise
men are lost?

There is such penury of the good in the world, and such need of them in the
commonwealth: that if it were in our power, we with our tears ought to pluck
them out of their graves, and give them life: and not to lead them into the
Wars, as to a shambles to be put to death.

Pliny in one Epistle, and Seneca in another, say: that when they desired a
Roman Captain that with his armey he should enter into a great danger,
whereof great honor should ensue unto him, and little profit to the
Commonwealth. He made answer.

For nothing would I enter into that danger, if it were not to give life to a
Roman Citizen: For I desire rather to go enuironned with the good in Rome,
then to go laden with treasures into my Country.

Comparing Prince to Prince, and law to law, and the Christan with the Pagan:
without comparison the soul of a Christian ought more to be esteemed the^ the
life of a Roman; For the good Roman observes it as a law, to dye in the
war, but the good christian has the precept, to live in peace.

Snetonius Tranquillus in the second Book of Caesar's says, That among all
the Roman Princes there was no Prince so well beloved, nor yet in the wars
so fortunate as Augustus was.

And the reason hereof is, because that Prince never began any war, The
reason why the Emperozr Augustus was o fortunate.
unless by great occasion he was thereunto provoked. O, of how many princes
(not Ethnicks, but Christians) we have heard and read all contrary to this,
which is, that were of such large conscience, that they never took upon them
any war that was just, to whom I swear and promise, that since the war
which they in this world began, was unjust: the punishment which in another
they shall have is most righteous.

Xerxes King of the Persians being one day at dinner, one brought unto him
very fair and sauourie figs of the province of Athens: the which being set
at the table, he swear, by the immortal Gods, and by the bones of his
predecessors, that he would never eat figs of his Country, but of Athens,
which were the best of all Greece. And that which by words of mouth king Xerxes
swear, by valiant deeds, with force and shield he accomplished, and went
forthwith to conquer Grecia, for no other cause but for to fill himself with
the figs of that Country, so that he began that war not only as a light
prince, but also as a vicious man.

Titus Liuius says, that when the French men did taste of the wine of Italy,
immediately they put them selves in Arms, and went to conquer the Country,
without having any other occasion to make war against them: So that the
Frenchmen for the licoriousnesse of the pleasant wines, lost the dear blood of
their own hearts.

King Antigonus dreamed one night, that he saw King Methridates with a Sith
in his hand, who like a Mower did cut all Italy, And there fell such fear to
Antigonus, that he A dream of King Antigonus.
determined to kill King Methridates: so that this wicked prince for crediting
a light dream, set all the world in an uproar.

The Lumbardes being in Pannonia, heard say that there was in Italy sweet
fruits, sauourie flesh, odorifetous Wines, fair Women, good Fish, little
cold, and temperate heat: the which news moved them not only to desire
them, but also they took weapons to go conquer Italy: So that the Lumbardes
came not into Italy to revenge them of their enemies, but to be there more
vicious and riotous.

The Romans and the Carthagenians were friends of long time, but after they
knew that there was in Spain great mines of gold and silver, immediately arose
between them exceeding cruel wars, so that those two puissant Realms, for
to take from each other their goods, destroyed their own proper Dominions.

The Authors of the above said, were Plutarchus, Paulus Diaconus, Berosus, and
Titus Liutus. O secret judgments of God, which suffer such things! O
merciful goodness of thee my Lord, that permits such things, that through
the dream of one prince in his chamber, another for to rob the treasures of
Spain, another to fly the cold of Hungary, another to drink the Wines of
Italy, another to eat figs of Greece, should put all the Country to fire and
blood.

Let not my pen be cruel against all Princes which have unjust wars: For
as Traianus said, Just war is more worth then fained peace. I commend,
approve, and exalt princes which are careful and stout, to defend and keep
that which their predecessors left them: For admit that for dispossessing
them, hereof comes all the breach with other princes.

Look how much his enemy offends his conscience for taking it: so much
offends he his Commonwealth for not defending it. The words which the divine
Plato spoke in the first book of his Laws, did satisfy me greatly, which
were these: It is not meet we should be too extreme in commending those which
have peace: nor let us be too vehement in reproouing A true saying of Plato.
those which have war: For it may be now, that if one have war, it is to
the end to attain peace, And for the contrary, if one have peace, it shall be
to the end to make war. Indeed Plato said very true For it is more worth to
desire short war for long peace, then short peace for long war.

The Philosopher Chilo being demanded whereby a good or evil Governor might
be known, he answered. There is nothing whereby a good and evil man may be
better known then in that for which bey strive. For the tyrannous Prince
offers himself to aye to take from another, but the virtuous Prince
trauelleth to defend his own.

When the Redeemer of this world departed from this world, he said not, I
give ye my war, or leave ye my war: but I leave you my peace, Our Savior
Christ the true pattern of peace.
and give you my peace. Thereof ensues, that the good Christian is bound to
keep the peace, which Christ so much commanded, then to invent war to
revenge his proper injury, which God so much hated.

If Princes did that they ought for to do, and in this case would believe me:
for no temporal thing they should condescend to shed man's blood, if nothing
else, yet at the least the love of him which on the Cross shedd his precious
blood for us, should from that clean dissuade us. For the good Christians are
commanded to bewail their own sins: but they have no license to shed the
blood of their enemies.

Finally, I desire, exhort, and further admonish all princes and great Good
counsel, and worthy to be followed.
Lords, that for his sake that is prince of peace, they love peace, procure
peace, keep peace, and live in peace. For in peace they shall be rich, and
their people happy.

CHAP. XIIII. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius writes to his friend Cornelius,
wherein he describes the discommodities of war, and the vanity of Triumph.
MArcus Aurelius wishes to thee Cornelius his faithful friend, health to thy
person, and good luck against all evil fortune. Within fifteen days after I
came from the war of Asia, whereof I have triumphed here in Rome, remembering
that in times past thou were a companion of my travel: I sent immediately to
certify thee of my triumphs: For the noble hearts do more rejoice of their
friends joy, then they do of their own proper delights.

If thou will take pains to come when I send to call thee, be thou assured,
that on the one part, thou shall have much pleasure to see the great abundance
of riches that I have brought out of Asia, and to behold my receiving into
Rome: and on the other, thou can not keep thy self from weeping to see such
a sort of Captives (the which entered in before the triumphant chariots) bound
and naked, to augment the conquerours most glory: and also to them vanquished
to be a greater ignomie. Seldom times we see the Sun shine bright all the day
long, but first in the Summer there has been a mist, or if it be in the
winter, there has been a frost.

By this Parable, I mean, that one of the miseries of this world is, that we
shall see few in this world which now be prosperous: but before have had
fortune, in some cases, very malicious: For we see by experience, some come to
be very poor, and other chance to attain to great riches: so that through
the empouerishing of those, the other become rich and prosperous.

The weapon of the one causes the other to laugh: so that if the bucket that
is empty above, does not go down, the other which is full beneath cannot come
up.

Speaking therefore according to sensuality, thou would have been glad that
day to have seen our triumph, with the abundance of riches, the great number
of Captives, the diversity of beasts, the valiantnes of the Captains, the
sharpness of wits Dangers incident to wars.
which we brought from Asia, and entered into Rome, whereby thou might well
know the dangers that we escaped in the ware.

Wherefore speaking the truth the matter between us and our enemies was so
debated, that those of us that escaped best, had their bodies sore wounded, and
their veins also almost without blood.

I let thee know my Cornelius, that the Parthians are warlike men, and in
dangerous enterprises very hardy and bold. And when they are at home in their
Country, every one with a stout heart defends his house: and surely they do
it like good men, and valiant Captains: For if we other Romans, without
reason, and through ambition, do go to take an other man's, it is meet and
just, that they by force do defend their own.

Let no man through the abundance of malice, or want of wisdom envy the
Roman Captain; for any triumph that is given him by his mother Rome: for
surely to get this only one days honor, he aduentureth his life a thousand
times in the field: I will not speak all that I might say of them that we
led forth to the wars, nor of them which we leave here at home in Rome,
which be all cruel Judges of our fame: for their judgment is not upright
according to equity, but rather proceeds of malice and envy. Though they
take me for a patient men, and not far out of order, yet I let thee know my
Cornelius, that there is no patience can suffer, nor heart dissemble to see
many Romans to have such great envy, (which through their malicious tongues)
pass not to backebite other men's triumphs. For it is an old disease of evil
men, through malice to backebite that with their tongue, which through their
cowardnesse, they never durst enterprise with their hands.

Notwithstanding all this, you you must know, that in the war you must first
often hazard your life, and Envy and malice a deadly foe to true honor.
afterward to the discretion of such tongues commit your honor. Our folly is
so foolish, and the desires of men so vain, that more for one vain word, then
for any profit, we desire rather to get vain glory with traue), then to
seek a good life, with rest. And therefore willingly we offer our lives now,
to great travel and pain: only that among vain men hereafter we may have a
name.

I swear by the immortal Gods, unto thee my Cornelius, that the day of my
triumph, whereas to the seeming of all those of this world, I went triumphing
in the chariot openly: yet I ensure thee my heart wept secretly: Such is the
vanity of men, that though of reason we be admonished, called, Man puts his
life in danger only to win honor.
and compelled, yet if we fly from her, and contrary: though we be rebuked,
evil handeled, and despised of the world, yet we will serve it.

If I be not deceived, it is the prosperity of Foolish men, and want of good
judgments, that cause the men to enter into others Houses by force, rather
then to be desirous to be quiet in their own, with a good will. I mean that
we should in following virtue sooner be virtuous, then in haunting vices, be
vicious: for speaking the truth, men which in all, and for all desire to please
the world, must needs offer themselves to great travel and care.

Oh Rome, Rome, cursed be thy folly, and cursed be he that in thee brought up
so much pride, and be he cursed of men, and hated of Gods, which in thee has
invented such pomp. For, very few are they, that worthily unto it have
attained: but infinite are they, which through it have perished.

What greater vanity, or what equal lightness can be, then that a Roman
captain, because he has conquered Kingdoms, troubled quiet men, destroyed
cities, beaten down castles, robbed the poor, enriched tyrants, carried away
treasors, shed much blood, made infinite widows, and taken many Noble men's
lives, should be afterward (with great triumph of Rome,) received in
recompense of all this damage?

Will thou now that I tell thee a greater folly, which above al other is
greatest? I let thee know, infinite are they that dye in the wars, and one only
carries away the glory thereof: So that these woeful and miserable men, though
for their carkas they have not a grave, yet one captain goes triumphing alone
through Rome. By the immortal Gods I swear unto thee, and let this pass
secretly, as between friends, that the day of my triumph, when I was in my
triumphant chariot, beholding the miserable captives, laden with yrons, and
other men carrying infinite treasours, which we had evil gotten: and to see
the careful widows weep for the death of their Husbands, and remembered so
many noble Romans that lost their lives in Affrike: though I seemed to rejoice
outwardly, yet I ensure How little the Emperor Marc: Aurelius esteemed vain
honors.
thee I did weep drops of blood inwardly. For he is no man borne in the
world, but rather a Fury, bred up in hell among the Furies: that can at the
sorrows of another take any pleasure.

I know not in this case what reputation the Prince, or Captain should make of
himself, that comes from the Wars, and desires to enter into Rome? For,
if he think (as it is reason) on the wounds he has in his body, or the
Treasors which he has wasted, on the places that he has burnt, on the perils
that he has escaped, on the iniuryes which he has received, the multitudes
of men which unjustly are slain, the Friends which he has lost, the enemies
which he has gotten, the little rest that he has enjoyed, and the great travels
that he has suffered: in such case I say, that such a one with sorrowful sighs
ought to lament, and with bitter tears ought to be received. In this case of
triumphing. I neither commend the Assyrians, nor envy the Persians, nor am
content with the Macedonians, nor allow the Caldeans, nor content me with the
Greeks.

I curse the Trojans, and condemn the Cathagenians, because that they
proceeded not acording to the zeal of justice, but rather of the rage of
pride, to set up triumphs, endamaged their countries, and left an occasion to
undo us.

O cursed Rome, cursed thou have been, cursed thou art, and cursed thou shall
be: For if the fatal destenies Wherefore the Emperor cursed Rome.
do not lie unto me, and my judgment deceive me not, and fortune fasten not
the nail: they shall see of thee Rome in time to come, that which we others
presently see of the Realms past. Thou ought for to know, that as thou by
tyranny have made thy self Lady of Lords: so by justice thou shall return to
be the servant of servants.

O unhappy Rome, and unhappy again, I return to call thee. Tell me I pray
thee, why art thou at this day so dear of Merchandise, and so cheap of folly?
where are the ancient fathers which builded thee, and with their virtues
honored thee? in whose stead presently thou magnifyest so many tirants, which
with their vices deface thee. Where are all those noble and virtuous Batons,
which thou have nourished, in whose stead thou have now so many vicious and
vagabonds? Where are those, which for thy liberty did shed their blood, in
whose stead now thou have those, that to bring thee into subjection, have lost
their life? Where are thy valiant Captains, which with such great travel did
endeavor themselves to defend the walls from enemies, in whose stead have
succeeded those that have plucked them down, and peopled them with vices and
vicious? where are thy great priests, they which did always pray in the
temples, in whose stead have succeeded those, that know not but to defile the
churches, and with their wickedness to move the gods to wrath? where are those
so many Philosophers and Orators which with their counsel gouernd thee? in
whose stead have now succeeded so many simple and ignorant, which with their
malice do undo thee? O Rome, all those Ancients have forsaken thee, and we
succeeded those which now are new, and if thou knew truly the virtue of
them, and did consider the lightness of us: the day that they ended their
life, the self same day not one stone in thee should have been left upon
another. And so those fields should have sauoured of the bones of the virtuous,
which now stink of the bodies of the vicious.

Peradventure, thou art more ancient then Babylon, more beautiful then
Jerusalem, more rich then Carthage, more strong then Troy, more in circuit
then Corinth, more pleasant Rome in ancient time the most flourishing City of
the world.
then Tirus, more fertile then Constantinople, more high then Camena, more
invincible then Aquileta, more privileged then Ga^des, more environed with
Towers then Capua, and more flourishing then Cantabria.

We see that all those notable Cities perished, for all their virtuous
defenders: and think thou for to remain, being replenished with so much
vice, and peopled with so many vicious?

O my mother Rome, take one thing for a warning, that the glory which now is of
thee, was first of them, and the same destruction that was of them shall
hereafter light upon thee for such is the world.

For thus goes the world, even as we presently see the troubles of them that
be past: so shall those that be to come, see ours that be present.

CHAP. XV. Marcus Aurelius goes on with his Letter, and declares the order
that the Romans used in setting forth their men of war, and of the
outrageous villainies which Captains and Soldiers use in the war.
I Will now declare unto thee, my friend Cernelius, the order which we have to
The Emperor goes on with his letter, touching the order of war.
set forth men of War and thereby thou shall see the great disorder that is
in Rome: For in the old time there was nothing more looked unto, nor more
corrected then was the discipline of War: And for the contrary, now a days
there is nothing so dissolute, as are our wen of war.

News once spread abroad through the Empire, how the Prince does take upon him
any war, immediately diverse opinions engender amongst the people, and every
one judges diversely upon the war: For as much as one says it is just, and
the Prince that takes it upon him is just. Others say, that it is unjust, and
that the Prince which began it is a tyrant: The poor and sedtious persons
do allow it, to the end they might go, and take other men's goods by force.
The rich and patient do condemn it, because they would enjoy their own in
quiet: So that they do not justify or condemn war, according to the zeal
of justice: but according to the little or much profit, that shall follow them
of that enterprise: I command which am a Roman Emperor, war to be proclaimed,
because a City or province has rebelled, and that according to their Custom
they do not observe the ceremonies of Rome. First you must understand, the
Priests must be called to go immediately to pray to the immortal Customs which
the Romans used before they went to the war.
Gods: for the Roman people never went to shead the blood of their Enemies in
wars: but first the Priests did shed the tears of their eyes in the Temples.

Secondly, all the sacred Senate does go to the Temple of the God Jupiter, and
there they swear all with a solemn oath, that if the enemies, (against whom
they go) do require a new confederation with Rome, or demand pardon of their
faults committed: that (all reuengement laid aside) they shall not deny to give
them mercy.

Thirdly, the Consul which is appointed for to be the Captain of the war,
went to the High Capitol, and there he makes a solemn vow to one of the
Gods, which likes him best, that he will offer him a certain Jewel, if he
return victorious of the same War: and though the Jewel which he does
promise, be of great value, yet all the people are bound for to pay it.

The fourth is, that they set up in the Temple of Mars the Ensign of the
Eagle, which is the ancient Roman Ensign, and that is, that all the Romans
take it for commandment, that no spectacle nor feast be celebrated in Rome,
during the time that their brethren be in the wars.

The fifth, A Pretour mounteth up to the roppe of the gate of Salaria: and
there he blows the Trumpet for to muster men of War, and they bring forth
the Standers and Ensigns, to divide them among the Captains.

How fearful a thing it is to see, that so soon as the Captain is environed
with the ensign, so soon has he license to commit all evils and villainies.
So that he takes it for a bravery to rob the Countries whereby he passes,
and to deceive those with whom he practices. What liberty Captains and
Governors of war have to do evil, and to be evil, it is very manifest in
those whom they lead in their company: For the sons leave their fathers, the
servants their Lords, the Scholars their Masters, the Officers, their offices,
the Priests their Temples, the amorous their loves: and this for none other
cause, but that under the color of the war, their vices should not be
punished by justice.

O my friend Cornelius, I know not how I should begin to say that which I will
tell thee. Thou ought to know, that after our men of war are gone out of
Rome, they neither fear the Gods, neither honor the Temples, they reverence
not the Priests, they have no obedience to their Fathers, nor shame to the
people, dread of justice, neither compassion of their Country, nor remember
that they are children of Rome: and yet very few of them think to end their
life, but that all shame laid aside, they love the condemned idleness, and
hate the just travel. Therefore hark, I will tell thee more, and though it
seems much that I speak, I ensure thee it is but little in respect of that
they do, for so much as some rob temples, others spread rumors: these break
the doors, and those rob the Gods. Sometimes they take the free, The great
outrages that the Roman soldiers did.
sometimes they loose the bond. The nights they pass in plays, the days in
blasphemies, to day they fight like Lions, to morrow they fly like cowards.
Some rebel against the Captains, and others fly to the enemies. Finally, for
all good they are unable: and for all evil they are meet. Therefore to tell
thee of their filthiness, I am ashamed to describe them.

They leave their own wives, and take the wives of others, they dishonor the
daughters of the good, and they beguile the innocent Virgins: there is no
neighbout but they do covet, neither hostess but that they do force, they
break their old wedlock, and yearly seek a new marriage: so that they do
all things what they list, and nothing what they ought.

Do thou think presently, my friend Cornelius, that there are few evils in
Rome, fith so many evil women do go to the war? Here for their sake, men
offend the Gods: they are traitors to their Country, they deny their
patentage, they do come to extreme poverty, they live in infamy, they rob
the goods of others, they waste their own, they never have quiet life, neither
remains any truth in their mouths: Finally, Lewd women oftentimes the cause
of war.
for the love of them, oftentimes war is moved again, and many good men lose
their lives. Let us leave the reasons, and come to Histories.

Thou know right well, that the greatest part of Asia, was conquered and
governed, more with the Women Amazones, then with any barbarous people.

That young, noble and valiant Porro, King of Judea, for want of men and
abundance of women, was overcome of the great Alexander. Hannibal the terrible
Captain of the Carthagenians was always Lord of Italy, until he did permit
women to go to the war. And when he fell in love with a maden of Capua, they
saw him immediately turn his shoulders unto Rome. If Scipio the Affricane had
not scoured the Roman Armies of Leacherie, the invincible Numantia had never
bin won.

The captain Sylla in the wars of Mithridates, and the courageous Marius, in
the wars of the Zimbres, had over their enemies so many victories, because in
their Camps they suffered no women.

In the time of Claudius the Emperor, the Tharentines and Capuanes were very
mortal enemres: insomuch as the one against the other, pitched their Camps;
and by chance one day in the camp of the Capuanes, two captains fell at
variance, because they both loved one Woman: and when the Tharentines perceived
their dissension, immediately with their power they gave them the onset.

Whereof ensued, that through the What mischief followed, by the ^^^^^dnes of
a strumpet.
naughtiness of one evil woman, was lost the Liberty of that goodly City.

I had in this war of Parthes sixteen thousand Horsemen, and twenty four
thousand footmen, and 35. thousand women, and the disorder in this case was so
great, that from the Host I sent my wife Faustine, and the wives of diverse
other Senators home to their houses, that they should keep the old, and
nourish the young.

Our Fathers led women in the old time to the wars, to dress meare for the
whole, and to cure the wounded: but now we lead them to the end cowardes
should have occasion to be Effeminate, and the valiant to be vicious. And in
the end, their Enemies do break their heads, but the women do wound their
hearts.

I will that thou know many other things (my Cornellus,) and they are, that
the Gawles, the Vulcanes, the Flaminii, the Regii, the which are Priests of
the Mother Sybilla, of the God Vulcane, of the God Mars, and of the God
Jupiter: the fear of the Gods set aside, leaving their Temples desert, laying
off their honest garments, nor remembering their holy Ceremonies, breaking
their straight vows, an infinite number of them go to the Camp, where they
love more dishonestly then others: For, it is a common thing, that those which
once presume to be solicity and shamefaste after they are once fleshed, exceed
all others in shame and vice.

It is a most dishonest thing to carry Priests to the Wars, for their office
is to pacify the Gods with tears, and not to threatten men with Weapons.

If perchance Princes would say, It is good to carry Priests to the wars to
offer Sacrifices to the Gods: To Priests exempt from war.
this I answer, that the Temples are buylt to pray, and the Fields ordained
for to fight: So that in one place the Gods would be feared, and in an other
honored and sacrificed.

In the year of the Foundation of Rome. 315. the Consul Vietro passed in to
Asia, and went against the Palestines the which were rebelled against the
Romans, and by the way he passed by the temple of Apollo, in the ysle of
Delphos: and as there he made a prayer unto the God Apollo, very long, to the
end he would reveal unto him whether he should return victorious from Asia,
or not?

The Oracle answered.

Oh Consul Victro, if thou will return victorious from thine Enemies, restore
The answer of the Oracle of Apollo.
our Priests, which thou have taken from our Temples: For we other Gods will
not, that the man whom we choose for our divine service, ye others should
lea^e, to all the vices of the World.

I^ this be true (as it is true indeed) that the God Apollo said unto the
Consul Vietro, me thinks it is no just thing to condescend that the
consecrated Priests should go, and endaunger to loose themselves, in the
Wars,

For as thou know Cornelius, without doubt, greater is the offense which
they do commit in going for to undo themselves, then they do in the service
which they do to Princes, being desirous to fight.

Let us have the Priests in the Temples to pray, and let us see how the
Captains are wont to govern themselves, and in this case thou shall find
that the day that the Senate How the Rumanes were wont to make trial of their
Captains.
do appoint a Senator for Captain, they prove him if he can play at the
Weapons in the Theater.

The Consul leads him to the high Capitol with him, the Eagle is hanged at
his breast, they cast the purple upon his shoulders, they give him money of the
common treasure, immediately he grows into such pride, that forgetting the
poverty past which he suffered in his Country, he thinks one day to make him
Emperor of Rome.

It is a common thing that when fortune exalts men of low estate, to high
degree, they presume much, and know little, and much less what they are worth.
So that if their feeble force were coequall to their high mind, one alone
should suffice to overcome their enemies, and also to win many realms.

The Captains have taken a custom now in Rome, and they tell me that it is
an invention of Manritane, that is, that they do tease their beardes, they
crule their hairs they clippe their words, they do change their garments,
they accompany with murderers, they go the most part armed, they go very fast
to seem fierce, and to conclude they little esteem to be beloved and take it
a great glory to be feared.

And to the intent thou should know, my Cornelius, how much they would be
feared, I will recite thee an history, which is, That I standing one day in
Penthapolin, a Captain of mine, I hearing him, and he not seeing me, for so
much as they would not let him do all that he would have don in the house, he
said unto an hostice of his.

Ye other villains did never know Captains of Arms, therefore know it, if
thou do not know it mother, that the earth can never tremble but when it is
threatened with a Roman Captain, and the Gods do never suffer the Sun to
shine, but where we others are obeyed.

Since thou have now heard that he said, hear also the valiantness that he
has done. Within a short space after, the Captain went unto a battle in
Arabia, where he was the first that fled, and left the Standard alone in the
field, the which had A reward given by the Emperor to a cowardly Captain.
almost made me to lose the battle: But I to recompense his valiant deed
commanded his head to be cut off: For in giving the onset upon the enemies, the
flying of one man does more hurt, then the fighting of two thousand does
profit. I have oftentimes heard the Emperor Traian my Lord say, That the men
which in peace seem most fierce, in wars commonly are most cowards.

It chances that diverse things are compassed, for having only a good
eloquence, others for having witchcraft, others for being very diligent, others
for opening their purse, and truly this is the most and best mean that is
occupied in Rome. But the affairs of war do not consist in talking many
words before their friends: but in fighting manfully in the field against
their enemies: For in the end, men most full of words, are for the most part
cowards in deeds. What will thou I tell thee more, my Cornelius, of the
injuries which the Captains do in the Cities, whereby they pass, of the
slanders which they raise in the provinces where they abide? I let thee know,
that the little worm does not so much harm that gnaweth the wood, the moth to
the garments, the spark unto the towe, the Locust unto the corn, neither the
wyuell to the garners, as the Captains to the people. For they leave no beast
but they lull, nor orchard but they rob, nor wine but they drink, nor dove
house but they clime, nor temple but they spoil, nor chase but they hunt, no
sedition but they raise, no villainy but that they commit. And they do more then
they ought to do, for they eat without meaning to pay, and they will not serve
unless they be well paid: and the worst of all is, that if they have their
pay, immediately they change or play it If they be not paid they rob and
mutine forthwith: so that with poverty they are not content, and with riches
they wax vicious and insolent. The matters is now come to such corruption, and
there is at this day men of war in Rome so careless, that here no captain
seems but an example of murderers, a sturrer up of sedicious persons, an enuyer
of the good, a partaker with all evil, a thief of thieves, a Pirate of
rouers, and finally, I do not say that they seem to be: but I do affirm
that they are the scourge of your virtuous, and a refuge of the vicious.

I would not say this, but yet not withstanding, I ought to say it, because it
is a thing so far out of order, and so much to be laughed at: that these
wicked men though they are our familiar enemies, there is no Prince that rules
them, nor Justice that corrects them, nor fear that does oppress them, nor
law that subdueth them, nor shame that refraineth them, nor parents that
correct them, nor punishment that does abase them, nor yet death that does end
them, but now as men which are without remedy, we let them eat of all.

CHAP. XVI. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius pursues his Letter, showing the great
damages that have ensued for the wars begun with strange realms.
O Unfortunate Rome who was not wont Marcus Aurelius continues his letter,
showing the detriment that follows wars.
to have such evil luck, but the elder thou art, the more unlucky I see
thee: For by writings we read, and also with our eyes we see, that the more
fortunate a city or person has been in the beginning, the more froward
fortune is unto him in the ending. Truly in those ancient times, and in those
glorious worlds, I say, when they were peopled with true Romans, and not as
now (they which have no children but bastards) the Armies were so well taught
that came from Rome as the philosophers which were in the schools of Greece.
If the Greek writings do not lie unto me, Philip the great King of Macedony,
for this is so renowned in histories, and his son the Great Alexander for
this was so fortunate in the Wars, that they had their armies so well
correct, that it rather seemed a Senate which governed, then a Camp which
fought.

In that we can gather out of Titus Liuius, and other Writers, from the time
of Quintus Cincinnatus Dictator, until the noble Marcus Marcellus, were the
most prosperous times of the Roman Empire. For before Kings did travel, and
afterward it was persecuted with Tirants.

In these so happy times, one of the greatest felicities that Rome had, was to
have the warre-like discipline well What felicity the ancient Romans took in
warlike discipline.
corrected. And then Rome began to fall when our Armies began to do
damage: For if those of the war have truce with vices, the others of the Common
wealth cannot have peace with virtues.

O cursed be thou Asia, and cursed be the day that with thee we had
conquest: For we have not seen the good that have followed us of thy
conquest, until this present, and the loss and damage which from thee come
unto us shall be lamented in Rome for ever.

O cursed Asia we spend our treasures in thee, and thou have given unto us thy
vices. In change of our valiant men, thou have sent us thy fine mineons, we
have won thy Cities, and thou triumphest of our virtues. We battered thy
fortes, and thou have destroyed our manners: we triumph of thy Realms, and
thou did cut the throtes of our friends. We made to thee cruel wars,
and thou conquerest from us the good peace. With force you were ours, and with
good will we are yours: We are unjust Lords of thy riches, and just tenants
of thy vices.

Finally, thou Asia, art a woeful grave of Rome, and thou Rome art a filthy
sink of Asia. Since our ancient Fathers did content themselves with Rome
alone, why should not we their children content our selves with Rome and Italy?
but that we must go to conquer Asia, where we adventured our honor, and
spend our treasure? If those ancient Romans, being as they were, so
princely Barons of life, and so valiant in fighting, and so hardy for to
command, did content themselves with this little border: why should not we
content our selves, not being as they are, having a Realm rich, and vicious?
I know not what toye took us in the head, to go conquer Asia, and not to
content our selves with Rome? Italy was not so poor of riches, nor so
destitute of Cities, nor so unpeopled of people, nor so solitary of beasts, nor
so vndecked with buildings, nor so barren of good fruits: but that of all these
things we had more then our fathers wished, and also more then we their
children deserved: For me I would say, that it is for want of judgment, or
abundance of pride, for us to seek to exceed our Forefathers in Seigniorie,
when we are not coequall unto them in virtue. I was contented with all things
of my forefathers, save only that they were a little proud and seditious, and
herein we their children do resemble them well.

For so much as we are not only proud and feditious, but also covetous and
malicious: so that in virtuous things we go backward, and in unlawful
works we go forward. What is become of the great victories that our
forefathers had in Asia? What is become of the infinite Treasure they have
robbed in the Country? What is become of the great number of captives, that
they took in the war: What is become of the riches which every one brought
home to his house? What is become of the valiant Kings which they took in that
Conquest?

What is become of the Feasts and Triumphs, wherewith they entered triumphing
into Rome?

What will thou I say more unto thee in this case? (my friend Cornelius) but
that all they which invented the war are dead, all those which defended that
Country are dead, all those which entered triumphing into Rome are dead: and
finally, all the riches and triumphs which our Fathers brought from Asia,
they and those in short space had an end, except the vices and pleasures
whereof we see there is no end.

O if the valiant Princes knew, what a thing it is to invent wars in strange
Realms, what travels they seek for their persons, what cares in their hearts,
what trouble to their subjects, what waste to their treasures, what poverty to
their friends, what pleasures to their enemies, what destruction of the good,
what liberty of the evil, and what occasion they give to strangers to speak,
what universal evil they sow in their natural Countries, and what evil
poison they do leave to their heirs: I swear by the faith of a good man, that
if as I feel it, Princes did feel it, and as I taste it, Princes did taste
it, and also as I have proved it, princes did prove it: I do not say, that
with effusion of blood I would take realms by force: but also they offering
them to me with tears, I would not take them willingly. For speaking the
truth, It is not the point of valiant Princes for to sustain an other man's, to
put their own in ieopardy.

I ask now, what profit took Rome of the conquest of Asia? I admit that it
durst conquer it, that it was hardy in winning it, obstinate in fighting, and
happy in taking it: should it therefore be fortunate in maintayning it? I say
and affirm, and of that I say, I do not repent me: That it is possible to
take Asia, but it is but a folly to presume to maintain and defend it.

Do thou not think it a great folly to presume to maintain Asia, since
there never comes news of a victory, but that it is occasion of What
mischief came to Rome by conquering Asia.
an other battle, and that for to sustain watre, they rob all Italy? In
Asia our money is spent, our children are perished.

In Asia dyed our Fathers, for Asia they make us pay tributes: In Asia the good
horses are consumed: Into Asia they carry all our corn: In Asia all the
thieves are nourished: From Asia comes all the seditious persons: In Asia all
the good do perish: From Asia, they send us all the vices. And finally, in
Asia all our treasures are spent, and in Asia all our excellent Romans are
killed.

And since this is the service that Asia does to Rome, why will Rome continue
war with Asia? Other Princes before us have conquered Asia, taken Asia, and
possessed Asia: but in the end, when they saw that it was a Country, where
they feared not the Gods, nor acknowledged subjection to their Princes, neither
that they were apt to retain laws, they determined to forsake them, because
they found by experience, that they neither weary their bodies with wars,
neither win their hearts with benefits. Those Princes being hardy, nor so bold
to sustain Asia by land, should we others presume to succor it by sea? They
forsake it being neighbors, and will we others maintain it being strangers?
In my opinion, Asia is a Country, where all the valiant men have employed their
valiantness, where all the fools have proved their folly, where all the proud
have showed their pride, where all the Princes entered in with might, where all
thetyrants have employed their Life: but in the end, it neither profits the
one to will it, nor to the others to know it, and yet much less to vanquish
it.

I know not the man that loves Asia, that wills well to Asia, that speaks
well of Asia, or that favors the things of Asia: since she gives us
occasion to speak daily, to sigh nightly, and to weep hourly.

If men attained to the secret to know the Fatal Destenyes, with the which
the Gods have created Asia: they would not strive so much in the conquest
thereof. For, the Gods have created it in such a sign, that it should be a
common pasture where all feed, The great miseries that were specified of Asia.
a common Market, where all sell: a common-Inne, where all rest: a common table
where all play: a common House, where all dwell: a common Country, where all
remain: and thereof it comes, that Asia is desired of many, and governed of
few. For, being as it is a common country, every man will make it his own
proper.

Peradventure thou will think my friend Cornelius, that I have spoken now all
the evils of Asia: but hearken yet I will form thee a new question again.
For, according to the damages which have followed (from Asia) to our mother
Rome, time shall rather want to write, then matter to declare. Not without
tears I say, that which I will say, that there was never any Roman captain
that did kill ten thousand Asians, with the weapons he brought into Asia: but
that he lost a hundredth thousand Romans, with the vices they brought to Rome.
So that the Asians by the hand of their enemies dyed with honor, and left us
Romans alive, full of their vices with infamy.

I ask now what they were that invented to dine in common places, to suppe in
secret gardens, to apparel the women as men in the Theaters, to color the
flesh of Priests with yeallow? to noynte the Women as men in the Bath, the
Senators going smelling to the Senate? Princes to be apparelled with purple,
against the ancient decree? To eat twice in the day, as the tyrant Dennys
did, to keep Harlots and concubines as they of Tire do: to speak blasphemy
against the gods, which were never heard of before in the Empire? These said
vices of Asia, What vices were brought to Rome, from Asia.
Asia has presently sent to Rome.

At the same time, when in those parts of the Orient, the war was kindeled:
ten valiant captains brought these vices to Rome, whose names my pen shall
pardon to tell, because their vile offenses should not obscure their valiant
deeds. Before that Rome conquered Asia, we were rich, we were pacient, we
were sober, we were wise, we were honest, and above all, we lived well
contented.

But now since that time we have given our selves to forget the pollicyes of
Rome, and to learn the pleasure of Asia: so that all vices may be learned in
Rome, as all Sciences may be heard in Greece.

By this above rehearsed, all warlike Princes may see, what profit they have
to conquer strange Realms, etc. Let us now leave the vices, which in What
inconvenience comes by co^quering strange Realms,
the wars are recovered; and talk of money which the princes covet and love.
And in this I say, that there is no Prince brought into such extreme poverty,
as he which conquereth a strange country.

Oh Cornelius: thou have not seen how Princes more of a will, then of
necessity, do waste their treasures: how they demand that of another man's,
and how their own does not suffice them: they take those of Churches: they
seek great Lones, they invent great Tributes: they demand great Subsidies:
they give strangers occasion to speak, and make themselves hated of their
subjects. Finally, they pray their subjects, and humble themselves to their
enemies.

Since I have declared the damages of war: I will now declare what the
original of war is.

For it is impossible that the physician apply unto the sick agreeable
medecin, if we know not of what humor the sickness does proceed.

Princes, since they came of men, are nourished with men, do counsel with
men, and live with men, and to conclude, they are men. Sometimes through pride,
which abounds in them, sometimes through want of counsel, they themselves
imagine, and other flattrers tells, that though they have much in respect of
other princes, yet they can do little. Also they say unto them, that if their
substance be great, their Fame ought to be greater.

Further, they tell them, that the good Prince ought little to esteem that he
has inherited of his predecessors, in respect of the great deal more he
ought to leave to his successors, Also they tell them, that never prince left
of him any great memory, but inuenting some cruel War against his enemy.
Also they tell them that the hour that one is chosen Emperor of Rome, he may
boldly conquer the whole earth.

These vain reasons being heard of the princes, afterward as their Fortune
is base, and their minds high, immediately they defy their enemies, they open
their Treasures, they assemble great armies, and in the end of all, the Gods
suffer, that they thinking to War the mean and occasion to make a
commonwealth poor.
tkae an other man's goods, they waste and lose their own.

Oh Princes, I know not who does deceive ye, that you which by peace may be
rich, and by war will be poor? Oh Princes, I know not who does deceive you: that
you which may be loved, do seek occasions to be hated? Oh princes, I know
not who does beguyle ye, that ye which may enjoy a sure life, do adventure
your selves to the mutabilitie of Fortune? Oh princes, I know not who does
deceive you: that you so little esteem and weigh your own abundance, and so
greatly set by the wants of others? Oh princes, I know not who does deceive
you, that all having need of you, you should have need of others?

I let thee to know, my Cornelius, though a prince be more quick and
careful then all other his predecessors have bin in Rome; yet it is impossible
that all things touching war, should succeed unto him prosperously. For, How
uncertain the event of War is,
in the greatest need of wars, either he wants money, or his subjects do
not succor him, or time is contrary unto him, or he finds perilous pasges,
he lacks Artillery, or the captains rebel, or else succor comes to his
adversaries: so that he sees himself so miserable, that thoughts do more
oppress his heart, then the enemies do harm his land. Though a prince had no
war, but for to suffer men of war, yet he ought to take upon him no war.

I ask thee now my Cornelius, what travel so great to his person, or what
greater damage to his Realm can his Enemies do, then that which his own men of
war do, etc?

The Enemies, to do the worst they can, will but rob our Frontiers: but our
men of War do rob the whole country. The Enemies we dare, and may resist,
but to ours we cannot, nor dare not speak. The Enemies, the worst they can do,
is once in a month to rob and run their ways: but ours daily do rob,
and remain still. The Enemies fear their enemies only: but ours do fear
their enemies, and have no pity on their friends.

The enemies, the further they go on, the more they diminish: but ours, the
further they go, the more they increase.

I know no greater war that Princes can have then to have men of war in
their realms: For as experience does show us, before the Gods they are
culpable, to Princes importunate, and to the people troublesome: so that they
live to the damage of all, and to the profit of none. By the God Mars I swear
unto thee, (my friend Cornelius) as he may direct my hands in the war, that I
have more complaints in the Senate, of the thefts which my Captains did in
Illyria, then of all the enemies of the Roman people.

Both for that I say, and for that I kept secret, I am more afraid to create an
Ensign of two hundred men of war, then to give a cruel battle to thirty
thousand men: For that battle, fortune (good or evil) forthwith dispacheth,
but with these I can be sure no time of all my life. Thou will say unto me
(Cornelius) that since I am Emperor of Rome, I should remedy this since I know
it: For that Prince which dissembleth with the fault of another, by reason he
will condemn him, as if it were his own.

To this I answer, that I am not mighty enough to remedy it, except by my
remedy there should spring a greater inconvenience. And since thou have not
been a Prince, thou could not fall into that I have, nor yet understand
that which I say: For Princes by their wisdom know many things, the which to
remedy they have no power: So it has been, so it is, so it shall be, so I
found it, so I keep it, so will I leave it them, so I have read it in books,
so have I seen it with my eyes, so have I heard it of my predecessors: And
finally, I say, our Fathers have invented it, and so will we their children
sustain it, and for this evil we will leave it to our heirs. No greater
hinderance to a Common wealth then to keep men of war.


I will tell thee one thing, and imagine that I err not therein, which is,
considering the great damage and little profit, which men of war do bring
to our Common wealth: I think to do it, and to sustain it, either it is the
folly of men, or a scourge given of the Gods. For there can be nothing more
just, then for the Gods to permit, that we feel that in our own houses,
which we cause others in strange houses to lament.

All those things I have written unto thee, not for that it skileth greatly
that I know them: but that my heart is at ease for to utter them: For as
Alcibiades said, the chests and the hearts, ought always to be open to their
friends.

Panutius my Secretary goes in my behalf to visit that Land, and I gave him
this Letter to give thee: with two Horses? wherewith I do think thou will be
contented, for they are Genets.

The Weapons and riches which I took of the Parthians, I have now divided,
notwithstanding I do send thee two Chariots laden with them.

My wife Faustine greeteth thee, and she sends a rich glass for thy
Daughter, and a jewel with stones for thy sister. No more but I do beseech
the gods to give thee a good life, and me a good death.

CHAP. XVII. An Admonition of the Author to Princes and great Lords, to the
intent that the more they grow in years, the more they are bound to refrain
from vices.
AVlus Gelius in his book De noctibus Atticis says, that there was an
ancient custom among the Romans, to A custom among the ancient Romans.
honor and have in great reverence aged men. And this was so inuiolate a Law
amongst them that there was none so noble of blood and lineage, neither so
puissant in riches, neither so fortunate in battles that should go before the
aged men, which were laden with white hayres: so that they honored them as
they did the Gods.

Amongst other, the aged men had these preheminences, that is to say, that in
feasts they sat highest, in the Triumphs they went before, in the Temples
they did sit down, they spoke to the Senate before all others, they had their
garments furred, they might eat alone in secret, and by their only word they
were credited as witnesses.

Finally, I say, that in all things they served them, and in nothing they
annoied them. After the people of Rome began war with Asia, they forsook
all their good Roman customs immediately.

And the occasion hereof was, that since they had no men to sustain the
Commonwealth, by reason of the great multitude of people which died in the
war: they ordained that all the young men should marry, the young maids, the
widows, the free and the bond, and that the honor which had been done until
that time unto the old men, from henceforth should be done unto the married
men, though they were young: So that the most honored in Rome was he, not of
most years, but he that had most children. This Law was made a little before
the first battle of Carthage.

And the custom that the married men were more honored then the old, endured
until the time of the Emperor Augustus, which was such a friend of
Antiquities, that he renewed all the walls of Rome with new stone, and renewed
all the ancient customs of the Commonwealth.

Lycurgus in the laws which he Lycurgus his Laws to the Lacedaemonians.
gave to the Lacedaemonians, ordained, that the young men passing by the old,
should do them great reverence: and when the old men did speak, then the
younger should be silent.

And he ordained also, that if any old man by casualtie did lose his goods,
and came into extreme poverty, then he should be sustained of the Common
wealth: and that in such sustentation they should have respect, not only to
succor him, for to sustain him, but further to give him to live competently.
Plutarch in his Apothegmes declares, that Cato the Censor visiting the corners
of Rome, found an old man sitting at his door weeping, and shedding many
tears from his eyes. And Cato the Censour demanding him why he was so evil
handled, and wherefore he wept so bitterly? the good old man answered him.

O Cato, the Gods being the only Comforters, comfort thee in all thy
tribulations, since thou art ready to comfort me at this woeful hour. As well
as thou know that the consolations of the Heart are more necessary, then
the physic of the body: the which being applied sometimes does heal, and
an other time they do harm. Behold my scabby hands, my swollen legs, my mouth
without Teeth, my peeled Face, my white beard, and my balde head: for thou
(being as thou art) discreet, should be excused to ask me why I weep?

For men of my Age, though they weep not for the little they feel: yet they
ought to weep for the overmuch they live. The man which is laden with tears,
tormented with diseases, Death makes an end fall worldly misery.
pursued with Enemies, forgotten of his friends, visited with mishaps, and with
evil will and poverty: I know not why he demands long life? For there can
be no sharper reuengement of vices, which we commit: then to give us long life.

Though now I am aged, I was young, and if any young man should do me any
injury, truly I would not desire the Gods to take away his life, but that
they would rather prolong his life. For, it is great pity to hear the man
(which has lived long) recount the troubles, which he has endured.

Know thou Cato, if thou do not know it, that I have lived 77. years, and
in this time, I have buried my Father, my Grandfather, two Aunts, and five
uncles. After that I had buried 9. Systers, and 11. Brethren. I have buried
afterward, two lawful wives, and five bond-women, which I have had as my
lemmans.

I have buried also 14. children, and 7. married daughters: and therewith not
contented, I have buried 37. Nephews, and 15. Nieces, and that which grieueth
me most of all is, that I have buried two good friends of mine: One of the
which remained in Capua, and the other which remained was resident here at
Rome.

The death of whom has grieved me more, then all those of my alyance and
pare^tage. For, in the world there is no like loss to that, where a man
loses him whom entierly he loves, and of whom also he is dearly beloved.

The fatal Destenyes ought to content themselves, to have annoyed my house
with so many misfortunes. But all this, and above all this, they have left me a
wicked nephewe, which shall be mine heir, and they have left unto me, that all
my life I shall lament.

Oh Cato, for that thou owe to the Commonwealth; I do desire thee: and by
the immortal Gods I do conjure thee, that since thou art a virtuous Roman,
and Censor of the people, that thou provide for one of these two things: that
is to say, that this my nephew do serve me, or else ordeyne that I dye
forthwith. For, it is a great cruelty that those do pursue me, which are
alive, since it is now forty years, that I ceased not to bewail the dead.

Cato being well informed of that the old man had told him, and since he
found all that true which he spoke, he called unto his presence the young
Nephewe, and said unto him these words:

If thou were such a Child as thou ought to be, thou should excuse me
of pain, and thy self of travel. But since it is not so, I pray thee take
patiently that which I shall command thee: and be thou well assured, that I
will not command thee any thing but that which shall be correspondent to
Justice. A wise Sentence of Cato.


For, the vicious younglings (as thou art) ought to be more ashamed of the
unbridled youthfulness they have committed: then for all the punishments
which is given unto them:

First, I command thou be whipped, because thou art become so disobedient, and
troublesome to thy Graundfather.

Secondly, I command that thou be banished the limits of Rome: because thou
art a vicious young man.

Thirdly, I command that of all the goods which thou have enherited, thou
shall be disinherited, because thou do not obey thy Graundfather.

And the cause why I give such severe sentence is, to the end that from
henceforth the young shall not disobey the Aged, and also that those which have
inherited great treasours, shall not think that men should permit them to be
more vicious then others.

Phalaris the Tyrant writing to a Friend of his, which was very aged, said
these words: the which seemed rather spoken of a Philosopher, then A saying of
Phalaris the Tyrant.
of a tyrant. I have marvelled at thee, and am offended with thee (my friend
(...)) to know as I do, that in years thou art very aged, and in works very
young: and also it grieueth me that thou have lost the credit of knowledge in
the Schools.

It grieueth me more, that through thee the privileges should be lost, which
the old men have accustomed to have in Greece: that is to say, that all the
thieues, all the perjured, and all the murderers were more sure, when by white
hayres they seemed to be old: when they retired to the Aultars of the Temples.

Oh what goodness, Oh what wisdom, what valiantness, and what innocence
ought the aged men to have in the ancient time: since in Rome, they honored
them as Gods, and in Greece they privileged those white hairs as the temples?

Pliny in an Epistle he wrote to Fabarus says, that Pyrrus king of the
Epyrotes, demanded of a philosopher, which was the best city of the world?
who answered him thus:

The best City of the world is Molerda, a place of three hundredth Fyres in
Achaia: because all the walls are of black stones, and all those which
govern have hoary heads.

And further he said: Woe be unto thee Rome: Woe be unto thee Carthage: A
wise answer of a philosopher
Woe be unto thee Numantia: Woe be unto thee Egypt: and woe be unto thee
Athens; Five Cittyes which count themselves for the best of the World: whereof
I am of a contrary opinion.

For, they auaunte themselves to have white Walls: and are not ashamed to have
young Senators.

This philosopher said very well, and I think no man will say less then I
have said.

Of this word Senex, is derived the name of a Senator: For so were the
governors of Rome named: because the first King (that was Romulus,) chose an
hundred aged men to govern the Commonwealth: and commanded that all the
Roman youth should employ themselves to the wars.

Since we have spoken of the honor which in the old time was given to the
ancient men, it is reason we know now, from what years they accounted men
aged: to the end they should reverently be honored as aged men.

For the makers of laws, when they had established the honors which ought
to be done to the Aged, did as well ordain, from what day and year they should
begin.

Diverse ancient philosophers did put six ages, from the time of the birth of
man, until the hour of his death. That is to say: Childe-hood, which lasts
until seven years: Infancy, which lasts until seventeen years: Youth,
which continues till thirty years: Man's estate, which remains The six Ages
of man's life said open and explaned.
till fifty and five years. Age, which endures till threescore, and
eighteen years: Then last of all, Crooked-age, which remains till death.

And so after man had passed five and fifty years, they called him aged.

Aulus Gelius in his tenth book in the 27, Chapter says, that Fuluius
Hostilius (who was King of the Romans) determined to count all the old and
young which were amongst the people: and also to know which should be called
Infants, which young and which old. And there was no little difference among the
Roman Philosophers, and in the end it was decreed by the King, and the Senate,
that men till seventeen years should be called Infants, and till six and
forty should be called young, and from six and forty upwards they should be
called old.

If we will observe the Law of the Romans, we know from what time we are
bound to call and honor the aged men. But adding hereunto it is reason that the
old men know, to what prowesses and virtues they are bound, to the end that
with reason, and not with fainting they be served: for speaking the truth, if
we compare duty to duty, the old men are more bound to virtue then the young
to service. We cannot deny but that all states of Nations (great and small,
young and old) are bound to be virtuous: but in this case, the one is more to
be blamed then the other.

For oftentimes if the young men do offend, it is for that he wants
experience: but if the old man offend it is for the abundance of malice:

Seneca in an Epistle said these words: I let thee know my friend Lucillus
that l am very much offended, A grave sentence of Senses.
and I do complain not of any friend or foe, but of my self and none other.
And the reason why I think this, is that I see my self old in vices: so
little is that wherein I have served the Gods, and much less is that I have
profited him.

And Seneca says further, He which prayseth himself most to be aged, and
that would be honored for being aged, ought to be temperate in eating,
honest in appartell, sober in drinking, soft in words, wise in counsel, and to
conclude, he ought to be very patient in adversity, and far from vices which
attempt him.

Worthy of praise is the great Seneca for those words: but more worthy shall
the old men, if they will conform their works according to these words: For
if we see them for to abandon vices, and give themselus to virtues: we will
both serve them, and honor them.

CHAP. XVIII. That Princes when they are aged, should be temperate in eating,
sober in drinking, modest in apparel, and above all, true in communication.
IT is consonant to the counsel of Seneca, Good counsel of Seneca, worthy to
be followed both of old and young.
that the aged should be temperate in eating which they ought to do, not
only for the reputation of their persons, but also for the preservation of
their lives.

For the old men which are drunk and amorous, are persecuted with their own
diseases, and are defamed by the tongues of other. That which the ancient men
should eat (I mean those which are noble and virtuous, ought to be very
clean, and well dressed, and above all, that they do take it in season and
time: for otherwise, too much eating of diverse things, causes the young to be
sick, and enforces the old to die.

Young men though they eat dishonestly, very hastily, and eat speaking, we
can do no less but dissemble with them: but the old men which eat much, and
hastily, of necessity we ought to reprove them. For men of How circu^spect and
wary men ought to be in eating and (...),
Honor ought to eat at table with a great gravity: as if they were in any
counsel, to determine causes. It is not mine intention to persuade the feeble
old men not to eat, but only to admonish them to eat no more then is
necessary.

We do not prohibit them to eat delicate things, but to beware of
superfluous things. We do not counsel them to leave eating, having need: but
to withdraw themselves from curiosity.

For though it be lawful for aged men to eat sufficient, it is not honest
for them to eat, to overcome their stomachs.

It is a shame to write it, but more shame ought they to have which do it;
which is: that the goods which they have won and inherited by their
predecessors, they have eaten and drunken: so that they have neither bought
House not vine, nor yet married any Daughter: but they are naked, and their
poor children go to the Tauernes and Innes: and the miserable Fathers to the
Hospitalles, and Churches.

When any man comes to poverty, for that his house is burned, or his ship
drowned: or that they have taken all from him by Law: or that he has spent
it in pleading against his enemies, or any other in conuenie^ce is come unto
him: me thinks we are all bound to succor him, and the heart has compassion
to behold him: but he that spends it in Apparel not requisite, to seek
delitious Wines, and to eat delicate meats: To such a one (I would say,) that
the poverty which he suffers, is not sufficient for his deserts. For of all
troubles there is none so great, as to see a man suffer the evil, whereof he
himself has bin the occasion.

Also, according to the counsel of Seneca, the Ancients ought to be well
advertised, in that they should not only be temperate in eating, but likewise
they should be sober in drinking: and this both for the preservation of their
health: as also for the reputation of their honesty.

For, if the old physicians do not Discommodityes that come by excess of
eating and drinking.
deceive us, human bodies do dry and corrupt, because they drink
superfluously, and eat more then Nature requires.

If I should say unto the old men, that they should drink no wine: they might
tell me, that it is not the counsel of a Christian. But presuppose they ought
to drink, and that for no opinion they should leave it: yet I admonish,
exhort, and desire them, that they drink little, and that they drink very
temperate.

For the disordinate and immeasurate drinking, causes the young men to be
drunk, and the old men, both drunk and foolish. Oh how much authority lost
they, and what gravity do honorable and ancient men lose, which in drinking
are not sober?

Which seems to be true, forasmuch as the man being laden with wine, although
he were the wisest in the world, he should be a very fool, that would take
counsel of such one in his affairs Plutarche in a book which he made, of the
Fortunes of the Romans, said: that in the Senate of Rome, there was an
Ancient man, who made great exclametions, that a certain young man had in
such heinous sort dishonored him, that for the iniuryes he had spoken, he
deserved death.

And when the young man was called for to answer to that he had said unto him;
he answered: Fathers conscript, though I seem young unto you, yet I am not so
young, but that I knew The answer of a young man to the Senate or Rome.
the Father of this old man, who was a virtuous and noble Roman, and somewhat
a kin to me. And I seeing that his Father had gotten much goods fighting in
the wars, and also seeing this oldeman spending them in eating and drinking:
I said unto him one day.

I am very sorry my Lord and uncle, for that I hear of thy honor in the
market place: and am the more sorry, for that I see done in thy house, wherein
we saw fifty men armed before in our hour, and now we see a hundred knaves
made drunk.

And worse then that, as thy Father showed to all those that entered into his
house the Ensigns he had won in the Wars: so now to those that enter into
thy house, thou show them diverse sorts of Wines.

My uncle complained of me, but in this case I make the Plaintiff judge
against me the defendant. And I would by the immortal Gods he deserved no
more pain for his works, then I deserve by my words.

For if he had been wise, he would have accepted the correction which
secretly I gave him: and had not come openly, to declare his faults in the
Senate.

The complaint of the old man being heard by the Senate, and the excuse in like
manner of the yong-man: they gave judgment, that they should take all the
goods from the old man, and provide him of a Tutour which should govern him
and his house.

And they commanded the Tutour, That from hence forward he should not give
him one cup of Wine, since he was noted of drunkenness. Of truth the
sentence which the Senate gave was very just: The judgment of the Senate
against drunkenness
For the old man which gives himself to wine, has as much need to have a
Governor, as an Infant, or a fool.

Laertius made a book of the Feasts of Philosophers, and declares sundry
ancient banquets, among the which he puts one, where were assembled many
great Philosophers. And admit that the meats were mean, and simple: yet the
bidden guests were sage.

And the cause why they did assemble, was not to eat, but to dispute of some
grave doctrines, whereof the Philosophers did somewhat doubt: For in those
days, the greater the Stoyckes and the Peripatetikes were in number: so much
the more were the Philosophers divided amongst themselves.

When they were so assembled, truly they did not eat, nor drink out of
measure: but some pleasant matter was moved between the masters and the
scholars, between the young and the old, that is to say, which of them could
declare any secret of Philosophy, or any profounde sentence. O happy were such
feasts, and no less happy were they that thither were bidden,

But I am sorry that those which now bid, and those that are bidden, for a
truth are not as those Ancients were: For there are no feasts now a days of
Philosophers, but of gluttons, not to dispute, but for to murmr, not to open
doubtful things, but to talk of the vices of others, not to confirm ancient
amities, but to begin new dissentions, not to learn any doctrines, but to
approve some nouelty. And that which worst of all is, the old strive at the
table with the young, not on him which has spoken the most grauest sentence:
but of him which has drunk most wine, and has rinsed most cups.

Paulus Diaconus in the history of the Lumbards declares, that four old
Lumbards made a banquet, in the which, the one drank to the others years, and
it was in this manner: They made defyance to drink two to two, and after each
man had declared how many years old he was: the one drank as many times as
the other was years old, and likewise his companion pledged him. And one of
these four companions had at the least 58. years: the second 63, the third
87. the fourth 92. so that a man knows not what they did eat in this
banquet, either little or much: but we know that he that drank least, drank
58. cups of wine. An evil qustome used among the Goths.


Of this so evil custom came the Goths to make this Law, which of many is
read, and of a few understood, where it says, We ordain and command on
pain of death, that no old man drink to the others years being at the
table. That was made because they were so much given to Wine, that they drank
more often then they did eat morsels. The Princes and great lords which now are
old, ought to be very sober in drinking, since they ought greatly to be
regarded and honored of the young.

For speaking the truth, and with liberty, when the old man shall be overcome
with wine, he has more necessity that the young man lead him by the arm to
his house, then that he should take off his cappe unto him with reverence.

Also Princes and great Lords ought to be very circumspect, that when they
become aged, they be not noted for young in the apparel which they wear: For
although hat for wearing a fine and rich garment, the Prince does not enrich
or empouerish his Commonwealth: yet we cannot deny, but that it does much for
the reputation of his person: For the vanity and curiosity of garments, does
show great lightness of mind. According to the variety of ages, so ought the
diversity of apparel to be, which seems to be very clear, in that the
young maids are attired in one sort, the married women of an other sort: the
widows of an other.

And likewise I would say, that the apparel of children ought to be of one
sort, those of young men of an other, and those of old men of an other, which
ought to be more honester then all.

For men of hoary heads ought not to be adorned with precious garments: but
with virtuous works: Every man ought for to wear apparel according to his
calling.
To go cleanely, to be well apparrelled, and to be well accompanied, we do
not forbid the old, especially those which are noble and valiant men: but to
go fine, to go with great trains, and to go very curious, we do not allow.
Let the old men pardon me, for it is not the office but of young fools: for
the one shows honesty, and the other lightness. It is a confusion to tell
it, but it is greater shame to do it, that is to say, that many old men of our
time take no small felicity to put caules on their heads, every man to wear
jewels on their necks, to lay their caps with agglets of gold, to seek out
diverse inue^tions of metal, to load their fingers with rich rings, to go
perfumed with odoriferous sauors, to wear new fashioned apparel: and
finally, I say, that though their face be full of wrinckles, they cannot suffer
one wrinckle to be in their gown. All the ancient histories accuse Quint.
Hortensius the Roman, for that every time when he made himself ready, he had
a glass before him: and as much space and time had he to streighten the
pleytes of his gown, as a Woman had, to trim the hairs of her head.

This Quintus Hortensius being Consul, going by chance one day through Rome,
in a narrow street met with the other Consul: where thorough the streightnes
of the passage, the pleights of his Gown were undone: upon which occasion he
complained unto the Senate of the other Consul, that he had deserved to loose
his life.

The Author of all this is Macrobius, in the third book of the Saturnales.

I can not tell if I be deceived, but we may say, that all the curiosity that
old men have to go fine, well apparrelled, and clean, is for no other thing
but to shake off Age, and to pretend right to youth. What a grief is it to
Pride in the aged, ought to be neglected.
see diverse ancient men, the which as ripe Figs do fall: and on the other
side it is a wonder to see how in their age they make themselves young. In this
case (I say) would to God we might see them hate vices, and not to complain
of their years which they have.

I pray and exhort all Princes and great Lords, whom our sovereign Lord has
permitted to come to age, that they do not despise to be aged: For speaking
the truth, the man which has envy to seem old, does delight to live in the
lightness of youth. Also men of honor ought to be very circumspect: for so much
as after they are become aged, they be not suspected A lie in a young man
hateful, but in an old man abominable.
of their friends, but that both unto their friends and foes, they be counted
faithful. For a Lie in a young man's mouth, is esteemed but a lie: but in the
mouth of an ancient or aged old man, it is counted as a heinous blasphemy.

Noble Princes and great Lords after they are become aged, of one sort they
ought to use themselves to give, and of the other to speak. For, good Princes
ought to sell their words by weight, and give rewards without measure.

The Ancient do oftentimes complain, saying: That the young will not be
conversant with them; and truly if there be any fault therein, it is of
themselves. And the reason is, that if sometimes they do assemble together, to
pass away the time: if the old man set a talking, he never makes an end. So
that a discrete man had rather go a dozen miles on foot, then to hear an old
man talk three hours,

If with such efficacy we persuade old men, that they be honest in their
apparel: for a truth we will not give them license to be dissolute in their
words, since there is a great difference to note some man in his Apparel, or
to accuse him to be malicious, or a babbler. For to wear rich and costly
Apparel, iniurieth few, but injurious words hurt many.

Macrobius in his first book of the dreams of Scipio, declares of a
Philosopher named Crito: who lived an hundred and five years: and till fifty
years he was far out of course.

But after he came to be aged, he was so well measured in his eating and
drinking, and so wary in his speech, that they never saw him do any thing
worthy reprehension: nor heard him speak word, but was worthy of noting.

On this condition we would give license to many, that till fifty years A
worthy lesson, etc.
they should be young: So that from thenceforth they would be clothed as old
men, speak as old men, and they should esteem themselves to be old But I am
sorry, that all the Spring time does pass in flower, and afterward they
fall into the grave as rotten, before they find any time to pull them out.

The old do complain that the young do not take their advise, and their
excuse herein is, that in their words they are too long: For if a man do
demand an old man his opinion in a case, immediately he will begin to say,
that in the life of such, and such Kings, and Lords of good memory, this was
done, and this was provided: so that when a young man asks them counsel how
he shall be have himself with the living: the old man begins to declare
unto him the life of those which be dead.

The reason why the old men desire to speak so long is that since for their
age they cannot see, nor go, nor eat, nor sleep, they would that all the time
their members were occupied to do their duties, all that time their tongue
should be occupied to declare of their times past. All this being spoken, what
more is to say, I know not, but that we should content our selves, that the
old men should have their flesh as much punished, as they have their tongue with
Old men ought to be a lantern to youth.
talk martyred. Though it be very vile for a young man to speak, and
slander to a young man not to say the truth, yet this vice is much more to be
abhorred in old Princes, and other noble and worshipful men, which ought not
only to think it their duty to speak truth, but also to punish the enemies
thereof, For otherwise the noble and valiant Knights should not lose a little of
their authority, if a man saw on their heads but white hairs, and in their
mouths found nothing but lies.

CHAP. XIX. Of a letter of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, to Claudius and
Claudinus, reproouing them being old men, and that they lived youthfully.
MARK Emperor, borne in Mount Celio, A Letter of the Emperor, reproving light
behavior in old men.
desires to you my neighbors, Claude and Claudine health of your persons, and
amendment of your lives, I being as I am, at the Conquest of Asia, and you
remaining always in the pleasures of Rome, we understand your news very
late, and I think our letters arrive there as late. Notwithstanding, to those
which go thither, I give answers for you others, and of all those which come
hither, I demand of your health. And do not demand of others how well and how
much I love you, but of your own proper hearts: and if your heart say, that I
am a fained friend, then I take my self condemned. If perchance your hearts do
tell you that I love you, being true indeed that I hate you, or if I tell you
that I hate you, being true that I love you: of truth I would pluck such a
heart out of my body, and give it to be eaten of the beasts. For there is no
greater deceit, then that which the man does to himself.

If a stranger beguile me, I ought to dissemble it, if an enemy deceive me,
I ought to revenge it, if my friend misuse me, I ought to complain of him:
but if I deceive my self, with whom shall I comfort my self? For there is no
patience that can suffer the heart to deceive himself in any thing, which he
has not deepaly considered. Peradventure, ye will say, I do not esteem you,
and that I have not written any letter unto you of long time, To this I answer.

That you do not attribute the fault to my negligence, but to the great
distance of countries that there is from hence to Rome: and also to the great
affairs of Asia: For amongst other discommodities, the war has this also,
that it depriueth A discommodity that war brings.
us of the sweet conversation of our Country.

I have always presumed to be yours, and at this present am at no man's
pleasure, more then at yours: And since you have always known of me, what
you desired to know, I have espied in you others that, which of force I must
speak. For in the end I have not seen any possess so much, to be worth so
much, to know so much, nor in all things to be so mighty, but that one day he
should need his poor friend.

The divine Plato said, and also well, That the man which loves with his
heart, neither in absence forgets, neither in presence becomes negligent,
neither in prosperity he is proud, nor yet in adversity abject, neither he
serves for profit, nor yet he loves for gain: and finally, he defends the
case of his friend as his own.

Diverse have been of the opinions which the Ancients held to affirm, For
four causes Friends are to be esteemed.
for what end friends were taken, and in the end they were fully resolved,
that for four causes we ought to choose friends.

The first, we ought to have friends to treat, and to be conversant with all:
for according to the troubles of this life, there is no time so pleasantly
consumed, as in the conversation of an assured friend.

The second is, we ought to have friends, to have friends, to whom we may
disclose the secrets of our hearts: for it is much comfort to the woeful heart,
to declare to his friend his doubts, if he perceive that he does feel them in
deed.

The third, we ought to search and choose friends, to the end they help us in
our adversities: For little profits it my heart, that with tears the friends
do hear all that I bewail, unless afterward in deed he will take pains
to reform the same.

The fourth, we ought to seek and preserve friends to the end they be
protectors of our goods, and likewise Judges of our evils: for the good friend
is no less bound to withdraw us from the vices whereby we are slaundered,
then to deliver us from our enemies, by whom we may be slain.

The end why I told you all this was, if that in this letter you chance to
light upon any sharp word, that you take it patiently, considering that the
love that I bear you, does move me to speak, and the faith which I owe unto
you, does not suffer me that I should keep it close. For many things ought
to be borne among friends, though they tell them in earnest, which ought not to
be suffered of others, though they speak it in jest. I come therefore to show
the matter, and I beseech the immortal Gods, that there be no more then that
you have told me, and that it be less then I suspect.

Gaius Furius your Kinsman, and my especial friend, as he went to the Realm
of Palestine, and Jerusalem, came to see me in Antioch, and has told me
news of Italy and Rome; and among others, one above all the residue I have
committed to memory, at the which I could not refrain laughing, and less to
be troubled after I had thought of it. O how many things do we talk in
jest, the which after we have well considered, give occasion to be sorry.

The Emperor Adrian my good lord had a Ieaster, whose name was Belphus young,
comely and stout, albeit he was very malicious, as such are acustomed to be:
and whiles the Ambassadors of Germany supped with the Emperor in great joy:
the same Belphus began to jest of every one that was present, according to his
accustomed manner with a certain malicious grace. And Adrian perceiving that
some changed color, others murmured, and others were angry: he said unto
this ieaster: Friend Belphus, if thou love me and my service, use not these
spiteful The speech of the Emperor Adrian to his ieaster.
ieasts at our supper, which being considered on, may turn us to evil rest in
our beds.

Gaius Furius has told me so many slanders chanced in Italy, such
novelties done in Rome, such alteration of our Senate, such contentions and
strife between our Neighbors, such lightness of you two, that I was astonnied
to hear it, and ashamed to write it. And it is nothing to tell after what sort
he told them unto me, unless you had seen how earnestly he spoke them:
imagining that as he told them without taking any pains, so did I receive
them (as he thought) without any grief: though in deed every word that he
spoke, seemed a sharp piercing arrowe unto my heart For often times some
tells us things, as of small importance, the which do prick our hearts to
the quick.

By the opinion of all, I understand that you are very old, and yet in your
own fantasies, you seem very young. And further they say, that you Apparel
your selves a new now, as though presently you came into the world: and
moreover they say, that you are offended with nothing so much, as when they
call you old, and that in Theaters where comedies are played: and in the
Fields, where the brute beasts do run, you are not the hindmost, and that
there is no sport, nor lightness invented in Rome, but first it is registered in
your house. And finally, they say, that you give your selves so unto pleasures,
as though you never thought to receive displeasures.

O Claude and Claudine, by the God Jupiter I swear unto you, that I am ashamed
of your unshamefastness, and am greatly abashed of your manners: and above all,
I am exceedingly grieved for your offense. For at that time that you ought to
lift your hands, you are returned again into the filth of the world. Many
things men commit, which though they seem grave, yet by moderation of the
person that commits them, they are made light: but speaking according to the
truth, I find one reason, whereby I might excuse your lights: but to the
contrary, I see ten whereby I may condemn your follies.

Solon the Philosopher in his Laws said to the Athenians, that if the young
offended, he should be gently admonished, The difference of Solon and Lycurgus
in opinion.
and grievously punished, because he was strong: and if the old err, he
should be lightly punished, and sharply admonished, since he was weak and
feeble.

To this Lycurgus in his laws, to the Lacedaemonians, said contrary: That if
the young did offend, he should be lightly punished, and grievously
admonished, since through ignorance he did err: and the old man which did
evil, should be lightly admonished, and sharply punished, since thorough
malice he did offend.

These two philosophers being (as they have bin) of such authority in the
world that is past, and considering that their laws and sentences were of
such weight, it should be much rashness in not admitting the one of them.

Now not receiving the one, nor rereprouing the other: Me thinks that there
is no great excuse to the young for their ignorance, and great condemnation to
the aged for their experience.

Once again I return to say that you pardon me, my friends, and you ought not
greatly to weigh it, though I am somewhat sharp in condemnation, since you
others are so dissolute in your lives: for of your black life my pen does
take ink.

I remember well that I have heard of thee Claude, that thou have been lusty
and courageous in thy youth: so that thy strength of all was enuyed, and the
beauty of Claudine of all men was desired.

I will not write unto you in this letter, my friends and neighbors, nether
reduce to memory, how thou Claude have employed thy forces in the service of
the comonwealth: and thou Claudine have won much honor of thy beauty: for
sundry times it cha^ced, that men of many goodly gifts are noted of grievous
offenses. Those which striued with thee are all dead, those whom thou desire
are dead, those which served thee Claudine are dead, those which before thee
Claudine sighed, are dead: those which for thee dyed, are now dead: and since
all those are dead with their lightness, do not you others think to die,
and your follies also? I do demand now of thy youth one thing, and of thy
beauty another thing, what do you receive of these pastims of these good
entertainements, of these aboundances, of these great contentations, of the
pleasures of the world, of the vanity that is past, and what hope you of all
these to carry into the narrow grave?

O simple, simple, and ignorant persons, how our life consumes, and we
perceive not how we live therein. For it is no felicity to enjoy a short or
long life: but to know to employ the same either well or evil,

O children of the earth, and Disciples of vanity, now you know that Time
flies, without moving his wings, the life goes without lifting up his feet,
the World dispatcheth us not telling us the cause, men do beguile us not
moving their lips, our flesh consumes to us unawares: the heart dies,
having no remedy: and finally our glory decaieth, as it it had never been,
and death oppresses us without knocking at the door.

Though a man be never so simple, or so very a fool, yet he cannot deny, but
it is impossible for to make a fire in the bottom of the sea, to make a way in
the air, of the thin blood to make rough sinews, and of the soft veins to
make hard bones. I mean that it is impossible, that the green flower of
youth, be not one day withered by age.

CHAP. XX. The Emperor follows his Letter and persuades Claudius and
Claudinus being now old, to give no more credit to the World, nor to any of
his deceitful flatteryes.
THat which I have The continuation of the Emperors letter to his friends.
spoken now, tends more to advertise the young, then to teach the old: For
you others have now passed the prime time of childhood, the summer of youth,
and the harvest of adolescency, and are in the winter of age, where it seems
an uncomely thing, that those your hoary hairs should be accompanied with
such vain follies. Since young men know not that they have to end their
youth, it is no marvel, that they follow the world: but the old men, which
see themselves fall into this guile, why will they run after vices again?

O world, for that thou art the world, so small is our force, and so great our
debilitie, that thou willing it, and we not resisting it, thou do swallow us
up in the most perilous gulf, and in the thorns most sharp thou do prick
us: by the priuiest ways thou leadest us, and by the most stony ways thou
carriest us. I mean, that thou bring us to the highest favors, to the end
that afterward with a push of thy pike thou might overthrow us. O world,
wherein all is worldly, two and fifty yeeares have passed since in thee I was
first borne, during The vanity of the world and the uncertainty thereof.
which time thou never toldest me one truth: but I have taken thee with ten
thousand lies. I never demanded the thing but thou did promise it me, and
yet it is nothing at all that ever thou did perform. I never put my trust
in thee, but ever thou beguiledst me, I never came to thee, but thou did
undo me: finally, never saw I ought in thee whereby thou deseruest love, but
always hatred.

This presupposed, I know not what is in thee. O world, or what we worldlings
want: for if thou hate us we cannot hate thee, if thou do us injury, we
can dissemble it, if thou spurn us with thy feet, we will suffer it, if thou
beatest us with a staff, we will hold our peace, also though thou persecutest
us, we will not complain, though thou take ours, we will not demand it of
thee, though thou do beguile us, we will not call ourselves beguiled, and the
worst of all is, that thou do chase us from thy house, yet we will not
depart from thence. I know not what this means, I know not from whence this
comes: I know not who ought to praise this same, that we covet to follow the
world, which will none of us, and hate the gods which love us: often times I make
account of my years past, sometimes also I turn and toss my book to see what
I have read, and another time I desire my friends to give me good counsel:
and for no other end I do it, then to attain to that I have spoken, and to
know that I will say. I reading Rethorike in Rhodes, Adrian my lord maintaining
me there, knowing that I was two and thirty years of age, it happened in the
Spring time I found my self solitarily, and soluarinesse with liberty smelled
the world, and smelling it, I knew it, and knowit, I followed it, and following
it, I attained it, and attayning unto it, thereunto I joined my self, and
joining my self therewith, I proved it, and in proving it, I tasted it, and in
tasting it, me thought it bitter, and in finding it bitter I hated it, and
hating it I left it, and leaving it, is returned, and being returned, I
received it again.

Finally, the world inuiting me, and I not resisting it, two and fifty years
we did eat our bread together, and in one house we have always remained,
will thou know after what sort the world and I do live in one house together,
or better for to say, in one heart remain? Harken then, and in one word I will
tell it thee.

When I saw the world brave, I served him, when he saw me sad, he flattered
me, when I saw him wealthy, I asked him, when he saw me merry, he begulled
me, when I desired any thing, he help me to attain to it, and afterward
when the same I best enjoyed, then he took it from me, when he saw me not
pleased, he visited me, when he saw me, he forgot me, when he saw me
overthrown, he gave me his hand to relieve me, when he saw me exalted, he
tripped me again to overthrow me.

Finally, when I think that I have somewhat in the world, I find that all
that I have is a burden.

If this which I have spoken of the world be any thing, more is that a great
deal which yet of my self I will say, which is, that without doubt my folly
is greater then his malice, since I am beguiled so often, and yet always I
follow the deceyuer.

O world, world, thou have such moods and fashions in thy proceeding, that thou
leadest us all to perdition. Of one thing I marvel much, whereof I cannot be
satisfied. Which is, since that we may go upon the bridge, and yet without any
gain we do wade through the water, and where as the shallow is sure, we
seek to run into the gulf, and where the way is dry, we go into the
plash, where we may eat wholesome meats to nourish the life, we receive
poison to hasten death, we seek to destroy our selves, whereas we may be
without danger.

Finally I say, without profit we commit a fault, though we see with How
wary every man ought to be
our eyes the pain to follow. Wise men ought circumspectly to see what they
do, to examine that they speak, to prove that they take in hand, for to beware
whose company they use and above all, to know whom they trust: For our
judgment is so corrupt, that to beguile us, one is enough, and to make us not
to be deceived, ten thousand would not suffice. They have so great care of
us, I do mean the world to be guile us, and the flesh to flatter us, that the
high way being as it is narrow, the pathway dangerous, and full of pricks,
the journey is long, and the life short: our bodies are never but laden with
vices, and our hearts are full of sorrows and cares.

I have wondered at diverse things in this World, but that which astonieth me
most is, that those which be good, we make them believe they are evil, and
those which are evil, we persuade others to believe that they are good. So
that we shoot at the white of virtues, and hit the butte of vices.

I will confess one thing, the which being disclosed, I know that infamy will
follow me, but peradventure some virtuous man will marvel at it, that is,
that in those two and fifty years of my life, I have proved all the vices of
this world, for no other intent but for to prove if there be any thing where
in man's malice might be satisfied.

And afterward all well considered, all examined, and all proved, I find,
that the more I eat, the more I dye for hunger, the more I drink, the greater
thirst I have, the more I rest, the more I am broken, the more I sleep, the
more drousier I am: the more I have, the more I covet: the more I desire, the
more I am tormented, the more I procure, the less I attain.

Finally, I never had so great pain through want, but afterward I had more
trouble with excess: it is No man ever contented with his estate in this world,
a great folly to think, that as long as a man lives in this flesh, that he
can satisfy the flesh: for at the last cast, she may take from us our life;
but we others cannot take from her, her disordinate covetousness: if men did
speak with the Gods, or that the Gods were conversant with men, the first
thing that I would ask them, should be, why they have appointed an end to our
woeful days: and will not give us an end of our wicked desires? O cruel Gods,
what is it you do? or what do you suffer us? it is certain, that we shall
not pass one good day of life only, but in tasting this, and that life
consumes. O intolerable life of man, wherein there are such malices, from the
which we ought to beware, and such perils to fall in, and also so many things
to consider, that then both she and we do end to know our selves, when the
hour of death approaches.

Let those know that know not, that the World takes our will, and we others
like ignorants cannot deny it him, and afterward having power of our will,
does constrain us to that which we would not: so that many times we would
do virtuous works, and for that we are now put into the Worlds hands, we
dare not do it.

The World uses another subtilty with us, and to the end we should not strive
with it, it prayseth the Every man ought to fly the vain intisements of the
world.
times past, because we should live according to the time present.

And the World says further, that if we others employ our forces in his
vices, he gives us license, that we have a good desire of virtue. O would to
God in my days I might see, that the care which the World has to preserve
us, the Worldlings would take it to withdraw them from his vices. I swear that
the Gods should then have more servants, and the World and the flesh should not
have so many slaves.

CHAP. XXI. The Emperor proceeds in his Letter, and proves by good reasons,
that since the aged persons will be served and honored of the young, they
ought to be more virtuous and honest then the young.
I Have spoken all this before rehearsed, for occasion of you Claude and
Claudine The prosecution of the Emperors letter teaching old men to be virtuous
the which at 60 and 10 years will not keep out the prison of the world: You,
I say, which have your bodies weak and corrupted, what hope shall we have of
young men which are but 25. years of age (if my memory deceive me not, when
I was there, you had Nephews married, and of their children made sure, and two
of the children borne: and since that is true, me thinks when the fruit is
gathered, the fruit is of no value, and after the meal is taken from the mill,
evil shall the mill grind.

I mean that the old man ought to desire that his days might be shortened in
this world. Do not think my friends, that a man can have his house full of
Nephews, and yet say, that he is very young? for in loding the tree with
fruits, the blossoms immediately fall, or else they become withered. I have
imagined with my self, what it is that you might do to see me young, and cut
of some of your years: and in the end I know no other reason, but when you
married Alamberta your daughter with Drusius, and your Niece Sophia the fair,
with Tuscidan, which were so young, that the daughters were scarce 15. veares
old, nor the young men 20. I suppose, because you were rich of years, and
poor of money, that he gave to every one of them in stead of money for dowry
ten years of yours: hereof a man may gather, that the money of your Nephews
have remained unto you, and you have given unto them of your own years. I
understand my friends, that your desire is to be young, and very young: but I
greatly desire to see you old and very old I do not mean in years, which in
you does surmount, but in discretion, which in you does want.

O Claude and Claudine, note that which I will say unto you, and bear it
always in your memory.

I let you know, that to maintain youth, to deface age, to live contented, to
be free from travels, to lengthen life, and to avoid death: These things are
not in the hands of men, which do desire them, but rather in the hands of
those which gives the^: the which according to their justice, and not
according to our covetousness, do give us life by weight, and death without
measure.

One thing the old men do, which is cause of slaundering many, that is, that
they will speak first in counsels, they will be served of the young in
feasts, they will be first placed, in all that they say they will be believed,
in Churches they will be higher then the residue, in distributing of offices
they will have the most honor, in their opinions they will not be gainesayde.
Finally, they, will have the credit of old sage men, and yet they will lead
the life of young doting fools. All these preheminences and privileges, it is
very just that old men What is required in every old man.
should have spent their years in the service of the commonwealth: but with
this I do advise and require them, that the authority given them with their
white hairs, be not diminished by their evil works.

Is it a just thing that the humble and honest young man do reverence to the
aged man, proud and disdainefull? Is it a just thing that the gentle and
gracious young man do reverence to the envious and malicious old man? is it a
just thing that the virtuous and patient young man do reverence to the foolish
and impatient old man? is it a just thing, that the stout and liberal young man
do reverence to the miserable and covetous old man? is it just that the
diligent and careful young man do reverence to the negligent old man? is it
just that the abstinent and sober young man do reverence to What duty is
required of the young man to the old.
the greedy and gluttonous old man? is it just that the chaste and continent
young man do reverence to the lecherous and dissolute old man? Me thinks
these things should not be such, that thereby the old man should be honored,
but rather reproved and punished. For old men offend more, by the evil example
they give, then by the fault which they commit. Thou can not deny me, my
friend Claude, that it is 33. years since we both were at the Theaters to
behold a play when thou came late, and found no place for thee to sit in,
thou saydest unto me who was set, Rise my son Mark, and since now thou art
young, it is but just that thou give me place which am aged.

If it be true, that it is three and thirty years sithence thou askedst place
in the Theaters as an old man: Tell me, I pray thee, and also I conjure thee,
with what ointment have thou anointed thy self, or with what water have thou
washed thy self to become young. O Claude, if thou had found any medicine,
or discovered any herb, wherewith thou could take white hairs from men's
heads, and from women the wrinccles of their face: I swear unto thee, and
also I do assure thee, that thou should be more visited and served in Rome,
then the God Apollo is in his Temple at Ephesus. Thou should well remember
Annius Priscus, the old man, which was our Neighbor, and somewhat a kin to
thee: the which, when I told him that I could not be filled with his good
words, and to behold his ancient white hairs, he said unto me.

Oh my Son Mark, it appears well that thou have not bin aged, because thou
talkest as a young man: For if white hairs do honor the person, they greatly
hurt the heart. For at that hour when they see us aged, the strangers do hate
us, and ours do not love us. And he told me more: I let thee know my son
Mark, that many times my wife and I, talking of the years of another
particularly, when she beholds me, and that I seem unto her so aged: I say
unto her, and swear that I am yet young, and that these white hayres came unto
me by great trauells, and the age by sickness.

I do remember also, that this Annius Priscus was Senator one year: and
because he would not seem aged, but desired that men should judge him to be
young, he shaued his beard and his head, which was not accustomed among the
Senators nor Censors of Rome: And on a day among the other Senators, he entered
into the high Capitol, one said unto him thus. A Question demanded of a^
Senator of Rome.


Tell me man, from whence come thou? What will thou? and why come thou
hither? How durst thou being no Senator, enter into the Senate? He answered,
I am Annius Priscus the aged: How chances it now you have not known me? They
replied unto him: if thou were Annius Priscus, thou would not come hither
thus shaven.

For, in the sacred Senate can none enter to govern the commonwealth, unless
his person be endued with virtues, and his head with white hayres: and
therefore thou art banished, and deprived of thy Office. For the old, which
live as the young ought to be punished.

Thou know well Claude and Claudine, that that which I have spoken, is not
the faynings of Homer, neither a Fable of Ouide: but that you your selves saw
it with your eyes, and in his banishment I did help him with money: and
moreover he was banished another time for the lightness he did commit in the
night in the City: and I marvel not hereof; For we see by experience, that
Old men which are fleshed in vices, are more obstinate to correct then the
young.

Oh what evil fortune have the old men, which have suffered themselves to wax
old in vice? For, more dangerous is the fire in an old house then in a new:
and a great cut of a sword is not so perilous, as a rotten Fistula.

Though old men were not honest and virtuous, for the service of the Gods and
the commonwealth, for the saying of the people, nor for the example of the
young: yet he ought to be honest, if it were but for the reverence of their
years.

If the poor old man have no teeth, how shall he eat? If he have no heat in
his stomach, how can he digest? If he have no taste, how can he drink? if
he be not strong, how can he be an adulterer? if he have no feet, how can he
go? if he have the palsy, how can he speak: if he have the gowte in his
hands, how can he play? Finally, such like worldly and vicious men, have
employed their forces being young, desirous to prove al these vices: and when
they are old it grieueth the^ extremely that they cannot acomplish their desire

Amongst all these faults in old men (in mine opinion,) this is the chiefest,
that since they have proved all things, that they should still remain in their
obstinate folly. There is no part but they have traveled, no villainy but
they have essayed, no Fortune but they have proved, no good but they have
persecuted, no evil but has chanced unto them, nor there is any wickedness,
but they have attempted

These unhappy men which in this Old me^ by experience know and feel many
dangers.
sort have spent all their youth, have in the end their combs cut, with
infirmities and diseases: yet they are not so much grieved with the vices
(which in them do abound) to hinder them from virtues, as they are tormented
for want of corporal courage, to further them in their lusts.

Oh if we were Gods, or that they would give us license to know the thoughts
of the old, as we see with our eyes, the deeds of the young.

I swear to the God Mars, and also to the Mother Berecynthia, that without
comparison, we would punish more the wicked desires which the aged have to be
wicked: then the light deeds of the young.

Tell me Claude and Claudine, do you think though you behave your selves as
young, you shall not seem to be old? Know you not that our nature is the
corruption of our body: and that our body hinders our understandings, and
that the understandings are kept of our soul, and that our soul is the mother
of desires and that our desires are the scourge of our youth, and that our
youth is the ensign of our age, and age the spy of death, and that death in
the end is the house where life takes his harbor: and from whence youth flies
a foot, and from whence age cannot escape a horseback?

I would rejoice that you Claude and Claudine, would but tell me what you
find in this life, that so much therewith you should be contented: since no we
you have passed foure-score years of life, during the which time, either you
have bin wicked in the world, or else you have bin good. If you have bin good,
you ought to think it long until you be with the good Gods: if you have bin
evil, it is just you dye, to the end you be no worse.

For speaking the truth, those which in threescore and ten years have bin
wicked in works, leave small hope of their amendment of life.

Adrian my Lord, being at Nola in Campania, one brought unto him a nephew of
his from the study, whereas the young child had not profited a little: for he
became a great Grecian, and Latinist: and moreover, he was fair gracious, and
honest.

And this Emperor Adrian loved his Nephew so much, that he said unto him
these words: My Nephewe, I know not whether I ought to say unto A speech of
the Emperor Adrian.
thee that thou art good, or evil: For, if thou be evil, life shall be evil
employed on thee, and if thou be good, thou ought to dye immediately: and
because I am worse then all, I live longer then all.

These words which Adrian my Lord said, do plainly declare and express, that
in short space the pale and cruel death does assault the good, and lengtheneth
life a great while to the evil.

The opinion of a philosopher was, that the gods are so profound in their
secrets, high in their mysteries, and so just in their works, that to men which
least profit the commonwealth, they lengthen life longest: and though he had
not said it, we others see it by experience. For the man which is good, and
that bears great zeal and friendship to the Commonwealth: either the Gods
take him from us, or the Enemies do slay him, or the dangers do cast him
away, or the trauells do finish him. When the great Pompeyus and Julius Caesar
became enemies, and from that enmity came to cruel wars, the Gronicles of
the time declare, that the kings and people of the occidental part became in he
favor of Julius Caesar, and the mightiest, and most puissant of all the
oriental parts, came in the aid of great Pompeius, because these two Princes
were loved of a few, and served and feared of all:

Amongst the diversity and sundry nations of people which came out of the
Oriental part, into the host of the great Pompeius, one nation came
marvelous, and cruel barbarous, which said, they dwelled on the other side
of the mountain Riphees, which go unto India.

And these Barbarians had a Custom, not to live no longer then fifty years:
and therefore when they came to that age, they made a greater A custom among
the Barbarians.
fire, and were burned therein alive; and of their own wills they sacrificed
themselves to the Gods. Let no man be astonished at that we have spoken, but
rather let them marvel of that we will speak (that is to say) that the same
day any man had accomplished fifty years, immediately he cast himself quick
into the fire, and his friends made a great feast. And the feast was, that they
did eat the flesh of the dead half burned, and drank in wine and water the
ashes of his bones: so that the stomach of the children being alive, was the
grave of the Fathers being dead.

All this that I have spoken with my tongue, Pompeius has seen with his eyes,
for that some being in the camp did accomplish fifty years; and because the
case was strange, he declared it often in the Senate.

Let every man judge in this case, what he will, and condemn the barbarians at
his pleasure, yet I will not cease to say what I think. O golden world, which
had such men. O blessed people, of whom in the World to ome shall be a
perpetual memory, What contempt of world? what forgetfulness of himself?
what stroke of fortune? what whippe for the flesh? what little regard of life?
O what bridle for the virtuous? O what confusion for those that love life. O
how great example have they left us, not to fear death. Since those here
have willingly despised their own lives, it is not to be thought that they
dyed to take the goods of others, neither yet to think that our life should
never have end, nor our covetousness in like manner.

O glorious people, and ten thousand fold happy, that the proper sensuality
being forsaken, have ouercom the natural appetite to desire to live, not
believing in that they saw, and that having faith in that they never saw, they
striued with the fatal Destenies. By the way they assaulted fortune, they
changed life for death, they offered the body to death, and above all, have
won honor with the Gods, not for that they should hasten death, but because
they should take away that which is superfluous of life. Archagent a Surgeon of
Rome, and Anthonius Musus, a Physician of the Emperor Augustus, and
Esculapius, father of the Physic, should get little money in that Country.
He that then should have sent to the barbarous to have done as the Romans at
that time did, that is to say, to take sirrops in the mornings, pills at night,
to drink milk in the morning, to anoint themselves with grome^seed to be
let blood to day, and purged to morrow, to eat of one thing, and to abstain
from many, a man ought to think, that he which willingly, seeks death, will
not give money to lengthen life.

CHAP. XXII. The Emperor concludes his letter, and showed what perils those
old men live in, which dissolutely like young children pass their days, and
gives unto them wholesome counsel for the remedy thereof.
But returning to thee Claude and to thee Claudine, me thinks The conclusion
of the Emperors letter, reproving old men which live dissolutely, like young
children.
that these barbarous men being fifty years of age, and you others having
above threescore and ten, it should be just, that sithence you were elder in
years, you were equal in virtue, and though (as they) you will not accept
death patiently, yet at the least you ought to amend your evil lives willingly.

I do remember, that it is many years since, that Fabritius the young,
son of Fabritius the old, had ordained to have deceived me: of the which,
if you had not told me great inconveniences had happned: and since that you
did me so great a benefit, I would now requite you the same with another the
like. For amongst friends there is no equal benefit, then to deceive the
deceyuer: I let you know, if you do not know it, that you are poor aged folks,
your eyes are sunk into your heads, the nostrels are shut, the hairs are
white, the hearing is lost, the tongue faultereth, the teeth fall, the face is
wrinkled, the feet swollen, and the stomach cold. Finally I say, that if the
grave could speak, as unto his Subjects, by justice he might command you to
inhabit his house.

It is great pity of the young men and of their youthful ignorance; for then
unto such their eyes are not opened, to know the mishaps of this miserable
life, when cruel death does end their days, and adiorneth them to the grave.

Plato in his book of the Common wealth said, that in vain we give good
counsels, to fond and light young men: for youth is without experience of that
it knows, suspicious of that it hears, incredible of that is told him,
despising the counsel of an other, and very poor of his own. For so much as
this is true that I tell you Claude, and Claudine, that without comparison, the
ignorance which the young have of the good, is not so much: but the obstination
which the old has in the evil is more: For the mortal Gods many times do
dissemble with a thousand offenses committed by ignorance, but they never
forgive the offense perpetrated by malice.

O Claude, and Claudine, I do not marvel that you do forget the gods, (as
you do) which created you, and your Fathers, which begot you, and your parents
which have loved you, and your friends which have honored you: but that which
I most marvel at is, that you forget your selves: For you never consider what
you ought to be, until such time as you be there where you would not be,
and that without power to return back again.

Awake, awake, since you are drowned in your dreams, open your eyes since you
sleep so much, accustom your selves to travels, sithence you are vagabonds,
learn that which behooves you, since now you are old. I mean, that in time
convenient you agree with death, before he make execution of life.

Fifty two years have I known the things of the world, and yet I never saw a
Woman so aged thorough years, nor old man with members so feeble, that for
want of strength could not (if they list) do good: nor yet for the same
occasion should leave to be evil, if they list to be evil.

It is a marvelous thing to see, and worthy to note, that all the corporal
members of Man waxes old, but the inward heart, and the outward tongue: For the
heart is always given to invent All the members of man wax feeble in time,
but only the heart and tongue.
evils, and the tongue is always able to tell Lies.

Mine opinion is, that the pleasant Summer being past, you should prepare
your selves for the intemperate winter which is at hand. And if you have but
few days to continue, you should make have to take up your lodging. I mean
that since you have passed the days of your life with travel, you should
prepare your selves against the night of death, to be in the haven of rest.

Let mockeryes pass as mockeries, and accept truth as truth: that is to say,
that it were a very just thing, and also for your honor necessary, that all
shose which in times past have seen you young and foolish, should now in your
age, see you grave and sage. For there is nothing that so much forgets the
lightness and follyes of youth, as does gravity and constancy in Age.

When the Knight runs his carriere, they blame him not for that the Horses
mane is not finely combed: but at the end of his race he should see his horse
amended, and looked unto: What greater confusion can be to any person, or
greater slander to our mother Rome, then to see that which now a days therein
we see? That is to say: that the old which can scarcely creep through the
streets, to behold the plays and games as young men, which search for naught
else but only pomp and vanity?

It grieueth me to speak it, but I am much more ashamed to see, that the old
Romans do daily cause the white hairs to be plucked out of their heads,
because they would not seem old, to make their beard small, to seem young,
wearing their hosen very close, their shyrts open before: the gown of the
Senator embrodered, the Roman sign richly enamelled, the collar of gold at
the neck, as those of Dace: Fringes in their gowns, as those of Sapphire,
hoops in their hattes, as the Greeks, and pearls on their fingers, as those of
India.

What will thou I tell thee more, then I have told thee? but that they wear
their Gowns long and large, as those of Tharento, and they wear The pride of
the ancient Senators of Rome.
them of the color as men of war: and every week they have change, as
players: and the worste of all is, that they show themselves as doting with
love, now in their Age, as others have done heretofore in their youth.

That old men are overcome by young desires, I do not marvel, for that brutish
Lust is as natural, as the daily food: but the old men (being old men)
should be so dissolute: herewith men justly ought to be offended. For the old
men covetous, and of Flesh vicious, both offend the Gods, and slander the
commonwealth.

Oh how many I have known in Rome, who in their youth have been highly praised
and esteemed, and after wards through giving themselves to very much lightness
in their age, have bin of all abhorred. And the worst of all is, that they have
lost all their credit, their parents, their favor, and their poor innocent
Children their profit? For many times the Gods permit, that the Fathers
committing the offenses, the pains should fall upon their own children.

The renowned Gaguino Cato, who descended from the hie lineage of the sage
Catoes, was five years Flamen priest, and administrator to the Vestall
virgins, three years Praetor, two years Censor, one year Dictator, and five
times Consul, being 75. years old, he gave himself to follow, serve and to
desire Rosana, and daughter of Gneus Cursius, a Lady of truth very young and
fair, and of many desired, and much made of: time afterward passing away, and
God Cupid doing his office, the love was so kindled inwardly in the heart of
this old man, that he ran almost mad: So that after he had consumed all
his goods in serving her daily, he sighed, and nightly he wept, only for to
see her.

It chanced that the said Rosana fell sick of a burning ague, wherewith she
was so distempered, that she could eat no meat, but greatly desired to eats
grapes: and since there were none ripe at Rome, Gaguino Cato sent to the
river of Rheyn, to fetch some, being far, and many miles distant from thence,

And when the thing was spredde through Rome, and that all the people knew it,
and the Senate understanding the folly of him: the Fathers A severe sentence
given by the Senators of Rome upon an old man.
commanded that Rosana should be looked up with the Vestall Virgins, and the
old man banished Rome for ever, to the end, that to them it should be a
punishment, and to others an example.

Truly it grieved me sore to see it, and also I had great pains in writing
it: For I saw the Father dye in infamy, and his children live in poverty: I
believe that all those which shall hear this example, and all those which
shall read this writing, shall find the fact of this amorous old man, both
vile and filthy, and they will allow the sentence of the Senate which they gave
against him for good and just.

I swear, that if Gaguino Cato had had as many young men in his banishment as
he left old men Lovers that followed his example in Rome: there should not be
cast away so many men, neither so many women evil married.

It chances often times, that when the old men (specially being noble and
valiant) are advertised of their servants, are rebuked of their parents, are
prayed of their friends, and accused of their enemies to be dishonest in such
a place, they answer, That they are not in love, but in jest.

When I was very young, no less in wisdom, then in age, one night in the
Capitol I met with a neighbor of mine, the which was so old, that he might
have taken me for his nephew: to whom I said these words: Lord Fabritius, are
you also in A question demanded of an old man and his answer.
Love? he answered me. You see that my age suffers me not that I should be a
lover, if I should be, it is but in sport.

Truly I marvelled to meet him at that hour, and I was ashamed to have such
an answer. In old men of great age and gravity such request cannot be called
love, but grief, not pastime, but loss of time, not mocrie, but villainy: for
of love in jest, ensues infamy indeed.

I ask you Claude and Claudine, what a thing is it, to see an old man be in
love? Truly it is no other, but as a garland before the Tavern doors: where
al men think that there is wine, and they sell naught else but vinegar. They
are eggs white without, and rotten within, they are golden pills, the taste
whereof are very bitter, and as empty boxes in shops, which have new writings
on them, or as a new gate, and within in the house is full of filth and cobwebs.

Finally, the old Lover is a knight of Exchetes, which helps to lose money,
and can deliver no man from peril. Let this word be noted, and always in your
memory committed, That the old man that is vicious, is but A good example, and
worthy to be noted.
as a Leeke which has the head white, and the tale green.

Me thinks that you ought to break the wings of time, since that you have
feathers to fly withal: deceive not your self, nor your friends and
neighbors, saying, that there is time for all. For the amendment is in your
hands, but time is in the hands of God to dispose.

Let us come now to remedy this great damage, do what you can by the day of
youth, and defer it not until the night of age, for ill cutteth the knife,
when the edge thereof is dulled: and ill can he gnawe the bones which is
accustomed to eat the flesh. I tell you, and advertise you, that when the old
and rotten houses begin to fall, underset not them with rotten wood, but with
hard timber. I mean with the upright thoughts of accounts, which we ought to
give the Gods of our life, and to men of our renown.

For I say, that if the Vine be gathered of our virtues, we ought to graffe
again the amendment: and if the shreds of our gatherings be dry and withered
through our perverse works, we ought to set them again with new mould and
good desires.

The Gods are so gentle to serve, and so good to content, that if for all the
services we owe them, and for the gifts which they give us, we cannot pay them
in good works: they demand no more in pauement but good wills.

Finally, I say, that if thou Claude and Claudine have offered the meal of
youth to the world, offer now the blood of age to the Gods.

I have written longer then I had thought to have done. Salute all my
neighbors, specially Drusio the Patrician, and noble Roman widow. I remember
that Gobrine your niece did me a pleasure, that day of the Feast of the mother
Berecinthia, wherefore I send two thousand Sesterces, one thousand to help to
marry her: and the other thousand to help for to relieve your poverty.

My wife Faustine is sick, and I send you another 1000. Sesterces to give to
the Vestall virgins, to pray to the Gods for her.

My wife sends to thee Claudine a Cofer: by the immortal Gods I swear unto
thee, I cannot tell what is in it. I beseech the Gods sithence you are aged to
give you a good death, and to me and Faustine, they suffer us to lead a good
life. Marcus of mount Celio with his own hand writes this.

CHAP. XXIII. Princes ought to take heed that they be not noted of avarice,
for that the covetous man is both of God and man hated.
THe great Alexander King of Macedony, and Darius the unfortunate What caused
Alexander to be loved and honored
King of Persians, were not only contrary in wars and conquests, which they
made, but also in the conditions and inclinations which they had: For Alexander
naturally loved to give and spend: and Darius to the contrary, to heap, lock
and keep. When the fame of Alexander was spredde abroad throughout all the
word to be a Prince of honor, and not covetous, his own loved him entirely,
and strangers desired to serve him faithfully.

The miserable King Darius, as he King Darius noted of covetousness.
was noted of great avarice, and of small liberality, so his did disobey him,
and strangers hated him: whereof may be gathered that Princes and great Lords
by giving, do make them selves rich: and in keeping, they make themselves poor.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes declares, that after King Darius was dead, and
Alexander had triumphed over all the Oriental parts, a man of Thebes being in
the market place of Athens, setting forth the fortune of Alexander for the
sundry Countries which he had conquered, and describing the evil fortune of
Darius, for the great number of men which he had lost, a Philosopher with a
loud voice said, O man of Thebes, thou art greatly deceived, to think that one
prince loses many seigniories, and that the other Prince wins many Realms.
For Alexander the Great, wann naught but stones and couerings of Cities: for
with his liberality he had already gotten the good wills of the Citizens: and
on the contrary, the unfortunate Darius did not lose but stones, and the
couertures of Cities, for with his covetousness and avarice he had now lost
all the hearts of those of Asia.

And further, this Philosopher said unto him, that Princes which will enlarge
their estates, and amplify their realms in their conquests, ought first to
win the hearts, and to be noble and liberal; and afterward to send their
armies to conquer the Forts, and walls, for otherwise little avails it to
win the stones, if the hearts do rebel.

Whereby a man may gather, that that which Alexander wanne, he wanne by
liberality and stoutness: and that which King Darius lost, he lost for being
miserable and covetous.

And let us not marvel hereat, for that Princes and great Lords which are
overcome with avarice, I doubt whether ever they shall see themselus
Conquerours of many realms. The vice of avarice is so detestable, so evil, The
vice of avarice so odious, that it cannot be sufficiently expressed.
so odious, and so perilous, that if a man should employ himself for to write
all the discommodities thereunto belonging, my pen should do naught else,
then to presume to dry up all the water in the sea: For the stomach where
avarice enters, causes a man to serve vices, and worship Idols.

If a virtuous man would prepare himself to think on the great travel, and
little rest that this cursed vice bears with him, I think that none would be
vicious therein. Though the covetous man had no other travel, but always to
go to bed with danger, and to rise up with care: Me thinks that it is a
trouble sufficient for such a one when he goes to bed, thinks that he
should be killed in his bed, or that sleeping his coffers should be rifled:
and from that time he rises, he is always tormented with fear to lose that
which he has won, and careful to augment that little too much.

The divine Plato in the first book of his Commonwealth said these words.
The men be made rich, because they never learned to be rich: for he which
continually, and truly will become rich, first ought to abhor covetousness,
before he begin to occupy himself to lock up goods. For the man which
sets no bond to his desire shall always have little though he see himself
Lord of the world.

The sentence of the Stoyckes does satisfy my mind much, whereof Aristotle in
his politikes, makes mention, where he says: That unto great affairs, are
always required great riches: and there is no extreme poverty, but where
there has been great abundance, A worthy saying of Aristotle.
etc. Thereof ensues, that unto Princes and great Lords which have much, they
want much: because unto men which have had little, they can want but little.

If we admonish worldlings not to be vicious, they will always have excuses
to excuse themselves, declaring why they have been vicious: the vice of Avarice
excepted, to whom, and with whom they have no excuse. For, if one vain reason
be ready to excuse, there are two thousand to condemn them. Let us put example
in all the principal vices, and we shall see how this only of Avarice
remains condemned, and not excused?

If we reason why a noble Prince or great Lord is hautie and proud? He will
answer that he has great occasion. For the natural disposition of men is,
rather to desire to command with travel, then to serve with quyetnes and rest.

If we reprove any man that is furious, and given to anger: he will answer
us, that we marvel not, since we marvel not of the proud: For that the enemy
has no more authority to trouble any man, then the other to take revenge of
him.

If we blame him for that he is fleshly and vicious: he will answer us, that
he cannot abstain from that sin: For, if any man can eschew the acts, he
fights continually with unclean thoughts. If we say that any man is
negligent, he will answer us, that he deserves not to be blamed: For, the
vileness of our nature is such, that if we do travel it, immediately it is
weary: and if we rest it, immediately it rejoices. If we rebuke any man that
is a glutton, he will answer us, that without eating and drinking, we cannot
live in the world: for the Divine Word has not forbidden man to eat with the
mouth, but the unclean thoughts which come from the heart.

As of these few vices we have declared, so may we excuse all the residue: but
to the vice of covetousness, none can give a reasonable excuse. For with money
put into the coffer, the soul cannot profit, nor the body rejoice.

Boethius in his book of consolation said, That Money is good, not when we
have it in possession, but when we want A true saying o^ Boethius.
it: And in very deed the sentence of Boethius is very profound: For, when man
spends money, he attaineth to that he will, but having it with him, it
profits him nothing.

We may say of these rich and covetous men, that if they heap and keep, they
say it is for dear and dry years, and to relieve their parents and friends.
We may answer them, that they do not heap up to remedy the poor in like
necessityes, but rather to bring the Commonwealth to greater poverty. For then
they sell all things dear, and put out their money to great usury: so that
this covetous man does more harm with that he does lend them, then the dry:
year does, with that it has taken from them.

The noble and virtuous men ought not cease to do well, for fear of dry
years: For, in the end if one dear year come, it makes al dear: and at
such a time, and in such a case, he only may be called happy, which for being
free and liberal in Alms, shall rejoice that his table should be costly?

Let all covetous men beware, that for keeping of much goods, they give not to
the devil their souls: For, it may be that before the dear year comes to
sell their Corn, their bodies shall be laid in the grave.

Oh what good does GOD to the Nobles, giving them liberal hearts: and what ill
luck have covetous men (having as they have) their hearts so hard laced: For if
covetous men did taste how sweet and necessary a thing it is to give, they
could keep little for themselves.

Now since the miserable and covetous men have not the heart to give to their
friends, to depart to their parents, to succor the poor, to lend to their
neighbors, nor to sustain the Orphans, It is for to be thought that they
will spend it on themselves.

Truly I say no more, for there are men so miserable, and so hard of that they
have, that they think that as evil spent, which among themselves they spend:
as that which one robs from them of their goods. How The description of a
miserable and covetous man.
will the covetous and miserable wretch give a garment to a naked man, which
dare not make himself a coat? How will he give to eat to the poor
familiar, which as a poor slave eats the bread of branne, and sells the
flower of meal? How shall the Pilgrims lodge in his house, who for pure misery
dare not enter? and how does he visit the Hospital, and relieve the sick,
that often times hazardeth his own health and life, for that he will not give
one penny to the Physician? how shall he succor secretly the poor and needy,
which makes his own children go barefoote and naked? how can he help to
marry the poor maids being orphans, when he suffers his own daughters to
wax old in his house? how will he give of his goods to the poor Captives,
which will not pay his own men their wages? how will he give to eat to the
children of poor Gentlemen, which always grudgeth at that his own spend? how
should we believe that he will apparel a widow, which will not give his
own wife a hoode? How does he daily give alms, which goes not to the Church
on the Sunday, because he will not offer one penny? how shall the covetous man
rejoice the heart, since for spending of one penny, often times he goes
supperlesse to bed? And finally, I say, that he will never give us of his own
proper goods, which weepeth always for the goods of another.

CHAP. XXIIII. The Author follows his matter, and with great reasons
discommendeth the vices of covetous men.
ONe of the things Poverty far better, then riches with covetousness
wherein the divine providence shows, that we do not understand the manner of
her government, is to see that she gives understanding to a man to know the
riches, she gives him force to seek them, subtly to gather them, virtue to
sustain them, courage to defend them, and also long life to possess them.

And with all this she gives him not license to enjoy them, but rather
suffers him, that as without reason he has made himself Lord of an other
man's, of right he should be made slave of his own: thereby a man may know,
of how greater excellency virtuous poverty is, then the outrageous
covetousness: for so much as to the poor, God does give contentation of that
little he has, and from the rich man he takes contentation of the great
deal he possesses,

So that to the covetous man we see troubles increase howerly, and the gain
comes unto him but monthly. Let us compare the rich and covetous man to the
poor potter, and we shall see who shall profit most, either the potter with
his pots that he makes of the earth, or else the covetous with his money,
which he has in the earth. Though I make no answer to this, yet answer herein
has already been made, that the one is much better at ease with the earth,
then the other is with the good: For the Potter gets his living by selling
pots, and the covetous man loses his soul by keeping riches.

I humbly require the high Princes and also I beseech the great Lords, and
further I admonish the other nobles and Plebeians, always to have this word in
memory. I say and affirm, that the more strongly the man keeps, and locketh
his treasure, The desire of covetous men never satisfied.
the more strongly and privily is he kept: for if he put two keys to keep
his treasure, he puts seven to his heart not to spend them. Let the noble
and valiant men beware, that they give not their minds to heap up treasures:
for if once their hearts be kindled with covetousness, for fear of spending a
half penny, they will daily suffer themselves to fall into a thousand
miseries. The Plebeians which are very rich may say, that they have not heaped
up much treasures, sithence they cannot behold a hundred, or two hundred
duccats. To this I answer, that the estates considered, ten duccates do as
much harm to a Treasurer, as to others ten thousand: For the fault consists
not in keeping, or hiding (much or little) riches: but for so much as in keeping
them, we cease to do many good works. To me it is a strange matter, that
niggardliness has a greater force to the covetous, then conscience has in
others: For there are many, which notwithstanding conscience, do profit with
the goods of others, and the covetous having more misery then conscience,
cannot yet profit with their own: With much care and less diligence the
covetous men do provide that the millers do not rob the meal, that their
beasts make no wastes, that the Hunters run not through the corn, that their
wine perish not, that those which owe them any thing, do not go and make
themselves bankroutes, that wynets do not eat their corn, and the thieves rob
not their goods: but in the end they watch none so well as themselves: for all
the others, (early or late) have always opportunity to rob from them
somewhat: but the covetous has never the heart to change a duccate.

Men ought to take great pity of a covetous man, who by his own will The
description of a covetous man.
and not of necessity, wears his gown all to torn, his shoes out, his
points without agglets, an evil fauouted girdle, his coat rent, his hat old,
his hose seame rent, his cap greasy, and his shirt lousie. Finally, I say,
that diverse of these misers feign that they have a great sum to pay, and it
is for no other thing, but for not wearing a good garment. What can the
covetous do more, then for keeping a penny in his purse, he will go two
months, and not trim his beard? Sithence it is true that these pinch-penies
do behave their persons so evil, do ye think they have their houses any
thing the better furnished? I say no, but you shall see their chambers full of
cobwebs, the doors out of the hinges, the windows riuen, the glasses broken,
the planches loose, the couertures of the house without gutters, the stools
broken, the beds worme-eaten, and chimnies ready to fall: so that to harbor a
friend or kinsmen of theirs, they are constrained to Lodge him in their
neighbors house, or else to send to borrow all that they want. And passing
over the garments they wear, and the housen wherein they dwell, let us see
what Tables they keep: For of their Gardens they eat no fruit, but that that
falls off the tree, of their vines but rotten grapes, of their sheep the
sickest, of their Corn the wettest, of wine, that which has taken wind, of
Lard that is yeallow, of milk, that is turned. And finally I say, the
felicity that gluttons have in eating, the self same have they in keeping.

Oh unhappy are the gluttons, and much more the covetous: for the taste of one
consists only in the throat, and the felicity of the other consists A
comparison between the glutton, and the usurer.
in that he may lock up in his chest.

We have now seen how the covetous wear simple apparel, keep a poor
Table, and dwell in a filthy house: and yet they less regard those things
that touch their honor. For, if they had their ears as open to hear, as they
have their hearts bent at each hour to gather and heap up: they should hear
how they are called mysers, usurers, niggards, pinchpennies, oppressors,
cruel, unthankful, and unfortunate. Finally I say, that in the comon-wealth
they are so hated, that all men had rather lay hands upon their bodies to kill
them, then tongues on their renown, to defame them. The covetous man is of all
other the most unlucky. For, if he fall at strife with any, he shall find no one
friend that will come to visit him in his house: but he shall have a hundred
thieues which will rob him of his goods. For to revenge a covetous enemy, a man
need desire naught else but that he live long: for, he is more tormented in
his life with his own covetousness, then he can be otherwise with any penance.
If rich men would say unto me, that they do not rejoice to have fair houses,
sithe^s they have the^, neither of curious apparel, since they may wear it,
nor of dainty meats, since they may eat them, and that that which they
do, is not to be covetous, but for that they are good Christians.

In so just a thing, reason would my pen should cease: but I am sorry, they so
little esteem things touching their honor, and much less the matters touching
their conscience.

If the auaritious say, he keeps goods to do alms, I do not believe it:
for daily we see, if a poor man ask him alms, he answers them immediately,
God help you, for he has neither purse nor money. The covetous The alms of
the covetous man, if he give any.
uses this, that he never gives alms in his house, but fat meat, restie
bacon, rotten cheese, and hoary bread: so that it seems rather that they make
clean their house, then give alms to the poor. If the covetous man would
tell us, that that which they have, is to discharge some debts of their
predecessors, wherewith they are burdened. I say, it is a vain excuse, since
we see that the wills of their fathers, of their mothers, and of their
grandfathers, be not as yet performed, neither will they think to perform
them, which seems very true. For since the hour that they laid their
fathers in the grave, they never had any thought of their dead Fathers.

He which of pure covetousness and misery, suffers himself to dye for
hunger and cold: I think he has small devotion for to give alms, and much
less to do any man good. If the covetous man say unto us, that that which he
keeps, is for none other cause but for to build a sumptuous Chapel, and to
leave of them some memory: To this I answer, That if such a one does it with
his own proper swette, and makes restitution of all the evil that he has
done, it shall be sanctified, and of all good men commended: but if the
covetous will that many live in great poverty, only to make a rich tomb, God
does not command that, neither does the Church admit it: for sacrifice done to
God with the cries of others is not acceptable.

If the covetous tell us, that though they heap treasures, it is not but at
their death to distribute it unto the poor, and to be brought honestly to the
ground: I say that I commend this purpose, so his intent be accordingly
performed: but I am sorry the covetous man should think hereby to merit, and
that he should thus discharge the wickedness of his life, for the
distribution of a little money after his death.

I would think it more sure, that Princes and great Lords should spend their
goods to marry poor maidens being Orphans in their life, then to command
money to be dealt after their death. For often times the heirs or their
executors, the body interred, do little perform the will of the Testator: and
much less observe the Legacies bequeathed, though it be to the utter undoing
of the poor Orphans.

O what guerdon and commendation deserves he that justly and truly
discharges the Legacies of the dead, and of the surplus (if any be) or with
their own, relieve the Orphans, and marry the poor maidens, keeping them
from the vices of the world. Suppose that a covetous man chances to traffic
at Medine in Spain, at Lions in France, at Lisbone in Portingall, at London in
England, at Antwarpe in Flaunders, at Millaine in Lombardy, at Florence in
Italy, at Palermo in Scicill, at Prage in Bohemie, and at Buda in Hungary:
Finally, vith his eyes he has seen all Europe, and by traffic he has
knowledge of all Asia. Admit now that in every place he has gotten goods, and
that which he has gotten, was not with whole conscience, but acording to the
companies, so has the offenses been diverse.

In this case, if at the hour of death when the covetous man divides his
money between the children, he might also divide his offenses, so that he
dispossessing himself of the goods, might thereby be free from the offenses,
then it were well. But alas it is not so, for the wicked children live
triumphing on the earth with the goods, and the miserable father goes weeping
to hell with his sins.

CHAP. XXV. Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to his friend
Cincinnatus, who being a Roman Knight became a merchant of Capua, wherein he
touches those Gentlemen which take upon them the trade of Marchanaize against
their vocation. It is divided into three Chapters,
Mark the Emperor with his brother Annius Verus, fellow in the Empire, wishes
to thee Cincinnatus The Emperor shows the abuse of those that leave their
calling.
of Capua, health to thy person, and grace against thy evil fortune. From the
feast of our mother Berecinthe, I have seen neither servant of thy house, nor
read letter of thy hand, which makes me suspect greatly that thy health is in
danger, or that thou mistrustest our friendshipp: for earnest friendship
requires daily communication or visitation: I pray thee be not so careless
from henceforth, and do not forget us in such wise. I mean that thou will
come and see us, or at the least that thou will write unto us often: for the
letters of faithful friends, though utterly they do not take from us the
desire of the presence: yet at the least, they make us hope for a meeting. I
know that thou may answer me, that in the Common wealth of Capua thou art
so busied, that it is impossible thou should write unto me: hereto I
answer thee.

That in no affairs thou can be so occupied, that it be a lawful let, not
to communicate, or write unto thy friend: For we may well call the time which
we live, to be well employed, which is spent in the service of God, and in
the conversation of our friends.

All the residue that we waste in talking, traveling, sleeping, eating and
resting, we ought not to write it in the book of life, but in the Register of
death: For albeit that in such se^blable works the body is refreshed, yet
therewith the heart cannot be comforted.

I swear unto thee therefore my friend, that it is impossible that man take
any contentation of any worldly thing, where the heart is not at rest: for our
comfort is not in the sinews or in the bones of the body, but in the lively
power of the soul, It is long sithence that you and I have known together, it
is long time likewise that I loved thee, and thou me: and since we are so true
old friends, it is but reason, that with good works we do renew our
friendship. For falsely they usurp the name of friendship, which are not
conversant one with the other, no more then if they were strangers. The man
which speaks not to me, which writes not to me, which sees me not, which
visits me not, which gives me not, and to whom I give not.

I would not he were my enemy: but it little avails me that he call me
friend, for particular friendship consists not in abundance, but that friends
do open their hearts, and talk with their persons.

Peradventure thou will say, that the great distance which is from Rome to that
Country, has been occasion to diminish our friendship: for the noble hearts
are on fire with the presence of that they love, and have great pain with the
absence of that they desire.

I answer, that the farther the delicious wines are sent, from the place where
they grow, the greater strength they have. I mean, that herein true Wherein
true friendship consists.
friends are known, when their persons are surthest severed: for then are
their wills most conjoined.

Tell me I pray thee Cincinnatus, sithence always thou have found me a
diligent friend in thy service, why do thou mistrust my faithful good will?
The green leaves outwardly do show that the tree inwardly is not dry, I
mean, that the good works outwardly do declare the feruentnes of the heart
inwardly. If thou Cincinnatus presumest to be a true friend of thy friend, I
will thou know this rule of friendship which is: where perfect love is not,
there wants always faithful service: and for the contrary he that perfectly
loves, assuredly shall be served. I have been, am and will be thine, therefore
thou shall do me great injury, if thou art not mine.

CHAP. XXVI. The Emperor proceeds in his Letter, and declares what virtues
men ought to use, and the vices which they ought to eschew.
IN times past, I being young and thou old, I did succor thee with money, The
Emperor shows what virtues men ought to use, and the vices they ought to
eschew.
and thou me with good counsel: but now the world is otherwise changed, in
that thy white hayres do judge thee to be old, and thy works do cause thee to
be young: Therefore necessity compels me, that we change our style, which
is: that I succor thee with counsel, though thou give me no money therefore:
for I count thy covetousness to be such, that for all the good counsel, and
Counselors of Rome, thou will not vouchsafe to give one quatrine of Capua.

Now for the good that I wish thee, and for that which I owe to the Law of
friendship, I will presently give thee a counsel, whereby thou may know
what a good man ought to do, to be beloved of God, and feared and loved of
men. If thou will quietly lead thy life in this miserable World, retain this
well in memory which I write unto thee,

First, the good deeds thou have received of any, those shall thou remember:
and the wrongs thou have sustained, them shall thou forget. Secondarily,
esteem much thy own little, and weigh not the much of an other. Thirdly, the
company of the good always covet, and the conversation of the evil daily
fly. Fourthly, to the great show thy self grave, and to the small more
conversant. Fifthly, to those which are present, do always good works: and of
those that be absent, always speak good words. Sixthly, weigh little the loss
of fortune, and esteem much things of honor. The seventh, to win one thing,
never adventure thou many: nor for many things doubtful do not adventure any
one thing certain. Finally, and lastly, I pray thee, and advertise thee that
thou have no enemy, and that thou keep but one friend. He which among the
good, will be counted for good, none of these things he ought to want, I know
well that thou will have great pleasure to see these my counsels well written:
but I ensure thee, I shall have greater pleasure to see them in thy decdes well
observed: For by writing to give good counsel, it is easy: but by works to
follow the same, is marvelous hard.

My faithful friendship to thee plighted, and thy great ability considered,
caused me always for thee in Rome to procure honorable offices, and by my
suit thou have been Edite, and Tribune, and master of the horses, wherein thou
behauedst thy self with such wisdom, that all the Senate therefore yielded
me most hearty thanks, I procuring them for thee, and thou for thy self
winning such perpetual renown. One thing of thee I understand, which with
good will I would not have known, and much less that any such thing by thee
should have bin committed: that is to say; That thou leaving thy Office of
Pretorship in the ware by Land, have taken upon thee the traffic of a
Merchant by sea: so that those which in Rome knew thee a knight, do see thee
now in Capua, a Merchant. My pen indyting this my letter, for a time stood in
suspense for no other cause, but only to see what thing in thee first I might
best blame: either the noble office which thou did forsake, or the vile and
base estate which thou have chosen. And though thou be so much bereaved of thy
senses, yet call to mind thy ancient predecessors which died in the wars,
only to leave their children, and nephews armed knights: and that thou
presently seek to loose thy liberty through thy covetousness, which they wan
by their valiantnes. I think I am not deceived, that if thy predecessors were
revived, as they were ambicious of honor, so would they be greedy to eat
thee in morsels, sinues, bones and all. For the children which unjustly take
honor from their Fathers, of reason ought to loose their lives.

The Castles, Towns, houses, mountains, woods, beasts, Jewels, and silver,
which our predecessors have left us, in the end by long continuance do perish:
and that which causes us to have perpetual memory of them, is, the good
renown of their life. And therefore if this be true, it is a great shame for
their parents to have such children, in whom the renown of their
predecessors does end. In the flourishing time of Cicero the Orator, when by
his counsel the whole Commonwealth was governed, he being then of power, both
in knowledge, and of money: Salust said unto him in his Inuectiue, that he
was of base stock: whereunto he answered: Great cause have I to render
thanks unto the Gods, that I am not as thou art, by who^ thy high Lineage is
ended: A worthy saying of Cicero.
but my poor stock by me does now begin to rise. It is great pity to see,
how many good, noble, and valiant men are dead: but it is more grief to see
presently their children vicious and unthrifts. So that there remains as much
memory of their infamy, as there does of the others honesty. Thou make me
ashamed, that thou have forsaken to conquer the enemies as a Roman knight,
and that thou art become a merchant, as a poor Plebeian.

Thou make me to muse a little, my friend Cincinnatus, that thou will harm
thy familiars, and suffer strangers to live in peace. Thou seek to procure
death to those which give us life: and to deliver from death, those which take
our life. To Rebels thou give rest, and to the peacemakers, thou give
anoyance. To those which take from us our own thou will give, and to those
which gives us of theirs, thou will take. Thou condemnest the innocents, and
the condemned, thou will deliver. A defender of thy country thou will not be,
but a tyrant of thy Commonwealth. To all these things aduentureth he, which
leaves weapons, and falls to Merchandise. With my self often times I have
mused, what occasion should move thee to forsake Chivalry, wherein thou had
such honor, and to take in hand marchaundise, where of follows such in
famie? I say, that it is as much shame for thee to have gone from the wars as
it is honor for those which are born to office in the commonwealth.

My friend Cincinnatus, my end tends not to condemn marchaundise nor
marchaunts, nor to speak evil of those which traffic, by the trade of
buying and selling. For, as without the valiant knights, wars cannot be
achieved: so likewise without the diligent merchants, the commonwealth cannot
be maintained? I cannot imagine for what other cause thou should forsake the
wars, and trafficque merchandise, unless it were, because thou now being old
and want force to assault men openly in the straytes: should with more
ease sitting in thy chair, rob secretly in the marketplace. O poor
Cincinnatus, since thou buiest cheap and sellest dear, promisest much, and
performest little: thou buiest by one measure, and sellest by another, thou
watchest that none deceive thee, and playest therein as other merchants
accustom. And to conclude, I swear, that the measure wherewith the Gods shall
measure thy life, shall be much iuster then that of thy merits.

Thou have taken on thee an office, wherewith, the which they companions in
many days have robbed, thou in one hour by deceit do get, and afterward
the time shall come, when all the goods which thou have gotten, both by truth,
and falsehood, shall be lost, not only in an hour which is long, but in a
moment which is but short. Whether we give much, we have much, we may do much,
or we live much, yet in the end the gods are so just, that all the evil we do
commit shall be punished, and for all the good we work, we shall be rewarded,
so that the Gods oftentimes permit, that one alone shall scourge many, and
afterward the long time punishes all.

CHAP. XXVII. The Emperor concludes his letter, and persuades his friend
Cincinnatus to despise the vanities of the world, and shows though a man be
never so wise, yet he shall have need of another man's counsel.
IF I knew thy wisdom esteemed the world, and the vanities thereof, so The
Emperor concludes his letter, describing the vanities of the world.
much as the world does possess thee, and thy days, as by thy white hairs
most manifestly does appear: I need not to take the pains to persuade thee,
nor thou should be annoied in hearing me: Notwithstanding thou being at
the gate of great care, reason would that some should take the clapper to
knock threeat, with some good counsel: for though the rasor be sharp, it
needs sometimes to be whet. I mean though man's understanding be never so
clear, yet from time to time it needs counsel.

Virtuous men often times do err, not because they would fall, but for that the
things are so evil of disgestion, that the virtue they have, suffices not to
tell them what thing is necessary for their profit. For the which cause it is
necessary, that his will be brideled, his wit fined, his opinion changed, his
memory sharpened, and above all, now and then, that he forsake his own
advise, and cleave unto the counsel of an other. Men which covet to make high,
sumptuous, fair and large buildings, have great care that the foundation
thereof be surely laid: for where the foundations are not sure, there the
whole buildings are in great danger. The manners and conditions of this world,
(that is to say) the prosperous estates whereupon the children of vanity are
set, are founded of quicke-sand: in that sort, that be they never so valiant,
prosperous and mighty, a little blast of wind does stir them, a little heat
of prosperity does open the^, a shower of adversity does wet the^, and unawares
death strikes them all flat to the ground. Men seeing they cannot be
perpetual, do procure to continue themselves, in raising up proud buildings,
and leaving to their children great estates: wherein I count them fools, no
less then in things superfluous: for admit the pillars be of gold, the beams
of silver, and that those which join them be kings, and those which build
them noble, and in that mining they consume a 1000. years before they can have
it out of the ground, or that they can come to the bottomes: I swear unto
them, that they shall find no stedy rock, nor lively mountain, where they may
build their house sure, nor to cause their memory to be perpetual.

The immortal Gods have participated all things to the mortal men, immortality
only reserved, and therefore they are called immortal, for so much as they
never dye, and we others The frailety and state of man described.
are called mortal, because daily we vanish away. O my friend Cincinnatus, men
have an end, and thou think the Gods never ought to end. Now green, now
ripe, now rotten, fruit is severed from this life, from the tree of the
miserable flesh, and esteem this as nothing, for so much as this is natural.
But oftentimes in the leaf or flower of youth, the frost of some disease, or
the peril of some mishap does take us away: so that when we think to be
alive in the morning, we we are dead in the night.

It is a tedious and long work to weaue a cloth: yet when in many days it is
wouen, in one moment it is cut. I mean, that it is much folly to see a man
with what toil he enricheth himself, and into what peril he puts himself
to win a state of honor: and afterward when we think little we see him
perish in his estate, leaving of him no memory. O my friend Cincinnatus, for
the love that is between us, I desire thee, and by the immortal Gods I do
conjure thee, that thou give no credit to the world which has this condition,
to hide much copper under little gold, under the color of one truth, he
tells us a thousand lies, and with one short pleasure he mingleth ten
thousand displeasures. He beguileth those to whom he pretends most love, and
procures great damages to them, to whom he gives most goods, he recompenseth
them greatly which serve him in jest, and to those which truly love him, he
gives mockes for goods.

Finally, I say, that when we sleep most sure, he waketh us with greatest
peril. Either thou know the world with his deceit, or not: if thou know
him not, why do thou serve him, if thou do know him, why do thou follow
him? Tell me, I pray thee, would not thou take the thief for a fool,
which would buy the rope, wherewith he should be hanged, and the murderer
that would make the sword wherewith he should be beheaded, and the robber by
the hieway, that would show the well wherein he should be cast? and the
traitor that should offer himself in place for to be quartered? the rebel that
should disclose himself to be stoned? Then I swear unto thee, that thou art
much more a fool which know the world, and will follow it, and serve it.

One thing I will tell thee, which is such, that thou never ought to forget
it, that is to say that we have great need of faith, not to believe the
vanities which we see, then to believe the great malice which with our ears we
hear. I return to advise thee, to read and consider this word which I have
spoken, for it is a sentence of profound mystery.

Do thou think Cincinnatus, that Rich men have little care to get great
riches? I let thee know that the goods of this world are of such condition,
Cares that are incident to them that hoorde up riches.
that before the poor man does lock up in his chests an 100. crowns: he
feels a thousand griefs and cares in his heart. Our predecessors have seen
it, we see it presently, and our successors shall see it: that the money which
we have gotten is in a certain number: but the cares and travels which it
brings are infinite. We have few painted houses, and few noble estates in
Rome, that within a little time have not great cares in their hearts, cruel
enmityes with their neighbors, much evil will of their heirs, disordinate
importunities of their friends, perilous malices of their Enemies, and above all
in the Senate they have innumerable process: and often times to lock up a little
good in their chests, they make ten thousand blots in their honor.

Oh how many have I known in Deceyuers never go unpunished, either in this
life, or the other.
Rome, to whom it has chanced, that all that they have gotten in Rome, to
leave unto their best beloved Child: another heir (with little care,) of whom
they thought not, has enjoyed it.

There can be nothing more just, then that all those which have beguyled
others with deceyte in their life, should be found deceived in their vain
imaginations after their death.

Injurious should the Gods be, if in all the evils that the evil propound to
do, they should give them time and place to accomplish the same. But, the gods
are so just and wise, that they dissemble with the evil, to the end they
should begin, and follow the things according to their own wills and
fantasies: and afterward at their best time, they cut off their lives, to
leave them in greater torment. The Gods should be very cruel, and to them it
should be great grief to suffer, that that which the evil have gathred, to
the prejudice of many good, they should enjoy in peace many years. Me thinks
it great folly, to know that we are borne weeping and to see that we dye
sighing: and yet for all this, we dare live laughing?

I would ask of the world and his worldlings, since that we enter into the
world weeping, and go out of the world sighing: why we should live laughing?
For, the rule to measure all parts, ought to be equal.

Oh Cincinnatus, who has beguyled thee? to the end that for one bottle of
water of the Sea of this world for thy pleasure, thou will blister thy hand
with the rope of cares, and bruise thy body in the anckor of troubles: and
above all to adventure thine own honor, for a glass of water of another man.

By the faith of a good man, I swear unto thee, that for all that great
quantity of Water thou drawest, for that great deal of money thou have, thou
remainest as much dead for thyrste, drinking of that water, as when thou were
without water in the cup.

Consider now thy years, if my counsel thou will accept, thou shall demand
death of the Gods, to rest thee as a virtuous man: and not riches A good
counsel to reframe from covetousness.
to live as a Fool.

With the tears of mine eyes I have bewailed many in Rome, when I saw them
depart out of this world: and thee I have bewailed, and do bewail (my friend
Cincinnatus) with drops of blood, to see the return into the world The credit
thou had in the Senate, the blood of thy predecessors, my Friendship, the
authority of thy person, the honor of thy parentage: the slander of thy
Commonwealth, ought to withdraw thee from so great covetousness.

Oh poor Cincinnatus, consider the white honored hairs which do fall, ought
to be occupied in the noble armies: since thou art noble of blood, valiant in
person, ancient of years, and not evil willed in the Commonwealth. For, thou
ought to consider, that more worth is reason, for the pathway of men which
are good: then the common opinion, which is the large high way of the evil.
For, if it be narow to go on the one side, there is no dust wherewith the eyes
be blinded, as in the other. I will give thee a counsel, and if thou feel
thy self evil, never count thou me for friend. Lust no more after the
greasy fat of temporal goods, since thou have short life: For we see daily
many, before they come to thy age dye, but we see few after thy age live.

After this counsel I will give thee an advise, that thou never trust present
prosperity: For, then always thou art in danger of some evil Fortune: If thou
art mounted into such pricking thorns as a fool: me thinks thou ought to
descend as a Sage. And in this sort all will say amongst the people, that
Cincinnatus is descended, but not fallen. My Letter I will conclude, and the
conclusion thereof see well thou note, that is to say: That thou and thy Trade
shall be cursed: where you other merchaunts will live poor, to dye rich. Once
again I return to curse you, for the covetousness of an evil man is always
accomplished, Covetousness always accursed.
to the prejudice of many good.

My wife Faustine does salute thee, and she was not a little troubled when she
knew thou were a Merchant, and that thou keep a shop in Capua. I send thee
a Horse to ride upon, and one of the most richest Arras of Trypolie, to hang
thy house withal, a precious ring, and a a pommel of a sword of Alexandrie:
And all these things I do not send thee, for that I know thou have need
thereof: but rather not to forget the good custom I have to give. Pamphile thy
aunt and my neighbor is dead, and I can tell thee, that in Rome dyed not a
woman of a long time, which of her left such renown: for so much as she forgot
all enmities: she succored the poor, she visited the banished, she
entertained friends, and also I heard say, that she alone did light all the
temples. Prescilla thy cousin has the health of body, though for the death of
her mother her heart is heavy. And without doubt she has reason: for the
only sorrows which the Mothers suffer to bring us forth, though with drops of
blood we should bewail them, yet we cannot recompense them. The Gods be in thy
custody and preserve me, with my wife Faustine, from all evil Fortune.

Mark of Mount Celio, with his own hand.

CHAP. XXVIII. The Author persuades Princes and great Lords to fly
covetousness and Avarice, and to become bountiful and liberal, which virtue is
ever pertinent to the royal person, etc.
PIsistratus, the renowned Tyrant among the Athenians, since his friends could
not endure the cruelties that he committed, each one returned to his own
house, and utterly forsook him. The which when the Tyrant saw, he laid all
his treasure and Garments on a heap together, and went to visit his friends,
to whom with bitter tears he spoke A saying of Pisistratus. the Tyrant.
these word. All my Apparel and money here I bring you, with determination,
that if you will use my company, we will go all to my house, and if you will
not come into my company, I am determined to dwell in yours. For, if you be
weary to follow me, I have great desire to serve you: since you know that
they cannot be called faithful Friends, where the one cannot bear with the
other,

Plutarchus in his Apothegmes says: that this Tyrant Pisistratus was very
rich, and extreme covetous: so that they write of him, that the gold and
silver which once came into his possession, never man saw it afterward: but if
he had necessity to buy any thing, if they would not present it unto him
willingly, he would have it by force.

When he was dead, the Athenians determined to weigh him and his treasure: the
case was marvelous, that the gold and silver he had weied more then his dead
body six times. At that time in Athens there was a Philosopher called Lido, of
whom the Athenians demanded, what they should do with the treasure The
opinion of the Philosopher Lido, concerning a covetous man.
and dead body? Me thinks (quoth, this Philosopher) That if those which are
living, did know any silver or gold which the tyrant took from them, it should
be restored again immediately: and do not marvel hereat, that I do not
require it to be put in the common treasure: For God will not permit that the
Common wealth be enriched with the theft of tyrants: but with the swet of the
Inhabitants. If any goods remain which do not appear from whom they have
been taken, me thinks that they ought to be distributed among the poor:
for nothing can be more just then that which the goods wherewith the tirant
has empouerished many, with the self same we should enrich some.

As touching his burial, me thinks he ought to be cast out to the fowls
to be eaten, and to the dogs to be gnawne.

And let no man think this sentence to be cruel: for we are bound to do no
more for him at his death, then he did for himself in his life, who being so
overcome with avarice that he would never disburse so much money, as should buy
him seven foot of earth wherein his grave should be made, And will you know,
that the Gods have done a great good to all Greece to take life from this
tirant: First, it is good, because much goods are dispersed, which heretofore
lay hid, and served to no purpose.

Secondly, that many tongues shall rest: for the treasures of this Tirant, made
great want in the Commonwealth, and our tongues the greatest part of the day
were occupied, to speak evil of his person.

Me thinks this Philosopher has touched two things, which the covetous man
does in the co^mon-welth, that is to say, that drawing much gold and silver to
the hidden Treasure, he robs the merchandise wherewith the people do live:
The other damage is, that as he is hated of all, so he causes rancour and
malice in the hearts of all: for he makes the rich to murmur, and the poor to
blaspheme.

One thing I read of in the laws of the Lumbardes, worthy (of truth) to A
custom among the Lumbards, worthy to be noted and followed.
be noted and known, and no less to be followed, which is, that all those
which should have gold, silver, money, silks, and clothes, every year they
should be registered in the place of justice. And this was, to the end, not to
consent, nor permit them to heap much, but that they should have to buy, sell,
and traffic, whereby the goods were occupied among the people: so that he
which did spend the money to the profit of his house, it was taken for good of
the commonwealth. If Christians would do that which the Lu^bards did, there
should not be so many covetous men in the common wealth: for nothing can be
more unjust, then one rich man heap up that which would suffice 10000. to live
with all: we cannot deny, but that cursed avarice to al sorts of men, is as
prejudicial, as the moth which eats all garments. Therefore speaking the
truth, there is no house that it does not defile: for it is more perilous to
have a clod of earth fall into a man's eye, then a beam upon his foot.

Agesilaus the renowned king of the Lacedaemonians, being asked of a man of
Thebes, what word was most odible to be spoken to a King: and what word was
that that could honor him most? he answered. The Prince with nothing so much
ought to be annoyed, as to say unto him that he is rich, and of nothing he
ought so much to rejoice, as to be called poor. For, the glory of the good
Prince consists not in that he has great treasures: but in that he has
given great recompenses.

This word without doubt, of all the world was one of the most royallest and
worthyest to be committed unto me morie, Alexander, Pyrrhus, Nicanor,
Ptholomeius, Pompeius, Julius Caesar, Scipto, Hanniball, Marcus Porlius,
Augustus, Cato, Traian, Theodose, Marcus Aurelius: etc. All these Princes have
bin very valiant and virtuous: but adding hereunto also, the Writers which had
written the deeds that they did in their lives, have mentioned also the
poverty which they had at their death. So that they are no less exalted, for
the riches they have spent, then for the prowesses they have done.

Admit that men of mean estate be auaritious, and Princes and great Lords
Covetousness in great personages, a greater blemish the^ in the poor
also covetous: the fault of the one is not equal with the vice of the other,
though in the end all are culpable: For if the poor man keep, it is for that
he would not want, but if the knight hoord, it is because he has too much.
And in this case I would say, that cursed be the Knight which trauelleth, to
the end that goods abound, and does not care that between two bows his renowm
fall to the ground.

Since Princes and great Lords will that men do count them Noble, virtuous,
and valiant, I would feign know what occasion they have to be niggards and
hard?

If they say, that that which they keep is to eat, herein there is no reason:
for in the end, where the rich eats least at his table, there are many that
had rather have that which remains, then that which they provide to eat in
their houses.

If they say that that which they keep is to apparel them, herein also they
have as little reason: for the greatness of Lords consists not in that they
should be sumptuously apparrelled, but that they provide that their servants
go not rent not torn. If they say it is to have in their chambers precious
jewels, in their hals rich Tapestry, as little would I admit this answer: for
all those which enter into Princes Palaces, do behold more if those that
haunt their chambers be virtuous, then that the Tapestries be rich.

If they say it is to compass their Cities with walls, or to make fortresses
on their frontiers: so likewise is this answer among the others very cold.

For good Princes ought not to travel, but to be well willed, and if in The
safety of Princes consists in the love of his subjects.
their realms they be well-beloved, in the world they can have no walls so
strong, as in the hearts of their Subjects. If they tell us that that they
keep is to marry their children, as little reason is that, for sithence
Princes and great Lords have great inheritances, they need not heap much: For
if their children be good, they shall increase that shall be left them: and if
by mishappe they be evil, they shall as well lose that which shall be given
them.

If they say unto us that which they heap is for the wartes in like manner,
that is no just excuse: For if such war be not just, the Prince ought not to
take it in hand, nor the people thereunto to condescend: but if it be just, the
commonwealth then and not the Prince shall bear the charges thereof. For in
just wars, it is not sufficient that they give unto the Prince all their
goods, but also they must themselves in person hazard their lives.

If they tell us that they keep it to give and dispose for their souls, at
their dying day: I say it is not only for want of wisdom, but extreme
sollie. For, at the hour of death princes ought more to rejoice, for that they
have given, then for that at that time they give.

Oh how Princes and great Lords are evil counseled, since they suffer
themselves to be slaundered for being covetous, only to heap a little cursed
treasure. For experience teaches us, no man can be covetous of goods, but
needs he must be prodigal of honor, and abandon liberty.

Plutarche, in the Book which he made of the fortunes of Alexander, says:
That Alexander the great had a private servant, called Perdicas: the which
seeing that Alexander liberally A Question lemau ded of great Alaxander, and
his answer.
gave all that which by great travel he attained: on a day he said unto him:
Tell me, most Noble Prince, since thou give all that thou have unto
others, what will thou have for thy self?

Alexander answered. The glory remains unto me, of that I have won and
gotten: and the hope of that which I will give and win.

And further he said unto him, I will tell thee Perdicas: If I knew that men
thought, that all that which I take were for covetousness, I swear unto thee by
the God Mars, that I would not beat down one corner in a Town: and to win
all the world, I would not go one days journey. My intention is, to take the
glory unto my self, and to divide the goods amongst others.

These words so high, were worthy of a valiant and virtuous Prince, as of
Alexander which spoke them.

If that which I have read in books do not beguile me, and that which with
these eyes I have seen: to become rich, it is necessary that a man give: For
that Princes and great lords, who naturally are given to be liberal, are
always fortunate to have.

It chances often times, that some man giving a little, is counted liberal, and
another giving much, is counted a niggard: the which proceeds of this, that
they know not, that liberality and niggardnesse consists not in giving much
or little: but to know well how to give. For, the rewards and recompenses,
which out of time are distributed, do neither profit them which receive them,
neither agree to him which gives them. A covetous man gives more at one time,
then a noble and free heart does in twenty: thus says the proverb, It is An
old proverb.
good coming to a niggardes feast.

The difference between the liberality of the one, and the misery of the other
is, that the noble and virtuous does give that he gives to many: but the
niggard gives that he gives, to one only.

Of the which vnaduisement, princes ought carefully to beware. For if in such
case one man alone should be found, which would commend his liberality, there
are ten thousand which would condemn his covetousness.

It happens often times to princes and great Lords, that indeed they are
free to recompense, but in giving, they are very unfortunate. And the cause is,
that they give it not to virtuous persons and well conditioned, but to those
which are unthankful, and do not acknowledge the benefit received.

So that in giving to some, they they have not made them their friends, and in
not giving unto others, they have made them their Enemies.

It suffices not unto Princes and great Lords, to have a great desire to
give, but to know, when, how, or where, and to whom they ought to give: For if
they be accused, otherwise to heap up treasures, they ought also to be
condemned for that they do give.

When a man has lost all that he has in play, in Whores, in Banquets, and
other semblable vices: It is but reason they be ashamed: but when they have
spent it, like noble, stout, and liberal men, they ought not to be
discontented; for the wise man ought to take no displeasure for that he loses,
but for that he evil spends: and he ought to take no pleasure for that he
gives, but for that he gives not well.

Dion the Grecian in the life of the Emperor Seuerus says, That one day in
the Feast of the God Ianus, when he had given diverse rewards and sundry
gifts, as well to his own servants, as to str^ngers, and that he was greatly
commended of all the Romans, he said unto them.

Do you think now (Romans) that I am very glad for the gifts, rewards, and
recompenses which I have bestowed: and freely given, and that I am very
glorious for the praises you have given me? by the God Mars I swear unto you,
and let the God Ianus be so merciful unto us all this year, that the
pleasure I A worthy ^aying of the Emperor Seuerus.
have is not so great for that I have given: as the grief is, for that I have
no more to give.

CHAP. XXIX. The Author follows his intention, and persuades Gentlemen and
those that profess Arms, not to abase themselves for gains sake, to take
upon them any vile function or office.
PLutarch in his Apothegmes says, that King Ptolomeus the first, was a The
praise of King Ptolomeus.
Prince of so good a nature, and so gentle in conversation, that often times he
went to supper to the houses of his familiar friends, and many nights he
remained there to sleep. And truly in this case he showed himself to be
well-beloved of his: For speaking according to the truth, a Prince on whose life
depends the whole state of the Commo^wealth, ought to credit few at the
Table, and also fewer in the bed. Another thing this Ptolomeus did, which was,
when he invited his friends to dinner or supper, or other strangers, of some
he desired to borrow stools, of others napkins, and of others cups: and so of
other things, for he was a prodigal Prince: For all that his servants in the
morning had bought, before the night following he gave it away.

One day all the Nobles of his Realm of Egypt assembled together, and desired
him very earnestly, that he would be more moderate in giving: for they said,
through his prodigality, the whole Realm was empouerished. The king answered:
You others of Egypt are maruellously deceived, that the poor and needy prince
is troubled. In this I dare say unto you, that the poor and needy Prince
ought to think himself happy: For good Princes ought more to seek to enrich
others, then to heap up Treasures for themselves.

Oh happy is the Commonwealth which deserves to have such a prince, and
happy is that tongue, which could pronounce such a sentence. Certainly A wise
saying of King Ptolomeus.
this Prince to all princes gave good example and counsel, (That is to say)
that for them it was more honor, and also more profit, to make others rich,
then to be rich themselves. For if they have much, they shall want no crauers,
and if they have little, they shall never want servants to serve them.

Suetonius Tranquillus in the book of Caesar's, says: that Titus the Emperor
one night after supper, from the bottom of his heart fetched a heavy sighe:
and he being demanded of those which were at his table, why he sighed so
sore? he answered. We have lost at this day my Friends. By the which words
the Emperor meant, that he counted not that day amongst A worthy saying of
Titus the Emperor.
those of his life: wherein he had given no reward nor gift.

Truly this Noble Prince was both valiant and mighty, since he sighed and
had displeasure, not, for that which in many days he had given, but because
that one day he had failed to give any thing.

Pelopa of Thebes, was a man in his time, very valiant, and also Rich, and
since he was fortunate in getting, and liberal in spending: one asked him, why
he was so prodigal to give? he answered. If to thee it seems that I give
much, to me it seems yet I should give more: since the goods ought to
serve me, and not I to honor them. Therefore, I will that they call me the
spender of the goods, and not the stewardes of the house.

Plutarche in his Apothegmes, says: that K. Darius flouting at K. Alexander,
for being poor, sent to know where his Treasures were for such great Armies?
To whom Alexander the great answered.

Tell King Darius, that he keeps in his coffers, his treasours of metal:
and that I have no other Treasours, then the hearts of my Friends. And further
tell A worthy saying of great Alex: to king Darius.
him, that one man alone can rob all his treasors: but he and all the world
can not take my Treasures from me, which are my Friends. I durst say,
affirming that Alexander said: That he cannot be called poor, which is rich
of Friends. For, we say by experience, Alexander with his Friends, took king
Darius treasures from him: and king Darius with all his treasures, was not
puissant enough to take Alexanders friends from him.

Those which of their natural inclination are shamefast, and in estate Noble,
they ought above all things to fly the slander of covetousness: For, without
doubt greater is that honor which is lost, then the goods that are gotten.

If Princes and great Lords, of their own natural inclination be liberal,
let them follow their nature: but if perchance of their own nature they are
enclyned to covetousness: let them enforce their will. And if they will not do
it, I tell them which are present, that a day shall come, when they shall
repent. For, it is a general rule, that the disordinate covetousness, do raise
against themselves all venomous tongues. Think that when you watch to take
men's goods, that others watch in like manner to take your honor. I do not
think that your life can be sure: For, there is no law that does ordain, nor
patience that can suffer, to see my neighbor live in quiet by the sweat of my
brows.

A poor man esteems as much a cloak, as the rich man does his delicious
life: Therefore it is a good consequent, that if the Rich man take the gown
from the poor, the poor man ought to take the life from the rich.

Phocion amongst the Greeks was greatly renowned: and this, not so much for
that he was sage, as for that he did despise all worldly riches: unto whom,
when Alexander the great (king of Macedonte,) had sent him an hundred marks of
silver, he said unto those that brought it: Why does Alexander send this Money
unto me, rather A worthy saying of Phocion, the philosopher.
then to other Philosophers of Greece? They answered him: He does send it
unto thee, for that thou art the least covetous, and most virtuous.

Then answered this Philosopher, Tell Alexander, that though he knows not
what belongs unto a Prince, yet I know well what pertayneth to a
Philosopher. For, the estate and office of Philosophers is, to despise the
treasurs of Princes: and the office of Princes, is to ask counsel of
Philosophers.

And further Phocion said: You shall say also to Alexander, That in that he
has sent me, he has not showed himself a pittyfull Friend, but a cruel
Enemy: for esteeming me an honest man (such as he thought I was) he should
have helped me to have been such.

These words were worthy of a wise man. It is great pity, to see valiant
and Noble men to be defamed of covetousness, and only for to get a few goods,
he abaseth himself to vile offices: which appertain rather to mean persons,
then to noble men and valiant knights. Whereof insueth, that they live
infamed, and all their friends slandered. Declaring further I say, that it
seems great lightness, that a knight should leave the honorable estate of
chivalry, to exercise the handycrafte of Husbandry: and that the Horses
should be changed into Oxen, the spears to mattockes, and the weapons into
ploughes: Finally, they do desire to toil in the fields, and refuse to fight
in the Frontiers.

Oh, how much some Knights of our time have degenerated, from that their
fathers have bin in times past: for their predecessors did advance themselves
of the Infidells, which in the the fields they slew, and their children brag of
their Corn and Sheep they have in their grounds,

Our ancient knights were not wont to sigh, but when they saw themselves in
great distress, and their successors weep now, for that it rayned not in the
month of May. Their Fathers did strive which of them could furnish most men,
have most weapons, and Great difference between the ancient warriors, and
these of our times.
keep most horses: but their children now a days contend, who has the finest
wit, who can heap up greatest treasours, and who can keep most sheep.

The Ancients striued who should keep most men: but these worldlings at this
day strive, who can have greatest revenues. Wherefore I say, since the one
does desire as much to have great Rents, as the others did delight to have
many weapons: It is as though Fathers should take the Sword by the pomell, and
the children by the scabberd All the good arts are perverted, and the art of
Chivalry above all others is despised: And not without cause, I called it an
art: for the ancient philosophers consumed a great time to write the laws that
the knights ought to keep. And as now the order of the the Carthaginia^s
seems to be most straight, so in times past, the order of Knighthood was the
streightest. To whom I swear, that if they observed the order of chiualry, as
good and gentle Knights: there remained no time vacant for them in life to be
vicious, nor we should accuse them at their death as evil christians. The true
and not feigned Knight, ought not to be proud, malicious, furious, a glutton,
coward, prodigal, niggard, a liar, a blasphemer, nor negligent. Finally, I
say, that all those ought not to be judged as Knights, which have golden
spurs, unless he has therewith an honest life.

O if it pleased the King of Heaven, that Princes would now a days examine as
straightly those, which have cure of souls, as the Romans did those which had
but charge of armies. In old time they never dubbed any man Knight, unless he
were of noble blood, proper of person, moderate in speech, exercised in the
war, An ancient custom among the Romans.
courageous of heart, happy in arms, and honest in life: Finally, he ought of
all to be beloved for his virtue, and of none hated for his vice. The Knights
in whom these virtues shined bright in Rome, had diverse liberties, that is to
say, that they only might wear rings, ride on horseback through the
streets, they might have a shield, shut the gates at dinner, they might drink
in cupps of silver, speak to the Senate, and make defyances, they might demand
the ensign, wear weapons, take the charge of Embassage, and ward at the gates
of Rome

The Author hereof is Blondus in the book De Italia illustrata. If Pliny
deceive us not in an Epistle, and Plutarch in his Politikes, Seneca in a
Tragedy, and Cicero in his Paradoxes: There was nothing wherein the Ancients
were more circumspect, then in electing of their knights: now it is not so, but
that one having money to buy a Lordship, immediately he is made Knight: it is
not to fight against the enemies in the field, but more freely to commit vices,
and oppress the poor in the towns. To the end he may be a good Christian, he
ought to think upon Jesus crucified, and to be a good knight, he ought always
to behold the arms of his shield, the which his Grandfather, or great
Grandfather wanne. For they they shall see, that they wanne them not being in
their houses: but in shedding of the blood of their enemies in the Frontiers.

CHAP. XXX. Of a Letter which the Emperor wrote to Mercurius his neighbor, a
Merchant of Samia, wherein men may learn the dangers of those which traffic
by sea and also see the covetousness of them that travel by land.
MArcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, born in mount Celio, wishes to thee A Letter
of the Emperor to Mercurius.
Mercurius his special friend, health, and consolation in the Gods, the only
Comforters. It seems well, that we are friends, since we do the works of
charity: For I understanding here thy mishap immediately sent a messenger to
comfort thee, and in hearing my disease, thou sendest a friend of thine to
visit me. Wherefore men may perceive if thou had me in mind, I did not
forget thee.

I understand that the messenger that went, and the other that came, met in
Capua: the one carried my desire for thee, and the other brought thy letter for
me. And if as diligently thou had read mine, as I attentiuly have heard
thine: thou should thereby plainly know, that my heart was as full of
sorrow, as thy spirit was full of pain. I was very glad, and great thanks I
yield thee, that thou sendest to comfort me in my fever tertian, and thy
visitation came at the same hour that it left me. But if the Gods did leave
this fact in my hands, even as they thought it good to fix the fever in my
bones: I would not leave thee without comfort, nor give place to the fever to
return again. Oh how great is our pride, and the misery of man's life.

I speak this because I do presume to take many Realms from other, and yet I
have not the power to pluck the fever out of my own bones. Tell me I pray
thee (Mercurius) what profit is it to us to desire much, to What profits it
a man to covet much, since his day ^s are so short.
procure much, to attain much, and to presume much, since our days are so
brief, and our persons so frail? It is long time since we have been bound
together in friendshipp, and many years have passed since we have known the
one the other: and the day that thy friendship trusted my faith, immediately my
faith was bound, that thy evils should be mine, and my goods thine: for as the
divine Plato said, that only is true friendship, where the bodies are 2. and
the wills but one.

I count that suspicious frendshippe where the hearts are so divided, as the
wills are feuered: for there are diverse in Rome great friends in words, which
dwell but x. house, a sunder, and have their hearts ten thousand miles distant.

When thou wentst from Rome, and I came from Samia, thou know the agreement
which we made in Capua, whereof I trust thou will not deceive me now, but that
I am another, thou here, and that thou should be another, I there: so that
my absence with thy presence, and thy presence with mine absence be always
together: By relation of thy messenger, I under stood that thou have lost much
goods but as by thy letter I was informed, the anguish of thy person was much
greater. As we understand here thou did send a ship laden with merchandise
to Greece, and the Mariners and Factors desiring more to profit by their
wisdom, then to accomplish thy covetousness: did cast the merchandise into
the sea, and only they traveled to save their persons, In deed in so
straight and perilous a case, thou have no reason to accuse them, nor yet they
are bound to satisfy thee: for no man can commit greater folly, then for the
goods of others to hazard his own proper life.

Pardon me (Mercury) I pray thee for that I have spoken, and also for that I
will say, which is, that for so much as the Mariners and Factors were not thy
children, nor thy Kinsemen, nor thy friends, so that thy merchandise might have
come to the haven safe, thou have little passed, if they had all been drowned
in the deep gulf of the sea.

Further, I say, though I would not say it, and thou much less hear it, that
according to the little care which you other covetous men have, of the children
and Factors of others, and according to the disordinate love which you have to
your proper goods: whereas thou weepest bitterly for the loss of thy goods,
though thou had seen all the Mariners drowned, thou would not have shed
one tear: For Roman merchants weep rather for ten crowns lost, which they
cannot recover, then for ten men dying, the which ten crowns would have
saved.

Me thinks it is neither just nor honest, that thou do that which they tell
me thou do, to complain of thy Factors, and accuse thy Mariners, only to
recover of the poor men by land that which the fish have in their possession
in the sea: For as thou know no man is bound to change health, life nor the
renown of their persons, for the recovery of goods. Alas What pity have I on
thee Mercury? in that the ship was laden with thy merchandise: and the
worst of all is: that according to my understanding, and thy feeling, the
Pirates have not cast such farthells into the Sea, as thoughts have burdened
and oppressed thy heart. I never saw man of such condition as thou art, for
that thou see the ship, (until such time) as they cast the merchandise over
the board, could not sail safely: and yet thou do lode thy self with
riches, to go to thy grave.

O grievous and cursed riches, with the which neither in the deep Seas,
neither yet in the maine land, our persons are in safeguarde: Knowing thy
property, I would rather bind my self to seek thy Lead and tin, then thy
heart so wounded. For, in the end, Riches never lets man be in quiet.
thy lead is together in some place in the bottom of the Sea: but thy
covetousness is seattered through all the whole Earth.

If perhaps thou should dye, and the Surgions with the sharp rasours should
open thy stomach, I swear unto thee, by the Mother Berecynthia, (which is the
mother of all the Gods of Rome) that they should rather find thy heart drowned
with the lead, then in life with thy body. Now thou can not be sick of the
Fever tertain as I am, for the heat within thy body, and the pain in thy head,
would cause thee to have a double quartaine: and of such disease thou can not
be healed on thy bed, but in the ship: not on land, but on the sea: not with
physicians, but with pirates. For the physicians would carry away the money, and
the pirates would show thee where thy lead fell.

Trouble not thy self so much Mercury, for though thou have not thy lead with
thee in the land, it has thee with it in the sea, and thou oughtst enough to
comfort thy self: for whereas before thou had it in thy coffers, thou have
it presently in thy intrailes. For, there thy life is drowned, where thy lead
is cast.

O Mercury, now thou know, that the day that thou did recommende thy goods
to the unknown rocks, and thy ship to the raging Seas, and thy outrageous
Avarice unto the furious winds, how much that thy factors went desiring thy
profit and gain, so much the more thou might have bin assured of thy loss.

If thou had had this consideration, and had used this diligence, thy
desire had bin drowned, and thy goods escaped. For, men that dare adventure
their goods on the Seas, they ought not to be heavy for that is lost, but they
ought to rejoice for that that is escaped,

Socrates, the ancient and great philosopher, determined to teach us, not by
words, but by works, in what estimation Socrates teaches us how to esteem
the goods of this world.
a man ought to have the goods of this world: for he cast into the Sea not
lead, but gold, not little, but much, not of another man's, but of his own,
not by force, but willingly, not by fortune, but by wisdom.

Finally, in this worthy fact, he showed so great courage, that no covetous
man but would have reioiced, to have found so much on the land, as this
philosopher did delight to have cast into the Sea. That which Socrates did was
much, but greater ought we to esteem that he said, which was this: Oh ye
deceytfull goods, I will drown you, rather then you should drown me.

Since Socrates feared, and drowned his own proper goods, why do not the
couetousfeare to rob the goods of other? This wise philosopher would not trust
the fine gold: and thou do trust the hard lead. Draw you two lots,
Socrates of Athens, and thou of Samia, see which of you two have erred, or done
well: he to carry gold from the land to the sea, to bring gold to the land.

I am assured, that the ancient Romans would say, that it is he: but the
covetous of this present World would say, that it is thou. That which in this
case I think is, that thou in praising it, do disprayse thy self, and
Socrates in dispraysing it, of all is praised and esteemed.

CHAP. XXXI. The Emperor follows his matter, and concludes his Letter,
greatly reproving his friend Mercurius for that he took thought for the loss
of his goods. He shows him the nature of fortune, and describes the
conditions of the covetous man.
THis messenger told me, that thou art very sad, that thou The conclusion of
the Emperors letter, showing the nature of covetous men.
cryest out in the night, and importunest the Godds, wakest thy neighbors; and
above all, that thou complaynest of Fortune, which has used thee so evil: I
am sorry for thy grief: for grief is a friend of solitude, enemy of company,
a lover of darkness, strange in conversation, and heir of desperation.

I am sorry thou cryest in the night; for it is a sign of folly, a token of
small patience, the point of no wise man, and a great proof of ignorance: for
at the hour when all the world is covered with darkness, thou alone do
discover thy heart with exclamations. I am sorry that thou art vexed with the
Gods, saying, that they are cruel: For So Much as if they have taken any thing
from thee for thy pride, they should restore it again for thy humility: for as
much as we offend the Gods through the offense so much do we appease them with
patience.

O my friend Mercurius, know thou not that the patience which the Gods have
in dissembling our faults, is greater, then that which men have in suffering
their chastisements? for we others unjustly do offend them, and they justly
punish us.

I am sorry that with thy exclamations and complaints thou slaunderest thy
neighbors: for as thou know, one neighbor always enuieth another, in
especially the poor the rich. And according to my counsel, thou should
dissemble thy pain, and take all things in good part: for if perhaps thy
riches have caused thy sorrow, thy patience will move them to compassion. I am
sorry thou complainest of thy fortune: For Fortune (since she is known of all)
does not suffer her self to be defamed of one: and it is better to think with
Fortune how thou may remedy it, then to think with what grief for to
complain. For there are diverse men which to publish their pain are very
careful, but to seek remedy, are as negligent.

O poor innocent Mercurius, after so long forgetfulness, art thou more
advised to complain of fortune again, and dare thou defy fortune, with whom
all we have peace? We unbend our bows, and thou will charge thy lances:
thou know not what war means, and yet thou will win the victory: all
are deceived, and will thou alone go safe? what will thou more I say unto
thee: since I see thee commit thy self unto Fortune? Do thou know, that it
is she that beats down the high walls, and defends the Towneditches?
Know thou not, that it is she that peopleth the uninhabitable deserts, and
dispeopleth the peopled Cities? Know thou not, that it is she that of
enemies makes friends: and of friends enemies? Know thou not, that it is
she that conquereth the Conquerours: Know thou not that it is she that of
traitors makes faithful, and of faithful suspicious. Finally, I will thou
know, that Fortune is she which turns realms, breaks armies, abasheth
Kings, rayseth Tyrants, gives life to the dead, and burieth the living: do
thou not remember, that the second King of the Lacedaemonians had over his gates
such words:

The Palace here behold where men do strive,
By fruitless toil to conquer what they can, A superscriptio written over
the gates of the King of Lacedemonia.

And fortune eke that Princes fancies rine,
By his unbridled will that always wanne.
Certainly these words were hie, and proceeded of a high understanding. And if
in this case I may be believed, they ought to be well noted of wise men, and
not written before the gates, but imprinted within the hearts. Better knew he
Fortune then thou, since he took himself for one disinherited, and not as
heir: and when he lost any thing as thou, he knew that he received it by
loan, and not that it was his own.

Men in this life are not so much deceived for any thing, as for to think that
the temporal goods should remain with them during life. Now that God does
suffer it, now that our woeful fortune does deserve it, I see no greater
mishapps fall unto any, then unto them which have the greatest estates and
riches: so that truly we may boldly say, that he alone which is shut in the
grave, is in safeguard from the inconstancy of fortune.

Thy messenger has told me further, that this summer thou preparedst thy
self to Rome, and now that it is Winter thou will sail to Alexandria. O thou
unhappy Mercury, tell me I pray thee, how long it is, sithence thou lost thy
senses: for as much as when this life does end, thy avarice begins a new:
thou foundest two Cities very meet for thy traffic, that is to say, Rome
which is the scourge of all virtues, and Alexandria, The vices of Rome and
Alexandria laid open.
which is the chiefest for all vices. And if thou love greatly those two
Cities, hear, I pray thee, what merchandise are sold therein. In Rome thou
shall load thy body with vices, and in Alexandria thou shall swell thy heart
with cares.

By the faith of a good man I do swear unto thee, that if perchance thou
buyest any thing of that which is here, or sellest ought of that thou bring
from thence: thou shall have greater hunger of that thou shall leave then
contentation of that thou shall bring. Thou do not remember that we are in
Winter, and that thou must pass the sea, in the which if the Pirates do not
deceive me, the surest tranquillity, is a sign of the greatest torment. Thou
might tell me that thy ships should return without fraught, and
therefore they shall sail more surely. To this I answer thee, that thou
shall send them more laden with covetousness, then they shall return laden with
silks. O what a good change should it be, if the avarice of Italy could be
changed for the silk of Alexandria. I swear unto thee, that in such case thy
silk would fraught a ship and our avarice would lode a whole navy That
covetousness is great, which the shame of the World does not oppress: neither
the fear of death does cause to cease.

And this I say for thee, that since in this dangerous time thou durst
sail, either wisdom wants, or else avarice and covetousness surmounteth.
To satisfy me, and to excuse thee with those which speak to me of thee, I
cannot tell what to say unto them, but that God has forgotten thee, and the
seas do know thee. I pray thee, what go thou to seek? since thou leauest
the government of thy house, and saylest in Alexandrie? Peraduentur thou go
to the gulf Arpin, where the mariners cast in thy lead?

Take heed Mercury, and consider well what thou do, for peradventure where
as thou think for to take from the fish the hard lead, thou may leave
unto them thy soft flesh, I have known many in Rome, which for to recover one
part of that they have lost, have lost all that which was left unto them. O my
friend Mercury, note, note; Note well this last word, whereby thou shall know,
what it is that you covetous men do What it is that covetous men do long for
in this life.
gape for in this life? Thou seek care for thy self, envy for thy
neighbors, spurs for strangers, a bait for thieves, troubles for thy body,
damnation for thy renown, unquietness for thy life, annoiance for thy
friends, and occasion for thy enemies. Finally, thou serchest maledictions for
thy heirs, and long suits for thy children.

I cannot write any more unto thee, because the Fever does so vehemently vex
me. I pray thee pray to the Gods of Samia for me: for medicines little
profit, if the Gods be angry with us.

My wife Faustine saluteth thee, and she says, that she is sorry for thy
loss: she sends thee a rich jewel for Fabilla thy daughter, and I do send
thee a Commission, to the end they shall give thee a ship in recompense of thy
lead.

If thou saylest with it, come not by Rhodes; for we have taken it from their
Pirates. The Gods be in thy custody, and give me and Faustine a good life
with ours, and a good name among strangers: I do not write unto thee with
mine own hand, for that my sickness does not permit it.

CHAP. XXXII. That Princes and Noble men ought to consider the misery of man's
Nature, and that brute beasts are in some points (reason set apart) to be
preferred unto men.
MIdas the ancient King of Phrygia, was in his government a cruel Tyrant, and
contented not himself to play the Tirant in his own proper Country, but also
maintained Rouers on the Sea, and thieves in the land to rob strangers,

This King Mydas was well known in the Realms of the Orient, and in such sort,
that a friend of his of Thebes said unto him these words. I let The tyranny of
Mydas described.
thee to know K. Mydas, that all those of thy own Realm do hate thee, and
all the other Realms of Asia do fear thee: and not for this that thou can
do much, but for the crafts and subtilties which thou use: By reason whereof
all strangers, and all thine own have made a vow to God never to laugh during
the term of thy life, nor yet to weep after thy death.

Plutarch in the book of Politiques says, that when this King Mydas was
borne, the Ants brought corn into his cradell, and into his mouth: and when
the nurse would have taken it from him, he shut his mouth, and would not suffer
any person to take it from him. They being all amazed with this strange sight,
demanded the Oracle what this betokened: who answered, That the child should
The answer of the Oracle concerning the life of King Mydas.
be marvelous rich, and withal exceeding covetous: which the Antes did
betoken in filling his mouth with corn And afterward he would not give them
one only grain, and even so it chanced, that King Mydas was exceeding rich,
and also very covetous: for he would never give any thing, but that which by
force was taken from him, or by subtlety robbed.

In the Schools of Athens at that time nourished a Philosopher called Sylenus,
who in letters and pureness of life was highly renowned. And as King Mydas was
known of many, to have great treasures: so this Philosopher Silenus was no
less noted for despising them.

This Philosopher Silenus traveling by the borders of Phrygia, was taken by
the thieves which robbed the Country, and being brought before King Mydas, the
King said unto him: Thou art a Philosopher, and I am a King, thou art my
prisoner, and I am thy Lord: I will that immediately thou tell me, what
ransom thou can give me to redeem thy person: for I let thee to know, that
I am not contented any Philosopher should perish in my Country, because you
other Philosophers say, that you will willingly renounce the goods of the
World, since you cannot have it.

The Philosopher Silenus answered him, Me thinks (King Mydas) that thou
can better execute tyranny then to talk of Philosophy, for we make no
account that our bodies be taken, but that our wills be at liberty.

Thy demand is very simple, to demand ransom of me for my person, Conference
between Mydas and the Philosopher Silenus.
whether thou take me for a Philosopher or no. If I be not a Philosopher,
what moves thee to fear to keep me in thy Realm: for sooner should thou
make me a Tyrant, then I thee a Philosopher. If thou ^akstst me for a
Philosopher, why do thou demand money of me: since thou know I am a
philosopher, I am a Crafts man, I am a Poet, and also a Musician: so that the
time that thou in heaping up riches have consumed, the self same time have I
in learning spent. Of a Philosopher to demand either gold or silver for
ransom of his person, is either a word in mockery, or else an invention of
tyranny: For sithence I was borne in the World, riches never came into my
hands, nor after them has my heart lusted. If thou (King Mydas) would give
me audience, and in the faith of a prince believe me, I would tell thee what
is the greatest thing, and next unto that the second, that the Gods may give in
this life, and it may be, that it shall be so pleasant unto thee to hear,
and so profitable for thy life, that thou will pluck me from my enemies, and
I may dissuade thee from tirannies.

When King Mydas heard these words, he gave him license to say these two
things swearing unto him to hear him with as much patience, as was possible.

The Philosopher Silenus having license to speak freely, taking an instrument
in his hands, began to play and sing in this wise:

The Senate of the Gods when they forethought
On earthly Wightes to still some royal grace, The speech of the Philosopher
Silenus.

The chiefest gift the heavenly powers had wrought,
Had been to sow his seed in barren place.
But when by steps of such divine constraint,
They forced man perforce to fix his line,
The highest good to help his bootelesse plaint
Had been to slyp, his race of slender twine.
For then the tender babes both want to know
The dear delight that life does after hale,
And eke the dread, that grisly death does show,
Ere Charons bote, to Stigian shore does sail.
THese two things the Philosopher proved with so high and natural reasons,
that it was a marvelous matter to see with what vehemence Sylenas the
Philosopher sang them, and with what bitterness Mydas the Tyrant wept.

Without doubt the sentences were marvelous profound, which the Philosopher
spoke, and great reason had the king to esteem it so much: For if we do
prepare our selves to consider whereof we are, and what we shall be, that is
to say, That we are of earth, and that we shall return to earth: We would not
cease to weep, nor sigh.

One of the greatest vanities which I find among the children of vanity is,
that they employ themselves to A worthy thing to be considered of among
Christians.
consider the influences of the stars the nature of the Planets, the motion
of the heavens, and they will not consider themselves, of which consideration
they should take some profit.

For man giving his mind to think on strange things, comes to forget his
own proper.

Oh if we would consider the corruption whereof we are made, the filth whereof
we are engendered, the infinite travel wherewith we are born, the long
tediousnes wherewith we are nourished, the great necessities, and suspicions
wherein we live, and above all, the peril wherein we dye: I swear and
affirm, that in such consideration we find a thousand occasions to wish
death, and not one to desire life.

The children of vanity are occupied many years in the Schools, to learn
Rethorike, they exercise themselves in Philosophy, they hear Aristotle, they
learn Homere without book, they study Cicero, they are occupied in Xenophon,
they hearken Titus Liuius, they forget not Aulus Gelius, and they know Ovid:
yet for all this I say, that we cannot say, that the man knows little, which
does know himself.

Eschines the Philosopher said well, that it is not the least, but the
chiefest part of Philosophy to know A worthy saying of Eschynes the Philosopher.
man, and wherefore he was made: for if man would deeply consider what man is,
he should find more things in him which would move him for to humble himself,
then to stir him to be proud, If we do behold it without passion, and if we
do examine it with reason, I know not what there is in man.

O miserable, and frail nature of man, the which taken by it self, is little
worth, and compared with an other thing is much less: For man sees in brute
beasts many things, which he does envy: and the beasts do see much more in
men, whereon if they had reason, they would have compassion. The excellency of
the soul laid aside, and the hope which we have of eternal life, if man do
compare the captivity of men to the liberty of beasts, with reason we may see,
that the beasts do live a peaceable life, and that which men do lead is but a
long death. If we prepare our selves to consider, from the time that both man
and beast come into this world, until such time as they both dye, and in how
many things the beasts are better then men: with reason we may say, that
nature like a pitiful mother has showed her self to beasts, and that she
does handle us an unjust stepmother.

Let us begin therefore to declare more particularly the original of the
one, and the beginning of the other, and we shall see how much better the
brute beasts are endowed, and how the miserable men are disinherited.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Author follows his purpose, and excellently compares the
misery of men, with the liberty of beasts.
WE ought deeply to consider, that no wild nor tame beast is so long before
he come to his shape, as the miserable man is: who with corruption of blood
and vile matter is nine months hid in the womb of his mother. We see the
Beasts more prouicent in their kind then man.
beast when she is great (if need require) does labor all exercises of
husbandry: so that she is as ready to labor when she is great as if she
were empty. The contrary happens to women, which when they are big with child,
are weary with going, trobled to be laid, they ride in Chariots through the
market places, they eat little, they brook not that they have eaten, they
hate that which is profitable, and love that which does them harm: Finally, a
woman with child is contented with nothing, and she fretteth and vexes with
her self. Sithence therefore it is tru^ that we are noisome and trouble^^^e to
our mothers when (...) bear us in their wombes, why do we not give them some
safe conduct, when they are in delivering? O miserable state of man, since the
brute beasts are borne without destroying their mothers: but the miserable men
before they are born, are troublesome and careful, and in the time of their
birth, are both perilous to themselves and dangerous to their mothers: which
seems to be very manifest: for the preparation that man makes when he will
die, the self same ought the woman to do, when she is ready to be
delivered: We must also consider, that though birds have but two feet, they
can go, move, and run, immediately when it comes forth: but when man is
borne, he cannot go, nor move, and much less run. So that a Popingey ought
more to be esteemed which has no hands, then the man which has both hands
and feet. That which they do to the little babe The miserable estate of man in
his infancy.
is not but a prognostication of that which he ought to suffer in the progress
of his life: that is to say: That as they are not contented for to put the
evil doer in prison, but they lode his hands with yrons, and set his feet in
the stocks: so in like manner to the miserable man, when he enters into the
Cha^ter of his life, immediately they bind both his hands and his feet, and
lay him in the Cradell. So that the innocent babe is first bound and rolled,
before he be embraced, or have suck of the mother.

We must note also, that the hour wherein the beast is brought forth: though
it know not the Sier which begat it, at the least it knows the damme which
brought it forth which is apparent for so much as if the mother have milk, the
youngling forthwith does seek her teates: and if perchance the have no milk,
they go afterward to (...) themselves under her wings. Of the miserable man
it is not so, but the day that he is borne, he knows not the Nurse, that
gives him suck, neither the Father which has begotten him, the mother which
has borne him, nor yet the Midwife which has received him: moreover he
cannot see with his eyes, hear with his ears, nor judge with the taste, and
knows neither what it is to touch or smell: so that we see him, to whom the
Seigniory over all brute beasts and other things (that are created) partayneth
to be borne the most unable of all other creatures.

We must consider also, that though the beast be never so little, yet it can
seek for the teates of his mother to suck, or to wander in the fields to
feed, or to scrape the dunghilles to eat, or else it goes to the fountains
and rivers to drink, and that he learneth not by the discourse of time, or
that any other beast has taught it; but as soon as it is borne, so soon does
it know what thing is necessary for it. The miserable man is not born with so
many present commodities: he cannot eat, drink, nor go, make himself ready,
ask, nor yet complain and that which is more, he knows not scarsely how to
suck; for the mothers often times would give to their children (if they could)
the blood of their heart: and yet they cannot cause them to take the milk of
their breasts. O great misery of man's nature, for so much as the brute beasts, as
soon as they are come forth of their mothers womb can know and seek: but
when Nature of men and beasts compared both together.
it is offered unto man, he cannot know it. We must note also, that to brute
beasts nature has given clothing, wherewith they may keep themselus from the
heat of Summer, and defend themselves from the cold of Winter: which is
manifest, for that to Lambs and sheep she has given wool, to birds
feathers, to hogs bristles, to horses hair, to fishes scales, and to snailes
shells.

Finally, I say, there is no beast, which has need with his hands to make any
garment, nor yet to borrow it of another. Of all this the miserable man is
deprived, who is borne all naked, and dies all naked, not carrying with him
one only garment: and if in the time of his life he will use any garment, he
must demand of the beasts, both leather and wool: and thereunto he must also
put his whole labor and industry.

I would ask Princes and great Lords, if when they are borne, they bring with
them any apparel: and when they dye, if they carry with them any treasure? To
this I answer no: but they dye as they are borne, as well the rich as the
poor, and the poor as the rich.

And admit that in this life fortune does make difference between us in
estates, yet nature in time of our birth, and death, does make us all equal.
We must also think and consider, that for so much as nature has provided the
beasts of garments, she has has also taken from them the care of what they
ought to eat: for there is no beast that does either plow, sow or labor, but
does content her self, and passes her life either with the flies of the air,
with the Corn that she finds in the highwayes, with the herbs in the
fields, with the Ants of the Earth, with the grapes of the vine, or with the
fruits which are fallen. Finally (I say) that without care all beasts take
their rest, as if the day following they should have no need to eat.

Oh, what a great benefit should GOD do to the miserable man, if he had taken
from him the travel to apparel himself, and the care to search for things
to eat. But what shall the poor miserable man do, that before he eats, he
must till, sow, he must reap, and thresh the Corn, he must The cares and
troubles that follow man in this life.
cleanse it, grind it, paste it, and bake it: and it cannot be provided
without care of mind, nor be done without the proper sweat of the brows: And
if perchance any man did provide for himself with the sweat of others, yet
shall he live with his own offenses.

Also in other things the silly beasts do excel us: For, in the Flowers, in
the leaves, in the herbs, in the straw, in the Oats, in the bread, in the
flesh, or in the fruits which they eat, or in the waters which they drink,
they feel no pain, although it be not sweet: nor take no displeasure, though
their meats be not sauorie. Finally, such as Nature has provided them,
without disguysing, or making themselus better, they are contented to eat.

Man could loose nothing, if in this point he agreed with beasts: but I am very
sorry that there are many vicious and proud men, unto whom nothing wants,
either to apparel, or eat: but they have too much to maintain themselves,
and herewith not contented, they are such Drunkards, to taste of diverse wines,
and such Epicures, to eat of sundry sorts of meats, that often times they spend
more to dress them, then they did cost the buying.

Now when the Beasts are brought forth, they have knowledge, both of that that
is profitable, and also of that which is hurtful for them. For we see this,
that the sheep does fly the wolf, the catte flies the dog, the ratte flies
the catte, and the chicken the kyte: so that the beasts in opening the eyes,
do immediately know the friends, whom they ought to follow, and the Enemies
whom they ought to fly. To the miserable man, was utterly denied this so
great privilege. For, in the world there has bin many beastly Man of all
other creatures subject to dangers.
men, who have not only attained that, which they ought to know whiles they
lived: but also even as like beasts they passed their days in this life, so
they were infamed at the time of their death.

Oh miserable creatures that we are: which live in this wicked world; For, we
know not what is hurtful for us, what we ought to eat, from what we ought to
abstain, nor yet whom we should hate: we do not agree with those whom we
ought to love, we know not in whom to put our trust, from whom we ought to
fly, nor what it is we ought to choose, nor yet what we ought to forsake.

Finally, I say, that when we think often times to enter into a sure Haven,
within three steps afterward, we fall headlong into the deep Sea. We ought
also to consider, that both to wild and tame beasts, nature has ginen arms or
weaponsto defend themselves, and to assault their enemies, as it appears:
For, that to byrds she has given wings, to the Hearts swifte feet, to the
Elephants tuskes, to the Serpents scales, to the Eagles tallons, to the Fawkon
a beak, to the Lions teeth, to the Bulls horns, and to the Bears paws.
Finally I say, that she has given to the Foxes subtlety, to know how to hyde
themselves in the Earth, and to the Fishes little finnes, how to swim in the
water.

Admit that the wretched men have few enemies, yet in this they are none
otherwise privileged then the beasts: for we see (without tears it cannot be
told) that the beasts which for the service of Man were created: with the self
same beasts, men are now a days troubled and offended. And to the end it
seem not we should talk of pleasure, let every man bethink with himself,
what it is that we suffer with the Beasts of this life: For, the Lions do
fear us, the Wolves devour our sheep, the dogs do byte us, the Cats
scratche us, the Bear does tear us, the Serpents poison us, the Bulls hurt
Brute beasts an instrument to punish man.
us with their horns, the Byrds do ouerflye us, the Rats do trouble us, the
spyders do annoy us, and the worste of all is, that a little Fly sucketh our
blood in the day, and the poor Flea does hinder and let us from sleeping in
the night.

Oh poor and miserable man, who for to sustain this wretched life, is
enforced to beg all things that he needs of the Beasts. For the beasts do
give him wool, the beasts do draw him water, the beasts do carry him from
place to place, the beasts do plough the Land, and carries the corn into
their barnes. Finally I say, that if the man receive any good, he has not
wherewith to make recompense: and if they do him any evil, he has naught
but the tongue to revenge.

We must note also, that though a man load a beast with strypes, beat her,
and drive her by the foul ways, though he take her meat from her, yea,
though her younglings dye: yet for none of all these she is sad, or sorrowful,
and much less does weep: and though she should weep, she can not. For beasts
little esteem their life, and much less fear death. It is not so of the
unhappy and wretched man, which cannot but bewail the unthankfulness of their
friends, the death of their Children, the wants which they have of
necessaries, the cases of adversity which do succeed them, the false witness
which is brought against them, and a thousand calamityes which do torment
their hearts. Finally I say, that the greatest comforts that men have in this
life, is to make a river of water with the tears of their Eyes,

Let us enquire of Princes and great Lords, what they can do when they are
borne: whether they can speak as Orators, if they can run as Posts, if they
can govern themselves as kings if they can fight as men of War, if they can
labor as laborers, if they can work as masons, if they know to teach as
masters? These little children would answer, that they are not only ignorant
of all that we demand of them, but also that they cannot understand it,

Let us return to ask them, what it is that they know, since they know
nothing of that we have demanded them? They will answer, that they can do no
other thing, but weep at their birth, and sorrow at their death.

Though all those (which sail in this so perilous Sea) do rejoice and take
pleasure, and seem to sleep soundly: yet at the last there comes the wind
of adversity, which makes them all know their follies. For, if I be not
deceived, and if I know any thing of this world: those which I have seen at
the time of their birth take ship weeping: I doubt whether they will take Land
in the grave laughing?

Oh unhappy life! (I should say rather death) which the mortals take for life:
wherein afterward we must spend and consume a great time, to learn all Arts,
Sciences, and offices: and yet notwithstanding, that whereof we are ignorant,
is much more then that which we know. We forget the greatest part, save only
that of weeping, which no man needs to learn: for we are borne, and live
weeping, and until this present we have seen none to die in joy. We must
note also that the beasts do live and dye, with the inclinations wherewith they
were borne: that is to say, that the Wolf follows the sheep: and not the
birds: the hound follows the hares, and not the rattes: the sparrow flies
at the birds, and not at the fish, the spider eats the flies, and not the
herbs. Finally, I say, that if we let the beast search his meat quietly, we
shall not see him given to any other thing.

The contrary of all this happens to men, the which though nature has created
feeble, yet Gods intention was not they should be malicious: but I am sorry,
since they cannot avoid debility, that they turn it into malice. The
presumption which they have to be good, they turn to pride: and the desire
they have to be innocent, they turn into envy. The fury which they should take
against malice, they turn into anger, and the liberality they ought to have
with the good, they convert into avarice: The necessity they have to eat, they
turn into gluttony: and the care they ought to have of their conscience, they
turn into negligence. Finally, I say, that the more strength beasts have, the
more they serve, and the less men are worth, so much the more thanks have
they of God: The innocence of the brute beasts Malicious men worse then brure
beasts.
considered, and the malice of the malicious men marked without comparison, the
company of the brute beast is less hurtful, then the conversation of evil
men.

For in the end, if he be conversant with a beast, ye have not but to beware
of her: but if ye be in company with a man, there is nothing wherein ye ought
to trust him: We must note also, that it was neither seen or read, that there
was any beast that took care for the grave: but the beasts being dead, some
were torn in pieces with Lions, other dismembered by the bears, others gnawn
with dogs, other remain in the fields: other are eaten of men, and other by the
Ants.

Finally, the entrails of the one, are the graves of others. It is not so of
the miserable man, the which consumes no small treasure to make his Tomb,
which is the most vainest thing that is in this miserable life: for there is no
greater vanity nor lightness in man, then to be esteemed for his goodly and
sumptuous sepulture, and little to weigh a good Life. I will swear, that at
this day all the dead do swear, that they care little if their bodies be
buried in the deep Seas, or in the golden Tombs, or that the cruel beasts
have eaten the^, or that they remain in the fields without a grave: so that
their souls may be among the celestial Companies. Speaking after the Law of
a Christian, I durst say, that it profits little the body to be among the
painted and carved stones, when the miserable soul is burning in the fiery
flames of hell. O miserable creatures, We ought not to regard where our dead
corpse are enterred.
have not we sufficient wherewith to seek in this life, to procure, to
travel, to accomplish, to sigh, and also what to bewail, without having such
care and anguish to know where they shall be buried? Is there any man so
vain, that he does not care that other men should condemn his evil life, so
that they praise his rich tomb? To those that are living I speak and say of
those that are dead, that if a man gave them leave to return into the World,
they would be occupied more to correct their excess, and offenses, then to
adiourne and repair their graves, and tombs though they have found them
fallen down. I cannot tell what to say more in this case, but to admonish men
that it is a great folly to make any great account of the graves.

CHAP. XXXIIII. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius writes this letter to Domitius a
Citizen of Capua to comfort him in his exile, being banished for a quarrel
betwixt him and another about the running of a horse, very comfortable to those
that have been in favor and now fallen in disgrace.
Mark the Roman Emperor, borne at Mount Celio, to thee Domitius of A Letter
of the Emperor to a banished man.
Capua, wishes health and consolation from the gods the only Comforters. The
bitter Winter in these parts have raised bosterous winds, and the winds have
caused much rain, and the much rain has caused great moystures: the which
engenders in me sundry diseases. Among the which the gowt of my hands is one,
and the Statica in my legs is another, Eschines the Philosopher said, that
the liberty of the soul, and the health of the body, cannot be esteemed too
much, and much less also bought for money. Tell me, I pray thee, what can he
do, or what is he worth, that has neither liberty nor health? The divine
Plato in his books of his common wealth, recites three things.

The first, that the man which owes nothing, cannot say that he is poor: For
the day that I owe money to another, another, and not When good orders were
observed in Rome.
my self is Lord of mine own. The second, the man which is no servant nor
captain, has not reason to say, that any thing makes him unhappy: For Fortune
in nothing shows her self so cruel, as to take from us the liberty of this
life.

The second, which Plato said, is that among all temporal goods there is none
more greater, nor greater felicity then the treasure of health: For the man
which is persecuted with sickness, with riches can have no contentation.

In the time of our old Fathers, when Rome was well corrected, they did not
only ordain the things of their Commonwealth: but also they provided for
that which touched the health of every person. So that they watched to cure
the body, and they were circumspect to destroy vices. In the time of Gneus
Patroclus and Julius Albus, they say that the City of Rome was ordinarily
visited with sickness: Wherefore first they did forbid, that in the month of
July and August, there should be no stews for Women: For the blood of the
young was corrupted in Veneriall acts.

The third, that no man should bring any fruit from Salon or Campania to sell,
during these two months in Rome: For the delicate Ladies of Rome for extreme
heat, and the poor for their poverty, did not eat in summer but fruits: and
so the market places were full of fruits, and the houses full of Agues. The
third, they did defend that no inhabitant should be so hardy, to walk after
the Sun was set: For the young men, through the lightness they used in the
nights, took diseases which vexed them in the days.

The fourth, they did prohibit that no man should be so hardy to sell openly
in Rome, wine of Candie or Spain. For, in the great heat of the summer, as
the Sun is very hot, so the wine as poison does kill young men.

The fifth, that they should purge the priueyes, and make clean the streets
and Houses: For, of the corruption of the air, is engendered the plague among
the people.

When Rome was rich, when Rome prospered, all these things were observed in the
commonwealth. But since Catilina the tyrant did rebel, since The time when
good orders were broken in Rome.
Scylla and Marius did slander it: since Caesar and Pompeyus did play the
Tyrants: since Octauius Augustus, and Marcus Antonius did rob it: since
Caligula and Nero did defame it: they cared little whether they entered into
Rome, to sell the wine of Spain or Candia. For, they feared more the knife of
the enemies, then the heat of the summer. Great reason had the Ancients, to
forbid those things in Rome, For to say the truth, they are not healthful.

When I was young in Rome, my head did not ache, with talking in the night, nor
I did feel my blood chased with drinking wine: Then I was not troubled to
ieatte, in the heat in the summer, nor I was annoyed to go bare-legged in the
winter. But now that I am old, there is no heat but offends me, nor cold
but pearseth me. For men through much evil rule in their youth, come to
grievous diseases in their age.

Oh if mortal men, after that they be old, could at any time work with the
Gods, that they should become young again: I swear unto thee, by the faith of
a good man, that they would behave themselves so well, that the world should
not again deceive them. Since men have been vicious in their youth, I do not
marvel though they are full of diseases when they are old. For, how can he love
his health, which hates virtue? All that which I have spoken here before is to
the end you may know and believe that I am sick, and that I cannot write unto
thee so long as I would, and as thou desire: so that hereof it follows,
that I shall bewail thy pain, and thou shall be grieved with my gowt. I
understood here how at the feast of the God Ianus, through the running of a
horse, great strife is raised between thee and thy neighbor Patricius: And the
brute was such, that they have confiscated thy goods, battered thy house,
banished thy children, and deprived thee from the Senate for ten years.

And further, they banished thee out of Capua for ever, and have put thy fellow
in the prison Mamortine: The reason that Domitius was banished.
so that by this little fury, thou have cause to lamet all the days of thy
life: Al those which come from thence do tell us, that thou art so woeful in
thy heart, and so changed in thy person, that thou do not forget thy heavy
chances, nor receiuest consolation of thy faithful friends.

Think not that I speak this, that thou should be offended: for according
to the often chaunges which fortune has showed in me, it is long since I knew
what sorrow meant: For truly the man which is sorrowful, sigheth in the day,
watches in the night, delyteth not in company, and with only care he
rests. The light he hates, the darkness he loves, with his bitter tears he
waters the Earth, with heavy sighs he pierces the Heavens, with infinite
sorrows he remembers that that is past, and foreseeth nothing that which is
to come. He is displeased with him that does comfort him, and he takes rest
to express his sorrows.

Finally, the unfortunate man is contented with nothing, and with himself
continually he does chafe. Believe me Domitius, that if I have well touched
the conditions of the sorrowful man, it is for no other cause, but for that my
evil fortune has made me taste them all.

And hereof it comes, that I can so well discribe them: for in the end, in
things which touch the sorrows of the spirit, and the troubles of the body,
there is great difference from him that has read them, and from him that has
felt them. If thou did feel it there, as I do feel it here, it is
sufficient to give thee and thy friends great dolor, to think that for so
small a trifle thou should undo thee, and al thy parentage: and speaking
with the truth, I am very sorry to see thee cast away: but much more it
grieueth me, to see thee drow ned in so little water.

When men are noble, and keep their hearts high, they ought to take their
enemies agreeable to their Estates. I mean, that when a Noble man shall
adventure to hazard his person and his goods, he ought to do it for a matter of
great importance: For in the end, more defamed is he that overcomes a
Labourer, then he which is overcome with a knight: O how variable is Fortune,
and in how short space does happen an evil fortune? in that which now I will
speak?

I do condemn my self, and accuse thee. I complain to the Gods, I reclaim
the dead, and I call the living, to the end they may see, how that before our
eyes we suffer the griefs, and know them not, with the hands we touch them,
and perceive them not, we go over them and see them not: they sound in our
ears, and we hear them not: daily they do admonish us, and we do not
believe them.

Finally, we feel the peril, where there is no remedy for our grief: for as
experience does teach us, with a little blast of wind, the fruit does fall, with
a little spark of fire the house is kindled, with a little rock the ship is
broken, at a little stone the foot does stuinble, with a little hook they take
great fish, and with a little wound dies a great person.

For all that I have spoken, I do mean that our life is so frail, and
fortune so fickle, that in that part where we are surest harnessed, we are
soonest wounded. And Seneca writing to his mother Albina, which was banished
from Rome, said these words.

Thou Albina art my mother, and I A worthy speech of Seneca to his mother
Albina.
thy son, thou art aged, and I am young: I never believed in fortune, though
she would promise to be in peace with me.

And further he said, All that which is in me, I count it at the disposition
of Fortune, as well of riches, as of prosperity: And I keep them in such a
place, that at any boure in the night when she lists, she may carry them
away, and never wake me. So that though she carry those out of my Cofers, yet
she should not rob me of this in my Entrals, Without doubt such words were
marvelous pithie, and very decent for such a a wise man.

The Emperor Adrian my Lord, did wear a ring of gold on his finger, which he
said was of the good Drusius Germanicus; and the words about the ring in Latin
letters said thus: Illis est grauis fortuna quibus est repentina: Fortune to
them is most cruel, whom suddenly she assaulteth.

We see oftentimes by experience that in the fystula which is stopped, and not
in that place which is open, the Surgeon makes doubt. In the shallow water,
and not in the deep seas, the Pilot despayreth. The good man of Arms is more
afraid of the secret ambushmnt, then in the open battle. I mean, that the
valiant men ought to beware, not of strangers but of his own, not of enemies
but of friends, not of the cruel war, but of the fained peace, not of the
unjust damage but of the privy evil.

O how many men we have seen, whom the mishaps of fortune could never change,
and yet afterward having no care she has made them fall.

I ask now what hope can man have, which will never trust to the prosperity of
fortune: since for so light a thing, we have seen such trouble in Capua, and so
great loss of thy person and goods? If we know fortune, we would not make so
great complaint of her.

For speaking the truth, as she is for all, and would content all, though in
the end she mock all, she gives How little we ought to regard the
flatteries of forune.
and shows us all her goods, and we others take them for inheritance. That
which she lends us, we take it for perpetual, that which in jest she
gives us, we take it in good earnest: and in the end, as she is the mocker of
all, so she goes mocking of us: thinking that she gives us another man's,
and she takes our own proper.

I let thee know, that knowing that of fortune which I know, I fear not the
turmoyles of her travels, neither does her lightnings or thunders astonish me
nor yet will I not esteem the pleasantness of her goodly fair flatteries. I
will not trust her sweet reioysings, neither will I make account of her
friendships, nor I will join my self with her enemies, nor I will take any
pleasure of that she gives me, neither grief of that she takes from me;
nor I will have respect when she tells me truth, nor I do not regard it,
though she tell me a lie.

Finally, I would not laugh for that she asks me, nor I will weep for that
she sends me. I will now tell thee (my friend Domitius) one thing, and
heartily I desire thee for to keep it in memory: Our life is so doubtful, and
fortune is so sudden, that when she threatens she strikes not always,
neither does she threaten always when she strikes. The man which presumes
to be sage, and in all things well provided goes not so fast, that at every
step he is in danger of falling, nor so softly, that in long time he cannot
arrive at his iorneyes end: for false fortune gauleth in stead of striking, and
in stead of gauling strikes. Therefore since in years I am older then thou,
and have more experience of affairs: if thou have marked that I have told
thee, thou will remember well that which I will say unto thee, which is, that
that part of thy life is troublesome, which unto thee seems to be most sure.

Will thou that by example I tell thee all that, which by words I have spoken?
Behold Hercules of Thebes, who escaped so many dangers both by sea and land,
and afterward came to dye in the arms of a harlot. Agamemnon the great
Captain of the Greeks, in the x. years which he warred against Troy, never
had any peril, and afterward in the night, they killed him entering into his
own house.

The invincible Alexander the Alexaander the great after his so many conquests
dyed by poison.
Great, in all the conquests of Asia did not die, and afterward with a little
poison ended his life in Babylon, Pompeius the Great, dyed not in the conquest
of his enemies: and afterward his friend Ptolomeus slew him. The courageous
Julius Caesar in 52. battles could not be overcome, and afterward in the
Senate, they slew him with 23. wounds.

Hannibal, the terrible Captain of Carthage, slew himself in one moment
(which the Romans could not do in 17. years) only because he would not come
into the hands of his enemies. Asclipius medius, brother of great Pompeius, in
20. years that he was a Rouer on the seas, never was in any peril: afterward
drawing water out of a well, was drowned therein. Ten Captains whom Scipio had
chosen in the conquest of Affricke, ieasting on a bridge, fell into the water,
and there were drowned. The good How quickly sudden death ouertaketh many men.
Bibulus going triumphing in his Chariot at Rome, a tile fell on his head: so
that his vain glory was the end of his good life.

What will thou more I say unto thee, but that Lucia my sister having a needle
on her breast, and her child between her arms; the child laying his hand
upon the needle, and thrust it into her breast, whereby the mother dyed.

Gneus Ruffirius, which was a very wise man, and also my Kinsman, one day
combing his white hayres, struck a tooth of the comb into his head, wherewith
he gave himself a mortal wound; so that in short space after his life had
end, but not his doctrine nor memory.

How think thou Domitius: By the immortal Gods I do swear unto thee, that
as I have declared to thee this small number, so I could recite thee other
infinite. What mishappe is this after so many fortunes? what reproach after such
glory? What peril after such surety, what evil luck after such good
success, what dark night after so clear a day, what evil entertainment
after so great labor: what sentence so cruel after so long process? O what
inconvenience of death after so good beginning of life? Being in their stead,
I cannot tell, what I would, but I had rather choose unfortunate life and
honorable death then an infamous death and honorable life. That man which will
be counted for a good man, and not noted for a brute beast, ought greatly to
travel to live well, and much more to dye better: for the evil death makes
How careful men ought to be to live well.
men doubt that the life has not bin good, and the good death is the excuse of
an evil life.

At the beginning of my Letter, I wrote unto thee, how that the gowte troubles
me evil in my hand. I say it were to much to write any longer: and though the
Letter be not of my own hand; these two days the love that I bear thee, and
the grief that holds me, have striued together. My will desires to write,
and my fingers cannot hold the pen. The remedy hereof is, that since I have
no power to do what I would as thine: thou ought to accept what I can, as
mine. I say no more herein, but as they tell me thou buildest now a house in
Rhodes: wherefore I do send thee a thousand sexterces to accomplish the same.

My wife Faustine saluteth thee, who for thy pain is sore grieved: They tell
us thou have been hurt, wherefore she sends thee a weight of the Balm of
Palestine. Heal thy face therewith, to the end the scarres of that wound do
not appear. If thou find green Almonds, and new nuts, Faustine desires
thee that thou will send her some. By another man she sends a gown for
thee, and a kirtle for thy wife. I conclude, and do beseech the immortal Gods
to give thee all that I desire for thee, and and that they give me all that
thou wishest me. Though by the hands of others I write unto thee, yet with my
heart I love thee.

CHAP. XXXV. That Princes and Noble men ought to be advocates for widows,
Fathers of Orpnans, and helpers of those which are comfortless.
MAcrobius in the 3. book of the Saturnals says, That in the noble City of
Athens, there was a temple called Misericordia, which the Athenians kept so
well watched and locked, that without leave and license of the Senate, no man
might enter in. There were the Images of pitiful Princes only, and none
entered in there to pray, but pitiful men.

The Athenians abhorred always severe and cruel deeds, because they would not
be noted cruel. And thereof comes this manner of saying, that the greatest
injury they could say unto a wan was, That he had never entered into the
School of the Philosophers to learn, nor into the Temple of Misericordia to
pray: So that in the one, they noted him for simple, and in the other they
acused him for cruel.

The Historiographers say, that the most noble lineage that was at that time,
was of a King of Athens, the which was exceeding rich and liberal A worthy
example of an Athenia^ King.
in giving, and above all very pitiful in pardoning. Of whom it is written,
that after the great Treasures which he had offered in the temples, and the
great riches he had distributed to the poor: he took upon him to bring up
all the Orphans in Athens, and to feed all the widows.

O how much more did that statute of the said pitiful King shine in that
Temple, who nourished the Orphans: then the Ensigns which are set up in the
Temples of the Captains which had robbed the widows. All the ancient Princes,
I say, those that have been noble and valiant, and that have not had the name
of Tyrants, though in some things they were noted: yet they always have been
praised, esteemed, and commended to be merciful and gentle: so that they
recompensed the fierceness and cruelty which they show to their enemies, with
the mercy and clemency which they used to the Orphans.

Plutarch in his Politiques says, that the Romans among themselves ordained,
that all that which remained of banquets and feasts, which were made at
marriages and triumphs should be given to Widows and A good custom among the
ancient Romans.
orphans. And this custom was brought to so good an order, that if any rich
man would use his profit of that which remained, the Orphans might justly
have an action of felony against him, as a thing robbed from them.

Aristides the Philosopher in an Oration he made of the excellency of Rome,
says: That the Princes of Persia had this custom, never to dine nor suppe,
but first the Trumpets should blow at their gates, the which were more loud,
then harmonius. And it was to this end, that all the Widows and Orphans
should come thither: for it was a Law amongst them, that all that which was
left at the royal tables, should be for the poor and indigent persons.

Phalaris the Tirant writing to a friend of his, said these words: I have
received thy brief Letter, with the rebuke likewise which thou gave me
therein, more bitter then tedious, And admit that for the time it grieved me,
yet after I came to my self, I re ceyued thereby great comfort. For in the
end, one loving rebuke of his friends is more worth then a feigned flattery of
his enemy, A rebuke of a friend more acceptable, then the slattring words of
foes.


Amongst the things whereof thou accusest me, thou say that they take me
for agreat tyrant, because I disobey the Gods, spoil the Temples, kill the
Priests, pursue the innocents, rob the people, and the worst of all, that I
do not suffer me to be entreated, nor permit that any man be conuersaunt with
me.

To that they say I disobey the Gods, in very deed they say true. For if I did
all that the Gods would I should do I should do little of that men do ask
me. For as much as they say I rob the Temples: there unto also I grant: For
the immortal Gods do demand rather of us pure hearts, then that we should
build their Temples.: For that they say I kill the priests, I confess also
that it is true. For they are so dissolute, that I think I do more services
to the Gods to put them to death, then they do in doing their Sacrifices while
they live.

For that they say I rob the Temples, I also confess it: For I defending it
as I do from Enemies, it is but meet and reasonable they find me and my
Servants: For that they say I suffer me not to be entreated, it is true: For
daily and hourly they ask me so many unjust and unreasonable things, that
for them and for me it is better to deny them, then for to grant them.

For that they say that I am not conversant with any: I confess it is true,
for ever when they come into my Palace, it is not so much to do me service,
as to ask some particular thing for their profit. For that they say I am not
pitiful among the miserable, and will not hear the Widows and Orphans, in
no wise to that I will agree: For I swear unto thee, by the immortal Gods,
that my gates were never shut to Widows and Orphans.

Pulto in the life of the Emperor Claudius says, that once a poor widow
came before Claudius the Emperor with weeping eyes, to desire him of justice.
The pittifulnes of the Emperor Claudius.


The good Prince being moved with compassion, did not only weep as she: but
with his own hands dried her tears. And as there was about the Emperor many
Noble Romans, one amongst them, said thus unto him: The authority and
gravity of Roman Princes, to hear their Subjects in justice suffices
only: though they dry not the tears of their faces.

This Emperor Claudius answered, Good Princes ought not to be contented, to
do no more then just ludges: but in doing justice a man must know that they
are pitiful. For oftentimes those which come before Princes, do return more
contented with the love they show them: then with the Justice they minister
unto them: And further he said. For as much as you say: That it is of small
authority, and also of less gravity, that a Prince do weep with a widdowe,
and with his hands wipe her eyes: I answer thee, that I desire rather to be
partaker of the griefs with my Subjects, then to give them occasion to have
their eyes full of tears.

Certainly these words are worthy to be noted, and no less followed. Admit
that clemency in all things deserves to be praised: yet much more ought it
to be commended, when it is executed on women. And if generally in all, much
more in those which are void of health and comfort. For, Women are quickly
troubled, and with greater difficulty comforted.

Plutarche and Quintus Curtius say, that good entertainment which Alexander the
great, showed unto the wise and children of king Darius (after he was utterly
vanquished) exalted his clemency: in such sort, that they gave rather more
glory to Alexander, for the pity and honesty which he used with the
children, then for the victory he had of the Father.

And when the unhappy King Darius knew the clemency and pity, which the
good King Alexander used toward his wife and his children, he sent unto him
his Ambassadors, to the end that on his behalf, they should thank him for
that that is past, and should desire him, that he would so continue in time to
come: Saying, that it might chance, that the Gods and Fortune, would mittigate
their wrath against him.

Alexander answered unto the Ambassadors these words: Ye shall say in my
behalf to your king Darius, The speech ^t King Alexander, to king Darius
that he give me no thanks, for the good and pitiful work which I have
showed or done to his captive Women, since he is certain, I did it not for
that he was my friend: and that I would not cease to do it, for that he is
mine enemy. But I have done it, for that a gentle Prince is bound to do in
this case.

For, I ought to employe my clemency unto Women, which can do naught but
weep: and my puissant power Princes shall feel, which can do naught else but
wage battle, etc. Truly those words were worthy of such a Prince.

Many have envy at the surname of Alexander, which is great. And he is called
Alexander the great, because if his heart was great in the enterprises he
took upon him, his courage was much more greater in Cities and Realms which
he gave.

Many have envy at the renown which they give Pompeyus: because they call
him great: for, this excellent Roman, made himself conqueror of xxii.
Realms, and in times past has bin accompanied with xxv. Kings. Many have
envy at the renown of Scipto the Africane, because he overcame and conquered
the great and renowned city of Carthage: the which city in riches was
greater then Rome, in Arms and power, it surmounted all Europe. Many have
envy at Scipio the Asian, who was called Asian because he subdued the proud
Asia: the which until his time was not, but as a church-yarde of Romans.

Many have great envy at the immortal name of Charles the great, because
being as he was (a little king) he did not only vanquish and triumph over many
Kings and Realms: but also forsook the royal Sea of his own Realm.

I do not marvel that the proud Princes have envy against the virtuous and
valiant Princes: but if I were as they, I would have more Envy at the renowm
of Anthoninus the Emperor, then of the name and renown of all the Princes in
the world.

If other Princes have attained such proud names, it has bin for that they
robbed many Countries, spoiled many Temples, committed much tyranny, dissembled
with many Tyrants, pesecuted diverse Innocents, and because they have taken from
diverse good men, not only their goods, but also their lives: For, the world
has such an evil property, that to exalte the name of one only, he puts
down 500.

Neither in such enterprises, nor yet with such Titles wanne the Emperor
Anthoninus Pius, his good name and renown.

But, if they call him Authoninus the pitiful, it is because he knew not,
but to be the Father of Orphans: and was not praised, but because Wherefore
the worthy Anthoninus was renowm. d.
he was the only Advocate of Widows.

Of this most excellent Prince is read, that he himself did hear, and judge
the complaints and process in Rome, of the Orphans: And for the poor, and
Widows, the gates of his Palace were always open: So that the porters which
he kept within his Palace, were not for to let the Entry of the poor: but
for to let, and keep back the rich.

The Hystoriographers, oftentimes say, that this good Prince said: That A
worthy saying of the Emp: and worthy to be followed
the good and virtuous Princes, ought always to have their Hearts open, for
the poor, and to remedy the Widows, and Father-lesse, and never to shut
their Gates against them.

The God Apollo says: that the Prince which will not speedily judge the
causes of the poor, the Gods will never permit that he be well obeyed of the
rich.

O high and worthy words, that it pleased not the God Apollo, but our Living
GOD, that they were written in the hearts of Noble Princes. For, nothing can be
more unjust or dishonest, then that in the palaces of Princes and great
Lords, the rich and the fools should be dispatched, and the Widows and
Orphans friends, should have no audience?

Oh happy: and not once, but an hundredth times treble happy is he, that will
have commiseration: remembering the poor afflicted, and oppressed; and open his
hand to comfort and relieve them: and does not shut his coffers from
helping them: unto him (I assure and promise) that at the straight day of
judgment, the process of his life shall be judged with mercy and pity.

CHAP. XXXVI. That the troubles, griefs, and sorrows of Widows are much
greater then those of Widowers: wherefore Princes and Noblemen ought to have
more compassion upon the Women then on men.
IT is great pity to see a Noble and virtuous man sorrowful, alone, and a
widower, if especially he lived contented when he was married. For if he will
not marry, he has lost his sweet company: and if he think to marry
another, let him be assured he shall scarcely agree with his second wife.

There is much sorrow in that house, where the woman that governed it is How
accessarie it is for a wife to be in her own house.
dead: For immediately the Husband forsakes himself, the children do lose
their obedience, the servants become negligent, the hand-maydes become wanton,
the Friends are forgotten, the house decays, the goods waste, the apparel is
lost: And finally, in the widdowers house, there are many to rob, and few to
labor.

Both heavy and lamentable are the thoughts of the widdower: For, if he
thinks to marry, it grieueth him to give his children a stepmother.

If he cannot be married, he feels greater pain, seeing him all the day to
remain alone: so that the poor miserable man sigheth for his Wife he has
lost, and weepeth for her whom he desires to have.

Admit that this be true, there is great difference from the cares and sorrows
of women, to that of men. A thing very clear: for so much as the widdower
lawfully may go out of his house, he may go to the fields, he may talk with
his Neighbors, he may be occupied with his friends, he may follow his
suits, and also he may be conversant, and refresh himself in honest places.
For, commonly men are not so sorrowful, in taking the death of their wives, as
the wives are, in taking the death of their Husbands.

All this is not spoken in the disfavor of wise and sage men, whom we see make
small streams, with the tears of their eyes, for the death of their wives. But
for many other vain and lightmen: which the 9. days (of the Funeral past) a
man does see without any shame, to go throughout their streets, beholding the
ladies and Dam sells, which are in the windows.

Truly the woeful women which are honest, use not such lightness. For, whiles
they are widows, it is not lawful for them to wander abroad, to go out of
their houses, nor to speak with strangers, nor practice with her own, nor be
conuersaunt with her Neighbors, A custom used by widows in ancient times.
nor plead with their creditors, but agreeable to their woeful estate, to hyde
and withdraw themselves within their houses, and to lock themselves into their
own Chambers: and they think it their duties, to water their plants with
tears, and importune the Heavens with sobs and sighs.

Oh how woeful? O how grievous? O how sorrowful is the state of Widows? For
so much as if a Widow go out of her house, they take her for dishonest. If
she will not come out of her house, she loses her goods: If she laugh a
little, they count her light. If she laugh not, they count her an hypocrite. If
she go to the Church, they note her for a gadder. If she go not to the Church,
they say she is unthankful to her late husband. If she go ill apparelled, they
account her a niggard. If she go cleanly and handsome, they say now she would
have a new husband. If she do maintain herself honestly, they note her for
presu^ptuous.

If she keep company, immediately they suspect her house. Finally I say, that
the poor miserable Widows shall find a thousand which judge their lives,
and they have not one that will remedy their pain.

Much loses that Woman which loses her Mother, which has borne her or her
Sisters, which she loves, or the friends which she knows, or the goods
which she has heaped up: But I say and affirm, that there is no greater loss
in the world unto a woman, then the loss of a good Husband. For in other
losses, there is but one only loss: but in that of the Husband, all are lost
together.

After that the wife does see her loving Husband in the grave, I would ask
her; What good could remain with her in her house? Since we know, that if her
husband were good, he was the Haven of all her Troubles, What a comfort a good
husband is to a woman
the remedy of all her necessities, the inue^tor of all her pleasurs, the true
love of her heart, the true lord of her person, and idol whom she honored.

Finally, he was the only faithful steward of her house, and the good father
of all her children and family. Whether Family remains or not, whether
children remains or not, in the one, and in the other, trouble and vexation
remains most assuredly, to the poor Widow.

If perchance she remain poor, and have no goods, let every man imagine
what her life can be? For the poor, miserable, and unhappy woman, either will
adventure her person to get, or will loose her honesty to demand. An honest
woman, a Noble and worthy woman, a delicate woman: a sweet woman: a woman of
renown: a woman that ought to have care to maintain Children and family,
ought to have great reason to be full of anguish and sorrow: to see, that if
she will maintain her self with the Needle, she shall not have sufficiently
to find her bread and water. If she gain with her body, she loses her
soul;

If she must demand of others, she is ashamed. If she fulfill the testament
of her Husband, she must sell her Gowns. If she will not pay his debtes, they
cause her to be brought before the judges. As women naturally are tender, what
heart will suffer them to endure such inconveniences? and what Eyes can
abstain to shed infinite tears? If perchance goods do remain to the
miserable widow, she has no little care to keep them? She is at great
charges and expenses, to sustain and maintain her self, in long suite about
her lands, much trouble The care that Worldlings have.
to augment them: and in the end, much sorrow to depart from them. For all her
children, and heirs, do occupy themselves more to bethink them, how they
might inherit, then in what sort they ought to serve her.

When I came unto this passage, a great while I kept my pen in suspense, to
see whither I ought to teach this matter, or no: (that is to say) that
oftentimes the poor Widows put openly the demand of their goods: and the
Judges do secretly demand the possession of their person.

So that first, they do injury to her honor, before they do minister justice
to her demands.

Though perchance she has no child, yet therefore she remains not
without any comfort: and for that the parents of her Husband do spoil her of
her goods. For, in this case their heirs oftentimes are so disordered, that
for a worn cloak, or a broken shirt, they will trouble and vex the poor
widdowe.

If perchance the miserable widow have children: I say, that in this case she
has double sorrow: For, if they are young, she endures much pain to bring
them up: so that each hour and moment their Mothers live in great sorrows, to
bethink them only of the life and death of their children. Sorrows that women
have in bringing up their children.


If perhaps the Children are old, truly the griefs which remain unto them
are no less. For so much as the greatest part of them are either proud
disobedient, malicious, negligent, Adulterers, gluttons, blasphemers, false
liars, dull-headed, wanting wit, or sickly. So that the joy of the woeful
Mothers is, to bewail the deaths of their well beloved Husbands, and to remedy
the discordes of their youthful children.

If the troubles which remain unto the careful mothers with their sons be
great: I say that those which they have with their Daughters, be much more.
For if the Daughter be quick of wit, the Mother thinks that she shall be
undone, If she be simple, she thinks that every man will deceive her. If she
be fair, she has enough to do to keep her. If she be deformed, she cannot
marry her. If she be well mannered, she will not let her go from her. If she
be evil mannered, she cannot endure her. If she be too solitary, she has not
wherewith to remedy her. If she be dissolute, she will not suffer her to be
punished.

Finally, if she put her from her, she fears she shall be slaundered. If she
leave her in her house, she is afraid she shall be stolen. What shall the woeful
poor widow do, seeing herself burdened with daughters, and environed with
sons, and neither of them of sufficient age: that there is any time to remedy
them: nor substance to maintain them? Admit that she marry one of her
sons, and one daughter, I demand therefore if the poor widow will leave her
care and anguish? truly I say no: though she choose rich personages, and well
disposed, she cannot escape, but that day that she replenished her self with
daughters in law, the same day she charge her heart with sorrows, travels and
cares.

O poor widows, deceive not your selves, and do not imagine that having
married your sons and daughters, from that time forwards, ye shall live
more joyful and contented: For that laid aside, which their Nephews do
demand them, and that their sons in Law do rob them; when the poor old
woman thinks to be most surest, the young man shall make a claim to her
goods: what daughter in Law is there in this world, who faithfully loves her
stepmother? And what son in Law is there in the world, that desires not to
be heir to his father in Law? Suppose a poor widow to be fallen sick, the
which has in her house a son in Law, and that a man ask him upon his oath,
which of these two things he had rather have: either to govern his mother in
Law, with hope to heal her, or to bury her, with hope to inherit her goods? I
swear, that such would swear, that he could rejoice more to give a ducket for
the grave, then a penny for a Physician to cure and heal her.

Seneca in an Epistle says, That the Fathers in Law naturally do love their
daughters in Law, and the sons A saying of Seneca.
in Law are loved of the mothers in Law. And for the contrary he says, that
naturally the sons in law do hate their mothers in Law: but I take it not
for a general rule, for there are mothers in Law which deserve to be
worshipped, and there are sons in Law which are not worthy to be beloved.

Other troubles chance daily to these poor widows, which is, that when one
of them has one only son whom she has in stead of a husband, in stead of
a brother, in stead of a son, she shall see him dye: whom since she had his
life in such great love, she cannot though she would, take his death with
patience: so that as they bury the dead body of the innocent child, they
bury the lively heart of the woeful and sad mother. Then let us omit the
sorrows which the mothers have when their children dye, and let us ask the
mothers what they feel when they are sick? They will answer us, that
always, and as oftentimes as their children be sick, the death of their
husband then is renewed, imagining that it will happen so unto them as it has
done unto others. And to say the truth, it is no marvel if they do fear.
For, the vine is in greater peril when it is budded, then when the grapes are
ripe.

Other troubles oftentimes increase to the poor widows, the which amongst
others, this is not the least: Troubles and cares incident to Widows.
(that is to say) the little regard of the Friends of her Husband, and the
unthankfulness of those which have been brought up with him.: The which, since
he was laid in his grave, never ented into the gates of his house, but to
demand recompense of their old services, and to renew and begin new suites.

I would have declared, (or to say better, briefly touched) the trauells of
widows, to persuade Princes that they remedy them, and to admonish Judges to
hear them, and to desire all virtuous men to comfort them. For, the Charitable
work of it self is so Godly, that he deserves more which remedyeth the
troubles of the one only: then I which write their miseries altogether.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of a letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote to a Roman
Lady, named Lauinia comforting her for the death of her husband.
MArcus of mount Celio, Emperor of Rome, chief Consul, Tribune of the
people, high Bishop appointed against the Daces, wishes health and comfort to
thee Lauinia, noble and worthy Roman matron, the late wife of the good
Claudinus.

According to that thy person deserves, to that which unto thy husband I
ought, I think well that thou will suspect that I weigh thee little: for that
unto thy great sorrows, complaints, and lamentations, are now arrived my
negligent consolations. When I remember thy merits which cannot fail, and
imagine that thou will remember my good will, wherewith always I have desired
to serve thee: I am assured, that if thy suspicion accuse me, thy virtue and
wisdom will defend me: For speaking the truth, though I am the last to comfort
thee: yet I was the first to feel thy sorrows.

As ignorance is the cruel scourge (...).
of virtues, and sputre to all vices: so it chances often times, that over much
knowledge puts wise me^ in doubt and slaundereth the innocent: For as much
as we see by experience, the most presumptuous in wisdom, are those which
fall into most perilous vices. We find the Latins much better with the
ignorance of vices, then the Greeks with the knowledge of virtues. And the
reason hereof is, for that of things which we are ignorant, we have no pain to
attain unto them, and less grief also to lose them.

My intention to tell thee this, was, because that I knew that which I would
not have known, and have heard that which I would not have heard, that is to
say, that the days and troubles of Claudinus thy husband are ended, and now
thy sorrows (Lauinia his wife) do begin. It is now a good while that I have
known of the death of the good Claudinus my friend, and thy husband, though I
did dissemble it. And by the God Mars I swear unto thee, that it was not for
that I would not bewail him, but because I would not discomfort thee: For it
were extreme cruelty, that she which was so comfortless, and sorrowful, for
the absence of so long time: should be killed with my hand, through the
knowledge of the death of her so desired husband. It were too unkind and
unseemly a thing, that she, of whom I have received so many good works,
should receive of me so evil news.

The ancients of Carthage held for An ancient Law among the Carthagenians.
an inviolable Law, that if the Father did tell the death of his son, or the
son the death of the Father, or the woman the death of her husband, or the
husband the death of his wife, or any other semblable, woeful, and lamentable
death: that he should be cast into the prison among them, which were condemned
to die. It seemed to those of Carthage, that he which said unto another, that
his brother, kinsman or friend was dead, immediately they should kill him, or
he ought to dye, or at the least he should never be seen in his presence.

If in this case the Law of the Carthaginians was inst: then I ought to be
excused, though I have not told this heavy news. For as often as we see him,
who has brought us any evil tidinges: our sorrows by his sight, is renewed
again.

Since Claudinus thy Husband dyed, I have not had one hour of rest, for to
pass the time away: for fear least such woeful and sorrowful news, should
come to thy knowledge. But now that I know that thou know it. I feel double
pain. For now I feel his death, my care, and thy want of consolation: and the
damage by his death shall follow the Roman Empire.

Thou have lost a noble Roman, valiant in blood, moderate in prosperities,
pacient in adversities, courageous The life and virtues of Claudinus described.
in dangers, diligent in affairs, wise in counsels, faithful to his friends,
subtle and wary of his Enemies, a lover of the commonwealth, and very honest
in his person: and above all, and whereof I have most envy is, that he never
offended man in his life, nor hurt any with his tongue.

We find seldom times so many virtues assembled in one man. For saying the
truth, if a man do narrowly examine the vices of many, which presume to be
very virtuous: I swear that he should find more to reprove, then to praise.
Since thou have lost so good a Husband, and I so faithful a Friend: we are
bound, thou to bewail so great a loss, and I, to sigh for so good a
companion. And this I do not desire for Claudine, who now rests among the
Gods: but for us others, which remain in danger of so many evils. For the
dead do rest, as in the sure Haven: and we others do fail, as yet in raging
Sea.

O thou heavy heart, how do I see thee, between the Bell and the clappers
(that is to say) that thou want the company of the good: and art enuironned
with the flock of evil. For the which occasion I doubt often times, whether I
may first bewail the evil which live: or the good which are dead? because in
the end, the evil men do offend us more, which we find: then does the good
men which we loose. It is a great pity to see the good and virtuous men dye:
but I take it to be more sorrow to see the evil and vicious men live.

As the divine Plato says, the gods to kill the good which serve them, and to
give long life to the evil which offend them, is a mystery so profound, that
daily we do lament it, and yet we can never attain to the secrets thereof.

Tell me I pray thee Lauinia, know thou not now, that the Gods are so
merciful, with whom we go when we dye, and that men are so wicked, with whom
we be whiles we live: that as the evil were borne to dye: so the good dye to
live. For the good man though he dye, lives: and the evil man though he live
dies,

I swear unto thee by the Mother Berecynthia, and so the God Jupiter do
preserve me, that I speak not this, which I will speak fainedly: which is,
that considering the rest that the dead have with the Gods, and seeing the
sorrows and troubles we have here with the living: I say and affirm once
again, that they have greater compassion of our life, then we others have of
their death.

Though the death of men were as the death of beasts, that is to say, that there
were no Furyes nor devils, which should torment the evil, and that the Gods
should not reward the good: yet we ought to be comforted, to see our friends
die, if it were for no other, but to see them delivered, from the thraldom of
this world.

The pleasure that the Pilot has to be in sure Haven, the glory that the
captain has to see the day of victory, the rest that the Traveler has to
see his journey ended, the contentation that the workman has, to see his work
come to perfection, all the same have the dead, seeing themselves out of this
miserable life.

If men were borne always to live, it were reason to lament them, when we see
them dye: but since it is true that they are borne to dye, I would say, since
needs dye we must, that we How little this life is to be respected.
ought not to lament those which dye quickly, but those which live long.

I am assured that Clandine thy Husband, remembering that which in this life he
has passed and suffered, and seeing the rest that he has in the other:
though the Gods would make him Emperor of Rome, he would not be one day out of
his grave. For returning to the world, he should dye again, but being with
the Gods, he hops to live perpetually.

Lady Lauinia, most earnestly I desire thee, so vchemently not to pierce the
heavens with thy so heavy sighs, nor yet to wette the earth with thy so
bitter tears: since thou know that Claudine thy husband is in place where
there is no sorrow, but mirth, where there is no pain, but rest: where he
weepeth not, but laugheth, where he sigheth not, but sings, where he has no
sorrows, but pleasures, where he fears not cruel death, but enjoys
perpetual life. Since therefore this is true, it is but reason the widow
appease her anguish, considering that her husband endures no pain.

Oftentimes with my self I have thought, what the Wddowes ought to imagine,
when they see themselves in such cares and distress.

And after my count made, I find that they ought not to think of the company
past, nor woeful sollitarines wherein they are presently, and much less they
ought to think on the pleasures of this world: but rather to remember the rest
in the world to come For the true widdowe ought to have her conversation among
the living: and her desire to be with the dead.

If till this present thou had pain and trouble, to look for thy Husband to
come home: have thou now joy, How little we ought to esteem of this life.
that he looks for thee in Heaven: wherein I swear unto thee, that thou
shall be better used of the Gods, then he was here of men. For, in this world
we know not what glory means, and there they know not what pains are.

Licinius and Posthumous thy uncles, told me that thou art so sorrowful,
that thou will receive no comfort: but in this case I think not that thou
bewailest so much for Claudinus: that alone do think thou have lost him:
For since we did rejoice together in his life, we are bound to weep together
at his death.

The heavy and sorrowful hearts, in this world feel no greater grief: then
to see others rejoice at their sorrows. And the contrary hereof is, that the
woeful and afflicted heart feels no greater joy, nor rest in extreme
mishappes of Fortune, then to think that others have sorrow and grief of
their pain.

When I am heavy and comfortles, I greatly joy to have my friend by me: and my
heart does tell me, that what I feel, he feels: So that all which my Friend
with his eyes does bewail, and all that which of my griefs he feels, the
more wherewith he burdeneth himself, and the more thereof he discharges me.

The Emperor Octauian Augustus, (the Hystories say) on the river of Danuby,
found a kind of people which had this strange custom, that with eyes was
never seen, nor in books at any time never read: which was, that two Friends
assembled, and went to the aulters of the Temples, and there one friend
confederate with another: so that their hearts were married, as man and wife
are married: touching their bodies, swearing, and promising there to the gods,
never to weep, nor to take sorrow, for any mishappe that should come to their
persons. So that my friend should come to lament and remedy my troubles, as if
they had bin his own: and I should lament and remedy his, as if they had bin
mine.

Oh glorious world, O age most happy, O people of eternal memory! wherein
men are so geentle, and friends so faithful: that their own trauells they
forgot, and the sorrows of strangers they bewailed. O Rome without Rome, O time
evil spent, O time to us others evil employed, O wretches that always are
careless, now a days the stomach and intrailes, are so severed from the
good, and the hearts so joined with the evil: that men forgetting Me^ in their
kind, more cruel then beasts.
themselus to be men, become more cruel then beasts.

I labor to give thee life: and thou seek to procure my death. Thou weepest
to see me laugh, and I laugh, to see thee weep. I procure that thou do not
mount, and thou seek that I might fall. Finally, without the profit of
any, we cast our selves away: and without gain, we do rejoice to end our
lives.

By the faith of a good man I swear unto thee (Lady Lauinia) that if thy
remedy were in my hands, as thy grief is in my heart: I would not be sorry
for thy sorrows, neither thou so tormented for the death of thy husband. But
alas, though I miserable man have the heart to feel thy anguish, yet I want
the power to remedy thy sorrows.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The Emperor proceeds in his letter, and persuades widows to
put their wills to the will of God, and exhorts them to live honestly.
SInce thy remedy, and my desire cannot be accomplished, because it is a thing
The prosecutio^ of the Emperors letter to widows.
impossible to receive, and speak with the dead: and not having power, me
thinks that thou and I should refer it to the Gods: who can give, much
better then we can ask.

O Lady Lauinia, I desire thee earnestly, and as a Friend I counsel and
admonish thee, and with all my heart I require thee, that thou esteem that for
well done, which the Gods have done: that thou conform thy self to the will
of the Gods, and that thou will naught else, but as the Gods will. For they
only know they err not: wherefore they have assaulted thy husband with so
sudden death, and unto thee his wife, have lent so long life.

The Gods being as they are, so mighty, and so sage, what is he that can be
judge of their profound judgments. The Gods know right well those which serve
them: and those which offend them: those which love them, and those which hate
them: those that praise them, and those that blaspheme them: those that yield
them thanks, and those which are unthankful.

And I tell thee further, that oftentimes the Gods are served more with them
which are buried in the graves, then with those which go weeping through the
Temples.

Will thou now enter into account with the Gods? thou oughtst to note and
consider, that they have left thee Children to comfort thy self, they have
left thee goods, wherewith thou may avoid poverty, they have left thee
Friends, by whom thou shall be favored, they have left thee parents, of whom
thou art beloved, they have left thee a good name for to be esteemed: and
health, wherewith thou may live.

Finally I say, that small is that which the Gods take from us, in respect of
that they leave us. After one sort we ought to behave our selves with men, and
after another we ought to serve the Gods. For to men sometimes it is
requisite, to show a countenance for to humble them: but to the Gods it is
necessary, to lie flat on the ground with thy stomach to honor them. The
duty that every Christian ^^eth to God.


And if the Oracle of Apollo do not deceive us, the Gods are sooner with
humility, (wherewith we worship them) appeased: then with presumptuous
Sacrifices (which we offer unto them) contented.

Since thou art widow (Lady Lauinia) and art a wise and virtuous Woman:
beseech the Gods to preserve thy children, to defend thy renown, and not to
sever thy Friends from thee, and that thou scatter not thy goods: to preserve
thy person in health, and above all, to be in their favor. Thou can not
win, nor loose so much in all thy life, as the Gods can give, or take from
thee in one hour.

Would to GOD the widow knew, how little she wins among men, and how much
she loses among the Gods, when she is not pacient in adversity: For
impatience oftentimes provoke the Gods to wrath.

We see it in man's body by experience, that there are sundry diseases, which
are not cured with words spoken: but with the herbs thereunto applied. And in
other diseases, the contrary is seen, which are not cured with costly
medicines, but with comfortable words.

The end of this comparison tends to this effect, that all the afflicted
hearts should know, that sometimes the the heart is more comforted with one
benefit which they do: then with an hundred words which they speak, And at
an other time, the sorrowful heart is more lightened with one word of his
friends mouth: then with all the service of others in the world.

Oh wretch that I am: for, as in the one, and in the other, I am destitute, So
in all I do want. For, considering thy greatness, and weyghing my little
knowledge, I see my self very unable: For, that to comfort thee, I want
science: and for to help thee I want riches. But I cease not to have great
sorrow: if sorrow in payment may be received. That which with my person I can
do, neither with paper or iuke I will requite. For the man which with word
only comfort (in effect being able to remedy) declares himself to have
been a feigned Friend in times past: and shows, that a man ought not to take
him for a faithful friend in time to come.

That which the Romans with the A custom used by the Romans in visiting
widows.
widows of Rome have accustomed to do, I will not presently do with rhee
(Lady Lauinia) that is to say, that thy Husband being dead, all go to visit
the Widow, all comfort the widow: and within a few days after, if the woeful
widow have need of any small favor with the Senate, they withdraw themselves
together, as if they had never known her Husband, nor seen her.

The renown of Roman widows is very dayntie: For of their honesty or
dishonestie, depends the good renown of their person, the honor of their
parents, the credit of their children, and the memory of the dead. For this
therefore, it is healthful counsel, for wise men to speak few words to
widows, and to do infinite good works. What avails it woeful widows, to
have their Cofers filled with letters and promises, and their ears stuffed
with words, and flatteries? If hitherto thou have taken me for thy neighbor,
and parent of thy husband, I beseech thee henceforth that thou take me for a
husband in love, for father in counsel, for brother in service, and for
advocate in the Senate. And all this so truly shall be accomplished, that I
hope thou will say: that which in many I have lost, in Marcus Aurelius alone I
have found. I know well (as thou do in like manner) that when the hearts with
sorrows are overwhelmed, the spirits are vexed and troubled, the memory is
dulled, the flesh does tremble, the spirit does change, and reason is
withdrawn. And since that presently sorrow and care, in thy house do remain:
let the gods forsake me, if I abandon thee, let them forget me, if I remember
thee not. But as Claudine remained thine, wholly till the hour of death: so
Marcus Aurelius will evermore be thine, during his life. Since I love thee so
entirely, and thou trustest me so faithfully, and that thou with sorrows art
so replenished, and my heart with care so oppressed: let us admit, that thou
Lady Lauinia, have the aucthority to command me in thy affairs, and I license
to counsel and advertise thee of things, touching thy honor and person. For
oftentimes the widows have more need of a mean remedy, then of a good
counsel: I earnestly desire thee to leave the lamentation A custom used among
the Roman widows.
of the Roman widows, that is to know: to shut the gates, to tear their
hairs, to cut their garments, to go bare legged, to paint the visage, to eat
solitarily, to weep on the graves, to chide her Chamberlaines, to pour out
water with tears, to put Acornes on the graves, and to bite their nails with
the teeth: For these things, and such other semblable lightness, behooves not
the gravity of Roman Matrons, either to see them or else to know them. Since
there is no extremity but therein vice is annexed: I let thee know (Lady
Lauinia) if thou be ignorant thereof, that the widows which are so extreme,
do torment themselves, do trouble their friends, do offend the gods, do
forsake theirs, and in the end they profit not the dead: and to the envious
people, they give occasion to talk. I would think and me seems, that the
women which are Matrons, and widows, ought to take upon them such garment, and
estate, the day that the gods take life from their husbands: as they entend to
wear during their life. What avails it that a widow be one month shut up
in her house, and that afterward within a year she is met in every place of
Rome, what avails it, An admonition of the Emperor to widows to leave off
mourning.
that for few days she hides her self from her parents, and friends, and
afterward she is found the first at the theaters: what profits it, that
widows at the first do mourn, and go evil attired, and afterward they
dispute, and complain of the beauty of the Roman wives? what forces it, that
widows for a certain time do keep their gates shut, and afterward their
houses are more frequented then others? What skilleth it, that a man see the
widows weep much for their husbands, and afterward they see them laugh more
for their pastimes? Finally, I say, that it little avails the woman, to seem
to suffer much openly for the death of her husband: if secretly she has
another husband already found? For the virtuous, and honest widow immediately as
she sees another man alive, she renueth her sorrow for her husband that is
dead.

I will show thee (Lady Lauinia) a thing that befell in Rome, to the end thou
think not I talk at pleasure. In the old time, in Rome there was a noble and
worthy Roman Lady, wife of the noble Marcus Marcellus, whose came was Fuluia.
And it happened so, that this woman seeing her husband buried in the field of
Mars, for the great priese she had, she scratched her face, she ruffled her
hair, she tore her gown, and fell down to the earth in a sound, by the
reason whereof two Senators kept her in their arms, to the end she should
torment her self no more. To whom Gneus ^l^uius the Censour said. Let Fuluia
go out of your hands, she will this day do all the penance of widows
Speaking the truth, I know not whether this Roman spoke with the Oracle, or
that he were a Divine: but I (...)
am ^ssured that all he spoke came to paile. For that this Fuluia was the wise
of so excellent a Roman, as that good Marcus Marceilus was: I would that so
unlucky a chance had not happened unto her, which was: that whiles the bones of
her husband were a burning, she agreed to be married to another: and which was
more, to one of the Senators that lifted her up by the arms, she gave her
hand, as a Roman to a Roman, in token of a faithful marriage. The case was
so abominable, that of all men it was dispraised that were present: and gave
occasion that they never credit widows afterward. I do not speak it (Lady
Lauinia) for that I think thou will do so. For by the faith of a good man, I
swear unto thee, that my heart neither suspected i^, nor yet the aucthority of
so grave a Roman does demand it: for to thee only the fault should remain,
and to me the wonder. Heartily I commend unto thee thy honesty, which to thy
self thou ought, and the care which behooves so worthy and notable a
widow. For if thou art tormented, with the absence of the dead: thou ought
to comfort thee, with the reputation of the living. At this present I will say
no more to thee, but that thy renown among the present be such, and that they
speak of thee so in absence: that to the evil, thou give the bridell to be
silent: and to the good, spurs to come and sefue thee. For the widow What
punishment ought to be inflicted upon a widow of light behavior.
of evil renown, ought to be buried quick. Other things to write to thee I
have none. Secret matters are dangerous to trust, considering that thy heart is
not presently disposed to hear news. It is reason thou know that I with thy
parents and friends have spoken to the Senate, which have given the office that
thy husband had in Constantinople, to thy son. And truly thou ought no
less to rejoice of that, which they have said of thee, then for that they have
given him. For they say, though thy husband had never been Citizen of Rome:
yet they ought to have given more than this, only for thy honest behavior. My
wife Faustine saluteth thee, and I will say I never saw her weep for any thing
in the world so much, as she has wept for thy mishap. For she felt thy
loss, which was very great: and my sorrow, which was not little. I send thee
four thousand sexterces in money, supposing that thou have wherewith to occupy
them, as well for thy necessaries, as to discharge thy debts. For the
complaints, demands, and processes which they minister to the Roman Matrons
are greater, then are the goods that their husbands do leave them. The gods
which have given rest to thy husband O Claudine, give also comfort to thee his
wife Lauinia. Marcus of mount Celio, with his own hand.

CHAP. XXXIX. That Princes and Noble men ought to despise the world, for that
there is nothing in the world but plain deceit.
PLato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, Empedocles, Democrates, Seleucus, Epicurus,
Diogenes, Thales, and Methrodorus, had among them so great contention to
describe the The opinion of sundry Philosophers of the description of the world.
world, his beginning and property: that in maintaining every one his opinion,
they made greater wars with their pens, then their enemies have done with their
lances. Pythagoras said, that that which we call the World is one thing, and
that which we call the universal is an other: the Philosopher Thales said,
that there was no more but one World: and to the contrary, Methrodorus the
Astronomer affirmed, there were infinite worlds: Diogenes said, that the world
was everlasting. Seleucus said, that it was not true: but that it had an end:
Aristotle seemed to say, that the world was eternal. But Plato said clearly,
that the world has had beginning, and shall also have ending.

Epicurus said, that it was round as a ball, Empedocles said, that it was not
as a bowl, but as an egg. Chilo the Philosopher (in the high Mount Olimpus)
disputed that the world was as men are: that is to say, that he had an
intellectable and sensible soul.

Socrates in his School says, and in his doctrine wrote that after 37
thousand years, all things should return as they had been before: That is to
say, that he himself should be borne anew, and should be nourished and should
read in Athens. And Dennis the Tytant should return to play the Tyrant in
Syracuse. Julius Caesar to rule Rome, Hannibal to conquer Italy, and Scipio to
make war against Carthage, Alexander to fight against King Darius, and so
forth in all others past.

In such and other vain questions and speculstions, the ancient Philosophers
consumed many years. They in writing many books have troubled their spirits,
consumed long time, traveled many Countries, and suffered innumerable dangers,
and in the end they have set forth few truths and many lies. For the least
part of that they knew not, was much greater then all that which they ever knew.

When I took my pen in my hand to write the vanity of the world: my
intention was not to reprove this material world, the which of the four
Elements is compounded: that is to say, of the earth that is cold and dry: of
the water that is moist and cold: of the air that is hot and moist, of fire
that is dry and hot: so that taking the world in this sort, there is no
reason why we should complain and lament of it, since that without him we
cannot live corporally, When the Painter of the world came into the world, it
is not to be believed, that he reproved the water which bare him, when he went
upon it: nor the air that ceased to blow in the sea, nor the earth that
trembled at his death, nor the light which ceased to light, nor the stones
which brake in sunder, nor the fish which suffered themselves to be taken, not
the trees which suffered themselves to be dry, nor the monuments that suffered
themselves to be opened: For the creature acknowledged in his Creator
omnipotency, and the Creator founded in the creature due obedience. Oftentimes,
and of many persons we hear say, O woeful world, O miserable world, O
subtle world, O world unstable, and unconstant!

And therefore it is reason we know what the world is, whereof the world is,
from whence this world is, whereof this world is made, and who is lord of this
world? since in it all things are unstable, all things are miserable, all (...).
things deceitful, and all things are malicious, which cannot be understood of
this material world. For, in the fire, in the air in the earth, and in the
water, in the light, in the Planets, in the stones, and in the Trees, there are
no sorrows, there are no miseryes, there are no deceytes, nor yet any malice.

The world wherein we are borne, where we live, and where we die, differs
much from the world whereof we do complain: for the world against whom we
fight, suffers us not to be in quiet one hour in the day.

To declare therefore my intention, this wicked World is no other thing, but
the evil life of the Worldlings, the Earth is the desire, the fire the
couetise, the water the inconstancy, the air the folly the stones are the
pride, the flowers of the Trees the thoughts, the deep Sea, the heart.

Finally I say, that the Sun of this world is the prosperity, and the moon is
the continual change. The Prince of this so evil a world is the devil, of
whom JESUS CHRIST laid; The prince of this world shall now be cast out: and
this the Redeemer of the World says: For, he called the worldlings and their
worldly lives the world: For since they be servants of sin, of necessity they
must be subjects to the devil. The pride, the avarice, the envy, the
blasphemy, the pleasures, the leachery, the negligence, the gluttony, the ire,
the malice, the vanity, and the folly. This is the world against which we
fight all our life, and there the good are princes of vices, and the vices are
Lords of the vicious.

Let us compare the travels which we suffer of the Elements, with those which
we endure of the vices, and we shall see, that little is the peril we have
on the sea and the land, in respect of that which increases our evil life. Is
not he in more danger that falls through malice into pride, then he which by
chance falls from a high rock? Is not he who with envy is persecuted, in
more danger then he that with a stone is wounded? Are not they in more peril
that live among vicious men, then others that live among brute and cruel
beasts. Do not those which are tormented with the fire of covetousness, suffer
greater danger the^ those which live under the mount Ethna.

Finally, I say, that they be in greater perils, which with high imaginations
are blinded, the^ the trees which with the importunate winds are shaken. And
afterward this world is our cruel enemy, it is a deceitful friend, it is
that which always keeps us in travel, it is that which takes from us our
rest, it is that that robs us of our treasure, it is that The deceitfulnes
of the world laid open.
which makes himself to be feared of the good, and that which is greatly
beloved of the evil, It is that which of the goods of other is prodigal, and
of his own very miserable.

He is the inuentor of all vices, and the scourge of all virtues. It is he
which entertaineth all his in flattery, and sayre speech.

This is he which brings men to dissension, that robs the renown of
those that be dead, and puts to sack the good name of those that be alive.

Finally, I say, that this cursed World is he, which to all ought to render
account, and of whom none dare ask account.

Oh vanity of vanities, where all walk in vanity, where all think vanity,
where all cleave to vanity, where all seems vanity: and yet this is little
to seem vanity, but that indeed it is vanity. For, as false witness should
he bear, that would say, That in this World there is any thing Assured,
Healthful, and True: as he that would say, that in Heaven there is any
unconstant, variable, or false thing.

Let therefore vain Princes see how vain their thoughts be: and let us
desire a vain Prince to tell us how he has governed with him the vanities of
the world? For, if he believe not that which my pen writes, let him be leeue
that which his person proves.

The words written in the book of Ecclesiastes are such.

I David's Son that swayes the Kingly seat,
With hungry thyrst, have thrown amid my breast:
A vain desire to prove what pleasures great A worthy saying of K. Salomo^:

In fleeting Lise have stable foot to rest.
To taste the sweet that might suffice my will,
With rayned course to shun the deeper way,
Whose streams of high delight, should so distill,
As might content my restless thoughts to stay.
For lo, Queen Follyes Impes through vain belief
So proudly shape their search of tickle reatch
That though desert auayles the wave of grief,
To Science top their clymbing will does stretch.
And so to draw some nice delighting end
Of Fancyes toil that feasted thus my thought:
I largely waighed my wasted bounds to bend,
To swelling Realms, as Wisdoms Dyall wrought.
I Royal Courts have reached from the soil
To serve to lodge my huge attending train:
Each pleasant house that might be heapt with toil
I reared up, to weelde my wanton rain.
I causde to plant the long unused vines,
To smooth my taste with treasure of the Grape:
I sipped have the sweet inflaming Wines,
Old rust of care by hid delight to escape.
Fresh Arbours I had closed to the skies,
A shrouded space to use my fickle Feet:
Rich Gardens I had dazzling still mine Eyes,
A pleasant plot, when dayntie Food was meet.
High shaking-trees by Art I strove to set,
To freight desire with Fruits of liking taste:
When boiling flame of Summers-Sunne did heat,
The blossom'de Boughs his shooting beams did waste.
From Rocky hills I forced to be brought
Cold silver Springs to bayne my fruitful ground:
Large throwne-out Ponds, I labored to be wrought,
Where numbers huge of swimming Fish were found:
Great compast Parkes I gloryed long to plant
And wild Forests, where swarmed Herds of Dear
Thousands of Sheep, ne Cattle could not want,
With new increase to store the wasted year,
Whole rowtes I kept of servile wights to serve
Defaultes of Princely Courts with yrke some toil
Whose skillful hand from cunning could not swerve,
Their sway was most to deck my dayntie soil.
The learned weights of Musickes curious art
I trained up, to please me with their play
Whose sugared tunes so sailed to my heart
As flowing grief, agreed to eble away.
The tender Maids, whose stalk of growing years
Yet reached not to age his second rain
Whose royal am s, were swallowed in no cares
But burnt by love, as Beautyes lotte does gain.
Lo I enioyde to feed my dulled spirit
With strained voice of sweet alluring song
But yet to mount the Stage of more delight
I ioyed to see their comely Daunces long.
The hills of massy Gold that I up heapt
So hugie were by hoord of long excess,
That clottered clay with prouder price was kept
In sundry Realms, when ruthful need did press,
In some I say my bodies rolling guide
Did gaze for naught, but subject lay to sight:
My judge of sounds wished nothing to abide,
But was instild to kindle more delight.
The clother of my corpse yet never felt
That pleased him ought but aye it touched again
My sicher of savors, if ought be smelt,
That might content, his would was never vain.
The greedy sighs of my devoured breast
Traveled in thought to conquer no delight,
But yielded straight as wire to the wrest
To office such, as wanton will be hight.
But when the door of by abused eyes,
Where hoysed up with looks and looks again
And that my eager hands, did aye incline
To touch the sweet, that season still their pain.
When wanton taste, was fed with each conceyt
That strange devise brought forth from flowing wit
When restless will was ballast with the weight,
Of princely reach, that did my compass fit.
I saw by search, the sorry unstable bloome:
The blasted fruit, the flitting still delight,
The fickle joy, the often abused doom,
The slipper stay, the short contented sight
Of such as set their heaven of singing life
In pleasures lap, that laugh at their abuse
Whose froward wheel, with frowning turn is rise
To drown their bliss, that blindely slept with use.
For lo, the course of my delighting years
That was embraste in arms of Fancies past
When wisdoms Sun, through follies clouds appears
Does blush to hear the count that pleasures cast.
So now I see the mass of huge delight
With flattering face does promise but decay
Whose flitting foot, entyced one to flight
His restles wings, do seek to sore away.
Lo thus he slippes, reclaimde with endless pain,
Possessed a while, departing soon again
Thus says the sage Solomon, talking of the things of the world: the which as
he spoke of the world, so had he proved it in deed, in his own person.

Crediting, as it is reason to such high doctrine, I cannot tell what my pen
can write more in this case: since he says, that after he had all proved,
Nothing in this world but vanity,
experimented, possessed, and tasted, he found that al we procure and have in
this world is vanity.

Oh Noble Princes and great Lords, I beseech you, and in the Name of JESUS
CHRIST, I exhort you, with great discretion, to enter into this deep Sea:
since this order is so disordered, that it brings all disorders, and evil
customs. For all those which shall travel by the way, when they shall think
to go most sure in the midst of their journey, they shall find themselves to
be lost.

None ought to agree with the world, for that he might live secure in his
house: for day and night to all worldlings he has his gates open, making
their entry large and sure. But let us beware we enter not, and much more that
we load not our selves with his vices, and be delighted with his pleasures.

For, since we do wax worse and that we are entered therein, though we do
repent, by no way we find the sure coming out, but that first we must well
pay for our lodging.

I marvel not though the Worldlings at every moment be deceived: since
superficiously they behold the The vain hope of the worldly minded man,
world with their eyes, and love it profoundly with their hearts. But if they
desired as profoundly to consider it, as they do vainly follow it, they
should see very plain, that the world did not flatter them with prosperity,
but threaten them with adversity.

So that under the greatest point of the Dye, which is the vi. is hidden the
least, which is the Ase,

I would counsel Noble-Princes, and great Lords, that they would not believe
the world, nor his Flatterers, and much less believe themselves nor their
vain imaginations. The which for the most part do think that after they have
traueled, and heaped up great treasure, they shall enjoy but their own travel,
without the trouble of any man, or that any man do go again them.

Oh how vain is such thought, and how often does it change contrary? The
world is of such an evil conditition, that if he let us rest, our first
sleep, as well us, as that which we have gotten, immediately in the morning,
yea oftentimes, an hour from thence, he awaketh us with a new care and now he
has prepared for us some mean, to occupy our selves about some other trouble.

CHAP. XL. The Author follows his intention, and speaks vehemently against
the deceyts of the World.
THe Emperor Traiane said one day to his master (which was Plutarche, the
great philosopher) The speech of the Emp: Traian.
Tell me master; why there are commonly more evil then good? and why without
comparison, there are more which follow vices, then those which embrace virtue?
The great Plutarch answered. As our natural inclination is more given to
lasciuiousnes and negligence, then to chastity and abstinencie: so the men
which do enforce The answer of Plutarch
themselves to follow virtue are few, and those which give slack the reins
unto vices are many. And know thou (if thou know it not, most Noble
Prince) that all this evil proceeds, that men do follow men, and that they
suffer not reason to follow reason

Feeble, and miserable is our nature, but in the end we cannot deny, that for
our trauells we may find remedy in it, which seems to be true.

For so much if the sun does annoy us, we retire to the shadow. If we are
grieved going on foot, we do remedy it going on Horseback. If the sea be
dangerous, we sail with ships. If the cold do vex us, we approach near the
Fire. If thyrst does trouble us, we do quench it with drink. If the rain does
wet us, we go into houses. If the plague be in one place, we fly into
another. If we have enemies, we comfort ourselves with our friends.

Finally I say, that there is no sorrow, nor travel, but that a man has found
some rest and remedy.

This presupposed to be true (as it is truth indeed) now I ask all the
worldlings, if they have found any remedy against the troubles and deceytes of
this world? If I be not deceived, and if I understand any thing of this world
the remedy which the world gives for the troubles, certainly are greater
trauells, then the travels themselves: so that they are salues, that do not
heal our wounds, but rather burn our flesh.

When the diseases are not very old rooted, nor dangerous, it profits more
oftentimes to abide a gentle fever: then to take a sharp purgation: I mean,
that the world is such a deceiuer, and so double, that he does contrary to
that he punishes. That is to say, that if he do persuade us to revenge an
injury: it is to the end that in revenging that one, we should receive a
thousand inconveniences.

And whereas we think it takes from us, it increases infinite. So that this
cursed guide, makes us to believe it leads us upon the dry land among our
friends: causes us to fall into the Ambushments of our enemies.

Noble Princes and great Lords, in the thoughts they have, and in the words
that they speak, are greatly esteemed: and afterward in the works which
they do, and in the affairs they travel, are as little regarded.

The contrary of all this does the wicked world, who with all those he How
little we ought to esteem the flatteries of the world.
acompanyeth, in his promises he is very gentle: and afterward in his
deeds, he is very proud. For speaking the truth, often times it costeth us
dear, and we others do sell it good cheap.

I say much, in saying that we sell it good cheap: but in a manner I should say
better, that we give it willingly. For few are those in number which carry
away wages of the world: and infinite are those which do serve it, only for a
vain hope. Oh Noble Princes and great Lords, I counsel and require you, that
you do not trust the world, neither in word, deed, nor promise, though he
swear and swear again, that he will keep all he has promised with you.
Suppose that the world does honor you much, flatter you much, visit you often,
offer you great treasures, and give you much: yet it is not because he will
give it you by little and little, but that afterward he might take it all from
you again in one day. For it is the old custom of the world, that those
which above all men he has set before: now at a turn, they are furthest
behind. What may we have in this The inconstancy of the world.
world and in his flatteries, since we do know, that one day we shall see our
selves deprived thereof? and that which is more, he uses such craft and
subtilty with the one and with the other, that in old men whom reason would
should not be vicious, he (the more to torment their persons) has kindled a
greater fire in their hearts, so that this malicious world puts into old
riches, a new covetousness: and in the aged, engenders cruel avarice, and
that in that time, when it is out of time. We ought greatly to consider, how
by the world we are deceived: but much more we ought to take heed, that we be
not by it destroyed. For whereas we think to be in open liberty: he keeps
us secret in prison. We think we are whole, and he gives us sickness. We
think we have all things, yet we have nothing. We think that for many
years long shall be our life, when that at every corner we are assaulted of
death. We think that it counts us for men that be wise, when he keeps us
bound like unto fools. We think that it increases our good, when that in
deed it burdeneth our conscience. Finally I say, that by the way where we
think to continue our renown, and life: we loose without recovery, both life
and fame.

O filthy world, that when thou do receive us, thou do cast us off: when
thou do assemble us, thou do separate us: when thou seem to rejoice us,
thou make us sad: when thou please us, how thou displeasest us: when thou
exaltest us, how thou humblest us: and when thou do chastise us, how thou
reioycest. Finally I say, that thou have thy drinks so impoysoned, that we
are without thee, with thee, and having the thief within the house, we go
out of the doors to seek him. Though: men be diverse in gestures: yet much more
are they variable in their appetites. And since the world has experience of so
many years, it has appetites prepared for all kind of people. For the
presumptuous he procures honors, to the auaricious he procures riches, and
to those which are gluttons, he How the world deceives sinful men.
presents diverse meats. The fleshly he blinds with women, and the
negligent he lets rest: and the end why he does all these things, is that
after he has fed them as flesh, he casts upon them the nets of all vices.

Note Princes, and great Lords, note noble men, though a Prince do see
himself Lord of all the world, he ought to think that of no value is the
seignory, unless he himself be virtuous. For little it profits that he be
Lord of the vicious: which is himself the servant of all vices.

Many say that the world does beguile them: and other say that they have no
power against the world. To whom we may answer. That if at the first
temptations we would have resisted the world: it is impossible that so
oftentimes it durst assault us. For of our small resistance, comes his so
great audacity. I cannot tell if I shall dissemble, I shall hold my peace, or
whether I shall say that I would say, since it greeueth my heart so much, only
to think of it. For I feel my eyes readier to lament it, then my fingers able
to write it, It is so, that every man suffers himself to be governed so of
the world, as if God were not in heaven, and he had not promised to be a good
Christian here in The vain opinion of the worldly minded me^,
earth. For all that he will, we will, that which he follows, we follow,
and that which he chooses, we choose. And that which is greatest sorrow of
all, if we do refrain our selves from adversity, it is not for that of our
own nature we would cease from it: but because the world will not command us
to do it.

Little is that which I have spoken, in respect of that I will speak: which is
that the world has made us now so ready to his law, that from one hour to
another, it changes the whole state of this life. So that to day he makes us
hate that, which yesterday we loved, he makes us complain of that, which we
commended: he makes us to be ofended now with that, which before we did
desire: he makes us to have mortal enemies of those, which before were our
special friends.

Finally I say, that the world makes us to love that in our life, which
afterward we bewail at the hour of death. If the world did give unto his
minions, any perfect and accomplished thing: it were somewhat that for a time a
man should remain in the service of his house: But since that in the world all
things are granted not during life, but as lending, which ought to be rendered
the day following: I know not what man is so very a fool, that in the world
does hope for any perpetual thing? For all that he gives, he gives with
such condition, that they shall render it unto him when he shall demand it:
and not at the discretion of him that does possess it. Peradventure the world
can give us perpetual life? I say certainly no. For in the sweetest time of
all our life, then suddenly we are assaulted of cruel death. Peradventure How
sudde^ly Death assaulteth us,
the world can give us temporal goods in abundance? I say certainly no. For no
man at any time had so much riches: but that which he wanted was more, then
that he possessed. Peradventure the world can give us perpetual joy? I say
certainly no. For exempting those days which we have to lament, and also the
hours which we have to sight: there remains not for us one moment to laugh.
Peradventure he can give us perpetual health? I say certainly no. For to men
of long life, without comparison the diseases are more which they suffer: then
the years are which they live. Peradventure the world can give us perpetual
rest? I say certainly no. For if the days be few, wherein we see the elements
without clouds: fewer are the hours, which we feel our hearts without cares.

Therefore since that in this miserable world there is no health perpetual,
nor life perpetual, nor riches perpetual, nor joy perpetual. I would know
what it is that the worldlings would of the world, since they know that it has
no good thing to give them, but only by lending, or by usury? If it be
usury, there is no gain of money: but rather return, with restitution of
vices.

O children of vanity, O masters of lightness, since it is so, that ye now
determine to follow and serve the world: look not of the world to have any
thing, but things of the world. In it is nothing but pride, envy, leacherie,
hate, ire, blasphemy, avarice, and folly. And if ye ask if he have in his
governance any virtuous thing, he will answer you, that he does never sell
such merchandise in his shop. Let no man think that the world can give us
that, which it has nor for it self. And if we will change any thing with
it, and it with us: he is so subtle to sell, and so curious to buy, that
that which he takes shall be of great measure, and that which he sells us,
shall want much weight.

CHAP. XLI. Of a Letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius wrote unto his
friend Torquatus, to comfort him in his banishment, which is notable, for all
men to learn the vanities of this World.
MArcus Emperor of Rome, companion in the Empire, with his Brother Annius
Verus, to thee Torquatus, of the city of comfor^ (...) if the Emp: Marc: Aur.
Gaietta, wishes all health to thy person, and strength against thy evil
Fortunes. I being in the Temple of the Vestall virgins, about three month
since, I received a Letter of thine: the which was in such sort, that neither
mine eyes for that time could make an end to read it, or since I have had the
heart to answer it. For in the inco^nueniences of our friends, if we have no
faculty nor might for to remedy it, at the least we are bound to bewail it.
Thy sorrow makes me so heavy, thy pain does trouble me so much, I am so
careful of thy anguish, so tormented with thy grief, that if the Gods had
given power to woeful men to imparte their sorrows, as they have given to rich
men to imparte their goods: by the faith I owe to God, I swear, that as I am
the greatest of thy Friends, I would be he which should take the most part
of thy griefs.

I know right well, and as well as he that has proved it, that as much
difference as there is between the ba^ke and the tree, the marow and the bone,
the corn and the straw, the gold, and the dross, the truth and the dreams:
so much is there to hear the Trauells of another, and to taste his own.
Notwithstanding, comfort thy self, my friend Torquatus: for where the friends
be true, the goods and the evils are common betwixt them.

Oftentimes with my self I have marvelled, to what end or intention, the
immortal Gods have given Travel, and torments to men, since it is in their
powers to make us live without them. I see no other thing, why the mishaps
ought patiently to be suffered: but because in those, we know who are our
faithful friends. In battle the valiant man is known, in tempestuous
weather the Pylot is known, by the Touchstone the gold is tried, How a true
friend is to be known,
and in adversity, the true Friend is known.

For my friend does not enough to make me merry, unless also he does take part
of my sorrow. I have heard say here, and now by thy letter I have seen, how
they have banished thee from Rome, and confiscated thy goods, and that for pure
sorrow thou art sick in thy bed: whereof I marvel not that thou art sick, but
to be as thou art alive. For saying to thee the Truth, where the heart is sore
wounded, in short space it has accustomed to yield up unto the body. I see
well, that thou complaynest, and thou have reason to complain, to see thy self
banished from Rome, and thy goods confiscate, to see thy self out of thy
country, without any parentage: yet therefore thy sorrows ought not to be so
extreme, that thou should put thy life in hazard. For he alone ought to
have license, and also is bound to hate life, which does not remember that
he has served the Gods, nor has done any profit to men.

If the affairs of the Empire did not occupy me, and the Imperial Majesty
did not withdraw me: I would immediately The love of Marcus Aurelius to his
friend,
have come to comfort thy person, where thou should have seen by
experience, with what grief I feel thy troubles. And therefore, if thou
take me for thy friend, thou ought to believe of me, that which in this
case I would of thee (which is) that as thou have been the most entier Friend
which I had in Rome: So is this the thing that most I have felt in this life.

Tell me my friend Torquatus, what is it thou suffer there, that I do not
lament here? It may be that sometime thou laughest, but I always weep:
sometimes thou comfortest thy self, but I am always sad. It may be that thou
lightnest thy pain: but I am in sighing. It may be that sometimes thou
castest from thee sorrow: but for me I cannot receive consolation. It may be
that thou hopest remedy of long life: but for me I find no remedy more
healthful, then present death. Finally (I say) that here I feel all that thou
feel there: and furthermore, I suffer all that, which as a friend I ought to
suffer here: so that both our pains are made one most cruel sorrow,
wherewith my woeful life is tormented. I would greatly desire to come and see
thee, and to help to disburden thee of this charge.

And since it is impossible that thou shall find some comfortable words: For,
thou know, that if the true Friends cannot do that which they ought: yet
they do accomplish it, in doing that they can.

If my memory deceive me not, it is well two and thirty years since we two
have known together in Rome, during the which, Fortune has made here between
us diverse alterations, in the which time I never saw thee one day contented.
For if thou were sad, nothing did make thee merry, but were as a man without
taste:: and if thou were joyful, thou esteemedst it little, as a man being
troubled. Therefore if the truth be so (as indeed it is) that in trauells thou
were laden with sorrows, and in prosperities thou were evil content, so that
of nothing in the world thou take any taste: why is it (my friend Torquatus)
that now again thou art in despair, as if thou came new into this world?
Thou did rejoice thy self xxxii. years, with the Triumphs and prosperity
of Rome: and thou complainest only of three months, that Fortune has been
contrary unto thee.

O Torquatus, Torquatus, do thou The considerations that every man ought to
have,
know that the wise men (in whom wisdom reigns) have more fear of two
unhappy days in this life: then of two hundredth of prosperous Fortune?

Oh how many have I seen go out of their prosperities, with the charges of
another man, and their own proper vices: so that the vainglory and the
failing prosperities endured few days: but the grief of that they have lost,
and the enmities which they have recovered, endure many years.

The contrary of all this comes to unfortunate men, which escape out of their
tribulations, spoiled of vices, environed with virtues, persecutors of evils,
zealous of good, friends of all, and enemies of none: contented with theirs,
and not desiring others. Finally, they are escaped wisely from the snare, and
have gathered the Rose, not hurting themselves with the pricks.

What will thou that I say more unto thee, but that the most Fortunate ate
vanquished in peace: and the unfortunate are conquerors in war.

One of the Sentences which most have contented me, of those which the
Ancients have spoken, is this, of the divine Plato, That those which are in
prosperity have no less need of good counsel, then the unhappy have of
remedy; For no less do they travel, which go always in the plain way,
then those A worthy saying of Plato.
which mount on the sharp craggy mountain.

According to that I have gathered of thy letter, me seems that when we hope
most rest, greatest travel has succeeded to thee. And hereof I do not
marvel, nor thou ought not be offended: for as experience teaches us, when
the trees have the blossoms, then they are most subject to the frost: and when
glasses are drawn out of the furnace they break. The Captains having won the
victory, do die. When they will put the key in the door, the house does fall.
The Pirates perish within the kenning of land,

By that I have spoken, I mean, that when we think to have made peace with
fortune, then she has a new demand ready forged. All new changes of Fortune,
causes all ways new pain to the person: but often times it is cause of more
great fortress: for the tree bears not so much fruit where it first grew, as
there where again it is planted: and the savors are more odoriferous, when
they are most chafed. I mean that men of high thoughts, the more they are
wrapped in the frownings of Fortune, the more valiant and stout they show
themselves. The man utterly is foolish, or has great want of understanding,
who hops at any time to have perfect rest, imagining that the World will give
no assault upon him: but that the time shall come, wherein he shall be
without care and fear.

This miserable life is of such condition, that daily our years do diminish,
and our troubles increase. O Torquatus, by the immortal Gods I do desire
thee, and in the faith of a friend I do require thee, thou being borne in the
world, nourishing thy self in the world, living in the world being conversant
in the world, being a child of the world, and following the world, what did
thou hope of the world but things of the world? Peradventure, thou alone wilt
eat the flesh without bones, give battle without peril, travel without
pain, and sail by the sea without danger. I mean, that ^s impossible for
mortal men to live in the world, unless No man in safety to long as he
lives in this world.
they will become subject to the sorrows of the world. The world has always
been the world, and now the world shall be after us, and as a world shall
handle the worldlings.

The wise men, and those which of their estates are careful, are not contented
to see, nor superficialy to know the things: but rather weigh them profoundly.
I say this, because if thou knew thy debelity, and knew fortune, and her
change, if thou knew the men, and their malices, if thou knew the world
and his flatteries, thou should win no little honor, where as otherwise
thou mayes chance to get infamy. We are now come to so great folly, that we
will not serve the Gods which have created us, nor abstain from the World
which persecuteth us: And the best is, that he not willing us (but rather
rejecting us) we say, that of our own wills we will love and serve him: and
yet knowing that those which longest have served the world, do go out of his
house, most bitterly lamenting. Oftentimes I stay for to think, that according
to the multitude of men which follow the world (being always evil handled of
the World) if the World did pray them as he does annoye them, if he did
comfort them, as he does torment them, if he kept them, as he banisheth them,
if he exalted them, as he abuses them, of he received them, as he expels
them, if he did continue them as he consumes them: I think that the Gods
should not be honored in heaven, nor the temples worshipped in the earth.

O Torquatus my friend, that which I will now say of thee, thou may say of
me: that is to say, how much we put our confidence in fortune, how lewdly we
pass our days, and how much we are ^inded in the world: yet for all that we
credit his word as much, as though he had never mocked any.

CHAP. XLII. Marcus Aurelius goes on with his Letter, and by strong and high
reasons persuades all that line in the world, not to trust the world, nor any
thing therein.
Tell l me I pray thee Torquatus, what will thou hear more? What will thou see
more? and The Emperor perswedeth me^ to trust in the world
what will thou know more? to know the world? seeing how until this present
thou have been handled of the world, thou demaundest rest, and he has given
thee trouble: thou demaundest honor, and he has given thee infamy. Thou
demaundest riches, and he has given thee poverty: thou demaundest joy, and he
has given thee sorrow. Thou demaundest to be his, and he has given thee his
hand. Thou demandest life, and he has given thee death: Therefore if it be
true, that the world has handled thee in this wise, why do thou weep to
return again to his wicked house? O filthy world, how far art thou from
just: and how far ought they to be from thee, which desire to be just: For
naturally thou art a friend of novelties, and enemy of virtues. One of the
Lessons which the world reads to his children is this: that to be true
worldlings they should not be very true: The which experience plainly shows
us, for the man which medleth much with the world, leaves always suspicion of
him that he is not true: The World is an Ambassador of the evil, a scourge
of the good, chiefest of vices, a tyrant of the virtuous, What the world is
compared unto.
a breaker of peace, a friend of war, a sweet water of vices, the gawle of
the virtuous, a defendor of lies, an inuentor of novelties, a trauellour of the
ignorant, a hammer for the malicious, a table of gluttons, and a furnace of
concupiscence. Finally, it is the peril of Charibdes, where the hearts do
perish: and the danger of Scylla, where the thoughts do waste.

Presuppose that these he the conditions of the world. The truth is, that if
there be any worldling who complayneth to be evil content with the world,
shall he therefore change his style? Truly no and the reason is, that if
perchance one worldling should go out the house of the world, there are x.
thousand vanities at his Gate:

I know not what wise man will live in the World, with such conditions, since
the vices wherewith we do rejoice our selves are very few, in respect of the
torments which we suffer. I say not that we do hear it by hearsay, and
read them in books: but we see with our own eyes, the one to consume and
wast the goods: others by misfortune to fall and lose their credit, others to
fall and loose their honor, and others to loose their life: and all these
miseryes seen, yet nevertheless, every man thinks to be free by privilege,
where there is none privileged.

Oh my dear Friend Torquatus, of one thing I assure thee, which is: that the
men which are born of women are so evil a generation, and so cruel is the
world wherein we live, and Fortune so empoysoned, with whom we frequent: that
we cannot escape without being spurned with his feet, bitten with his Teeth,
torn with his nails, or empoysoned with his venom.

Peradventure thou may say unto me that thou have seen some in Rome which
have lived longtime, Fortune never being against him. To this I answer thee,
that thou oughtst rather to have pity upon him, then envy: For it is not
for his profit, but for his great hinderance. For the World is How malicious
and unconstant the world is,
so malicious, that when it seems to be most our Friend, then it works us
most displeasure.

The healthful men dye rather of a short disease in few days, then the dry
and feeble men do, with a disease of many years. By this comparison I mean,
that since man cannot escape, nor live without travel: it is much better, that
by little and little he tastes them, then they enter al at one time into his
house.

Oh how much ought the man to be hated of the immortal Gods: who knows not
what travel means in this world? For he only ought to fear Fortune, who
knows not Fortunes force.

Since the Gods would permit, and thy mishap has been such, that thou have
found more danger, where thou thoughtst most surety, as a man euillfortuned:
it is reason that we apply unto thee some new ware, to the end thou lose not
thy good renowm, since thou have lost thy evil goods.

Tell me I pray thee (Torquatus) why do thou complain as a man sick? why
cryest thou as a fool? why sighest thou as a man in despair? and why do
thou weep as a Child? Thou art come out of the way: And thou complainst to
have lost thy way. Thou sailest by the broyling Seas: and thou wonderest that
the Waves do assault thee. Thou have ascended the steep and craggie
Mountains: and thou complainest that thou art weary. Thou walk by the
thorns, and wilt not that thy gown be torn.

Did thou think on the top of the high Mountain to live most sure? By that
I have spoken, I will ask what diligent service thou have done to the world,
that thou would the Gods of heaven should recompense thee?

Would thou of Fortune a safe conduct, she being (as she is) enemy of
many, Nature being not able to give it, the which is mother of all?

Oh my Friend Torquatus, that which that pitiful Nature cannot promise
Fortune and Nature two contrary enemies.
thee, did thou think that Fortune, (which is the just stepmother) should
give?

It is impossible that the Sea should always promise us surety, and the heavens
clearenesse, the Summer deawes, and the Winter, Frosts. Mark well, my Friend
Torquatus, that all natural things are subject to change every year: but all
the Worldlings ought to endure, to Eclipse every moment.

Since the natural Gods cannot always be in one man's custody, being
necessary, it is just that the goods of Fortune perish, since they are
superfluous. Unjust should the Gods be, if that which is to the damage of so
many, they had made perpetual: and that which is to the profit of all, they
had made mortal. I will no more reduce to thy memory, the prosperities which
thou have had in times past: before that we treat how Fortune handles thee at
this present.

The deceytfull Fortune, when at thy gate she sold her Merchandise, knowing
that she soldevnto thee, and thou being ignorant of that thou boughtst: she
gave thee fruitful ground, and afterward made it unto thee painful. She
has given thee sower for sweet, and the sweet she has returned to the
sower. She has given thee the evil for the good: and where that thou have
sold her good, she returns unto thee evil. Finally she has beguyled thee
in the just price, thou not supposing that thou had received any damage. We
can do no less in this case but to have compassion upon thee: yet though they
condemn malicious Fortune for selling, they will note thee simple in buying.
For in the shop of Fortune, all Merchandise are suspicious.

Oh vnhapie that we are, I say those which meddle with the Word: for in his
Market they see naught but lies, and we do not trust but in the overthrows
of our renown: which are not paid, but with the cost of our life. And the
factours of that Fair, give us nothing by weight or measure: for they are a
sort of vacabondes: And the worst of all is, knowing that they ought to lose
with Fortune, all seek to buy at her shop.

Give thy self to the World, love the world much, serve the world well,
follow the world well, and feel the world well: For, in the end of thy Do
what thou can at last the world will deceive thee,
journey, the world requires thee to be like unto his inconstancy.

I would enter into count, not with the World, which in the end is the world:
but with the worldlings which are in love with the world. For, in the end,
either it is good or evil. If the world be good for them, whereof do they
complain? If he be evil, why do they follow him? They cannot (though they
would) deny one of the two errors, wherein the worldlings fall: that is to
say, that they serve an evil master, or that they murmr of a good lord.

Now tell me, my Friend Torquatus, what did thou hope, since thou made so
long time a countenance to the world? Two and thyrtie years thou have served
the world, and have been in his favor: wherefore it were now high time, that
between thee and him were some discord. For between the Grandfathers and the
Nephews, between the Father and the children, between the uncles and the
nephews, daily we see great strifes: And did thou think, that between thee
and Fortune, perpetual peace should be?

She gave not to Belus, king of the Assyrians, but lx. years of prosperity.
To the queen Semiramis, six only. To Label King of the Lacedaemonians,
Examples of the vnco^stancy of the world.
five: To the K of the Chaldeans, four.

To the great Alexander of Macedony, four. To the great Amilcar, King of
Carthage, two. To our Julius Caesar, one: and to infinite others, she gave not
one.

If the world were pacient, he should be no world, if the world were constant,
he should be no world, if the world were sober, he should be no world, if
the world were true, he should be no world, if the world were corrigible, he
should be no world. Finally I say, that for naught else the world is world, but
because there is nothing in him worthy to be beloved: and many things in it
deserves to be reproved. If thou were wise, and knewst any thing of the
world, in all the discourse of those xxxii. years, thou had not eaten
without care, nor had gone without guyles, and had not spoken without
suspicion, nor slept without assault, nor trusted any friend.

For the War, men do bethink them all ways wherein their enemies do
beguile them, wherein they themselves may fail, and wherein fortune may let
them. I know not if it be that the world of himself be happy, or that the
Worldlings are fools: For if one stranger, one neighbor, or our proper
brother does envy us, we will never (though he do require us) pardon him, and
we cease not to follow the world, though we know he persecuteth us. So that
we draw our swords against flies: and will kill the Elephants with needles.
There is no greater ill in the world, then to think all things in the world
are in extremity: for if we be abased, we sigh alwais to mount, and if we be
high, we weep always for fear of falling. Such overthrows has the world,
and his snares are so secret, that we are no sooner shipped but we see both
our hands and feet entangled with vices: by the which our liberty is brought
into such extreme and cruel captivity, that we bewail our mishaps with
roaring voice as brute beasts, but as men we dare not once utter them. I know
not whereof this comes, for some I see which willingly fall, and other I see
which would recover themselves. I see diverse that would be remedyed, and I see
all do complain, but in the end I see no man that does amend.

These things I have written unto thee, for no other thing, but because from
henceforth thou should live more circumspectly: for as thou know est, I say
nothing, whereof I have not long experience.

The colt which thou have sent me is proved very good, especially for that
he leapeth very well, and for the careere he is exceeding ready, and has a
comely grace. I send thee two thousand sexterces, wherewith thou may relieve
thy necessities.

Finding opportunity, as touching thy banishment I will speak to the Senate
in thy behalf. I say no more to thee, but that the consolations of the gods,
and the love of the gods be with thee Torquatus.

The malice of the evil, and the ire of the furies, be absent from me
Marcus. My wife Faustine saluteth thee and in her behalf, and mine, recommend
us to thy fair daughter in law Solophonia, and thy daughter Amilda. Mark of
Mount Celio, writes to thee Torquate, with his own hand.

CHAP. XLIII. Princes and Nobles ought not to bear with Iuglers, Iesters,
Parasites, and common Players, nor with any such kind of raskals, and
loyterers. And of the laws which the Romans made in this behalf.
LIcurgus Promotheus, Solon, and Numa Pompilius famous inuentors and ordayners
of Laws, showed the subtilty of their wits, and the zeal which they had to
their people, in ordaining many Laws which they taught: not only what they
ought to do: but that which they ought to fly.

For the good and expert Physicians do deserve more praise for to preserve us
before we are sick: then to heal us after that we are diseased.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes Plutarch commends the Lacedaemonians in observing
their laws
never cease to exalt the Lacedaemonians, saying, That when they did observe
their Laws, they were the most esteemed of all the Greeks, and after they
brake them, they were the most vylest Subjects, which ever the Romans had, The
felicity or infelicitie of Realms, does not consist to have good or evil
Laws, but to have good or evil Princes: For little profits us the Laws to
be just, if the King be wicked.

Sextus Cheronensis in the life of Nero says: When the Romans and the
Greeks had wars together, and that the Ambassadors of those two Nations
were at controversy, which of them should have the Rhodians to be their
Friends? The Greek Ambassador said to the Romain: Ye ought A saying of
Plutarch,
not to make your selves equal. O Romans, with the Greeks, since the truth
is, that ye came from Rome to Greece to seek Laws. The Roman Ambassador
answered him: I grant thee, that from Rome we sent to seek Laws in Greece,
but thou will not deny, that from Greece you have brought the vices to Rome. I
say unto thee the truth, that without comparison, greater damage have the vices
done unto us, then your Laws has profited us.

Plutarch in an Epistle he wrote to Traiane, said these words: Thou writest
unto me (most noble Prince) that thou art occupied in ordayning new Laws: but
in my opinion it had been much better, that thou had kept, and caused to be
kept the old. For, little profits it to have the Books full of good Laws,
and that the Commonwealth be full of evil customs. I have seen very few
Princes but to make Laws they had ability sufficient: and to keep them, they
have felt in themselves great debilitie, and weakness.

Hereof we have example: For, Nero was he which made the best Laws in Rome:
and that afterward of life was most corrupt. For, the Gods oftentimes permit,
that by the hands of some evil men, the others should be constrained to be
good.

Plutarche says further. If thou will (Noble Prince) trust thine own
understanding, in my poor counsel, in few words, I would recyte unto thee
all the ancient laws. I will send thee very brief and sweet Laws: not to the
end thou should publish them in Rome: but to the end thou keep them in
thy house. For since thou have made Laws for all, I will make Laws for thee.

The first Law is, that thou behave thy self in such sort, that thou be not
detected The laws of Plutarche.
of any notable vice: For, if the Prince be virtuous in his Palace, none dare
be dissolute in his house.

The second Law is, that equally thou keep Justice, as well to him which
lives far off, as to him which is near about thee: For, it is much better
that thou depart of thy goods to thy Servants, then that thou should give
that Justice, which appertains to others.

The third Law is, that thou delight in word and deed to be true: and that
they take thee not in this defaulte to speak too much: For Princes which in
their words are uncertain, and in their promises doubtful shall be hated of
their Friends, and mocked of their enemies.

The fourth Law is, that thou be very gentle of behavior and conditions, and
not forgetful of services done: For unthankful Princes are hated of GOD, and
despised of men.

The fifth Law is: that as a Pestilence thou drive and chase away from thee
all cunning Sycophantes and Flatterers: For, such with their evil life, do
disturb a whole Common wealth: and with their Flatteryes do obscure and
darken thy Renown.

If thou (most Noble Prince) wilt observe these five Laws: thou shall need to
make no more Laws. For, there is no need of other Laws, in the Common
wealth, then to see that the Prince be of good life, etc.

This wrote Plutarche to the Emperor Traian: and every virtuous man ought to
have them written in his heart.

I was willing to touch this History, only to show the profit of this last
Law, where it says: that Princes admit into their conversation no Flatterers:
of whom it is reason we talk of now. For so much as there are diverse men,
with whom they lose their time, and spend their goods.

When Rome was well ordered, two Officers were greatly esteemed to the
Romans: The one was the masters of Fence, which were as men that fought and
turned, and many times in that fight they were slain. And the cause to invent
this play, was: to the Wherefore the Romans esteemed Fencers.
end young men (not expert in war) should see the Swords drawn, sharp
spears, shooting of Crosse-bowes, to give blows with their Sword, shead
blood, to give cruel wounds, and to sley men: For, in this sort they lost
fear, and in going to the wars they recovered courage.

The man which has once passed a Fourd in the water, though it be in the
night, dare pass it again: But he which has never passed it over, although
it be in the day, dare not once adventure it. I mean, that the Romans were
very Sage, to show unto their children the dangers, before they did put them
therein. For, this is the difference between the fearful heart, and the
courageous stomach: in that the one flies from a distaffe, and the other is
not afraid of a sword.

The second Office which was esteemed in Rome was, that of the Iugglers,
Ieasters, Comediants, and of such others, which invented plays and pastimes:
and the Romans devised these sports, to rejoice the people: and in especially
men of war, whom they feasted at their going forth, and much more at their
coming home. For the Romans thinking that they should be with such glory
received: went with determination, either to win the victory, or to dye in
battle.

The ancients and true Romans had such care for the Commonwealth of their
people, that they consented that Ieasters should jest, Iugglers should iuggle,
and the Players of Enterludes should play: But this was not through abundance of
vanity, nor for want of gravity, but to take from the Plebeians An ancient
custom among the Romans,
occasion of idleness, and to keep them occupied in other particular Plays:
they would that all the pleasures should be taken together: Not without cause (I
say) that the pleasures were taken in common: that is to say, that no Roman
could play any Plays particularly, make any Bankets, represent Comedyes, nor
make any Feasts, besides those which they made to rejoice the whole people: so
that in Rome they traveled severally, and rejoiced together. I would to GOD
that such, and so excellent a Roman custom were observed in our Christian
Commonwealth.

But now I am very sorry that indifferently Rich and poor, great and small,
do play Comedyes, run the Bulls, make iousts, ordeyne bankets, wear
devises, feast the Ladies, spend in bankets, and invent Feasts.

The which things altogether, do redound to the damage of the Commonwealth, to
the waste of the goods, and to the corruption of the ma^ners: For, the
particular pastimes do increase new vices to breed in men.

These Players did serve in Rome to make pastime, at the great Feasts of their
Gods: For since Romans were great worshippers of their Gods, and so careful
of their Temples, they sought to feast them all the ways they could invent.
Truly this was done by the divine sufferance: for their Gods being
laughing-stocks (as indeed they were) the living GOD would they should be
served, honored, and feasted, by Ieastures and mocks. Blondus in the third
book De Roma triumphante, mentions that which I have spoken, and says, That
the Romans were no less curious to give laws to the Iuglers and iesters
which went mocking up and down Rome, then to the captains which were fighting
in the war: For though they did permit Iesters, players and suglers, to
exercise The reason wherefore the Romans allowed Iesters,
their offices: yet they did command them that their lives might be upright
and just. Amongst others, such were the Laws which the Romans ordained for
these Iesters, Iuglers, Players and Tumblers.

The first Law was, which they commanded that they should all be known and
examined, to see if they were honest men, wise and sage: for the more their
offices were vain, so much the more they provided, that they were given to
wise men.

The second Law commanded to examine them, to see if they were able and comely
to exercise their offices: and indeed in this case, as well as in the other,
they had reason, as very a fool as he which for harkening to a fool not
pleasant, as the fool himself.

The third law was that they did not permit any Roman Iugler for to exercise
such feats, unless he had some other craft: so that if they occupied the
Holy days to play and show pastime in the streets, the other days they
should work at home at their houses.

The fourth Law was, that no Iugler nor Vice should be so hardy in his
ostentation to speak any malices: and indeed it was a Law very necessary: For
oftentimes they are few which do rejoice at their mockeries: and many which
do complain of their malices.

The fifth Law was, that no Iugler nor Iester should be so bold to make any
pastimes in any particular Houses but in open places: for otherwise those which
spoke them became hardy, and those which heard them were vicious.

The Romans not contented to have made these Laws ordained that the Iuglers
for no pastimes showed, or any other thing spoken should Allowance given by the
Romans to Iuglers.
be so bold as to receive any money: And to avoid their complaints, and to
satisfy their pains, they allowed every one of them a thousand sexterces
yearly out of the common treasure.

We ought greatly to praise the providence of the Romans, which have
prescribed a kind of life for the Iesters to live, even as they did to other
men of Rome, and to the Captains of war. And in this place no less then in
an other grave thing, they showed their wisdom: For a Governor of a
Commonwealth trauelleth more to correct fools, then to govern the sage.

CHAP. XLIIII. How some Iesters were punished by the Ancients, and of the
Iesters, and Loyterers of our time.
IVlius Capitolinus in the book of the manners of the ancients says, that in
times past, the Iesters and Iuglers were greatly esteemed. And we will not
deny but that they had reason, since with them they honored the gods they
took their pleasures, they rejoiced their feasts, they were very quick men,
not importunate, nor covetous.

The Iester has no grace, unless immediately a man puts his hand to the
purse. We find some fragments of an Oration which Cicero made in the Senate,
greatly reproving the Senators, and all the people, because they so willingly
gave ear to this Iester, who stirred up sedition among the Commons, his name
was Roscio, who was so greatly esteemed in Rome, that the Romans did more
willingly hear that which he said in his Jests, then that which Cicero spoke
in good earnest. This Iester Roscio and Cicero striued which of them both were
of greater wit, Roscio for presenting a thing with diverse jests, or Cicero
pronouncing weighty matters in earnest.

When I read in Julius Capitolinus that which I have spoken, I will not cease
to confess my innocence, for that I could not then keep my self from
laughing, to see that Roscio being Prince of folly, did presume to The
difference between Roscio the Iester and Cicero,
dispute with Cicero, which was Father of eloquence: Since all these things are
unstable in one, so from one day to another we see them chance. The Romans
did greatly esteem the policy of the Commonwealth, the discipline of war,
the nurture of children, the exercise of the young, and the honesty of the
Players and Iuglers, the which in time came to be dissolute, that very often
they were occasion of great slander among the people. The which by the Romans
seen and considered, and that the Iesters which were wont to show them
pleasures, were cause of dissension (and where all they commanded them to be
resident in their offices, they were vagabonds, and that using them as sages,
they lived as loyterers and fools, and not contented with that they gave them
of the common Treasure, but they went begging of every man) the Senate of Rome
determined among themselves to banish all the Iuglers, and Iesters out of the
Commonwealth.

On this execution of these loyteterers, sprang diverse dissentions among the
people: For the Princes which were good, cast them out, and those which were
evil called them in: So that one of the tokens which were in Rome, to know a
verruous or vicious Prince, was to see if he maintained Iesters, Iuglers or
vagabonds among the people.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes says, that the Lacedaemonians did never Permit any
iugler or Iester to be in the Commonwealth. And when one A good and ancient
Law among the Lacedaemonians.
did demand a Lacedemonian, by an Ambassador of Rhodes, what was the occasion
to make such a law, since that the Iesters and players showed pleasure to the
people, and the people lost naught but laughed at their folly: The Lacedemonian
answered; Licurgus saw, heard, felt, or read some great damage, the Iesters,
Iuglers, or Players, might do in the commonwealth, since against them he made
this so straight a law: But that which I know is that we Greeks are better
weeping with our Sages, then are the Romans laughing at their fools Dio in
the life of Traian declares, that there came a Iugler to Rome from Afric,
whose conuayance was so clean, that it was a wonderful thing to see what
feats he did and to he are what words he spoke.

And when they prayed the good Emperor Traian, that it would please him to
hear him, he answered. It is not for the authority of a grave and virtuous
Prince, that in his presence any such vain thing should be showed: For in such
a case, he should be no less noted of lightness, then the other accused of
folly.

And further he said, Before princes a man should not be so hardy to speak
dishonest words, nor show light representations. And in such case as much
pain deserve they which move him thereto: as those which do represent them:
For a man ought not to put before Princes the things which should allure them
to vices, but things which should move them to virtues.

Certainly these words were worthy of such a personage. Suetonius Tranquillus
in the life of Augustus declares, that in Rome there was a Iester very
pleasant, and of an excellent wit, called Epifanius, who one day upon a Holy
day to show the Emperor some pleasure, and hoping to have a good reward, went
to the Palace at one time in the attire of a Page, and another time in the
habit of a Roman Matrone: and so truly counterfeyted every thing, that it
seemed not to be him, but the self same person her represented.

The Emperor Augustus was greatly displeased with that the Iester had done,
and commanded forthwith that he should be whipped three times about the
Theater. And when he complained, that the Emperor commanded vacabonds to be
whipped once, and he thrice: the Emperor Augustus answered, Once they shall
Punishment infflicted by Augustus upon a Iester.
whippe thee, for the injury thou did to the Roman matron whom thou
did sepresent. The second time they shall whipp thee for the presumption
that thou have to represent it before my person. The third for the time that
thou have made diverse lose for beholding and hearing thee: For Iesters do not
deserve so much punishment in the Iestes and mockeries they do say, as for the
time which they lose, and cause others to lose.

Certainly, the punishment which was given to the Iester, was very just, and
exceeding good were the words which Augustus said. There was an other in the
time of Augustus, whose name was Pilas, And when the Emperor had banished all
the Iesters and Iuglers from Rome, this Pilas was so pleasant and merry with
all persons, that with great instance they besought the Emperor to revoke that
sentence. And the request indeed was so great, as if it had been for a
Philosopher, they could not have done more.

For vain and light men, employ rather that they have on him, who brings
unto them some folly, then on one which teaches and corrects their life. The
Emperor condiscended to the request of the people, on such condition, that
they should give a Master and Tutor unto Pilas that should chastise and correct
him as a fool; saying, That since Sages took fools to be their Masters, that
the fools also should have Sages for their Masters.

The case was that one day he that had the charge of Pilas, did rebuke him for
certain lightness that he had done, whereat Pilas was exceeding wroth with him:
The which the Emperor vnderstaunding, commanded he should be whipped and
banished for ever.

When Augustus gave this sentence they say, he said these words: Rome has been
mighty and puissant enough, to make her enemies stoop, and now she is not
able to banish Iesters and fools. And An other worthy sentence of the Emperor
Augustus,
that that is worst of all, they have presumption to vex us, and we have not
courage to reprove them. The Lacedaemonians had great reason, and also the
Romans, to rid their commonwealth of Iesters: for they are idle, vicious,
dishonest, malicious, and prejudicial to the commonwealth: these Iesters and
Iuglers are idle: seeing that more then others they eat the sweat of others.
They are vicious, for they cannot exercise their offices but in vices, and in
treating with vicious men.

They are dishonest, for they get not to eat by doing good works, but by
speaking dishonest words. They are malicious, for they have accustomed when
they love not a man, immediately to speak evil of him: They are unprofitable
for the common wealth for they mock us and sell us vain words, and we pay
them good money.

The world is come to so great The vanity of men in maintaining Iesters and
such idle persons:
folly and corruption, that even as grave and wise men think it great
inconvenience, to be conversant with vain and fond men: so the Lords of
Estate think it an honor, to have in their house, some foolish Iesters, yea
better to say (with reverence of speech) railing knaves, which speak not to
please, and show pastime, but to offend the present, and rail at the absent,
as well of the high as the low: and that that is more yet then this, is that
they are not contented to have given this entertainment and welcome to the
Noble men and Gentlemen that are at their Lords boorde: but they must needs
have a cast at my Lord himself to cheer him withal: which intolerable abuse
ought not to be suffered, but with most sharp correction punished.

But what shall we say, that for the most part the Lords are so vain, and the
Iesters so presumptuous and arrogant, that the Lords have more care to content
them, then they have to please the Lords. In the house of a Lord, a fool at
the end of the year will ask more then any other of those which are most
ancient, so that the follies of the one are more acceptable then the services
of all. It is shame to speak it, and no less for to write it, that the
children of vanity are so vain, that they bribe a fool or a Iester no less
in these days, to the intent he may be a mean for them unto the Prince, then
they did in times past desire Cicero, to make an Oration for them before the
Senate. It is for want of understanding, and through the vilety of the person,
oppression of the heart, and disprayse of renown, to be desirous by the means
of fools, to attain to any thing: For he can have no great wisdom which
puts his hope in the favor of a fool.

What remains for me to say, when I have said that which I will say? And it
is, that if a Iester or fool say openly to some Lord, God save your life, my
good Lord. Oh he is a Noble man indeed, he will not stick to give him a gown
of silk: and entering into a Church, he would not give a poor man a half
penny.

O what negligence is there of Princes? O what vanity of Lords? since they
forsake the poor and wise, to enrich the Iesters and fools: they have enough
for the world, and not for Jesus Christ: they give to those that ask for his
Lovers sake, and not to those which ask for the health of the soul.

He ought not to do so: for the Knight which is a Christian, and not a
worldling, ought rather to will that the poor do pray for him at the hour of
death, then that the fools and Iesters should praise him in his life.

What does it profit the soul, or the body, that the Iesters do praise thee
for a cote thou have given them: and that the poor accuse thee for the bread
thou have denied them? Peradventure How necessary it is to be beneficial to
the poor.
it will profit thee as much that a fool or a flatterer go before a Prince
apparrelled with a new liuerie of thine: as the poor man shall do thee damage
before God, to whom thou have denied a poor ragged shirt? All Gentlemen, and
Noble Parsonages, in the name of our Savior Jesus Christ, I admonish, exhort,
and humbly require, that they consider well what they spend, and to whom they
give: for the good Princes ought to have more respect of the necessities of the
poor, then of the follyes of counterfeytes.

Give as ye will, divide as ye list, for at the hour of death, as much as
ye have laughed with the fools, for that ye have given them, so much shall
ye weep with the poor, for that you have denied them. At the hour of death
it shall be grievous pains to him that dies, to see the flesh of the
Orphans all naked, and to he hold counterfaite fools laden with their
garments.

Of one thing I am amazed, that indifferently every man may become a fool, and
no man let him; and the worst of all is, if once a fool become covetous, all
the world afterward cannot make him to be in his right senses. Truly such
one which has no reason to be a fool, at the least he has good occasion:
since he gets more to eat playing, then the others do by working. O what
negligence of the Princes, and what small respect of the Governors of the
Common wealth is this? that a young How hateful Iesters and loyterers ought to
be in a Commonwealth.
man, whole, stout, strong and valiant, should be suffered to go from house
to house, from table to table, and only for babbling vain words, and telling
shameful lies, he should be counted a man of an excellent tongue? Another
folly there is in this case, that their words are not so foolish, as their
deeds are wicked though they have a good or evil grace, yet in the end, they
be counted in the Common wealth, as loyterers and fools. I know not whether in
this case is greater, either their folly, or our lightness: for they use us as
fools, in telling us lies, and we pay them good money.

The Romans did not permit in their Common wealths, old stale Iesters, nor
we Christians ought to retain into our houses idle loiterers: Ye ought to
know, that more offends A custom used by the Romans, worthy to be used of
every Nation:
he which sins with a deformed woman, then he which sins with a
beautiful Lady. And he which is drunk with sour Ale, offends more then he
which is drunk with sweet wine.

And so in like manner, greater offense commit they which lose their times with
fools that have no grace, then with Iesters which have good wits: for it may
be permitted sometime, that the Sage man for the recreation of his Spirits, do
frequent the company of some pleasant man.

CHAP. XLIV. Of a Letter which the Emperor wrote to Lambertus his friend,
Governor of Hellespont, certifying him that he had banished from Rome all
fools, and loytering Players: and is divided into three Chapters: a notable
Letter for those that keep counterfeyte fools in their houses.
MArcus Aurelius only Emperor of Rome, Lord of Asia, confederate with Europe,
friends of Affricke, and enemy of the wars, wishes health to thee Lambert,
Governor of the Isle of Helespont. With the furs which thou did send me, I
have caused my gown to be furred, and am girded with the girdle which thou
did present me, and am greatly contented with thy hounds: For all is so good,
that the body does rejoice to possess it, and the eyes to behold it, and also
the heart to render thanks for it. Where I did ask a few things of thee in
jest, thou have sent me many in earnest, wherein not as a servant but as a
friend thou have showed thy self: For the office of noble and worthy hearts,
is to offer to their friends, not only that which they demand, but that also
which they do think they will demand. Truly thou have better measured thy
services by thy nobleness: then I thee demand by my covetousness: For if
thou do remember, I did demand of thee only 12. skins, and thou have
sent me 12. dozen. I told thee that I desired 6. hounds for to hunt, and thou
have sent me 12. of the best that can be found in the Isle. In such sort,
that I had honor, and thou have won renown: For in the little I have
demanded, thou shall see my little covetousness: and in the much thou have
sent me, they shall perceive thy great liberality. I esteem highly that
which thou have sent me, and I beseech the Gods send thee good luck. For thou
know we may render thanks for the benefits received, but we have not the
power to requite the gentleness showed. For the man which dare receive of
another any gift, does bind himself to be his slave. I cannot be thy slave,
for I am thy friend, and thereof thou ought to rejoice, more then another.
For being a servant, I should serve thee with fear, but being a friend, I will
profit thee with friendship.

Therefore to declare the chief occasion wherefore I write unto thee at this
present, I say, I send thee three The cause wherefore the Emperor wrote this
letter.
ships laden with Iesters and Iuglers, Loyterers, Vacabondsand fools: and yet
I do not send unto thee all the vacabonds which are in Rome, for then thy I Will
should be peopled with strangers. The office that they had, was that some of
them iested and rayled at the table, some sang sundry malicious songs at
marriages, others told lies and news for their dinners at the gates, others
played common plays in the streets, other entertained the Roman matrons
with follish nouels and tales, others set forth vain and light books of rymes
and ballets, and yet I swear unto thee by the God Hercules, these Loyterers
wanted no fools to hear them. I let thee know my friend Lambert, that these
Loiterers are such, and their Scholars in number so many, that though the
Masters may be in 3. ships carried, yet the Scholars could not be in an
hundred transported.

Of one thing I marvel much, and also I affirm, that the Gods be offended,
since the earthquakes overthrew the houses, the great waters carry away the
bridges, the frost freese the vines, the corrupt air infecteth the Wise men:
and yet there is no plague that consumes the fools? O how unhappy art thou
Rome, unto him that The Emperor bewayleth the folly of the Romans.
shall well behold thee, and diligently search thee: For in thee wants
valiant Captains, honest Senators, just Censors, faithful officers, and
virtuous Princes: and only there abounds fools, Iesters, Players, Dicers,
Loyterers, and vagabonds,

O what service thou should do to the Gods, and profit to our mother Rome.
if for three ships of fools, thou did send us one bark only of wise men? I
would not say, (but I will not cease to say) that I have seen fools, that I
have heard many follies, but I never saw so great fools, nor heard such
extreme folly, as that of some noble Romans and Italians, who think it a
great act to keep a fool in their house. I judge him to be a greater fool,
that desires to keep a fool, then the fool himself: for a fool has a
se^blance of the sage, after he accompanies with a Sage: but the Sage shows
himself a fool, after he accompanies with a fool. Why do men seek things
of mockery? since all that is in the World is mockery? Why seek we fools,
since all that we say, is nothing but folly? Why do we rejoice with those
that flatter us, since there are none that say one only truth? Why do we
seek fained fools, since that all, or the most part of us all, are very
fools? I see diverse in Rome, the which though they company with honest men,
are dissolute, companying with Sages they are simple, treating with wise men,
they are without consideration, and being conversant with fools, they think
to be sage: if we keep company with pitiful. we shall be pitiful.

If we be conversant with the cruel, Such company as me^ haunt, the same
shall they show in their life.
we shall be cruel: If we communicate with liars, we shall be liars: If we
haunt the true, we shall be true: and if we desire the foolish, we shall be
fools: for according to the masters and doctrines we have, such shall be the
sciences which we shall learn, and the works which we shall follow.

The famous tyrant Dionysius the Syracusane, which was in Scicill, said unto
the Philosopher Diogenes.

Tell me Diogenes, what kind of men ought we to have in our houses: and with
what persons ought we to divide our goods?

Diogenes answered him. The wise man which will live in peace with the Common
wealth, and that will not see his goods evil employed, ought not to give to
eat, nor to accompany with any, but with the aged persons which should
counsel them, and with the young which should serve them, with friends which
should favor them, and with the poor, to the end they should praise them.

Dennis the tirant greatly commended that which Diogenes the Philosopher told
him: but he could never profit with that counsel: for as he showed himself a
tyrant in robbing: so he showed himself also indiscreet in spending.
Presuppose that which Diogenes the Philosopher spoke were true, that is to say,
that we ought to To what sorts of people men ought to give to eat.
feed the aged servants, friends and poor.

We see by this answer, it is not just to give to eat, either to Iesters,
Parasites, Flatterers, Loyterers or fools. First, me seems, that a man
ought not to think that fools are capable to give counsel, since they have
it not for themselves: for it should be great folly to use men as Sages, which
of their own will have made themselves fools.

The second, me seems that it is a vain thing to think, that the Iesters
should serve as servants: For these unhappy people, to fly travel only, have
taken upon them this office so slanderous.

Thirdly, it seems to be a shamefast thing, and of great inconvenience that
any Noble and sage man should determine to have any Flatterer or Iester for his
familiar friend: for such ought not, nor cannot be counted among the true
friends, since they love us not for the virtue we possess, but for the goods
which we have.

Fourthly, me thinks it a vain thing to think, that under the color of
poverty it should be just, to give meat to Iesters or Loyterers; for we cannot
say, that such are poor, for that they want riches, but that folly abounds
in them.

Since therefore a man is defamed to have such Iesters, Flatterers, for friends,
and that for being servants they are unable, and without wit to ask them
counsel: me thinks it a great folly to spend his goods on such loyterers:
For as their intentions to the Gods only are manifest, and to men secret: so
there is nothing wherein the good do approve, and manifest their intentions to
be good or evil, more then in the words which they speak, and in the
Companies which they keep.

CHAP. XLVI. Marcus Aurelius goes forward with his letter, and declares how
he found the sepulchers of many learned Philosophers in Helespont, whereunto
he sent all these Loyterers.
I Will thou know Lambert that thy Isle is consecrated with the bones of many
excellent men the which were banished by sundry tyrannous Princes of Rome. The
Ancients greatly commend that Isle, because there are therein stones called
Amatists, tame Dear, fair women, familiar wolves, swift dogs of feet, and
pleasant fountains.

Yet notwithstanding, I will not cease to commend these things which rejoice
those that be present, and The Emp: commends the isle of Helespont.
also comfort those that be to come: For I esteem more the bones which the
earth do cover: then the riches, which grows thereon. If thou have not lost
the sense of smelling, as that Isle does savor unto me of Sages: so does Rome
stink of fools: For, for the time it is less pain to endure the stink of
the beast: then to hear the words of a fool. When the wars of Asia were
ended, I returned home by that Isle, wherein I visited all the living people,
and all the graves of the dead Philosophers. And for a truth I tell thee
Lambert, that that journey was very troublesome unto me: for herein my person
endured much pain, on the land I suffered diverse dangers, and on the Sea I
saw my self in sundry perils.

In the city of Corinthe (where thou art resident at this present) in the
midst of the Marketplace, thou shall find the grave of the philosopher
Panimio, to whom the straight friendship auayled little, which he had with
Ouide: but the enmity greatly endammaged him which he had with Augustus the
Emperor. Two miles from Theadfonte, at the foot of the How reverently the
Sages were esteemed in former time
mountains Arpines, thou shall find the grave of the famous Orator Armeno,
who was by the Consul Scylla unjustly banished. And of truth, as here was
much blood lost, because Scylla should not enter into Rome: so there were not
few tears shed in Italy, for the banishment of this learned Philosopher.

In the gate of Argonauta, hard by the water, on the top of a high Rock, thou
shall find the bones of Celliodorus the philosopher, who observed all the
ancient laws: and was a great enemy of those which brought in new customs
and statutes.

This good Philosopher was banished, in the prosperity and fury of the
Marians: not for the evils they found in him, but for the vices he reproved in
them. In the fields Heliny, there was a great tomb, within the which were the
bones of Selleno the philosopher, who was as well learned in the vii.
Liberall-arts, as if he himself had first invented them.

And he was banished by the Emperor Nero: for because he persuaded this
cruel Emperor to be merciful, and pitiful. In the fields Helini, out of
the Woods, toward the west part, thou shall find the grave of the
philosopher Vulturnus: a man in Astrology profoundly learned, which little
auayled him in the time of his banishment. For he was banished by Marcus
Antonius: not for that Marcus Antonius would have banished him (for he was not
offended by him) but because his love Qu. Cleopatra hated him, as her mortal
enemy. For Women of an evil life, do commonly revenge their angry hearts,
with the death of their especial friends.

Diverse other Tombs in that isle I saw, the names whereof though in writing I
have them: yet at this present I cannot call them to memory. The noble minded
respect antiquities.
Well, by the faith of an honest man I swear unto thee, that thou shall find
all true which I have told thee.

Now I tell thee Lambert, that I visiting those graves, their Disciples did not
bear them greater obedience, when thee were alive, then I did reverence now
they are dead. And it is true also, that in all that time mine eyes were as much
wet with tears, as their bones were covered with earth.

These worthy and learned Philosophers were not banished, for any mischiefs by
their persons committed, nor for any slanders they had done in the
commonwealths: but because the deeds of our fathers deserved that they should
be taken from their company: and we their children were not worthy, to have
the bones of such famous and renowned Sages in our custody.

I cannot tell, if the envy I have to that isle be greater: or the pity I
have of this miserable Rome: for the one is immortal by the graves of the
dead, and the other is defamed with the bad life of the living.

I desire thee heartily as a friend, and do command thee as a servant, that
thou keep the Privileges, which I gave to that Isle, without breaking any
one. For, it is very just, that such cities, peopled with such dead, should be
privileged of the living: By this Centurion, thou shall know all things which
are chanced amongst the prisoners.

For, if I should write unto thee all the whole matter as it was done: I ensure
thee, unto me it would be much pain to write it, and unto thee great trouble
to read it. It suffiseth presently to say, that the day of the great solemnity
of the Mother Berecynthia, a What unlooked for mischiefs arise at such meetings.
slander arose in Rome, by the occasion of these Iesters, Scoffers, and
Loyterers: and by the faith of a good man, I swear unto thee, that the blood
which was shead through the places, surmou^ted the wine which was drunk at the
Feast. And think not that which I say to be little, that the blood which was
shed, surmounted the wine that was drunk.

For, as thou now know, the Citizens are come to so great folly: that he
which was on that day most drunk, they said that he had offered unto the Gods
greatest sacrifices. I am yet afraid to remember the crueltyes, which that day
I saw with mine own eyes: But I am much more ashamed of that which they talk
of us in strange Realms.

For, the Noble and worthy hearts, do not account it so much, to receive a
great wound: as to take it of a cowardly man.

There is great difference between the Nets wherewith they use to take
Birds, and no less is there between the hooks, wherewith they take Fish. I
mean, that the knife which cutteth the Flesh, differs much from the knife
which hurts the heart. For, the hurts of the body, with Surgeons help may
be healed: but the Gods only are the physicians of the perils of the heart.

I beheld and saw Rome, which was never vanquyshed by valiant men, at that
day overcome by loyterers. Rome which could never be won by those of Carthage,
is now won by Iesters, Players and Vacabonds: Rome which triumphed of all the
Realms, is now vanquished of the loyterers, Iesters and idle persons.

Finally, we saw that Rome which in times past gave laws to the barbarous, is
now become the slave of fools: In this case I have been so troubled, that I
cannot tell what to say, and less what I write unto thee: One thing comfort
me, that since Rome and her Romans do not rejoice themselves but with fools,
that she and her children be not punished but by the hands of fools. I think
not that in this case the Gods do any wrong, if Rome which laughed thorough
mockery at the players, do weep one day with the loyterers in good earnest.

Thou might demand me Lambert, since we other Princes are bound to
maintain equal justice with all: wherefore we do dissemble many offenses
which others have done in earnest, and yet we will not pardon those Iesters,
since all that they have invented, was for mirth and pastime? I promise thee,
though their offenses were great indeed, yet I do not banish the^ so much for
the blood they have shed, as for the good orders which they have perverted.

Once again I return to say unto thee, that I have not banished them so much
for because they were occasion The reason wherefore the Emperor banished
fools and loyterers.
of murders, as to be teachers of all lies. Without comparrison greater is the
offense to the gods, and greater is the damage to the Commonwealth to take away
(as the loyterers have done) the senses of wise men, then that which the
murderers do, to take life from their enemies.

The end of these Iestes, Scoffers, Iuglers, idle men, and those kind of
raskalr, is always to persuade men that they speak continually in mockeries,
treat continually in mockeries, and to rid them of their sorrows, and all
this is but to deceive them of their goods.

In the which case I say, and so pleased it the gods, that they should content
themselves with the goods, without robbing us of our wisdom. When Scipio the
Affrican had ended the wars of Affricke, he went through Rome, accompanied not
with valiant Captains, but with the Players, Iesters, and Iuglers. The which a
Philosopher seeing, said unto him these words.

O Scipio, according to the much they have talked of thee, and the little I see
in thee, it had been better thou had dyed in Affricke, then to come to Rome:
for thy high Acts in thy absence did astonish us, and thy lightness in thy
presence does offend us. To thee it is great infamy, and to the sacred Senate
little honesty, that thou having conquered so mighty Princes in Affricke,
should go accompanied with fools and mad men in Rome. I let thee to
understand, that thy Life had not then so much peril among thy enemies, as thy
honor has at this present among fools.

These words were very good, although The reward a poor Philosopher had for
speaking truth.
they were evil received of humane malice: for by reason of these words, the
poor aged Philosopher was banished by the friends of Scipio, out of Iraly, and
sent to the Isle of Helespont.

CHAP. XLVII. The Emperor ends his Letter, and shows the cause and time,
why, and when these Iesters and Iuglers were admitted into Rome.
AFter that these Loyterers and vagabonds shall land in thy Isle thou shall let
them go at liberty, and shall take none of their goods: but thou shall
advertise them that they be not so hardy to exercise their crafts nor feats:
For if they do the contrary thou may make them lose their life in thy Isle,
which I have conditionally pardoned here in Rome. One thing I command thee,
and I beseech thee forget it not, that is to say, that thou compel them to
labor, and that in no means thou suffer them to be idle.

For idleness is the mother of all vices in the person, and the causer of all
slanders which arise in the common Idleness the mother of all vices.
wealth.

Since we know not but to labor, and the loyterers know not but to loyter:
I would say, that with more reason they might say, that we were not sage, then
we might say, that they are fools. For wrongfully are they called fools,
which by craft eat the sweat of others: seeing the little regard we have to
these Loyterers, and considering how much we presume: by the faith of a good
man I swear unto thee Lambert, that with greater reason they should mock our
works, then we others should laugh at their words: for they profit more with
our goods, then we do of their folly. In the 251. of the foundation of Rome a
sore plague came into Italy. The which being ended, they determined to tell not
the thousands of men that were dead, but the small number of those which
remained alive. Rome afterward being so solitary, and Italy so desolate,
only to rejoice the people, and to the end the Cities should not remain
uninhabited: the first Theaters were invented, and then first were these players
received: For until that time the Romans knew no other thing, but to offer
sacrifice to their gods in the temples, and to fight against their enemies in
the fields. O lamentable thing to hear, that this plague lasted only 24.
months, and the rage and folly of these players and idle men has endured
more then 53. years. Would to the immortal gods that the plague had ended
those few which remain, before this cursed generation had brought so abominable
customs into Rome: For much better had it been for our mother Rome, that she
had wanted inhabiters, then such raskals should have come and dwelled therein.

I know Lambert, that those persons do greatly complain of me, and that the
complaints which they do in the beginning, shall not have an end there: but I
care not much for the complaints of the evil which do serve for no other thing
but to reprove the Justices which are ministered unto the^ by the good.

The Princes in that they command and the Judges in that they execute, ought
not much to esteem the complaints of all those which say they have wrong:
Provided that the cause be justified, and that under the color of justice
they do not wrong in deed.

In the flatteries which they tell us concerning our glory, and in the slanders
which they speak of us, concerning our reproach, wise men ought well to note
the nature of the person which speaks it, whether that be true which he
speaks, and what moves him to tell it: For as it is a shame for to be
rebuked of a man, which is honest: so it is no small infamy to be praised of
those which are evil.

Since the time I was borne, I never saw any thing less profitable in the
commonwealth, nor more vain, neither worse inventions, nor colder recreations
then these are, which these iesters, plaiers, and iuglers do invent.

What thing can be more monstrous then to see the folly of a fool, bring
diverse wise men out of their wits? What greater mockery can there be, then
that all do think that the jests of a fool ought to be rejoiced The folly
of fools ought to be contemned of the wise.
at, with the laughter of the Sage? What greater slander can there be, then
that in the offices of the noble and worthy Romans, the gates should always be
open for fools, and the wise men should find them always shut? What greater
cruelty can there be in Rome, then that the Senators and rich men give more to
a Player for a song which he sings in one hour, then they do to the servants
for serving them a whole year? what greater theft can there be then this, that
the Garrisons which are in Illyria want, and Players, Iesters, Iuglers,
Flatterers, and Loyterers, in Rome have too much?

What greater shame can Rome receive then this, when it shall be said in time
to come, that Iuglers, Players, Parasites, Iesters, and Flatterers, have won
more with their iugling, playing, (jesting and flattering, then diverse
Captains with their weapons and triumphs? Behold therefore Lambert, what
difference there is between Captames and Loyrerets.

For when the one went through Rome, sowing their follyes from gate to gate:
the others went from realm to realm, consuming their goods, aduenturing their
lives, fighting against the barbarous people, and shedding their own proper
blood.

And in the hindermost part of Spain, when those of Seuill had war with the
Gaditanes, it chanced that even in the midst of the time those of Seuill
wanted money, and two Parasites offered themselves for 2 years The great riches
of two Parasites.
to sustain the wars with their own proper goods; so that with the riches of
two fools, many wise men were overcome.

When the Amazones were Ladies of Asia, then they built the great temple of the
goddess Diana. And as the histories account, only with that they took away
from a player, was builte this noble Temple. If the histories of the Egyptians
do not deceive me, King Ca^mus, who with a 1000. gates built the great City of
Thebes, for such a building, so high and monstrous a City, all his subjects
together gave him not so much, as two Parasites did alone.

When the good Emperor Augustus renewed the walls of Rome, and made them of
hard stone, which before that time were only of earth, and brick, toward
such a costly Work, he had more of two Parasites which were drowned, then of
all the City beside.

I being in the City of Corinthe, saw an ancient Tomb, wherein the
Corinthians say their first King was buried. And the Historiographers say, that
this King was a great wrastler, other say, he was a Parasite: others say, he
was a Iugler, but howsoever it was, he was first a Iester, and obtained a
Realm in earnest.

Behold Lambert, how they are neglected of the gods, and favored of fortune,
and in how little estimation the goods of this life ought to be esteemed,
since some by counterfaiting the fools, leave of them as great memory of their
folly, as the others do by their wisdom.

There is one thing only of these loyterers that pleases me, that is to say,
that in his presence they make every man laugh with the follyes they speak,
and after that they are gone, all remain sad for the money they The property
of Iuglers.
carry away. Truly it is a just sentence of the gods, that those which have
taken vain pleasures together, do weep afterward for their loss severally.
At this present I will write no more unto thee, but that I send thee this
letter written in Greek, to the end thou may read it to al those of that
Isle. And thou shall immediately dispatch the ships, to the end they carry the
provisions to the men of war in Illyria. Peace be with thee Lambert, health
and good fortune to me Mark.

The Senate saluteth thee, and do send thee the propagation of the government
for the next year. In the Calends of January thou shall say, Gaude foelix. My
wife Faustine commends her to thee, and sends thee for thy daughter a rich
girdle: In payment of thy services, I do send thee two rich Jewels, two light
horses, and one laden with 4000. Sexterces. Marcus of Mount Celio with his own
hand writes unto thee.

CHAP. XLVIII. That Princes and Noble men ought to remember that they are
mortal, and must dye, wherein are sundry notable consolations against the
fear of death.
CLeobolus and Biton, were the sons of a renowned woman, the which was Nun
to the goddess Juno: and when the day of that solemn feast was celebrated,
her children prepared a Chariot, wherein their mother should go to the Temple:
For the Greeks had this custom, the day that the Priests went to offer any
sacrifice, either they were carried on men's arms, or in Chariots. They adorned
their temples so well, they esteemed their Sacrifices so much, and did so much
honor their Priests, that if any Priest did set his foot on the ground, that
day they did not permit him to offer any sacrifices to the Gods.

It chanced as this Nun went in her Chariot, and her children Cleobolus and
Biton with her, the beasts which drew the Chariot, suddenly fell down dead, ten
miles from the Temple of the goddess Juno. The children seeing the beasts
dead, and that their A true pattern for good and virtuous children.
mother could not go a foot, and that the Chariot was all ready, and that
there was no beasts to draw it: they (as loving children) determined to yoke
themselves, and draw the chariot, as if they had been dumb beasts. And as the
mother carried them nine months in her womb, so did they draw her in the
chariot x. miles. Now for that they passed through infinite numbers of men to
the feast of the goddess Juno, every man seeing Cleobolus and Biton yoked in
the Chariot like beasts, were greatly amazed, saying that these two children
deserved with great rewards to be recompensed. And truly they said justly, and
so they deserved it: For they deserved as much to be praised for the example
which they showed to all children to reverence their parents, as for carrying
their mother in the Chariot to the Temple: So after that the Feast was ended,
the mother not knowing how to require the benefit of her children, with many
tears besought the goddess Juno, that she with the other gods would be
contented to give her two children the best thing that the gods could give to
their friends.

The Goddess Juno answered her, that she was contented to require the other
Gods, and that they would do it. And the reward was, that for this noble fact
the gods ordained, that Cleobolus and Biton should sleep one day well, and in
the morning, when they should wake, they should dye.

The mother pitifully bewayling the death of her children, and complaining of
the gods, the Goddess Juno said unto her; Thou have no cause why to
complain, since we have given thee that thou have demanded, and have
demanded that which we have given thee. I am a goddess, and thou art my
servant, and therefore the gods have given to thy children the thing, which
they count most dear, which is death: For the greatest revenge which among the
gods we can take of our enemies, is to let them live long: and the best thing
that we keep for our friends, is to make them to die quickly.

The author of this history is called Hisearchus in his politikes, and Cicero
in his first book of his Tusculanes.

In the Isle of Delphos, where the oracle of the god Apollo was, there was a
sumptuous Temple, the which for want of reparation fell down to the ground, as
oftentimes it chances to high and sumptuous buildings, which from time to time
are not repaired: For if the walls, dungeons, Castles, and strong houses could
speak, as well would they complain for that they do not renew them, as the
old men do for that we do not cherish them.

Triphon and Agamendo, were two noble Personages of Greece, and counted for
sage and rich men, the which went unto the Temple of Apollo, and built it new
again, as well with the labor of their persons, as with the great expenses of
their goods. When the building was achieved, the god Apollo said unto them,
that he remembered well their good service, wherefore he would they should
demand him any thing in reward of their travel, and with a good will it
should be granted: for the gods use for a little service to give a great reward.

Triphon and Agamendo answered unto the god Apollo, that for their good will,
for their travel, and for their expenses, they demanded no other reward, but
that it would please him to give them the best thing that might be given unto
man, and that unto them were most profit, saying: That the miserable men have
not the power to eschew the evil, nor wisdom to choose the good,

The god Apollo answered, that he was contented to pay them their service which
they had done, and for to Death the best gift that can be given to mortal men.
grant them that which they had demanded. By reason whereof, Triphon and
Agamendo having dined, suddenly at the gates of the temple fell down dead: so
that the reward of their travel was to pluck them out of their misery. The
reason to declare these two examples, is to the end that all mortal men may
know, that there is nothing so good in this world, as to have an end of this
life: and though to lose it there be no savor, yet at the least there is
profit. For we would reprove a traveler of great foolishnes if sweating by
the way he would sing: and after, at his iourneyes end he should begin to
weep.

Is not he simple, which is sorry for that he is come into the Haven? is not
he simple, that gives the battle, and fights for that he has got the
victory? Is not he stubborn which How little we ought to esteem of Death.
is in great distress, and is angry to be succored? Therefore, more foolish,
simple, and stubborn is he, which trauelleth to dye, and is loath to meet
with death. For, death is the true refuge, the perfect health, the sure Haven,
the whole victory, the flesh without bones, Fish without scales, and corn
without slrawe. Finally, after death we have nothing to bewail, and much
less to desire.

In the time of Adrian the Emperor, a Philosopher called Secundus, (being
meruellously learned) made an oration at the funeral of a Noble Roman
Matrone, (a Kins-woman of the Emperors) who spoke exceedingly much evil of
life, and marvelous much good of death. And when the Emp: demanded him what
death was?

The philosopher answered thus: Death is an eternal sleep, a dissolution of
the body, a terror of the rich, a desire of the poor, a thing inhetitable, a
pilgrimage uncertain, a Thief of men, a kind of sleeping, a shadow of life,
a separation of the living, a company of the dead, a resolution of all
travels, and the end of all idle desires. Finally, Death is the scourge of all
evil, and the chief reward of the good.

Truly this Philosopher spoke very well, and he should not do evil, which
profoundly would consider, that he had spoken.

Seneca in an Epistle, declares of a Philosopher whose name was Bessus: to
whom, when they demanded what evil a man can have in Death, since men fear it
so much? He answered. If any damage or fear is in him who dies: it is not
for the fear of death: but for the vice of him which dies.

We may agree to that the Philosopher said: that even as the deaf cannot
judge harmony, nor the blind colors: so likewise they cannot say evil of
death, especially he which never tasted it. For, of all those which are dead,
none returned again to complain of Death: and of these few that live, all
complain of life.

If any of the dead returned hither to speak with the living, and as they
Comforts against the fear of death.
have proved it, so they would tell us.

If there were any harm in secret death, it were reason to have some fear of
death? But though a man that never saw, heard, felt nor tasted death, does
speak evil of Death, should we therefore fear Death?

Those ought to have done some evil in their life, which do fear and speak
evil of death. For, in the last hour, in the straight judgment, the good
shall be known, and the evil discovered.

There is no Prince nor Knight, rich nor poor, whole nor sick, lucky nor
unlucky, which I see with their vocations to be contented, save only the
dead: which in their graves are in peace and rest, and are neither covetous
proud, negligent, vain, ambicious, nor dissolute. So that the state of the dead
ought to be best, since we see none therein to be evil contented. And since
therefore those which are poor, ^oe seek the means wherewith to endch
themselves: those which are sad, rio seek whereby to rejoice, and those which
are sick, to seek to be healed: why is it, that those which have such fear
of Death, do seek remedy against that fear? In this case I would say, that
he which will not fear to die, let him use himself well to live. For the
guyltles takes away fear from death.

The divine Plato demanded Socrates how he behaved himself in life: and how
he would behave himself in death? He answered, I let thee know, A Question of
Plato, demanded of Socrates.
that in youth, I have traveled to live well, and in age I have studied to die
well: and since my life has been honest, I hope my death shall be joyful: And
although I have had sorrow to live, I am sure I shall have no pain to dye.

Truly these words are worthy of such a man. Men of stout hearts suffer
maruellously, when the swear of their travel is not rewarded, when they are
faithful, and their rewards answers nothing to their true service: when for
their good services, their Friends become unthankful to them, when they are
worthy honor, and that they prefer them to honorable room and office. For
the noble and valiant hearts do not esteem to loose the reward of their
labor: but think much unkindness, when a man does not acknowledge their
trauells.

Oh happy are they that dye: For, without inconvenience, and without pain
every man is in his grave. For, in this Tribunal, justice to all is so equally
observed, that in the same place where we have deserved life, in the same
place we merited death.

There was never nor never shall be judge so just, nor in justice so upright,
that gives reward by weight, and pain by measure: but that sometimes they
chasten the innocent, and absolve the guilty: they vex the faultlesse, and
they dissemble with the culpable. For, little avails it the playntife to have
good justice: if conscience want to the judge that should minister it.

Truly it is not so in Death, but all ought to account themselves happy. For
he which shall have good justice, shall be sure on his part to have the
sentence.

When great Cato was Censor in Rome, a famous Roman dyed, who showed at his
death a marvelous courage: and when the Romans praised him for that he had
so great virtue, and for the words he had spoken, Cato the Censor laughed at
that they said, for that they praised him. And he being A question demanded of
Cato, and his answer,
demanded the cause of his laughter? annswered. Ye marvel at that I laugh,
and I laugh at that ye marvel: For the perils and trauells considered
wherein we live, and the safety wherein we dye, I say, that it is more
needful to have virtue and strength to live, then courage to dye. The Author
hereof is Plutarch in his Apothegmes.

We cannot say, but that Cato the Censor spoke as a wise man: since daily we
see, shamefast and virtuous persons suffer hunger, cold, thyrst, travel,
poverty, inconvenience, sorrows, enmities, and mishaps: of the which things we
were better to see the end in one day, then to suffer them every hour. For it
is less evil to suffer an honest death, then to endure a miserable life.

Oh how small consideration have men to think, that they ought to dye but
once: Since the truth is, that the day when we are born, and come inthis
world, is the beginning of our death: and the last day is when we do cease to
live. If death be no other but an ending of life, then reason persuades us to
think, that our infancy dies, our childhood dies, our manhood dies, and
our Age shall dye: whereof we may consequently conclude that we dye every year,
every day, every hour, and every moment.

So that thinking to lead a sure life, we taste a new death. I know not why
men fear so much to dye, since that from the time of their birth, they seek
none other thing but death. For time never wants for any man to dye: neither
I knew any man that ever failed of this way.

Seneca in an Epistle declares, that as a Roman Woman lamented the death of
a Child of hers, a Philosopher said unto her: Woman, why A worthy sentence
of Seneca.
bewaylest thou thy child? She answered. I weep because he has lived xxv.
years, and I would he should have lived till fifty. For, amongst us mothers
we love our Children so heartily, that we never cease to behold them, nor yet
end to bewail them. Then the Philosopher said: Tell me I pray thee woman: Why
do thou not complame of the Gods, because they created not thy Son many
years before he was borne: as well as thou complavnest that they have not let
him live fifty years? Thou weepest that he is dead so soon: and thou do
not lament that he is borne so late.

I tell thee true Woman, that as thou do not lament for the one, no more
thou oughrest to be sorry for the other. For without the determination of the
Gods, we cannot shorten death: and much less lengthen our life.

So Pliny said in an Epistle, that the chiefest law which the Gods have A
sentence of Pliny,
given unto humane nature was, that none should have perpactual life. For, with
dis-ordinate desire to live long, we should rejoice to go out of this pain.

Two Philosophers disputing before the great Emperor Theodose: the one said
that it was good to procure death: and the other likewise said, it was a
necessary thing to hate life: The good Theodose taking him by the hand said:
All we mortalles are so extreme in hating and loving: that under the color
to love and hate life, we lead an evil life. For, we suffer so many trauells
for to preserve it, that sometimes A worthy speech of the Emp: Theodose
it were much better to loose it. And further he said: Diverse vain men are
come into so great follyes, that for fear of Death, they procure to hasten
death. And hauiwg consideration to this, me seems that we ought not greatly
to love life, nor with desperation to seek Death. For the strong and valiant
men ought not to hate Life, so long as it lasts: nor to be displeased with
death when he comes. All commended that which the Emperor Theodose spoke,
as Paulus Dyacon: says in his life.

Let every man speak what he will, and let the Philosophers counsel what they
lift, in my poor judgment, he alone shall receive death without pain, who
long before is prepared to receive the same. For, sudden death is not only
bitter unto him which tastes it, but also it seareth him that hates it.

Lactantius said, that in such sort man ought to live, as if from hence an
hour after he should dye. For those men which will have Death before their
eyes, it is impossible that they should give place to vain thoughts.

In my opinion, and also by the advice of Apuleius It is as much folly to fly
from that which we cannot avoid: as to desire that we can not attain. And
this is only spoken for those that would fly the voyage of death which is
necessary: and desire to come again, which is impossible.

Those that travel by long ways, if they want any thing, they borrow it of
their company. If they have forgotten ought, they return to seek it at their
lodging, or else they write unto their friends a letter. But I am sorry, that
if we once dye, they will not let us return again, we cannot speak, and they
will not agree we shall write: but such as they shall find us, so shall we
be judged. And that which is most fearful of all, the execution and sentence
is given in one day.

Let Noble Princes and great Lords believe me in this: Let them not leave that
undone til after their death: which they may do, during their life. And let
them not trust in that they command: but in that whiles they live they do.

Let them not trust in the works of an other: but in their own good deeds.
For in the end one sigh shall be more worth then all the friends of None ought
to procrastinate or deny their amendment.
the world. I counsel, pray, and exhort all wise and virtuous men: and also my
self with them, that in such a sort we live, that at the hour of death, we
may say we live. For we cannot say that we live, when we live not well. For,
all that time which without profit we shall live, shall be counted unto us
for nothing.

CHAP. XLIX. Of the death of Marcus Aurelius the Emperor, and how there are
few Friends which dare say the truth to sick men.
THe good Emperor Marcus Aurelius; now being aged, not only for the years he
had: but also for the great trauells he had in the wars endured: It
chanced, that in the xviii. year of his Empire, and lxxij. years from the
day of his birth, and of the foundation of Rome, five hundredth xliii. being in
the war of Pannonie (which at this time is called Hungaria) besieging a
famous city called Vendeliona, suddenly a disease of the palsy took him,
which was such, that he lost his life, and Rome her Prince, the best of life,
that ever was borne therein.

Among the Heathen princes some had more force then he, others possessed more
riches then he, others were as aduenturous as he, and some have known as
much as he: but none has bin of so excellent and virtuous a life, nor so
modest as he. For, his life being examined to the uttermost, there are many
princely virtues to follow, and few vices to reprove.

The occasion of his death was, that that in going one Night about his Camp,
suddenly the disease of the palsy took him in his arm: so that from thence
forwards he could not put on his gown, nor draw his sword, and much less
carry a staff.

The good Empreour being so laden with years, and no less with cares the
sharp Winter approaching more and more, great abundance of water A great
discourageme^t to love so worthy a personage.
and snow fell about the Tents: so that another disease fell upon him, called
Litargie, the which thing much abated his courage, and in his Host caused
great sorrow. For, he was so beloved of all, as if they had been his own
Children.

After that he had proved all medicines and remedies that could be found, and
all other things, which unto so great and mighty Princes were accustomed to be
done, he perceived in the end, that all remedy was past. And the reason
hereof was, because his sickness was exceeding vehement, and he himself very
aged, the Air vnwhol-some, and above all, because sorrows and cares oppressed
his heart.

Without doubt greater is the disease that proceeds of sorrow, then that
which proceeds of the Fever quartaine. And thereof fensueth, that more easily
is he cured, which of corrupt humors is full: then he which with profound,
thoughts is oppressed.

The Emperor then being sick in his chamber, and in such sort that he could
not exercise the feats of arms: as his men ran out of their Camp to
skyrmish, and the Hungarians in like manner to defend: the fight on both sides
was so cruel, through the great effusion of blood, that neither the Hungarians
had cause to rejoice, nor yet the Romans to be merry.

Understanding the evil order of his, and especially that v. of his Captains
were slain in the conflict, and that he for his disease could not be there in
person: such sorrows pierced his heart, Extreme sorrows oppressed the good Emp:
M: Aur.
that although he desired forthwith to have dyed, yet he remained 2. days and
3. nights, without that he would see light, or speak unto any man of his.

So that the heat was much, the rest was small, the sighs were continual, and
the thyrst very great: the meat little, and the sleep less: and above all
his face wrinckled, and his lips very black.

Sometimes he cast up his eyes, and at other times he wrong his hands: always
he was silent, and continually he sighed. His tongue was swollen, that he
could not spit: and his eyes very hollow with weeping. So that it was a great
pity to see his death: and no less compassion, to see the confusion of his
palace, and the hinderance of the war.

Many valiant captains, many noble Romans, many faithful servants, and many
old friends, at all these heaviness were present. But none of them durst speak
to the Emperor Mark, partly for that they took him to be so sage, that they
knew not what counsel to give him: and partly for that they were so
sorrowful, that they could not refrain their heavy tears. For, the loving
and true Friends, in their life ought to be beloved: and at their death to be
bewailed. Great compassion ought men to have of those which dye, not for that
we see them dye: but because there are none that tells them what they ought
to do.

Noble Princes and great Lords are in greater peril when they dye, then the
Plebeyans. For the counselor dare not tell unto his Lord at the hour of
death, that which he knows: and much less will tell him how he ought to
die, and what things he ought to discharge whiles he is alive.

Many go to visit the sick, that I would to GOD they went some other where.
And the cause hereof is, that they see the sick man's eyes hollow, the flesh
dried, the arms without flesh, the color enflamed, the ague continual, the
pain great, the tongue swollen, nature consumed, and besides all this, the
house destroyed: and yet they say unto the sick man, Be of good cheer, I
warrant you, you shall live.

As young men naturally desire to live, and as death to all old men is
dreadful: so though they see themselves in that distress, yet they refuse Men
ought to provide a clear conscience to depart this life, etc.
no Medecines, as though there were great hope of life. And thereof ensues
oftentimes, that the miserable creatures depart the world, without confessing
unto GOD, and making restitutions unto men.

Oh if those which do this, knew what evil they do. For to take away my
goods, to trouble my person, to blernish my good name, to slander my
parentage, and to reprove my life, these works are of cruel enemies: but to
be occasion to lose my soul, it is the works of the devil of hell.

Certainly he is a Devil which deceyueth the sick with flatteryes: and that
in steed to help him to dye well, puts him in vain-hope of long life.
Herein he that says it, wins little: and he that believes it,
aduentureth much. To mortal men it is more meet to give counselles to reform
their consciences with the truth: then to hazard their houses with lies. With
our friends we are ashamelesse in their life, and also bashful at their
death. The which ought ought not to be so: For, if our Fathers were not dead,
and that we did not daily see these that are present die: me thinks it
were a shame, and also a fear, to say to the sick that he alone should die:
But since thou know as well as he, and he knows as well as thou, that all
do travel in this perilous journey: what shame have thou to say unto thy
friend, that he is now at the last point?

If the dead should now revive, how would they complain of their friends? Good
counsel against the fear of death.
And this for no other cause, but for that they would not give them good
counsel at their death. For, if the sick man be my Friend, and that I see
peradventure he will dye: Why shall not I counsel him to prepare himself to
dye?

Certainly oftentimes we see by experience, that those which are prepared, and
are ready for to dye, do escape: and those which think to live, do perish.
What should they do, which go to visit the sick, persuade them that they
make their. Testaments, that they confess their sins, that they discharge
their conscience, that they receive the Communion: and that they do reconcile
themselves to their enemies. Certainly, all these things charge not the lance
of death, nor cut not the thread of life.

I never saw blindness so blind, nor ignorance so ignorant, as to be ashamed
to counsel the sick, that they are bound to do when they are whole. As we
have said here above.

Princes and great Lords, are those above all others, that live and dye most
abusedly. And the only cause in this, that as their Servants have no hearts to
persuade them, when they are merry: so have they no audacity to tell them
truth, when they are in peril. For such servants care little, so that their
masters bequeath them any thing in their wills, whether they die well, or live
evil.

O what misery and pity is it, to see a Prince, a Lord, a gentleman, and a
rich person die, if they have no faithful friend about them, to help them to
pass that pain? And not without a cause I say, that he ought to be a
faithful friend. For many in our life do gape after our goods, and few at our
deaths are sorry for our offenses.

The wise and sage men, before nature compels them to die, of Wise men
prepare themselves before death.
their own will ought to die. That is to say, that before they see themselves
in the pangs of death, they have their consciences ready prepared. For if we
count him a fool, which will pass the sea without a ship: truly we will not
count him wise, which takes his death without any preparation before.

What losest a wisest man to have his will well ordained? in what aduenuenture
of honor is any man before death, to reconcile himself to his enemies: and to
those whom he has borne hate and malice? What loses he of his credit, who in
his life time restores that, which at his death they will command him to
render? wherein may a man show himself to be more wise, then when willingly
he has discharged that, which afterward by process they will take from him?

O how many Princes, and great Lords are there, which only not for spending
one day about their testament, have caused their children and heirs, all the
days of their life to be in trauerse in the Law? So that they supposing to
have left their children wealthy, have not left them, but for Atturneyes and
Counselors of the law. The true and unfeigned Christian, ought every morning so
to dispose his goods, and correct life, as if he should dye the same night. And
at night in like manner he ought to commit himself to GOD: as if he hoped for
no life until morning. For, to say the truth, to sustain life, there are
infinite travels: but to meet with death, there is but one way.

If they will credit my words, I would counsel no man in such estate to
live, that for any thing in the world he should undo himself. The Rich and
the poor, the great and the small, the Gentlemen, and the Plebeyans, all Death
terrible to all men.
say and swear, that of death they are exceeding fearful. To whom I say and
affirm, that he alone fears death in whom we see amendment of life.

Princes and great Lords, ought also to be perfect, to end before they end,
to dye before they die, and to be mortified, before they be mortified. If they
do this with themselves, they shall as easily leave their life, as if they
channged from one house to another. For the most part of men delight to talk
with leisure, to drink with leisure, to eat with leisure, and to sleep with
leisure, but they die in haste: Not without cause, I say they die in haste,
since we see them receive the sacrament of the Supper of the Lord in haste,
male their wills by force, and with speed to confess and receive. So that
they take it, and demand it so late, and so without reason: that often times
they have lost their Senses, and are ready to give up the spirit, when they
bring it unto them.

What avails the Ship-master, after the ship is sunk? what do weapons,
after the battle is lost? What avails pleasures after men are dead? By this
which I have spoken, I will demand what it avails the sick? being heavy
with sleep, and berefte of their senses, to call for Confessors, unto whom
they confess their sins? Evil shall he be confessed, which has no
understanding to repent himself? What avails it to call the confessor to
understand the secrets of his Conscience, when the sick man has lost his
speech?

Let us not deceive our selves, saying in our age, we will amend hereafter: and
make restitution at our death. For, in mine opinion, it is not the point of
wise men, nor of good Christians, to desire so much time to offend, and they
will not epsy any to amend.

Would to GOD, that the third part of the precious time which men occupy in
sin, were employed about the Repentance not to be omitted.
meditations of Death, and the cares which they have to accomplish their
Fleshly lusts, were spent in bewayling their filthy sins.

I am very sorry with my heart, that they so wickedly spend and pass
theirlife, in vices and pleasures, as if there were no GOD, unto whom they
should render account for their offenses.

All worldlings willingly do sin, upon a vain hope only in Age to amend,
and at death to repent: But I would demand him that in this hope sinned: what
certainty he has in age of amendment, and what assurance he has to have long
warning before he die:

Since we see by experience, there are more in number which dye young, then
old: it is no reason we should commit so many sins in one day, as that we
should have cause to lament afterward all the rest of our life. And afterward
to bewail the sins of our long life, we desire no more but one space of an
hour. Considering the the Omnipotency of the Divine mercy it suffices: yea,
and I say, that the space of an houreis to much to repent us of our wicked
life: but I would counsel all, since the sinner for to repent takes but one
hour, that that be not the last hour. For, the sighs and repentance, which
proceed from the bottom of the heart, penetrate the high Heavens: but those
which come of necessity, does not pierce the bare seeling of the House.

I allow and commend, that those which visit^ the sick, do counsel them to
examine their consciences, to receive the Communion, to pray unto GOD, to
forgive their enemies, and to recommend themselves to the devout prayers of
the people, and to repent them of their sins.

Finally I say, that it is very good to do all this: But yet I say, it is
better to have done it before. For, the diligent and careful Pyrate, prepares
for the Tempest, when the Sea is calm.

He that deeply would consider, how little the goods of this life are to be
esteemed: Let him go to see a rich man when he dies, and what he does in his
bed. And he shall find that the wife demands of the poor husband her
dowry, the Daughter the What care is had to inherit transitory goods.
third part, the other the fifth, the child the pre-eminence of age, the
Son in law his Marriage, the physician his duty, the Slave his liberty,
the Servant their wages, the creditours their debtes, and the worst of all
is, that none of those that ought to inherit his goods, will give him one
glass of water.

Those that shall hear or read this, ought to consider, that that which they
have seen done at the death of their neighbors: the same shall come unto
them, when they shall be sick at the point of death. For, so soon as the Rich
shuts his eyes, forthwith there is great strife between the children for
his goods. And this strife is not to unburden his soul: but which of them
shall inherit most of his possessions, In this case, I will not my pen travel
any further, since both rich and poor do daily see the experience hereof.
And in thigs very manifest, it suffices only for wise men to be put in
memory, without wasting any more time to persuade them.

Now the Emperor Marcus Aurelius had a secretary very wise, and virtuous,
through whose hands the affairs of the Empire passed. And when this secretary
saw his Lord and Master so sick, and almost at the hour of death, and that
none of his parents or friends durst speak unto him: he plainly determined to
do his duty, wherein he showed very well the profound knowledge he had in
wisdom, and the great good will he bare to his Lord. This Secretary was called
Panutius, the virtues and life of whom Sextus Cheronensis in the life of Marcus
Aurelius declares.

CHAP. L. Of the Comfortable words which the Secretary Panutius spoke to the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius at the hour of his death.
O My Lord and Master, mytongue cannot keep silence, The worthy secretary
Panurius his speech.
mine eyes cannot refrain from bitter tears, nor my heart leave from fetching
sighs, nor yet reason can use his duty: For my blood boyleth, my sinews are
dried, my powers be open, my heart does faint, and my spirit is troubled. And
the occasion of all this is, to see that the wholesome counsels which thou
give to others: either thou can not, or will not take for thy self. I see
thee die my Lord, and I die for that I cannot remedy thee.

For if the gods would have granted me my request, for the lengthning of thy
life one day, I would give willingly my whole life.

Whither the sorrow be true or feigned, it needs not I declare unto thee with
words, since thou may manifestly discern it by my countenance. For mine
eyes with tears are wet, and my heart with sighs is very heavy.

I feel much the want of thy company. I feel much the damage, which (of thy
death) to the whole commonwealth shall ensue. I feel much thy sorrow which in
thy palace shall remain. I feel much for that Rome this day is undone: but
that which above all things does most torment my heart, is to have seen thee
live as wise, and now to see thee dye as simple.

Tell me I pray thee my Lord, why do men learn the Greek tongue? travel to
understand the Hebrew: sweat The reason why men study, is to learn to live
well.
in the Latin, change so many Masters, turn so many books, and in study
consume so much money, and so many years: if it were not to know how to pass
life with honor, and take death with patience?

The end why men ought to study, is to learn to live well. For there is no
truer science in man, then to know how to order his life well. What profits
it me to know much, if thereby I take no profit? what profits me to know
strange Languages, if I refrain nor my tongue from other men's matters? what
profits it to study many books, if I study not but to begyule my friends?
what profits it to know the influence of the stars: and the course of the
Elements: if I cannot keep my self from vices?

Finally I say, that it little avails to to be a master of the Sage, if
secretly he be reported to be a follower of fools. The chief of all
Phylosophie consists to serve GOD, and not to offend men.

I ask thee, most Noble Prince, what avails it the Pilot to know the Art of
Sailing, and after in a Tempest by negligence to perish? What avails it the
valiant Captain, to talk much of Wars, and afterward he knows not how
to give the Battle? What avails it the guide to tell the nearest way, and
afterward in the midst to loose himself?

All this which I have spoken, is said for thee my Lord: For, what avails it
that thou being in health, should sigh for death? since now when he does
approach, thou weepest because thou would not leave life?

One of the things wherein the wise man shows his wisdom, is to know
Stedfastnes of mind is commendable.
how to love, and how to hate. For, it is great lightness (I should rather say
folly) to day to love him, whom yesterday we hated: and to morrow to
slander him whom this day we honored.

What Prince so high, or what Plebeyan so base has there been, or in the world
shall ever be, the which has so little (as thou) regarded life: and so highly
commended death? What things have I written (being thy Secretary) with mine
own hand, to diverse Provinces of the world: where thou speak so much good
of death, that sometimes thou made me to hate life? What was it to see that
letter which thou wrotest unto the noble Roman, Claudinaes widdowe,
comforting her of the death of her Husband, which dyed in the wars? Wherein
she answered: that she thought her trouble comfort, to deserve that thou
should write her such a Letter.

What a pitiful and sundry letter have thou written to Antigonus, on the
death of thy child Verissimus, thy son so much desired? Whose death thou
tookest so, that thou exceedest the limits of Phylosophie? but in the end with
thy princely virtues, thou did qualify thy woeful sorows. What Sentences so
profound, what words so well couched did thou write in that book entitled
The remedy of the sorrowful, the which thou did send from the war of Asia,
to the Senators of Rome: and that was to comfort them after a sore plague. And
how much profit has thy doctrine done since: with what new kind of
consolation have thou comforted Helius Fabatus the Sensour, when his son was
drowned in the river? where I do remember, that when we entered into his house,
we found him weeping: and when we went from thence, we lest him laughing.

I do remember that when thou wentst to visit Gneus Rusticus in his last
disease, thou did speak to him so effectuously, that with the vehemence of
thy words, thou made the tears to run down his cheeks. And I demanding
him the occasions of his lamentations, he said: The Emperor The words of a wise
man works strange effects:
my Lord has told me so much evils that I have won, and of so much good that I
have lost, that I weep, I weep not for life which is short, but for death
which is long. The man whom above all thou have loved, was Torquatus whom thou
did obey as thy father, and seruedst as thy master.

This thy faithful friend being ready to die, and desiring yet to live, thou
sendest to offer sacrifices to the gods, not for that they should grant
himself, but that they should hasten his death.

Herewith I being astonished, thy nobleness to so satisfy my ignorance, said
unto me in secret these words. Marvel not Panutius to see me offer
sacrifices to hasten my friends death: and not to prolong his life: for there
is nothing that the faithful friend ought so much to desire to true friend, as
to see him rid from the travels of the earth, and to enjoy the pleasures of
heaven.

Why think (thou most noble Prince) that I reduce all these things to thy
memory, but for to demand thee how it is possible, that I which have heard
thee speak so well of death, do presently see thee so unwilling to leave
life? since the gods command it, thy age wills it, thy disease does cause
it, thy feeble nature does permit it, the sinful Rome does deserve it, and the
sickle fortune agrees, that for our great misery thou should die. Why
therefore sighest How loath great men are to die.
thou so much for to die? The travels which of necessity must needs come,
with stout heart ought to be received. The cowardly heart falls before he is
beaten down: but the stout and valiant stomach, in greatest peril,
recouereth most strength. Thou art one man, and not two, thou owe one death
to the gods, and not two: Why will thou therefore, being but one, pay for two?
and for one only life, take two deaths? I mean, that before thou endest life,
thou die for pure sorrow.

After that thou have sailed, and in the sailing, thou have passed such peril,
when the gods do render thee in the safe Haven, once again thou will run
into the raging Sea, where thou scapest the victory of life, and thou dyest
with the ambushments of death. Threescore and two years have thou fought in
the Field, and never turned thy back: and fear thou now, being enclosed in
the Grave? Have thou not passed the pykes, and briars, wherein thou have been
enclosed: and now thou tremblest, being in the sure way? Thou know what
damage it is, long to live, and now thou doubtest of the profit of death,
which ensues. It is now many years since death and thou have been at
defyance, as mortal enemies: and now to lay thy hands on thy Weapons, thou
flyest and turnest thy back.

Threescore and two years are past, since thou were bent against fortune and
now thou closest thy eyes, when thou ought over her to triumph. By that I
have told thee, I mean, that since we do not see thee take death willingly
at this present: we do suspect that thy life has not in times past been very
good: For the man which has no desire to appear before the gods, it is a
token he is laden with vices.

What meanest thou most noble Prince? why weepest thou as an infant, and
complainest as a man in despair? If thou weepest because thou dyest: I answer
thee, that thou laughest as much when thou liuedst. For of too much laughing in
the life, proceeds much wayling at the death. Who has always for his
heritage, Too much merriment in life breeds woe in death.
appropriated the places being in the common wealth. The inconstancy of the
mind, who shall be so hardy to make steadie? I mean that all are dead, all
die, and all shall die: and among all will thou alone live? Will thou obtain
of the gods, that which makes them gods? That is to say; that they make thee
immortal as themselves? Will thou alone have by privilege, that which the
gods have by nature? My youth demands thy age what thing is best, or to say
better which is less evil, to die well, or to live evil. I doubt that any
man may attain to the means to live well, according to the continual and
variable troubles and vexations which daily we have accustomed to carry
between our hands, always suffering hunger, cold, thirst, care, displeasures,
temptations, persecutions, evil fortunes, overthrows, and diseases.

This cannot be called life, but a long death: and with reason we will call
this life death, since a thousand times we hate life. If an ancient man did
make a show of his life, from time he is come out of the intrailes of his
mother, until the time he enters into the bowels of the earth, and that body
would declare all the sorrows that he has passed and the heart discover all
the ouerthrows of fortune, which he has suffered: I imagine the gods would
marvel, and men would wonder at the body which has endured A custom of the
Grecians and Romans.
so much, and the heart which has so greatly dissembled, I take the Greeks to
be more wise, which weep when their children be borne, and laugh when the
aged dye: then the Romans which sing when their children are borne, and weep
when the old men die. We have much reason to laugh, when the old men die,
since they die to laugh: and with great reason we ought to weep, when the
children are borne, since they are borne to weep.

CHAP. LI. Panutius the Secretary continues his exhortation, admonishing all
men willingly to accept death, and utterly to forsake the world and all his
vanities.
SInce life is now condemned for evil, there remains naught else, but to
approve death to be good. Oh if it pleased the immortal gods, that as I
oftentimes have heard the disputation of this matter: so now that thou could
therewith profit. But I am sorry that to the Sage and wise man, counsel
sometimes (or for the most part) wants. None ought to cleave much to his own
opinion, but sometimes he should follow the counsel of the third person: For
the man which in all things will follow his own advise, ought well to be
assured that in all, or the most part, he shall err.

O my Lord Mark, since thou art sage, lively of spirit, of great experience,
and ancient, did not thou think, that as thou had buried many, so likewise
some should bury thee? What imaginations were thine to think, that seeing the
end of their days, others should not see the end of thy years? Since thou
die rich, honorably accompanied, old, and above all, seeing thou die in
the service of the commonwealth, why fear thou to enter into thy grave? Thou
have always been a friend, as much to know things past, as those which were
hid and kept secret. Since thou have proved what honors and dishonours
deserve, riches and poverty, prosperity and adversity, joy and sorrow, love
and fear, vices and pleasures: me seems that nothing remains to know, but
that it is necessary to know what death is.

And also I swear unto thee (most noble Lord) that thou shall learn more in
one hour, what death is, then in an hundred years what life means: Since
thou art good, and presumest to be good, and have lived as good, is it better
that thou die, and go with so many good; then that thou escape, and live
amongst so many evil? That thou feel death, I marvel nothing at all, for
thou art a man: but I do marvel that thou dissemblest it not, since thou art
discreet Many things do the sage men feel, Wise men do outwardly dissemble
inward griefs.
which inwardly do oppress their heart, but outwardly they dissemble them,
for the more honor. If all the poison which in the sorrowful heart is
wrapped, were in small pieces in the feeble flesh scattered: then the walls
would not suffice to rubbbe, neither the nails to scratch us.

What other thing is death, but a trap or door wherewith to shut the shop,
wherein all the misery, of this woeful life are vendible? What wrong or
prejudice do the gods unto us, when they call us before them, but from an old
decayed house, to change us to a new builded Palace? And what other thing is
the grave, but a strong fort, wherein we shut our selves from the assaults of
life, and broils of fortune: Truly we ought to be more desirous of that we
find in death, then of that we have in life. If Helia Fabricia thy wife do
grieve thee, for that thou leauest her young, do not care: for she presently
has little care of the peril wherein thy The custo^e of many widows.
life depends. And in the end, when she shall know of thy death, she will be
nothing grieved. Trouble not thy self for that she is left a widow: for young
women (as she is) which are married to old men (as thou) when their husbands
die, they have their eyes on that they can rob, and their hearts on them whom
they desire to marry. And speaking with due respect, when with their eyes they
outwardly seem most for to bewail: then with their hearts inwardly do they
most rejoice.

Deceive not thy self in thinkeing that the Empress thy wife is young, and
that she shall find none other Emperor with whom again she may marry. For
such, and the like, will change the cloth of gold, for gowns of skins. I
mean, that they would rather the young shepherd in the field, then the old
Emperor in his royal palace. If thou take sorrow for the children whom
thou leauest I know not why thou should do so? For truly if it grieve thee
now, for that thou die: they are more displeased for that thou live. The
son that desires not the death of his father, may be counted the only
Phoenix of this world, for if the father be poor, he wishes him dead for that
he is not maintained; and if he rich he desires his death to enherite the
sooner.

Since therefore it is true (as indeed it is) it seems not wisdom that they
sing, and thou weep. If it grieve thee to leave these goodly palaces, and
these sumptuous buildings, deceive not thy self therein. For by the god
Jupiter I swear unto thee, that since that death does finish thee, at the end
of threescore and two years: time shall consume these sumptuous buildings in
less then 40. If it grieve thee to forsake the company of thy friends and
neighbors, for them also take as little thought, since for thee they will not
take any at all. For amongst the other compassions that they ought to have of
the dead, this is true, that scarcely they are buried, but of their friends and
neighbors they are forgotten. If thou take greatest thought for that thou will not die, as the other Emperors of Rome are dead: me seems that thou
ought also to cast this sorrow from thee: for thou know right well, that
Rome has accustomed to be so unthankful to those which serve her: that the
great Scipio also would not be buried therein.

If it grieve thee to die, to leave so great a Seignory, as to leave the
Empire, I cannot think that such vanity be in thy head: for temperate and
reposed men, when they escape from semblable offices, do not think that they
lose honor, but that they be free of a trouble some charge. Therefore if none
of all these things move thee to desire life, what should let thee that through
thy gates enter not death it greeueth men to die for one of these There are two
things that grieve men at their death.
two things, either for the love of those they leave behind them, or for fear
of that they hope. Since therefore there is nothing in this life worthy of
love, nor any thing in death why we should fear: why do men fear to die?
According to the heavy fighes thou fetchest, the bitter tears thou sheddest,
and according also to that great pain thou show, for my part I think, that
the thing in thy thought most forgotten was, that the gods should command thee
to pay this debt. For admit that all think that their life shall end, yet no
man thinks that death will come so soon. For that men think never to die, they
never begin their faults to amend: so that both life and fault have end in the
grave together.

Know not thou (most noble Prince) that the long night comes the midst
morning. Do thou not know, that after the moist morning there comes the
clear Sun? Know not thou that after the clear Sun comes the cloudy
Element. Do thou not know that after the dark mist, there comes extreme
heat: And after the heat, comes the horrible thunders: and after the
thunders, the sudden lightnings: and after the perilious lightnings comes
the terrible hail: Finally I say, that after the tempestuous and troublesome
time, commonly comes clear and fair weather.

The order that time has to make The same order that Time keeps, man ought
to follow.
himself cruel and gentle, the self same ought men to have, to live and die.
For after the infancy comes childhood, after childhood comes youth, after
youth comes age, and after age comes the fearful death: Finally, after
that fearful death, comes the sure life. Oftentimes I have read, and of thee
not seldom heard that the gods only which had no beginning, shall have also
no ending. Therefore me thinks (most noble Prince) that sage men ought not
to desire to live long: Formen which desire to live much: either it is for that
they have not felt the travels past, because they have been fools, or for that
they desire more time to give themselves to vices. Thou might not complain
of that, since they have not cut thee in the flower of the herb, nor taken
thee green from the tree, nor cut thee in the spring tide, and much less eat
thee eager before thou were ripe.

By that I have spoken, I mean, if death had called thee when thy life was
sweetest: though thou had not had reason to have complained, yet thou
might have desired to have altered it: For it is a greater grief, to say
unto a young man that he must die, and forsake the world. What is this (my Lord)
now that the wall is decayed ready to fall, the flower is an hered the grape
does rot, the teeth are loose the gown is worn, the lance is blunt the knife
is dull, and do thou desire to return into the world, as if thou had never
known the world? These threescore and two years thou have lived in the
proportion of this body, and will thou now that the iron fetters have rot thy
legs, desire yet to lengthen thy days, in this so woeful prison? They that
will not be contented to live threescore years and five This transitory life
not worth the desiring.
in this death, or to die in this life: will not desire to live threescore
thousand years.

The Emperor Augustus Octauian said: That alter men had lived fifty years,
either of their own will they ought to dye; or else by force they should cause
themselves to be killed. For at that time, all those which have any human
felicity, are at the best. Those which live above that age, pass their days
in grievous torments. As in the death of children, in the loss of goods, and
importunity of son in laws, in maintaining processes, in discharging debts,
in fighing for that is past, in bewayling that that is present, in dissembling
injuries, in hearing woeful news, and in other infinite travels. I So that it
were much better, to have their eyes shut in the grave: the^ their hearts and
bodies alive, to suffer Man never happy till death.
so much in this miserable life. He whom the gods take from this miserable life
at the end of fifty years, is quitted from all these miseries of life. For
after that time he is not weak, but crooked, he goes not, but rowlleth, he
stumbleth nor but falls.

O my Lord Mark, know thou not, that by the same way whereby goes death,
death comes? Know not thou in like manner that it is 62. years that life
has fled from death: and that there is another time as much, that death goes
seeking thy life? and death going from Illiria where he left a great plague,
and thou departing from thy palace ye two have now met in Hungary? Know
not thou, that where thou leapedst out of thy mothers intrailes to govern the
land, immediately death leaped out of his grave to seek thy life? Thou have
always presumed, not only to be honored, but also to be honorable, if it be
so, since thou honouredst the Ambassadors of Princes which did send them the
more for their profit, then for thy service, why do thou not honor thy
messenger, whom the gods send more for thy profit, then for their services?
Do thou not remember well, when Vulcan my son in law poisoned me, more for
the covetousness of my gods, then any desire that he had of my life? thou
Lord that did come to comfort me in my chamber, and toldst me that the
gods were cruel to slay the young, and were pitiful to take the old from this
world. And thou said further these words: Comfort thee Panutius, for if thou
were borne to the, now thou dressed to live.

Since therefore (noble Prince) that I tell thee that which thou toldst me, and
counsel thee the same which thou counsellest me: I render to thee that which
thou have given me. Finally of these vines I have gathered these cluster of
grapes.

CHAP. LII. The answer of the Emperor Marcus to Panutius his Secretary,
wherein he declares that he took no thought to forsake the world: but all his
sorrow was to leave behind him an unhappy child to inherit the Empire,
PAnutius blessed be the milk which thou have sucked in Dacia, the bread which
thou have eaten in Rome, the larning which thou have learned in Greece, and the
bringing up which thou have had in my palace. For thou have served as a good
servant in life, and give me good counsel as a trusty friend at death. I
command Commodus my son to recompense thy service, and I beseech the immortal
gods, that they acquit thy good counsels. And not without good cause I charge
my son with the one, and requrie the gods of the other. For the payment of many
services, one man alone may do; but to pay one good counsel, it is requisite
to have all the gods. The greatest good that a friend can do to his friend, is
in great and weighty affairs, to give him good and wholesome counsel. And
not without cause I say wholesome: For commonly it chances, that those which
think with their counsel to remedy us, do put us oftentimes in greatest
perils. All the trauells of life are hard, but that of death is the most hard
and terrible. Al are great, but this is the greatest. All are perilous, but
this is most perrillons. All in death have end except the travel of death,
whereof we The travel of death is harder then all the travel of life.
know no end, that which I say now, no men perfectly can know, but he which
sees himself, as I see my self now at the point of death.

Certainly Panutius, thou have spoken unto me as a wise man: but for that thou
know not my grief, thou could not cure my disease, for my sore is not
there, where thou have laid the plaster. The fistula is not there where thou
have cut the flesh. The opilation is not there; where thou have laid the
ointments. There were not the right veins, where thou did let me blood. Thou
have not yet touched the wound, which is the cause of all my grief. I mean
that thou ought to have entered further with me to have known my grief
better.

The sighs which the heart fetches (I say those which come from the heart)
let not every man think which hears them, that he can immedialy understand
them: For as men cannot remedy the anguishes of the spirit, so the gods
likewise would not that they should know the secrets of the heart.

Without fear or shame many dare say, that they know the thought of others,
wherein they show themselves to be more fools, then wise. For since there are
many things in me wherein I my self doubt: how can a stranger have any
certain knowledge therein.

Thou accusest me Panutius, that I fear death greatly, the which I deny: but
to fear it as man, I do confess: For to deny that I fear not death, should
be to deny that I am not of flesh.

We see by experience, that the Elephants do fear the Lion, the Bear the
Elephant, the wolf the Bear, the Lamb the Wolf, the Rat the Cat, the Cat
the Dog, the Dog the man: Finally the one and the other do fear for no other
thing, but for fear that one kills not the other. Then since brute beasts
refuse death, the which though they die, fear not to fight with the suries,
nor hope not to rest with the gods: so much the more ought we to fear death,
which die in doubt, whether the furies will tear The cause why men fear death.
us in pieces with their torments, or the gods will receive us in to their
houses with joy.

Think thou Panutius, that I do not see well my vine is gathered, and that
it is not hid unto me, that my palace falls in decay? I know well, that I
have not but the kernel of the Raison, and the skin: and that I have not but
one sigh of all my life, until this time. There was great difference between
me and thee, and now there is no great difference betwixt me and my self. For
about the ensign, thou do place the army. In the rivers, thou castest thy
nets; within the parkes thou huntest the bulls: in the shadow thou take cold.
By this I mean, that thou talkest so much of death, because that thou art sure
of thy life.

O miserable man that I am, for in short space, of all that is life I have
possessed: with me I shall carry nothing but only my winding sheet.

Alas how shall I enter into the field, not where of fierce beasts I shall
be assaulted: but of the hungry worms devoured. Alas I see my self in
that distress, from whence my frail flesh cannot escape. And if any hope
remain, it is in thee O death. When I am sick, I would not that he that is
whole should comfort me. When I am sorrowful, I would not that he which is
merry should comfort me. When I am bannished I would not that he which is in
prosperity should comfort me. When I am at the hour of death, I would not
that he should comfort me, which is not in suspicion of life. But I would that
the poor should comfort me in poverty, the sorrowful in my sorrows, the
banished in my banishment, and he which is in as great danger of his life, as I
am now at the point of death. He gives best counsel to the sorrowful that is
himself likewise tormented.


For there is no counsel so healthful, nor true, as that of the man which is
in sorrow, when he counsels another, which is likewise tormented himself.
If thou considerest well this sentence, thou shall find that I have spoken a
thing profound, wherein notwithstanding my tongue is appeased. For in my
opinion evil shall he be comforted, which is weeping with him, that
continually laugheth. I say this to the end thou know, that I know it; and
that thou perceive that I perceive it.

And because thou shall not live deceived, as to my friend I will disclose the
secret: and thou shall see, that small is the sorrow which I have, in respect of
the great, which I have cause to have. For if reason had not striued with
sensualtie, the sighs ended my life, and in a pond of tears, they had made my
grave.

The things which in me thou have seen, which abhore meat, to banish sleep,
to love care, to be annoyed with company, to take rest in sighs, and to take
pleasures in tears: may easily declare unto thee, what torment is in the sea
of my heart, when such tremblings do appear in the earth of my body.

Let us now come to the purpose, and we shall see why my body is without
consolation, and my heart overcome with sorrows: for my feeling greatly
exceeds my complaining, because the body is so delicate, that in scratching it,
it complains: and the heart is so stout and valiant, that though it be hurt,
yet it dissembleth.

O Panutius, I let thee know, that the occasion why I take death so grievously,
is because I leave my son The occasion why Aurelius took his death heavily
Commodus in this life: who lives in this age most perilous for him, and no
less dangerous for the Empire. By the flowers are the fruits known, by the
grapes the vines are known, and by the face men are known: by the colt the
horse is judged, and by the infant, youth is known.

This I say by the Prince my son, for that he has been evil in my life, I
do imagine that he will be worse after my death. Since thou (as well as I)
know the evil conditions of my son, why do thou marvel at the thoughts
and sorrows of the father? My son Commodus in years is young, and in
understanding younger. He has an evil inclination, and yet he will not
enforce himself against the same, he governs himself by his own sense,
and in matters of wisdom he knows little: of that he should be ignorant,
he knows too much: and that which is worst of all, he is of no man esteemed.
He knows nothing of things past, nor occupies him about any thing present.

Finally, for that which mine eyes have seen, I say, and that which within my
heart I have suspected I judge: that shortly the person of my son shall be in
hazard, and the memory of his father perish. O how unkindly have the gods used
themselves toward us, to command us to leave our honor in the hands of our
children? for it should suffice, that we should leave them our goods: and that
to our friends we should commit our honor. But yet I am sorry, for that they
consume the goods in vices: and lose the honor for to be vicious. The gods
being pitiful as they are, since they give us the authority to divide our
goods: why do they not give us leave to make our wills of the honor.

My sons name being Commodus in the Romain tongue, is as much to say, as
profit: but as he is, we will be content to be without little profit, which
he may do to some, so that we may be excused of the great damage, which he is
likely to do to all. For I suppose he will be the scourge of men, and the
wrath of God. He enters now into the pathway of youth, alone without a guide.
And for that he has to pass by the high and dangerous places: I fear lest
he be lost, in the wood of vices.

For the children of Princes and Children brought up in liberty and wantonness
easily falls into vices.
great Lord for so much as they are brought up in liberty and wantonness,
do easily fall into vices, and voluptuousness: and are most stubborn to be
withdrawn from folly.

O Panutius, give attentive ear to that I say unto thee. See thou not that
Commodus my son is at liberty, is rich, is young, and is alone? By the faith
of a good man, I swear unto thee, that the least of these winds would
overthrow, not only a young tender Ash, but also a mighty strong Oak.
Riches, youth, pride, and liberty are four plagues which poison the Prince,
replenish the common wealth with filth, kill the living, and defame the dead.
Let the old men believe me, and the young men mark me well what I say, that
where the gods have given many gifts, it is necessary they have many virtues to
sustain them.

The gentle, the peaceable, the cou^terfeit, the simple, and the fearful, do
not trouble the common wealth: but those whom nature has given most gifts. For
as experience teaches us, with the fairest women the stews are furnished, the
most proper personage are unshamefast, the most stout and valiant are
murderers, the most subtle are thieves, and men of clearest understanding, often
times become most fools.

I say, and say again, I affirm, and affirm again, I swear and swear
again, It is perilous to be adorned with natural gifts, and to want
requisite virtues.
that if two men which are adorned with natural gifts, do want requisite
virtues, such have a knife in their hands, wherewith they do strike and wound
themselves, a fire on their shoulders, wherewith they burn themselves, a rope
at their necks to hang themselves, a dagger at their breast wherewith they
kill themselves, a thorn in their foot, wherewith they prick themselves, and
stones whereat they stumble: so that stumbling they fall, and falling they
find themselves with death whom they hate, and without life, which so much
they loved.

Note well Panutius note, that the man which from his infancy has always the
fear of the gods before his eyes, and the shame of men, says truth to all,
and lives in prejudice to none: and to such a tree, though evil fortune do
cleave, the flower of his youth do wither, the leaves of their favors dry,
they gather the fruits of his travels, they cut the bough of his offices, they
bow the highest of his branches downwards; yet in the end though of the winds
he be beaten, he shall never be overcome.

O happy are those Fathers, unto whom the Gods have given quick children,
wise, fair, able, light, and valiant: but all these gifts are but means to
make them vicious. And in such case, if the Fathers would be governed by my
counsel, I would rather desire that members should want in them, then that
vices should abound. Of the most fairest children which are borne in the
Empire, my son Commodus the Prince is one: But I would to the immortal Gods,
that in face he resemble the blackest of Ethiope: and in manners, the greatest
Philosopher of Greece: For the glory of the Father is not, nor ought not to
be, in that his child is fair of complexion, and handsome of person What
parents should glory of in their children.
but that in his life he be very upright.

We will not call him a pitiful Father, but a great enemy, who exalts
forth his child for that he is fair, and does not correct him, though he be
vicious. I durst say, that the father which has a child endued with many
goodly gifts, and that he does employ them all to vices: such a child ought
not to be borne in the world, and if perchance he were borne, he ought
immediately to be buried.

CHAP. LIII. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius concludes his matter, and shows
that sundry young Princes for being vicious have undone themselves, and
empouerished their Realms.
O What great pity is it to see how the father buyeth his child of the gods
with sighs, how the mother delivers the^ with pain, how, they both nourish
them with travels, how they watch to sustain them, how they labor to remedy
them, and afterward they have so rebelled, and be so vicious, that the
miserable Fathers oftentimes do die not for age, but for the griefs wherewith
their children torment them. I do remember, that the Prince Commodus my son
being young, and I aged (as I am) with great pains we kept him from vices:
but I fear, that after my death he will hate virtues. I remember many young
Princes, which of his age, have inherited The Empire of Rome: who have bin of so
wicked a life, that they have deserved to loose both honor and life..

I remember Dennys, the famous tyrant of Scycile: of whom is said, that as
great reward he gave to those that invented vices, as our Mother Rome did, to
those which conquered realms: Such work could not be, but of a tyrant to take
them for most familiar, which are most vicious.

I remember four young Princes, which governed the Empire, but not with such
valiauntnes as the great Alexander: that is to say, Alexander, Antiochus, Many
young vicious princes in Rome.
Syluius, and Ptholomeus: unto whom for their vanity and lightness, as they
called Alexander the Great, Emperor in Greece: so likewise do they call these
young men, tyrants in Asia.

Very happy was Alexander in life, and they unhappy after his death. For all
that which with glorious triumphs he wanne, with vile vices they lost. So that
Alexander divided between them four, the world: and afterward it came into
the hands of more then four hundredth.

I do remember, that king Antigonus little esteemed that, which cost his Lord
Alexander much. He was so light in the behavior of his person, and so defamed
in the affairs of the Commonwealth: that for mockery and contempt, in the
steed of a crown of gold, he bare a garland: in the steed of a scepter, he
carried nettles in his hand: and of this sort and manner he sat to judge among
his counselors, and used to talk with strangers.

This young Prince does offend me much, for the lightness he committed: but much
more I marvel at the gravity of the Sages of Greece, which suffered him. It
is but meet he be partaker of the pain, which condescended to the fault.

I do remember Caligula the fourth Emperor of Rome, who was so young and
foolish, that I doubt of these two things, which was greatest in his time, That
is to say: The disobedience that the people bare to their Lord, or the hate
which the Lord bare to his people. For, that unhappy creature was so
disordered in his manners: that if all the Romans had not watched to take
life from him: he would have watched to take life from them.

This Caligula wore a brooche of The cruel inscription, in Coligulaes brooch
gold in his cap, wherein were written these words: Vtinam omnis populus vnam
precise ceruicem haberet, vt vno ictu omnes necarem: Which is to say: would to
God all the people had but one neck, to the end I might kill them all at a
stroke.

I remember the Emperor Tiberius, th'adoptiue son of the good Caesar
Augustus, which was called Augustus: because he greatly augmented the Empire.
But the good Emperor did not so much augment the state of his Commonwealth,
during his life, as Tyberius did diminish it, after his death. The hate and
malice which the Romain people bare to Tiberius in his life, was manifestly
discovered after the time of his death. For the day that Tyberius dyed (or
better to say, when they killed him) the Roman people made great processions,
and the Senators offered great presents in the temples, and the priests gave
great Sacrifices to their Gods: and all to the end their gods should not receive
the soul of this Tyrant amongst them, but that they would send it to be kept
among the Furyes of hell.

I remember Patrocles (2. K. of Corinth) inherited the realm at xxii. years of
his age, who was so disordred of his flesh, so indiscret in his doings, so
covetous of goods, and such a coward of his person, that where his father had
possessed the Realm 40. years, the son did not possess it thirty months.

I remember Tarquine the proud, who though among eight Knights of Rome was the
last, and comlyest of gesture, valiant in Arms, Noblest of blood, and in
giving most liberal: yet he employed all his gifts and grace^ which the Gods
had given him evil. For, he employed his beauty to riot, and his forces to
tyranny. For, through the treason and villainy, which he committed with the
Roman Lucretia, he did not only lose the realm, and flying saved his life:
but also for ever was banished, and all his Lineage likewise.

I remember the cruel Emperor Nero, who lived, inherited, and dyed young: and
not without a cause (I say) that he lived and dyed young. For, in him was
graffed the stock of the noble and worthy Caesar's: and in him was renewed the
memory of those tyrants: To whom think thou Panutius this Tyrant would have
given life, since he with his own hand gave his Mother her death?

Tell me (I pray thee) who think thou has made that cursed heart, who
slew his Mother, out of whose The cruelty of Nero, to his Mother.
womb he came? opened the breasts which gave him suck? Shed the blood where
of he was born? Tore the arms in which he was carried? and saw the entrails
wherein he was formed.

The day that the Emperor Nero slew his mother, an Orator said in the Senate:
Iure interficienda erat Agrippina, qua tale portentum peperit in populo Romano.

Which is to say, justly deserved Agrippina to be put to death, which brought
forth so strange a Monster, amongst the Roman people.

Thou oughtst not therefore to marvel (Panutius) at the novelties which thou
have seen in me: For in these three days that I have been troubled in my
mind, and altered in my understanding: all these things are offered unto me,
and from the bottom of my heart I have digested them. For the careful men are
not blinded, but with their own imaginations. All these evil conditions which
these Princes had scattred amongst them (of whom I have spoken) do meet
together, in my Son Commodus.

For, if they were young, he is young: if they were rich, he is rich: if they
were free, he is free: if they were bold, he is bold: if they were wild, he
is wild: if they were evil, certainly I do not think that he is good.

For, we see many young Princes, which have been well brought up, and well
taught: yet when they have inherited, and come to their Lands, they become
immediately vicious and dissolute. They seldom mend that are vicious in youth.


What hope have we of those, which from their infancy are dissolute and evil
inclined? Of good wine I have made often times strong vivineger: but of pure
vinegar, I have never seen good wine.

This child keeps me between the sails of Fear, and the Ancker of hope:
hoping he shall be good, since I have taught him well, and fearing he shall be
evil, because his mother Faustine has nourished him evil. And that which is
the worst, that the young child of his own nature, is inclined to all evil,

I am moved to say thus much, for that I see his natural inclination increase:
and that which was taught him diminish. For the which occasion, I doubt that
after my death, my son shall return to that, wherein his mother has
nourished him: and not to that, wherein I have taught him.

O how happy had I been, if never I had had child, or not to be bound to
leave him the Empire: For I would choose then, among the children of the good
Fathers: and would not be bound to such a one, whom the gods have given me.

One thing I ask thee Panutius, whom would thou call most fortunate?
Vespatian, which was natural father of Domitius, or Nerua, the adopted father
of the good Traiane: both those two, (Vespatian and Nerua) were good Princes,
but of children, Domitian was the head of all mischief: and Traiane was the
mirror of all goodness. So that Vespatian in that he had children, was
unhappy, and Nerua in that he had none, was most fortunate.

One thing I will tell thee Panutius, the which by thee considered, thou will
little esteem life, and shall lose the fear of death. I have lived threescore
and two years, wherein I have read much, hard much, seen, desired, attained,
possessed, suffered, and I have much rejoiced my self. And in the end of all
this, I see my self now to die, and I must want my pleasures, and my self
also. Of all that I have had, possessed, attained, and whereof I have enioied,
I have only two things to say, pain for that I have offended the gods, and
sorrow for the time which I have wasted in vices.

There is great difference between The difference between the poor and the
rich in death.
the rich and the poor in death, and more in life. For the poor dies to
just, but if the rich die, it is to their treat pain. So that the gods take
from the one, that which he had, and puts the other in possession, of that
he desired.

Great care has the heart to seek the goods, and they pass great troubles to
heap up them together, and great diligence must be had in keeping them, and
also much wit to increase them: but without comparison, it is greater grief to
depart from them.

O what pain intolerable, and grief it is to the wise man, seeing himself
at the point of death, to leave the sweet of his family, the majesty of his
Empire, the honor of his present, the love of his friends, the payments of his
debts, the deserts of his servants and the memory of his predecessors, in the
power of so evil a child, the which neither deserves it, nor yet will
deserve it.

In the ninth Table of our ancient Laws, are written these words: We ordain
and command, that the father which shall be good according to the opinion of
all, may disherite his son, who according to the opinion of all is evil. The
Law said further.

The child which has disobeyed his father, robbed any holy Temple, iniuried
any widow, fled from any battle, and committed any treason to a stranger,
that he should be banished from Vicious children by an ancient law
disinherited.
Rome, and dsinherited from his fathers goods.

Truly the law was good, though by our offenses it be forgotten. If my breath
fail me not as it does fail me (for of troth I am greatly pained) I would
declare unto thee how many Parthes, Medians, Egyptians, Assirians, Caldeans,
Indians, Hebrews, Greeks, and Romans, have left their children poor being
able to have left them rich, for no other cause, but for that they were
vicious. And to the contrary, other being poor, have left them rich, for that
they were virtuous.

By the immortal gods I swear unto thee, that when they came from the war
of Parthia, and triumphed in Rome, and confirmed the Empire to my son, if
then the Senate had not withstood me, I had left Commodus my son poor with
his vices, and would have made heir of all my Realms, some virtuous man. I let
thee know Panutius, that five things oppress my heart sore, to the which I
would rather see remedy my self, then to command other to remedy it.

The first, for that in my life time I cannot determine the processes, that the
virtuous widow, Drusia has with the Senate.

Because since she is poor, and deformed, there is no man that will give her
justice.

The second, because I die not in Rome. And this for none other cause, the^
that which the sound of the trumpet should be proclaimed, that all those which
have any quarrel, or debt against me, and my family, should come thither to be
paid, or satisfied of their debts and demands.

The third, that as I made four tyrants Five things that oppressed Marcus
Aurelius heart.
to be put to execution, which committed tyranny in Asia and Italy, so it
grieved me that I have not also punished certain pirates, which roued on the
seas.

The fourth, for that I have not caused the temple to be finished which I did
begin for all the gods. For I might have said unto them after my death, that
since for all them I have made one house: it were not much that any of them
should receive one into his, which pass this life in the favor of the gods,
and without the hatred of men. For dying after this sort, men shall sustain
our honors: and the gods shall provide for our souls.

The fifth, for that I leave in life for my only heir, Commodus the Prince,
yet not so much for the destruction which shall come to my house: as for the
great damage which shall succeed in the commonwealth. For the true Princes
ought to take the damages of their persons light, and the damages of the
commonwealth for the most grievous.

O Panutius, let therefore this be the last word which I will say unto thee,
that is to say, that the greatest good that the gods may give to the man that
is not covetous, but virtuous, is to give him good renown in life: and
afterward a good heir at our death.

Finally, I say, that if I have any thing to do with the gods, I require, and
beseech them, that if they should be offended, Rome slandered, my renown
defamed, and my house diminished, for that my son be of an evil life: that
they will take from him life, before they give me death,

CHAP. LIIII. Of the words which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius spoke unto his
son Commodus at the hour of death, necessary for all young gentlemen to
understand.
SInce the disease of Marcus Aurelius was so extreme that every hour of his
life he was assaulted with death: after he had talked a long time with Panutius
his Secretary, he commanded his son Commodus to be wakened, who as a young
man slept soundly in his bed. And being come before his presence, all those
which were there, were moved immediately with compassion, to see the eyes of the
father all swollen with weeping: and the eyes of the child, closed with
overmuch sleep.

They could not waken the child, he was so careless: and they could not cause
the good father sleep, he took so great thought.

All those which were there, seeing how the father desired the good life of the
son, and how little the son wayed the death of his father had compassion of
the old person, and bare hate to the wicked child. Then the good Emperor
casting his eyes on high, and directing his words to his son said.

When thou were a child, I told thy masters how they ought to bring thee up,
and after that thou did wax greater, I told thy Governors how they should
counsel thee: And now I will tell thee, how thou with them, which are few, and
they with thee being one, ought to govern and maintain the Commonwealth. If
thou esteem much that which I will say unto thee, my son: Know thou, that I
will esteem much more then thou will believe me: for more easily do we old
men suffer your injuries, then ye other young men do receive our counsels.
Wisdom wants to you for to believe us, yet we want not boldness to
dishonor you. And that which is worst, the aged in Rome, were wont to have a
chair of wisdom and sagenesse: but now a days the young men count it a shame
and folly. The world at this day is so changed, from that it was wont to be in
times past: that all have the audacity to give counsel, and few have the
wisdom to receive it, so that they are a thousand which tell counsels, and
there is not one that buyeth wisdom.

I believe well, my son, that according to my fatal Destenies, and thy evil
manners, little shall that avail which I shall tell thee: for since thou
would not credit these words which I spoke unto thee in my life: I am sure
that thou will little regard them after my death.

But I do this, more to satisfy my desire, and to accomplish that which I owe
unto the Commonwealth, then for that I hope for any amendment of thy life.

For there is no grief that does so much hurt a person, as when he himself
is cause of his own pain. If any man does me an injury, if I lay my hands
upon him, or speak injurious words unto him, my heart is forthwith satisfied:
but if I do injury to my self, I am he which wrongeth, and am wronged, for
that I have none on whom I may revenge my wrong, and I vex and chase with my
self.

If thou my son be evil, after that thou have enherited the Empire, my
mother Rome will complain of the gods which have given thee so many evil
inclinations. She will complain of Faustine thy mother which has brought
thee up so wantonly, she will complain of thee which have no will to resist
vice: but she shall have no cause to complain of the old man thy Father, who
has not given thee good counsels. For if thou had believed that which I
told thee, me^ would rejoice to have thee for their Lord, and the Gods to use
thee as their Minister.

I cannot tell my son, if I be deceived, but I see thee so deprived of
understanding, so uncertain in thy words, so dissolute in thy manners, so
unjust in justice, in that thou desire so hardy, and in thy duty so
negligent, that if thou change and alter not thy manners, men will hate thee,
and the Gods will forsake thee.

O if thou knew my son, what a thing it is to have men for their enemies,
and to be forsaken of the gods: by the faith of a good man I swear unto thee,
that thou would not only hate the Seigniorie of Rome, but with thy hands
also thou would destroy thy self: For men which have not the Gods
merciful, and the men friendly, do eat the bread of grief, and drink the
tears of sorrow.

I am sure thy sorrow is not so great to see the night does end my life, as is
that pleasure which thou have, to see that in short space thou shall be
Emperor of Rome. And I do not marvel hereat, for where sensuality reigns,
reason is banished, and constrained to fly.

Many love diverse things, because of truth they know them not: the which if
they did know, without doubt they would hate them. Though men love in mockery,
the Gods and men hate us in earnest.

In all things we are so doubtful, and in all our works so disordred, that at
some time our understanding is dull, and loses the edge: and another time, it
is more sharp then it is necessary. Thereby I mean, that the good we will not
hear, and much less we will learn it, but of the evil we know, more then
behooves us, or necessity requires. The counsel of the Emperor to his son
Comodus.


I will counsel thee, my son by words, that which in sixty two years, I
have learned by science and experience. And since thou art as yet so young, it
is reason that thou believe him which is aged; For since we Princes are the
mirror of all, every man does behold us, and we other do not behold our
selves. This day or to morrow, thou shall enherite the Roman Empire, and
think that inheriting the same, thou shall be Lord of the world. Yet if thou
knew how many cares and perils, commanding brings with it. I swear unto
thee, that thou would rather choose to obey all, then to command one. Thou
think my son, that I leave thee a great Lord, for to leave thee the
Empire, which is not so: for all they have need but of thee, and thou alone
have need of all

Thou think I leave thee much treasure, leaving thee the great revenues of
the Empire, that which also is as little: for though a Prince have treasures in
abundance, yet if he want friends, he has great want of treasures. Thou
think also my son, that I leave thee to be obeyed of all, and that none
dare again say thee.

Truly it ought not to be so: for it is more meet for the Prince (which
deserves to preserve his life, and augment his honor) to be conformable to
the will of all, then to desire that all should be agreeable to him: For thou,
my son, that know not what truth is, lies will not grieve thee: for as
much, as thou know not what rest is, the broils and motions of the people
shall not vex thee; For that thou know not what friends mean, thou shall
esteem it little to have enemies: for if thou were patient, reposed, true and
a loving man, thou would not only refuse the Empire of Rome, but also thou
would curse the father which would leave thee such inheritance. I would know,
if thou know it not, that in leaving thee the Empire, I do leave thee not
riches, but poverty, not rest, but travel, not peace but war, not friends but
enemies: not pleasures but displeasures. Finally, in peace I do leave thee,
where always thou shall have somewhat to bewail: and though thou would,
thou shall not laugh: I advertise, admonish, and also exhort thee my son, to
think all which I leave thee is vanity, lightness, folly, and a disguised
mockery. And if thou beleeuest it is in mockry, henceforth I know thou art
deceived; I have lived longer then thou, have read more, and with pain have gone
further then thou. And in the end I find my self mocked: hopest, thou to live
surely, and escape without fraud? when thou shall think to have the Empire in
rest, then shall arise a province in Africa or Asia, the loss should come to
great damage, and to recover it, great charges would ensue.

When thou think to recover Friends, then shall strange enemies invade thee.
So that in flattering, and rejoicing our Friends, we can not keep them; and
in flying, and rejecting them, we cannot defend our selves. When thou shall
think to be in greatest joy, then shall some care oppress thy heart. For
Princes which have and possess much, the news which give them pleasure, are
very seldom: but the things which annoy them, come hourly. When thou shall
think to have liberty, to do what thou will, then shall thou be most
restrained.

For, the good and well ordered Princes, ought not to go whither their wanton
desires moves them: but whither it is most lawful and decent for the honor
of their Estates: When thou shall think that none dare reprove thee, for that
thou art What words cannot do treason will.
Emperor, then oughtst thou most to beware. For, if they dare not threaten
evil Princes with words, they have the hardiness to sell them by Treason. If
they dare not punish them, they dare murmour at them: and these which cannot
be their friends, do procure to be their enemies. Finally, if they lay not
hands on their persons, they let their tongue run at large, to prate of their
renown. When thou shall think to have satisfied thy Servant, then will they
demand recompense for their services.

For, it is an old custom among Courtyers, to spend freely, and to covet
greedily. Therefore if thou do credit these things, I know not who is so
foolish, that for his enheritance desires such sorrow. For, admit that any man
come to the Empire, without comparison the rest is more worth, which the Fmpyre
takes from him: then all the pleasures which it gives him?

If the Empire of Rome were as well corrected and ordered, as in old time it
was accustomed to be: though it were great pain to govern it, yet it were
more honor to keep it, but it is so rooted in vices, and so many Tyrants are
entered therein, that I would take them more wise, to judge it is a mockery,
then those which embrace it as an honor.

If thou knewst what Rome is worth, what Rome has, what Rome may, and what
Rome is, I swear unto thee, that thou would not labor much to be lord
thereof. For though Rome with walls be strongly compassed: yet of virtuous
Citizens is greatly unprovided. If the inhabitants be great, the vices are
without number.

Finally I say, that the stones which are in the buyldings, in one day may be
counted: but the evils which are The sins of a populous City not to be
numbered.
therein, in a thousand years cannot be declared. By the faith of a good man,
I swear unto thee my son, that when I began to reign, in three years I
repaired the decayed walls that were of Rome fallen, and one only street to
live well, in twenty years I could not reform.

The divine Plato said very well: That much more ought the great cities to
glorify, to have virtuous Citizens, then to have proud and sumptuous
buildings. Beware, beware my son, that the inconstancy of youth, and the
liberty which thou have to possess, and govern the Empire, cause thee not to
undo thy self. For he is not counted free which in liberty is borne, but he
that dies in liberty. O how many I have read, heard, and also seen which are
borne slaves and afterward have died free: and this for that they were
virtuous. And how many I have seen die slaves being borne free only for
being vicious, so that their liberty remains, where nobleness is resident.
Princes which have great Realms, of necessity shall have occasion to punish
many excesses: wherefore it is requisite that they be courageous. And believe
me my Son, that they ought not to take courage upon them, because they be
mighty and puissant: but because they are virtuous. For, to punish these
excesses of others, that good life is more requisite, then is the great
authortitie of the Empire.

A virtuous Prince ought to leave no vice unpunished: For the good, to follow
good, and the evil for fear of his correction, dare not commit any offense in
the Commonwealth. He that lives like a wise man, is hardy to give punishment:
but he that lives in fear, dare not almost speak. For, the man which dare
be so hardy, to punish an other, for the self same fault, and transgression
for the which he deserves to be punished: of the Gods he is justly hated,
and of men despised.

Let Princes take it for an assured thing, that they shall never have the love
of the people, the liberty of the Commonwealth, the order of their house, the
contentation of their Friends, the subjection of their enemies, and the
obedience of their people: but with many Tears shed on the earth, and with
many prowesses of his person.

To a virtuous Prince, all do render: and against the vicious Prince. all the
earth does rebel. Now if thou will be virtuous, hear what thing virtue is.

Virtue is a Castle, which never is taken: a River which is not passed over: a
Sea, which is not sailed: a Fire, which never is quenched: a Treasure, that
never is wasted, an Army, that never is overthrown: a Change, which never
wearieth: a Spy, which ever returns: a sign, which beguyleth no man: a way
very straight: a Friend, that succoureth all necessities: a Surgion, that
immediately heals: and a Renown which never perishes.

If thou knew (my Son) what thing it is to be good, thou would be the
best of the world. For the more vicious a man is, so much the more he is
entangled in vices: and how As vice intangleth the vicious, so virtue cleaneth
to the virtuous.
much more a man is virtuous, so much more to virtues he cleaves. If thou will
be virtuous, thou shall do service to the Gods, thou shall give good renown
to thy predecessors, and for thy self thou shall prepare a perpetual
memory: Thou shall do pleasures to strangers, and get thee favor of thine
own people. Finally, the good will honor thee with love: and the evil will
serve with fear.

In the hystories of the wars of the Tarentines, I found that renowned Pyrrus
(king of the Epyrots) did wear in a ring these words written, It is too little
punishment for a vicious man, to take his life from him: and it is too small
reward for a virtuous man to give him the seigniorie of all the whole earth.
Truly, these words were worthy of such a man.

What thing can be begun of a virtuous man, whereof we hope not to see the
end, and come to good proof? I am deceived, if I have not seen in my days,
many men, which were base borne, unfit for sciences, void of vices in the
Commonwealth, poor of goods, and unknown of birth, which with all these base
conditions have learned so many virtues, that it seemed great rashness to
begin them, and afterward for being virtuous only, they have found the
effects such as they thought it.

By the immortal Gods I swear unto thee, and so the God Jupiter take me into
his holy house, and confirm thee my son in mine: if I have not known a
Gardner and a Porter in Rome, which for being virtuous, were occasion to cast
five rich Senators out of the Senate. And the cause to make the one to gain,
and the other to lose, was that to the one they would not pay the pots, and to
the other his apples: For at that time more was he punished, which took an
apple from a poor man, then he which beat down a rich man's house.

All this I have told thee my son, because vice abaseth the hardy prince, and
virtue gives courage to the bashful. From two things I have always kept my
self, That is to say; not to strive against open justice, nor to contend with
a virtuous person.

CHAP. LV. The Emperor Marcus Aurelius follows his purpose, and among other
wholesome counsels, exhorts his son to keep wise and sage men about him, for
to give him counsel in all his affayrs
HItherto I have spoken to thee generally, but now I will speak unto thee
particularly, and by the immortal gods I conjure thee, that thou be very
attentive to that I will say: For talking to thee as an aged Father, it is
reason thou hear me as an obedient child.

If thou will enjoy long life, observe well my doctrine: For the gods will not
condescend to thy hearts desires, unless thou receive my wholesome counsels.
Disobedience of children is their undoing.


The disobedience and unfaithfulness which children have to their fathers, is
all their undoing: for oftentimes the gods do pardon the offenses that are done
unto them: and do not pardon the disobediences which the children bare to their
Fathers. I do not require thee my son, that thou give me money, since thou
art poor. I do not demand that thou travel since thou art tender. I do not
demand the reuengement of mine enemies, since I have none. I do not demand
that thou serve me since I dye.

I do not demand the Empire, since I leave it unto thee. Only I demand,
that thou govern thy self well in the Common wealth, and that the memory of
my house be not lost through thee. If thou esteem much that I leave unto thee
so many realms, I think it better to leave to thee many good counsels,
wherewith thou may preserve thy self, sustain thy person, and maintain
thine honor: For if thou have presumption not to profit with my counsel, but
to trust to thine own mind, before my flesh be eaten with worms, thou shall
be overcome with thy enemies.

My son, I have been young, light, bold, unshamefast, proud, envious,
covetous, an adulterer, furious, a glutton, slothful, and ambitious, and for
that I have fallen into so great excesses, therefore I give thee such good
advise: for that man which in his youth has been very worldly, from him in
age proceeds ripe counsel. That which until this time I have counseled
thee, and that which to my Ripe counsel proceeds from the aged.
death I will counsel thee, I desire that once at the least thou prove it: And
if it do thee harm, leave it, and if it do thee good, use it: For there is
no medicine so bitter, that the sick does refuse to take: if thereby he
think he may be healed. I pray thee, I exhort thee, and I advise thee my
son, that thy youth believe my age, thy ignorance believe my knowledge, thy
sleep believe my watch, the dimnesse of thy eyes, believe the clearenesse of
my sight, thy imagination believe my virtue, and thy suspicion believe my
experience. For otherwise, one day thou shall see thy self in some distress,
where small time thou shall have to repent, and none to find remedy. Thou
may say unto me, my son, that since I have been young, I let thee to be
young, and that when thou shall be aged, thou will amend: I answer thee,
that if thou will live as young, yet at least govern thy self as old: In a
Prince which governs his common wealth well, many miseries are dissembled of
his person: even as for mighty affairs ripe counsels are necessary: so to
endure the troubles of the Empire, the person needs some recreation: for the
bow-string which always is stretched, either it lengthneth or it breaks.
Whether Princes be young or old, there can be nothing The pastime that Princes
should seek
more just then for the recreation of themselves to seek some honest pastimes.
And not without a cause, I say, that they be honest: for sometimes they
accompany with so dishonest persons, and so unthrifty: that they spend their
goods, they lose their honor, and weary their persons more, then if they were
occupied in the affairs of the common wealth: For thy youth, I leave thee
children of great Lords, with whom thou may pass the time away: And not
without cause I have provided that with thee they have been brought up from thy
infancy: for after thou came to man's estate, inheriting my goods, if
perchance thou would accompany thy self with young men, thou should find
them well learned: for thy wars I leave thee valiant captains, though (indeed)
things of war are begunn by wisdom: yet in the end, the issue falls out by
fortune: for stewards of thy treasurs, I leave thee faithful men: And not
without cause, I say, they are faithful: for oftentimes greater are the
thieves which are receivers, and treasurers, then are they that do rob among
the people. I leave thee, my son, expert and ancient men, of whom thou may
take counsel, and with whom thou may communicate thy troubles: for there can
be fourmed no honest thing in a Prince, unless he has in his company
ancient Princes are to accompany Ancient men.
men: for such give gravity to his person, and authority to his palace: To
invent Theaters, to sish ponds, to chase wild beasts in the forests, to run
in the fields, to let thy hawks fly, and to exercise weapons, al these things
we can deny thee, as to a young man, and thou being young, may rejoice thy
self in all these. Thou ought also to have respect, that to ordain arms,
invent wars, follow victories, accept truces, confirm peace raise bruites, to
make laws, to promote the one, and put down the others, to punish the evil,
and first to reward the good, the counsel of all these things ought to be
taken of clear judgments, of persons, of experience, and of white heads.
Think thou not, that it is possible to pass the time with the young, and to
counsel with the old? The wife and discreet Princes, for all things have time
enough, if they know well how to measure it.

Beware my son, that they note thee not to use great extremities: for the end
and occasion why I speak it, is because thou should know, if thou know
not, that it is as indecent a thing for a Prince, under the color of granitie,
to be ruled and governed wholly by old men, as under semblance of pastime,
always to accompany himself with the young: It is no general rule, that all
young men are light, nor all old men sage: And thou must according to my
advise, in such case use it thus: if any old All young men are not light, nor
all old men sage.
man lose the gravity of his age, expulse him from thee: if thou find any
young men sage, despise not their counsel: For the Bees do draw more honey
out of the tender flowers, then of the hard leaves. I do not condemn the aged,
nor I do commend the young; but it shall be well done, that always thou
choose of both the most virtuous: For of truth there is no company in the
World, so evil ordered, but that there is mean to live with it, without any
suspicion: so that if the young are evil with solly, the old are worse
through covetousness.

Once again, I return to advertise thee (my son) that in no wise thou use
extremity: for if thou believe none but young, they will corrupt thy manners
with lightness, and if thou believe none but the old, they will deprave thy
justice through covetousness, What thing can be more monstrous, then that the
prince which commands all, should suffer him to be commanded of one alone?
Believe me son, in this case that the gouernements of many, are seldom times
governed well by the Princes that rule many, must take counsel of many.
head of one alone. The Prince which has to rule and govern many, ought to
take the advice and counsel of many. It is a great inconvenience, that thou
being Lord of many Realms, should have but one gate, wherein all do enter
into to do their business with thee: For if perchance he which shall be thy
familiar, be of his own nature good, and be not mine enemy: yet I would be
afraid of him, because he is a friend of mine enemies. And though for hate
they do me no evil, yet I am afraid that for the love of another, he will
cease to do me good. I remember that in the Annalles of Pompeius, I found a
little book of memories, which the great Pompeius bare about him, wherein were
many things that he had read, and other good counsels, which in diverse parts
of the world he had learned: and among other words there were these: The
Governor of the Commonwealth which commits all the government to old men,
deserves very little, and he that trusts all young, is light: He that
governs it by himself alone, is beyond himself: and he which by himself
and others does govern it, is a wise Prince,

I know not whether these sentences are of the same Pompeius, or that he
gathered them out of some book, or that any Philosopher had told him them, or
some friend of his had given him them. I mean, that I had them written with
his hands, and truly they Weighty affairs are to be dispatched by counsel.
deserved to be written in letters of gold. When thy affairs shall be
weighty, see thou dispatch them always by counsel: For when the affairs be
determined by the counsel of many, the fault shall be divided among them all.
Thou shall find it for a truth (my son) that if thou take counsel of many,
the one will tell the inconvenience, the other the peril, other the fear, the
other the damage, the other the profit, and the other, the remedy: finally,
they will so debate thy affayrs, that plainly thou shall know the good, and see
the danger thereof.

I advertise thee (my son) that when thou take counsel, thou behold with thy
eyes the inconvenience, as well as the remedies which they shall offer unto
thee: for the true counsel consists not, to tell what they ought to do, but
to declare what thereof is like to succeed. When thou shall enterprise (my
son) great and weighty affairs, as much ought thou to regard the little
damages for to cut them off in time, as the great mishaps to remedy them.
For oftenttmes it chances, that for the negligence of taking up a gutter, the
whole house falls to the ground. Notwithstanding, I tell thee, thou take
counsel, I mean not, that thou ought to be so curious, as for every trifle
to call thy counsel: for there are many things of such quality, that they
would be immediately put in execution: and they do endammage themselves,
attending for counsel. That which by thine own authority thou may dispatch
without the damage of the Commonwealth, refer it to no other person: and
herein thou shall be just, and shall do justice conformable: for considering
that thy service depends only of them, the reward which they ought to have,
ought to depend only on thee.

I remember that when Marius the Consul came from the wars of Numedia, he
divided all the treasure he brought among his soldiers, not putting one
jewel into the common Treasury. And when hereof he was accused, for that he
had not demanded license of the Senate: he answered them. It is not just I take
counsel with others, for to give recompense to those, which have not taken the
opinions of others to serve me.

Thou shall find my son, a kind of men, which are very hard of money, and
exceeding prodigal of counsel. There are also diverse lenders, which without
demanding them, do offer to give it. With such like Whose counsel is to be
refused.
men, thou shall have this counsel, never look thou for good counsel at that
man, whose counsel tends to the prejudice of another: for he offers words
to thy service, and trauelleth thy business to his own profit. As the gods
gave me long life, of these things have I had great experience, wherein I let
thee know, that for the space of xv. years I was Consul, Senator, Censor,
Praetor, Questor, Edil, and Tribune: and after all this, I have been 18. years
Emperor of Rome, wherein all those which have spoken most against me, touched
the profit or damage of another. The chief intention of those which follow the
Courts of Princes, are to procure to augment their houses. And if they cannot
come to that, they seek to diminish that of another, not for that any profit
should follow unto them thereof, be it never so little: but because man's malice
is of such condition, that it esteems the profit of another his own damage.

They ought to have great compassion of the Prince, for the most that follow
him, serve him not for that they love him, but for the gifts and rewards which
they hope to have of him. And this seems to be true, for the day that Princes
shall cease to give them, the self same day begin they for to hate him. So
that such servants, we cannot call friends of our persons, but covetous of our
goods. That thou love my son, the one above the other, thou may right
well: but I advertise thee, that thou, nor they do make any semblance, in such
sort that all do know it: for if thou do otherwise, they will murmur at
thee, and will all persecute thee.

He incurreth into no small peril, nor has no little trouble, which is above
all of the Prince beloved, and of the people hated. For then he is hated and
persecuted of all: and yet more damage ensues unto him: of the enmity of all:
then does of the love of the Prince alone: for sometimes, the gods permitting
it, and his behauior deserving it, the prince does cease to love him, and
therewith his enemies begin to persecute him: From the time I knew what
meaned to govern a Common weal, I have always determined, never to keep man
in my house one day after I know him to be an enemy to the Commonwealth.

In the year of the Foundation of Rome, 649. Lucius Lucullus the Senator
going to the wars against Mythridates, by chance found a tablet of coppper,
in the city called Trigane: the which was at the gate of the king of that
Province. And on the same was engraven certain Caldean letters, the which in
effect said these words:

The Prince is not sage, who will put The marks of an indiscreet prince or
ruler.
in hazard the state of his Commonwealth, for the only commodity of one
alone: For the service of one, can not avail against the love of all.

The Prince is not sage, that for to enrich one alone, seeks to empouerish
all: For it is a thing intolerable, that one do labor the fields, and the
other do gather the fruit.

The Prince is not just, which will satisfy the covetousness of one, more then
the services of all: For there is mean to pay the services of the good, and
there is no Riches to satisfy the covetousness of the evil. The prince is a
fool that despises the counsel of all, and trusts in the opinion of one.
For though there be in a great Ship, but one pilot, yet it needs many
mariners. Bold is the Prince, which to love one only, will be hated of all: For
noble Princes ought to think it much profit, to be beloved, and much more
displeasure to be hated. These were the words which were written in that
tablet, worthy of eternal memory. And I will tell thee further in this case,
that Lucullus the Senator sent on the one part that Tablet of copper, where
these words were: and on the other part, the coffers wherein he had brought
the riches, to the end the Senate should chose one, and leave the other. The
Senate despising the riches and Treasours, chose the Tablet of counsels.

CHAP. LVI. The Emperor follows his matter, and exhorts his Son unto
certain particular things worthy to be engraued in the hearts of men.
Until now I have spoken as a father to his Son, that which touches thy
profit. Now I will tell thee what thou shall do after my death, for my
service. And if thou will be the true Son of thy Father, the things which I
have loved in my life, shall be of thee esteemed after my death: Do not
resemble many Children, which after their Fathers have closed their Eyes, do
remember them no more. For in such case, though indeed the Fathers be dead and
buried: yet they are always living, to complain to the Gods of their children.

Though it seems not to be slanderous, yet it is more perilous to contend
with the dead, then to iniure the living. And the reason is for that the living
may revenge, and are for to answer, It is more perilous to iniure the dead
then the living.
but the dead cannot make answer, and much less they can be revenged. And in
such case the Gods do take their cause in protection: and sometimes they execute
such cruel punishment of those that live, that rather then they would endure
it, rhey wish to be dead.

Thou oughtst to think (my Son) that I have begoten thee, I have nourished
thee, I have taught thee, I have trymmed thee, I have chastised thee, and I
have exalted thee.

And for this only consideration, though by death I am absent: it is not
reason that thou ever forget me: For the true, and not unthankful Child,
ought the same day to bury his Father in his tender heart, when others have
laid him in the hard grave. One of the visible chasticements The duty of a
thankful child.
which the Gods give to men in this world is, that the children obey not their
Fathers in their life: For the self same fathers did not remember their own
fathers after their death. Let not young Princes think after they have
inherited, after they see their Father dead, and after they are past correction
of their Masters, that all things ought to be done as they themselves will it,
for it will not be so: For they want the favor of the gods, and have
malediction of their fathers: they live in trouble, and dye in danger. I
require naught else of thee, my son, but that such a father as I have been to
thee in my life: such a son thou be to me after my death. I commend unto
thee my son, the veneration of the Gods: and this chiefly above all things:
for the Prince which makes account of the gods, need not to fear any storm of
fortune.

Love the gods, and thou shall be beloved. Serve them, and thou shall be
served: Fear them, and thou shall be feared, honor them, and thou shall be
honored, Do their commandments, and they will give thee thy hearts desire:
for the gods are so good, that they do not only receive in account that which
we do: but also that which we desire to do. I commend unto thee (my son) the
reverence of the Temples, that is to say, that they be not in discord, that
they be clean and renewed, that they offer therein the sacrifice accustomed: For
we do not this honor, to the substance wherewith the Temples are made: but
to the gods, to whom they are consecrated. I commend unto thee the veneration
of Priests, and Ministers are to be honored of all men.
I pray thee, though they be covetous, auaritious, dissolute, impatient,
negligent, and vicious: yet that they be not dishonored: for to us others, it
appertains, not to judge of the life they lead as men: but we must consider
that they are mediators between the gods and us.

Behold, my son, that to serve the Gods, honor the Temples, and reverence
the Priests, it is not a thing voluntary, but very necessary for Princes: For
so long endured the glory of the Greeks, as they were worshippers of their
goods, and careful of their temples. The unhappy realm of Carthage was nothing
more cowardly, nor less rich, then that of the Romans, but in the end of the
Romans, they were overcome: because they were great lovers of their
treasures, and little worshippers of their Temples. I commend unto thee (my
son) Helia thy stepmother, and remember, though she be not thy mother, yet
she has been my wife. That which to thy mother Faustine thou ought for
bringing thee into the world, the self same thou ought to Helia, for the
good entertainment she has showed thee. And indeed, oftentimes I being
offended with thee, she maintained thee, and caused me to forget: so that she
by her good words, did win again that, which thou by thy evil works did
lose. Thou shall have my curse if thou use her evil: and thou shall A good
admonition for children how to use their stepmothers.
fall into the ire of the Gods, if thou agreest that other do not use her
well: For all the damage which she shall feel, shall not be, but for the
inconvenience of my death, and injury of thy person: For her Dowry, I leave
her the tributes of Hestia, and the Orchards of Vulcanus, which I have made to
be planted for her recreation.

Be thou not so hardy to take them from her: for in taking them from her, thou
shall show thy wickedness, and in leaving them her, thy obedience, and in giving
her more, thy bounty and liberality. Remember (my son) that she is a Roman
woman, young, and a widow, and of the house of Traiane my Lord, and that she
is thy mother adoptatiue, and my natural wife: and above all, for that I leave
her recommended unto thee. I commend unto thee my sons in law, whom I will thou
use as parents and friends. And beware, that thou be not of those which are
brethren in words, and cousins in works: Be thou assured that I have willed
so much good to my daughters, that the best which were in all the Countries, I
have chosen for their persons. And they have been so good, that if in giving
them my daughters, they were my sons in law: in love I loved them as children.

I commend unto thee my sisters and daughters, whom I leave thee all married,
not with strange Kings, but with natural Senators. So that all dwell in Rome
where they may do thee services, and thou may give them rewards and gifts.
Thy sisters have greatly inherited the beauty of thy mother Faustine: and have
taken little nature of their Father Mark.

But I swear unto thee that I have given them such husbands, and to their
husbands, such and so profitable counsels, that they would rather lose their
life then agree to any thing touching their dishonor.

Use thy sisters in such fort that they be not out of favor, for that their
aged Father is dead, and that they become not proud for to see their brother
Emperor. Women are of a very tender condition: for of small occasion they do
complain, and of Women are of a tender condition.
less they wax proud. Thou shall keep them and preserve them after my death,
as I did in my life: For otherwise, their conversation to the people shall be
very noisome, and to thee very importunate. I commend unto thee, Lipula thy
youngest sister, which is enclosed within the Virgin Vestals, who was daughter
of thy mother Faustine, whom so dearly I have loved in life, and whose death I
have bewailed until my death. Every year I gave to thy sister six thousand
sexterces for her necessities: and indeeed I had married her also, if she had
not fallen into the fire, and burnt her face. For, though she were my last, I
loved her with all my heart. All have esteemed her fall into the fire for evil
luck: but I do count that evil luck for good fortune. For her face was not
so burned with coals as her rerenowne suffered peril among evil tongues.

I swear unto thee (my son) that for the service of the gods, and for the
renown of men: she is more sure in the temple with the Vestall Virgins, then
thou art in the Senate with thy Senators. I suppose now that at the end of the
journey she shall find her self better to be enclosed, then thou at liberty.
I leave unto her in the province of Lucania, every year six thousand
sexterces: travel to augment them for her, and not to diminish them. I commend
unto thee Drusia the Roman widow, who has a process in the Senate: For in
the times of the commotions past her husband was banished, and proclaimed
Traitor. I have great pity of so noble and worthy a widow: for it is now
three months since she has put up her complaint, and for the great wars I
could not show her justice. Thou shall find my son) that in 35. years I
have governed in Rome, I never agreed that any widow should have any suit
before me above eight days: Be careful to favor and dispatch the orphans and
widows: for the needy widow, in what place soever they be, do incur into
great danger. Not without cause I advertise thee, that thou travel to dispatch
the^ so soon as thou may: and to administer justice unto them: for through
the prolonging of beautiful women's suites, their honor and credit is
diminished: so that their business being prolonged, they shall not recover so
much of their goods as they shall lose of their renown. I commend unto thee
(my son) my old servants, which with my young years, and my cruel wars,
with my great necessities, with the cumbrance of my body, and my long disease,
have had great trouble: and as faithful servants oftentimes to ease me, have
annoyed themselves. It is convenient since I have profited of their life, that
they should not lose by my death. Of one thing I assure thee, that though my
body remain with the worms in the grave: yet before the gods I will remember
them. And herein thou shall show thy self to be a good child, when thou shall
recompense those which have served thy Father well.

All Princes which shall do justice Princes that do justice, do get enemies
in the execution thereof.
shall get enemies in the execution thereof. And since it is done by the hands
of those which are near him, the more familiar they are with the Prince, the
more are they hated of the people: all in general do love justice but none do
rejoice that they execute it in his house. And therefore after the Prince ends
his life, the people will take revenge of those which have been ministers
thereof. It were great infamy to the Empire, offense to the gods, injury to
me, unthankfulness to thee, having found the arms of my servants, ready
eighteen years, that thy gates should be shut against them one day.

Keep, keep these things (my son) in thy memory: and since particularly I
do remember them at my death, consider how heartily I loved them in my life.

CHAP. LVII. The good Marcus Aurelius Emperor of Rome, ends his purpose and
life: And of the last words which he spoke to his son Commodus, and of the
table of Counsels which he gave him.
WHen the Emperor had ended his particular recommendations The Emperor here
concludes his speech, and ends his life.
unto his son Commodus, as the dawning of the day began to appear: so his
eyes began to close, his tongue to faulter, and his hands to tremble, as it
does accustom to those, which are at the point of death. The Prince perceiving
then little life to remain, commanded his Secretary Panutius to go to the
coffers of his books, and to bring one of the coffers before his presence: out
of the which he took a table of 3. foot of breadth, and 2. of length, the
which was of Eban, bordered all about, with Unicorn. And it was closed with 2.
lids very fine, of red wood, which they call rasing, of a tree where the Phoenix
(as they say) breeds, which did grow in Arabia. And as there is but one only
Phoenix, so in the world is there but one only tree of that sort. On the
uttermost part of the Table, was graven the god Jupiter, and on the other the
goddess Venus: and in the other was drawn the god Mars, and the goddess
Diana. In the uppermost part of the table, was carved a Bull, and in the
nethermost part was drawn a King. And they said the painter of so famous and
renowned a work, was called Apelles.

The Emperor taking the Table in his hands, casting his eyes unto his Son,
said these words: Thou see my son, how from the turmoyles of Fortune I have
escaped, and how I into miserable destinies of death do enter, where by
experience I shall know what shall be after this life.

I mean not now to blaspheme the Gods, but to repent my sins. But I would
willingly declare why the Gods have created us: since there is such trouble in
life, and pain in death. Not understanding why the Gods have used so great
cruelty with creatures. I see it now, in that after lxij. years, I have
sailed in the danger and peril of this life: now they command me to land,
and harbor in the grave of death.

Now approaches the hour wherein the band of Matrimony is loosed, the threede
of Life untwined, the key Death alters all things.
does lock, the sleep is wakened, my life does end, and I go out of this
troublesome pain.

Remembering me of that I have done in my life, I desire no more to live: but
for that I know not whether I am carried by death. I fear and refuse his
darts. Alas what shall I do, since the Gods tell me not what I shall do? What
counsel shall I take of any man, since no man will accompany me in this
journey?

Oh what great disceipt? Oh what manifest blindness is this, to love one thing
all the days of our life, and to carry nothing with us after our death?

Because I desired to be rich, they let me dye poor: Because I desired to live
with company, they let me die alone. For such shortness of life, I know not
what he is, that will have a house: since the narrow grave is our certain
mansion place? Believe me my son, that many things past do grieve me
sore: but with nothing so much I am troubled, as to come so late to the
knowledge of this life: For if I could perfectly believe this, neither should
men have cause to reprove me, neither yet I now such occasion to lament me

Oh how certain a thing is it, that men when they come to the point of death,
do promise the Gods, that if they prerogue their death, they will amend their
life? but notwithstanding: I am sorry that we see them delivered from death,
without any manner of amendment of life.

They have obtained that, which of the Gods they have desired: and have not
performed that which they have prornised. They ought assuredly to think, that
in the sweetest time of their life, they shall be constrained to Deferring of
the punishment is not the pardoning of the fault.
accept death. For, admit that the punishment of ingrate persons be deferred:
yet therefore the fault is not pardoned.

Be thou assured (my Son) that I have seen enough, heard, selte, tasted,
desired, possessed, eaten, slept, spoken, and also lived enough. For, vices
give as great troubles to those which follow them much: as they do great desire
to those which never proved them. I confess to the immortal Gods, that I have
no desire to live: yet I ensure thee, I would not die. For, life is so
troublesome that it wearyeth us: and Death is so doubtful, that it fears us.
If the Gods deferred my death, I doubt whether I should reform my life? And if
I do not amend my life, nor serve the gods better, nor profit the commonwealth
more: and if that every time I am sick, it should grieve me to dye: I say it
is much better for me now to accept death, then to wish the lengthening of my
life. I say the life is so troublesome, so fickle, so suspicious, so vucertaine,
and so importunate. Finally I say, it is a life without life: that he is an
obstinate fool, which so much desires it. Come that that may come: for
finally, notwithstanding that I have spoken, I willingly commit self into the
hands of the gods, since of necessity I am thereunto constrained: For it
proceeds not of a little wisdom, to receive that willingly, which to do
we are constrained of necessity.

I will not recommend my self to the Priests, nor cause the Oracles to be
visited, nor promise any thing to the temples, nor offer sacrifices to the
gods, to the end they should warrant me from death, and restore me to life:
but I will demand and require them, that if they have created The wisdom of
God in disposing his gifts.
me for any good thing, I may not lose it for my evil life. So wise and sage
are the gods in that they say, so just and true in that they promise, that if
they give us not that which we others would: it is not for that they will not,
but because we deserve it not: for we are so evil, and worth so little, and
we may do so little, that for many good works we deserve no merit, and yet
with and evil work we be made unworthy of all: Since therefore I have put my
self into the hands of the gods, let them do with me what they will for their
service for in the end, the worst that they will do, is much better then the
world will do: For all that the world has given me, has been but mockery and
deceit: but that which the gods have given me, I have governed and possessed
without snspition: For this last hour (my son) I have kept the best, the
most noble, and richest jewel that I have possessed in my life time, and I do
protest unto the immortal gods, that if as they do command me to die, they
would give me lieence to read in the grave, I would command it to be buried
with me.

Thou shall know my son, that in in the tenth year of my Empire, a great
war arose against the unruly people of Persia, where by evil luck it was
appointed for me, in person to give the battle: the which won, and all
their Country destroyed, I returned by the old City of Thebes in Egypt, to
see if I could find any antiquity of those in times past. In the house of an
Egyptian Priest, I found a little table which they hanged at the gate of the
Kings palace the day of his Coronation.

And this poor Priest told me, that that which was in his table, was written
by a king of Egypt, named Ptholomeus Arasides. I beseech the immortal god, my
son, that such be thy works, as the words of this table require. As
Emperor, I leave thee heir of many Realms: and as a father I give thee this
Table of Counsels.

The words which the Fathers do teach unto the children at the last hour, the
children ought to keep continually in their memory. Let this therefore be my
last word, with the Empire thou shall be feared through out all the World: and
with the counsels of this Table thou shall be loved of all Nations.

This talk being ended, and the table given, the Emperor turned his eyes,
lost his senses, and for the space of a quarter of an hour, lay languishing in
extreme pain, and within a while after yielded up the Ghost. In this table
were certain Greek Letters which weere in meeter, and in our tongue signify
thus.

A Table left by the Emperor Marcus Aurelius to his Soune Commodus.
ONn Honors stall, I do no Tirant heave, A Table of good counsel.

Nor yet the poor suppress, if he were tust:
For riches rule I nould to pardon cleave,
For want of wealth, nor follow rigors lust.
For naked love I never spent reward
Nor would correct for only enuies heat
Of virtues impes I always had regard,
And mischiefs mates have plagude with torment great.
To others doom I never would commit
Of open right the quarrel to decide,
Ne yet of doubtful strifes in trust of wit,
The final end alone I would divide,
To them that sought for justice equal sway,
Her golden rule I never would deny,
Ne yet to such, for whom desert would lay,
Their slender faults might well be slipped by.
To feel the grief that waued in my mind
With others smart I never could sustain,
Nor yet rewards my princely words would bind,
When sweet delight had chiefest joy to rain.
In high estate when most blind for tune smilde,
A recklesse life, I restless ran not on,
Nor yet when change these happy days beguilde,
To cold despair my quiet mind was gone.
By boiling heat of malice endless fire,
To vices train I cast no eagre eye,
Ne yet for lust of pining wealths desire,
Unlawful facts I rechlesse would apply.
The traiterous breast I never could embrace.
Nor lend mine ears to swallow flattering talk:
Of vices slaves I wayed not the grace,
Nor left unsought good will in virtues walk.
Poor Irus band for that I did relieve,
Whose needy state does stop in Croesus swaye,
The greatest gods whose heavenly wrack does grieve,
The prowdest crowns was aye my present state.
The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE DIAL OF PRINCES, COMPILED By the Right Reverend
Father in God, ANTONIE of Gueuara, Bishop of Mondogueto, Preacher, Chronicler,
and Councellor to CHARLES the fifth, Emperor of ROME.

Containing many Instructions and Rules for the favored of the Court, being
once in favor, easily to keep and continue themselves in favor still. Very
necessary and profitable for all Princes and Noble men, and Gentlemen
Courtiers, that seek to continue themselves in honor and estimation.

LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop. 1619.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER,
WHat detracting tongues report of me, and my first travel in the translation
of this Dyall, enlarging them at pleasure to work my defame disabling my doing
herein, by brute it was no work of mine, but the fruit of others labor: I
need not much force, since by daily proof we see, that ill disposed minds can
never frame an honest tongue of head. For my object and reproof of this their
slanderous and malignant speech: I can allege (courteous Reader) two
principal causes, which thou reading, and judging with indifferency, may
easily aproue, if I should seem to gloss with thee. First the baseness of my
Style, the plain and humble words couched in the same, the mean, rude, and ill
contrived sentences laid before thee, together with the simple handling of the
whole, plainly shows to thee whence they are, and easily acquainteth thee
with the curious Translator: Who protests to God, and confesses to the
world, that he more rashly then wisely plunged himself into so grave and deep
a matter, and whose young years and unskillful head, might both then and now
have excused his fond enterprises herein.

For the second, and last, I must needs appeal to all the worshipful, and my
bebeloued companions, and fellow students of our house of Lincolnes Inn at
that time, from whence my poor English Dial took his light.

To whose just and true reports (for thy undoubted satisfaction and discharge
of my poor honesty) I refer thee, and wholly yield me.

These recited causes for purgation of my suspected fame, as also for
established assurance of the like, and thy further doubt of me hereafter.

I thought good, Gentle Reader, to denounce unto thee. I might well have spared
this second and last labor of mine, taken, in the rformation and correction of
this Dial, enlarging my self further once again, with the translation of the
late and new come favored Courtier, and which I found annexed to the Dial for
the 4. and last book, If my proceeding travel taken in the setting forth of
the first three books, and the respect of mine honesty in accomplishing of the
same had not incited me (unwillingly) to continue my first begun attempt, to
bring the same to his perfect and desired end, which whole work is now
complete by this last book, entitled, the favored Courtier, which first and
last volume wholly as it lies, I prostrate to the judgment of the grave and
wise Reader, subiecting my self and it, to the reformation and correction of
his learned head, whom I beseech to judge of me with favor and equity, and
not with malice to persecute my fame and honest intent, having for thy
benefit, to my little skill and knowledge employed my simple talent, craving
no other guerdon of thee but thy good report, and courteous acceptance hereof.

Which doing thou shall make me double bound to thee. First to be thankful
for thy good will. Secondly, to be considerate how hereafter I take upon me
so great a charge.

Thirdly, thou shall encourage me to increase my talent.

Fourthly, and lastly, most freely to bestow the increase thereof on thee, and
for the benefit of my Country and Commonwealth, whereunto duty binds me:
Observing the sage and prudent saying of the renowned Orator and famour
Cicero: with which I end, and there to leave thee.

Non nobis solum natisumus, ortusque nostri partem patria vendicat, partem
parents, partem amici.

In defense and preservation whereof (good Reader) we ought not alone to
employ our whole wits and able senses, but necessity enforcing us, to sacrifice
our selves also for benefit thereof.

Thine that accepts me. T. N.

THE PROLOGVE OF THIS PRESENT WORK Shows what one true friend ought to do
for an other: Addressed to the Right Honorable the Lord Fraunces Cenos, great
Commander of LION.
THe famous Philosopher Plato besought of all his Disciples to tell them, why
he iournyed so often from Athens to Scicile, being the way he traveled (indeed)
very long, and the sea he passed very dangerous: answered them thus. The cause
that moves me to go from Athens to Scicile, is only to see Phocion, a man
just in all that he does, and wise in all that he speaks: and because he is
my very friend, and enemy of Denis, I go also willingly to him, to aid him in
that I may, and to counsel him in all that I know: and told them further.

I let you understand my Disciples, that a good Philosopher, to visit and
help his friend, and to accompany with a good man, should think the journey
short, and no whit painful, though he should sulke the whole seas The
painful journey the Philosophers book to vi^^t good ^en.
and pace the compass of the earth. Appolonius Thianeus departed from Rome,
went through all Asia, sailed over the great flood Nile, endured the bitter
cold of Mount Caucasus, suffered the parching heat of the mountains Riphei,
passed the land of Nassagera, entered into the great India: and this long
pilgrimage took he upon him, in no other respect, but to see Hyarcus the
Philosopher, his great and old friend.

Agesilaus also among the Greeks accounted a worthy Captain understanding
that the King Hicarius had another Captain (his very friend) Captive: leaving
all his own affairs apart, traveling through diverse Countries, went to the
place, whete he was, and arrived there, presented himself unto the King, and
said thus unto him.

I humbly beseech thee, O puissant King, that thou vouchsafe to pardon Minotus
my sole and only friend, and thy subject now: for what thou shall do to him,
make thy account thou have done it to me: For in deed thou can never alone
punish his body, but thou shall therewith also crucify my heart.

King Herod after Augustus had overcome Mark Antonie, came to Rome, and laying
his Crown at the Imperial foot, with stout courage spoke these words unto
him. Know thou, mighty Augustus, if thou know it not, that if Mark Antony
had believed me, and not his accursed love Cleopatra, thou should then have
proved how bitter an enemy I would have been to thee, and he have found how
true a friend I was, and yet am to him. But he, as a man rather given over to
the rule of a woman's will, then guided by reasons skill, took of me but money
only, and of Cleopatra coonsell.

And proceeding further, said, Lo here my kingdom, my person, and royal
crown laid at thy princely feet, all which I freely offer to thee, to dispose
of at thy will and pleasure, pleasing thee so to accept it, but yet with this
condition (Inuict Augustus) that thou command me not to hear, nor speak ill
of Mark Antony my Lord and friend, yea, although he were now dead. For know
thou, sacred Prince, that true friends neither for death ought to be had in
oblivion, nor for absence to be forsaken.

Julius Caesar last Dictator and first Emperor of Rome, did so entirely love
Cornelins Fabatus the Consul, that traveling together through the Alps of
France, and being benighted, The properties of a true friend.
far from any town or harbor, save that only of a hollow cave, which happily
they lighted on: And Cornelius the Consul, even then not well at ease, Julius
Caesar left him the whole cave, to the end he might be more at rest, and he
himself lay abroad in the cold and snow.

By these godly examples we have recited, and by diverse others we could
recite, may be considered, what faithful friendship ought to be betwixt
true and perfect friends, and into how many dangers one friend ought to put
himself for another: for it is not enough, that one friend be sorry for the
troubles of another, but he is bound (if need were) to go and dye joyfully
with him.

He only, deservedly, may be counted a true friend, that unasked, and before
he be called, goes with his goods and person to help and relieve his
friend. But in this our iron age, alas, there is no such kind of amity, as
that we have spoken of. More then this, that there is no friend will part with
any thing of his to relieve his friend, much less that takes care to favor
him in his troubles: but if there be any such that will help his friend, it is
even then when time serves rather to pity and lament him, then to aid or
succor him.

It is a thing worth the knowledge, that to make a true and perpetual
friendship, we may not offer to many persons, but according to Seneca, his
saying, who says: My friend Lucillus, I counsel thee that thou be a true
friend to one alone, and enemy to none: for numbers of friends brings great
encumbrance, which seems somewhat to diminish friendship: For who that
considers the liberty of the heart, it is impossible that one should frame
and agree with the conditions of many, and much less that many should content
them with the desires and affections of one.

Tully and Salust were two famous Orators amongst the Romans, and great
enemies between themselves, and during this emulation between them. Tully had
purchased all the Senators friendship, and Salust only had no other friend
in all Rome, but Mark Antony alone,

And so these two great Orators being one day at words together: Tully in
great anger said to Salust: What force or power art thou of, or what evil
can thou do or attempt against me? since thou know that in all Rome thou
have but one only friend, Mark Antony, and I no enemy but one, and that is
he? To whom Salust answered:

Thou gloriest (O Tully) that thou have no more but one only enemy, and
afterward jests at me, that I have no more Friends but only me: but I hope
in the immortal Gods, that this only Enemy thou have, shall be able enough
utterly to undo thee: and this my sole Friend that I have, shall be
sufficient to protect and defend me in all my causes.

And shortly after these words passed between tham, Mark Anthony showed the
friendship he bare to the one, and the enmity he had to the other. For, he
caused Tullie to be put to death, and raised Salust to great honor.

A Friend may well imparte to the other, all his own, as bread, wine, money,
time, conversation, and such like, but he cannot notwithstanding give him part
of his heart: for that suffers it not to be parted nor divided, because it
ca^ be given but to one alone.

This granted to be true, as needs it must, doubtless that the heart cannot
be divided, but only given to one: then is it of necessity, that he that
will seek to have many Friends, must needs repair to the shambles to provide
him of many hearts.

Many vaunt themselves, and think it a glory to have numbers of friends, but
let such well consider to what use that legendarie of Friends do serve them,
they shall then easily find they stand them in no oeher steed, but to eat,
to drink, to walk, to babble, and to murmr togethers, and not one to help
the other, with their goods, favor, and credit at their need, nor friendly
to reprove them of their faults and vices, which doubtless ought not to be so.

For, where true and perfect friendship reigns, neither I with my friend, nor
he with me should dissemble any vice of fault.

Ouide says in his book De Art amandi, that the law of true and unfeigned
Love is so straight, that no friendship but mine in thy heart should harbor:
and in mine should lodge none others love but thine, for love is none What Love
is.
other thing, But one heart, liuining in two bodies, and two bodies obeying in
one heart.

In this World there is no treasure comparable to a true and sure Friend, since
to a faithful* Friend a man may safely discover the secrets of his heart,
bewray unto him his gryping griefs, trusting him with his honor, committing
to his guide and custody all his goods, he shall succor him in his misery,
counsel him in peril, rejoice at his prosperity, and mourn at his
adversity: And in fine I conclude, such a friend never wearyeth to serve him
in his life, nor to lament him after his death.

I grant that Gold and Silver is good, Kinsefolkes are good, and Money is
good: but true friends exceed them all without comparison.

For all these things cannot warrant us from necessity (if sinister Fortune
plunge us into it) but rather increase our torments and extreamitie. Also they
do not rejoice us, but rather heap further griefs upon us: neither do they
succor us, but rather each hour give us cause to complain, and much less
do they remember and advise us of that that is good, but still do deceive us,
not directing us the right way, but still bringing us out of our way: and when
they have led us awry out of the Highway, they bring us into Desert woods, and
high, and dangerous mountains, whence from we must fall down headlong.

A true friend is no partaker of these conditions, but rather he is sorry for
the least trouble that happens to his friend, he fears not, neither
spares his goods, nor the danger of his person, he cares not to take upon
him any painful journey, quarrels, or suits, nor yet to put his life in every
hazard of death.

And yet that that is most of all to be esteemed is, that like as the heart
and bowels ever burn with pure and sincere love, so does he wish and desire
with gladsome mind to bear the burden of all his friends mishaps, yea more
then yet is spoken of.

Alexander the Great, offered great presents to the Philosopher Zenocrates, who
would not vouchsafe to receive them, much less to behold them. And being
demanded of Alexander, why he would not receive them, having poor kinsfolks
and parents to bestow them on: he answered him thus.

Truly, I have both brothers and sisters (O Alexander) yet I have no kinsman
but him that is my friend, and one only friend I have, who has no need of A
remarkable saying of Zenocrates,
any gifts to be given him. For the only cause why I chose him to be my sole
and only friend, was for that I ever saw him spise these worldly things.

Truly the sentence of this good Philosopher Zenocrates is of no small efficacy
for him that will advisedly consider of it, since that not seldom, but many
times it happens, that the great troubles, the sundry dangers, and the
continual necessities and miseries we suffer in this vale of misery, have for
the most part procceded from our parents, and afterward by our friends have
been mediated and redressed. Therefore since we have thought it good and
necessary to chose a friend, and that he be but one only, each man must be
wise, lest in such choice he be deceived. For often times it happens, that
those that take little regard herein, grant their friendship to such a one as
is too covetous impatient, a great babbler, seditious, and presumptuous, and of
such conditions that sometimes it should be less evil for us to have him our
enemy, then to account of him as of our deer friend.

Him whom we will choose for our faithful friend, amongst other manners and
conditions, he must chiefly, and before all be endued with these, Great eat
is to be had in choosing a friend.
that he be courteous of nature, fair spoken, hard and stout to endure pain,
patient in troubles, sober in diet, moderate in his words, grave and ripe in
his counsels, and above all steadfast in friendship, and faithful in secrets:
And whom we shall find with these laudable virtues and conditions adorned, him
may we safely take and accept for our friend. But if we see any of these
parts wanting in him, we ought to shun him, as from the plague knowing for
certainety, that the friendship of a feigned and fantastical friend is much
worse and perilous, then the enmity of a known and open enemy: for to the
hands of one we commit our heart and faith, and from the deceites and treasons
of the other we defend our selves with our whole force and power.

Seneca writing to his dear and faithful friend Lucillus says unto him. I
pray thee (O Lucillus) that thou order and determine thine affairs by the
advice and counsel of thy friend, but also I do remember thee: that first
thou see well what manner of friend thou have chosen thee: for there is no
merchandise in the world this day, that men are so soon beguiled in, as they
are in the choice of friends. Therefore the grave sentence of Seneca wisely
wayed, we should assent with him in opinion, that since no man buyeth a Horse,
but he first causes him to be ridden, nor bread, but first he sees and
handles it, nor wine but he tastes it, nor flesh but first he wayeth it, nor
corn but he sees a sample, nor house but he does first value it, nor
Instrument but that first he plays on it, and judges of his sound: It is
but reason he should be so much the more circumspect before he choose his
Friend to examine his life and condition, since all the other things we have
spoken of, may be put in diverse houses and corners, but our Friend we lodge
and keep dearly in our proper be wells.

Those that write of the Emperor Augustus say, that he was very strange and
scrupulous in accepting Friends, but after he had once received them into his
friendship, he was very constant and circumspect to keep them. For he never
had any friend, but first he had some proof and trial of him, neither would
he ever after forsake him, for any displeasure done to him. Therefore it should
always be so, that true friends should bear one to an other such love and
affection, that the one being in prosperity, should not have occasion to
complain of himself, in that he did not relieve his friends necessity,
being in adversity: nor the other being poor and needy, should grudge or
lament for that his friend being rich and wealthy, would not succor him, with
all that he might have done for him. For to say the truth, where perfect
friendship is, there ought no excuse to be made, to do what possible is, the
one for the other.

The friendship of young men comes commonly (or for the most part at the
least) by being companions in vice and folly: and such of right ought rather
to be called vacabonds, then once to deserve the name of true friends. For,
that cannot be called true friendship, that is continued to the prejudice or
derogation of virtue.

Seneca writing again to Lucillus, says these words. I would not have thee
think, nor once mistrust, O my Lucillus, that in all the Roman Empire I have
any greater Friend then thuo: but with all, assure thy self, that our
Friendship is not so straight between us, that I would take upon me at any
time to do for thee otherwise then honesty should lead me.

For though that love I bear thee, The saying of Seneca, touching frindship.
has made thee Lord of my liberty: yet reason also has left me virtue free.

The Author proceeds on.
Applying that we have spoken, to that we will now declare, I say I will not
acknowledge my self your servant, for so should I be compelled to fear you
more then love you: much less will I vaunt my self to be your Kins-man: for
so I should importune and displease you: and I will not brag that heretofore
we have been of familiar acquaintance, for that I would not make any
demonstration, I made so little account of you, and less then I am bound to
do: neither will I boaste my self that I am at this present your familiar and
well-beloved: For indeed I should then show my self to be too bold and
arrogant: but that, that I will confess, shall be, that I love you as a
Friend, and you me as a Kins-man, albeeit this friendship has succeeded
diversely till now. For you being Noble as you are, have bountifully showed your
friendship to me, in large and ample gifts: but I poor, and of base estate,
have only made you sure of mine in words.

Plutarch in his politikes said: That it were far better to fell to our friends
our works and good deeds, whether they were (in prosperity, adversity, or
necessity) then to feed them with vain Flattering words for nothing:

Yet it is not so general a rule, but that sometimes it happens, that the
lofty and high words on the one side are so profitable, and the works so few
and feeble, on the other side, that one shall be better pleased and delighted,
with hearing the sweet and courteous words of the one, then he shall be, to be
served with the cold service and works of the other, of small profit and
value.

Plutarche also in his book De animalibus tells us: that Denis the Tyrant
being one day at the Table, reasoning of diverse and sundry matters with
Chrysippus the Philosopher, it chanced, that as he was at dinner, one brought
him a present of certain Sugar-cakes: wherefore Chrysippus ceasing his former
discourse, fell to persuade Denis to fall to his cakes. To whom Denis
answered, on with your matter Chrysippus, and leave not off so: For my heart
is better contented with thy sweet and sugared words, then my Tongue is
pleased with the delicate taste of these mountain-cakes. For as thou know,
these cakes are heavy of digestion, and do greatly annoy the stomach: but
good Good works do maruellously cheer the heart.
works do meruellously rejoice and comfort the heart.

For this cause Alexander the great had the poet Homer in greater veneration
(being dead) then all the other that were alive in his time: not for that
Homer ever did him service, or that he knew him, but only because of his
learned Books he wrote and compiled: and for the grave sentences he found
therein. And therefore he bare about him in the day time the book of the
famous deeds of Troy, (called the Illyades) hanged at his neck within his
bosom: and in the night he laid it under his bolster, at his beds-head where
he slept.

In recompense therefore (Sir) of the many good turns I have received at your
hands, I was also willing to compyle and dedicate this my little Treatise to
you, the which I present you with all my desires, my studyes, my watches, my
sweatte, and my troubles, holding my self fully satisfied for all the pains I
have taken, so that this my simple travel be grateful unto you (to whom I
offer it) and to the public weal profitable. Being well assured, if it please
you to trust me and credit my writing, you shall manifestly know how freely I
spoke to you, and like a friend, and not deceive you as a flatterer.

For, if the beloved and Favorites of Princes, chance to be cast out of
favor, it is because every man flattereth him, and seeks to please him, and
no man goes about to tell him truth: nor that, that is for his honor, and
fittest for him.

Salust in his book of the wars of Iugurtha says: that the high heroycall
facts and deeds were of no less glory to the Hystoriographers that wrote
them, then they were to the captain that did them.

For it happens many times, that the Captain dying in the battle he has
won, lives afterward notwithstanding, by the Fame of his noble attempt:
And this proceeds not only of the valiant deeds of Arms he was seen do, but
also for that we read of him in worthy Authors which have written thereof.

We may well say therefore (touching this matter) that as well may we take
him for a true friend, that gives good counsel, as he which does us great
pleasure and service. For according to the opinion of the good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, who who said to his Secretary Panutius, that a man with one pay,
may make full satisfaction and recompense of many pleasures and good turns
showed: but to requite a good counsel, diverse thanks, and infinite services
are requisite.

If we will credit the ancient Hystoriographers, we shall find it true, that
the most Noblest and virtuous Emperors, the fortunate Kings, and the valiant
Captains, when they should enterprise to go conquer their enemies, either they
sought for some Philosopher, or they chose some other honest learned man, of
whom they took counsel touching all their affairs, before they pressed any
Soldiers.

Comparing the times past, with The times past better then the times present.
the times present, we think (that have read somewhat) that the time past was
as pure grain, and this now as chafe and straw: that one as the time calm,
and still in the sea, and this as wavering and tempestuous: that then the fine
and pure mertal, and this now the dross thereof. The other, the marie, and
this the bones: the one the clear day, and the other the dark night. For in
these days, in Princes Courts, and noble men's houses, they glory more to have
a scoffing knave or iester to make them laugh, then they reckon of a grave and
wise man to give them counsel.

Alexander the Great in all his wars would always be accompanied with the wise
Aristotle.

Cyrus King of Persia, with the Philosopher Chilo: King Ptholomie, with
Pithinns the Philosopher: Pyrrhus King of Epyre, with Zatirus, Augustus the
Emperor with Simonides: Scipio the African with Sophocles, Traian the Emperor
with Plutarch, and Antoninus the Emperor with Gorgias: Now all these famous
Princes carried not with them so many learned Philosophers, to fight in battle
with armed weapon in hand like other their Soldiers, but only to use their
counsel and advise: so that the great battles they overthrew, and the worthy
victories they wan, with the noble triumphs done, was as much by the grave
counsel of these good and wise Philosophers, as by the force of their army,
and prowes of their captains.

The greatest good turn and benefit one friend can do for another, is to know
to give good counsel to his friend in his greatest need: and not without
cause, I say, to give counsel: For it happens often times, that those that
thought to have given us good remedy by their counsel, (wanting indeed
discretion and judgment in the same) have caused us to run into further
dangers.

And therefore Seneca being once demanded of the Emperor Nero, what he
thought of Scipio the Affrican, and Cato the Censor, answered him in this
manner.

I think it was as necessary that Cato was borne for the Commonwealth, as
Scipio for the wars, for the good Cato with his prudent counsel expelled
vice out of the Wealepublike: and the other with his noble courage and great
armies did ever withstand the force of the enemies:

According to the saying of Seneca, let us also say after him, that he is very
arrogant that presumes to give an other counsel; but withal, we say again,
that if the counsel be found good, he has given to his friend in his need
and necessity, as much praise deserves he that gave it, as he that knew how to
take it.

Now after the example of the ancient Philosophers, which went to the wars,
not to fight, but only to give counsel, I will (sir) for those things that
pertain to your service, and profit, take upon me the office of a
Philosopher; and for the first doctrine of my Philosophy, I say, that if it
please you, to receive these counsels which my pen does write unto you, at
this present. I promise you, and by the faith of a Christian man, I swear,
that they shall be such excellent helps to you, for the preservation of your
credit and favor you are now in, as you may be enriched by the true and
diligent service of your servants For if a man would with an oath ask the
truth of Plato, Socrates, Pythagoras, Diogenes, Lycurgus, Chilo, Pittachus, and
of Apolonius: and also of all the university and company of the other
Philosophers, they would swear and affirm, that the felicity of man
consists not in great might, in great authority, and possessions: but only
in deserving much: For the honor, favor, and dignities of this mortal life,
are more to be praised, and had in veneration, when they are placed in a
condign and worthy person, then they are being possessed of an unworthy and
graceless man, allotted to him, not by virtue, but by fortune: And therefore
your authority being great at this present, exalted thereto by Gods divine will
and providence, and now in the highest degree of prosperity: I would wish you,
my good Lord, less then any other Courtier, to trust to fortunes impery: For
if the earthquakes sooner bring to ground the proud and stately palaces, then
the mean and low houses: if ofter fall the highest mountains, the dreadful
lightnings, and tempests, then on the lowest hills: if among the greater
multitude of people the plagues be rifer, then amongst the fewer number: if
they use rather to spread their nets, and lay the birdlime on the green and
thickest bows then on the dry and withered sticks: to snare the seely birds
withal: If always the stillest seas do foreshew to us a greater tempest
following, and if that long health be a watch unto a great and dangerous
sickness ensuing: by this also I will infer, that those that are achieved to
sublime estate, and high degree, are commonly more subject to fall, then those
of meaner and baser sot.

The Emperor Augustus on a time demanded of the Poet Virgill, that he would
teach him how he might conserve himself in the Empire, and always be
acceptable to the public A question demanded by the Emperor Augustus of
Virgil, and his answer.
weal.

To whom Virgil answered. I I think, O mighty Caesar, that to reign long in
the Empire, thou must considerately look into thy seife, examining thy life
and doings: and how much thou shall see thy self excel, and exceed all those
(of thy Empire) in dignity: So much more must thou endeavor thy self to
surmount all others in virtue and worthiness: for he is unworthy to rule a
multitude, that is not chief himself in all virtues.

Those therefore that in Court of Princes bear office and authority, ought
earnestly to desire and endeavor themselves to avoid the filthy sink of
vice, and to seek the clear Spring of virtue: For otherwise, they shall be
more defamed for one vice or defect found in them, then honored for their
office and authority they have.

The Author concludes.
According to the saying of the Poet Virgill to the Emperor Augustus, I am
also of opinion (my Lord) that you ought to be very circumspect, and well
advised, in looking into your self who you are, what power you are of, what
you are worth, and what you possess: and doing thus, you shall find that among
your wise Counselors you are the greatest, among the rich, among the best
esteemed, among the most fortunate, among your Secretaries, among the Rulers,
amongst all those of your Realm and Subjects, you are ever the greatest. And
therefore as you are greatest, and supreme above them all: so you ought the
more to force to be the most virtuous of them all: For else it were against al
reason, being the greatest, to be the least, and most inferior of all: For
truly none ought to be praised for good, for that he is of power, force,
possessions, wealth, much worth, in favor of dignity, neither for any
nobility that is in him, if these natural gifts be not accompanied with
virtue and good works.

The ancient Historiographers do highly commend the greatness of Alexander,
the knowledge of Ptholomie, the justice of Numa Pompilius, the clemency of
Julius Caesar, the patience of Augustus, the truth of Traian, the pity of
Anteninus, the temperancie of Constantius, the continency of Scipio, and the
humanity of Theodosius: so that we may say these so great and noble Princes
have won more honor by their virtues, then they have achieved by triumphant
victories: albeit a man be never so dishonest, vicious Sin is not so
pleasaot in the committing, as it is likesome in the remembrance
and lascivious, and that he be rooted in all idleness; let us say and avouch
it for a truth, that it is impossible (if he may return to look back on
himself, and that he may call to mind what manner of man he has been, what
he is at this present, and to what end he may com) but that the remembrance of
his forepassed faults and deeds should be more grievous and irksome to him,
then the great delight his body should take of the present pleasures: for
neither the worms in the vines, nor the Locusts in the corn, nor the moths in
the garments, nor the little worms in the wood are so hurtful and
dammageable, as sins are of power to make a man sorrowful. For to say truly,
the pleasure we receive when we commit them is not so great, as is the
displeasure we feee after we remember them. The which I considering my Lord,
it causes me to look over my old memorials, to examine my memory, to
strengthen my judgment, and to seek a new kind of study, to no other end,
but to find out sweet words, diverse doctrines, and strange histories, by
means whereof I might withdraw you from vain and worldly delights, to cause
you to walk in the right path, and to affect things virtuous and honest,
though I have always known them as acceptable to you, as they have been
familiar: for Princes servants, the more they are busied with affairs, the
less they know themselves.

And therefore great pain suffers he, and with over venomous poison is he
infected, that with others and for other occupies all his time, and for his
own souls health cannot spare a moment of time. O what comfort and quiet were
it unto my heart, if it were assured it had taken the right way in the doctrine
which I write to you, and that I had not erred in the counsels I give you: so
that in reading my book you might acquire profit thereby, and I of my travel
therein reap my full contentation. And to the end, my Lord, we may better
express the matter, search the wound, and stop the veins, that we may leave
no part uncured, or dregs of infection.

If hitherto I have used plainness, I will now speak more plainly unto you,
and yet as one friend uses to another. And therefore may it please you to
accept these small written preposes in this book, among all the residue,
proceeding from the hands of one that rather desires the health of your
soul, then the gain and satisfaction of your affects and desires.

All you that be Princes familiars, and beloved Courtiers, observe and retain
with you these few precepts and counsels.
MY Lord, never tell to any, all that you think. Show not all that you have,
neither take all that you desire: Tell not all that you know Good counsel for
all men, especially for Courtiets.
Much less never do all that you may: For the right path way to bring the
favored Courtier into his Princes disgrace, is to be addicted to his sensual
appetites, and vain humors and not to be guided with reason and discretion.

2 Beware also you trust not, nor commit to the hazard of fortunes ticklenes,
such things, as touch and concern your person, honor, goods and consciences:
For the wise Courtier that lives in his Princes grace, will not rashly put
himself in danger, in hope to save himself harmless, at all times when he
lists.

3 Although every man offer his service to you, and seem to be at your
commandment when you shall need him: yet I tell you (sir) I would not wish
you had either need of them, or of me: For many of those fine and curious
Courtiers, which are the first that offer themselves to draw on your side, and
to stand by, if need be, are commonly at the very pinch, the first and
readiest to throw stones at our faces.

4 In other men's matters busy not your self too much: and in your own,
strive not with time, but take leisure: For living after this rule, you shall
long keep your self in the good and quiet estate you are in, and otherwise
some inconvenience might lightly fall upon you, that should make you remember
what you were wont to be.

5 The imminent peril and danger those are in, which are mounted to the top
of some high thing, or to the cliffe of some high and rockie mountain, where
they have no other way to descend, but to fall, is much like to that of the
familiars of Princes. And therefore, my Lord, I would wish you would procure
you, such faithful friends about you, that they having regard and care of your
person, should always hold you by the gown for falling. And not such as
after they had let you fall, would then lend you their hands to help you up
again.

6 Albeit the things of the soul should be preferted before all others of
this worldly life, yet nevertheless I will be content, so that you have as
great care and consideration of your conscience, as you have of your honor

All which I was willing to tell you sir, to the end you may better understand,
that those that are in estimation with the Prince, though they may benefit by
time, in taking their time, yet time does never benefit by them at all.

You must ever do good to your uttermost power, and never do displeasure to
any, though it lie in your power, and that you have just cause.

For the tears of the poor that are iniuried, and the lamentable cries and
plaintes of the oppressed, may possibly one day ascend to the presence of the
Tribunal Seat, where God shall sit in his Majesty, demanding justice and
vengeance against you: and also come to the cares of the Noble Prince, to cause
you to be hated of him for ever.

8 Touching the favor you will show to any, either in Offices, or other
benefits Christians are in all things to be prefered before all others.
you will bestow on any man, take heed you always rather prefer honest and
true Christians, then your own near Kins-men or friends. For a man may
lawfully make his Friend partaker of his goods, but not of his Conscience.

9 In your counsels you give, in any wise be not too much affectioned in
them, neither scorn with those that contrary your opinion. Be not proud and
severe unto those you do command, neither do any thing without good
aduisement and consideration. For, albeit in Princes Courts every man does
admire and behold the excellency and worthiness of the person, yet are those
always that are most in favor of the Prince, more noted, regarded, and sooner
accused then others.

10 If you will not err in the counselles you shall give, nor fail in those
things you shall enterprise: Embrace those that tell you the truth, and reject
and hate those, whom you know to be Flatterers and dissemblers. For you should
rather desire to be admonished of the thing present, then to be counseled
after the damage received.

Although we suppose assuredly, that all these things aboue-written, are not
likely to happen, nor yet come even so to pass, as I have spoken: yet if it
may please you (Sir) to remember, they are not therefore impossible.

For spiteful Fortune permits oftentimes, that the Sails, which in stormy
weather the Lightnings and boystrous Tempests could not break and tear in
piec^^, are afterward upon a sudden (even in the sweet of the mornings
sleep, each man taking his rest, leaving the Seas before in quiet calm) all
to shiuered, and torn a sunder. He that means to give another a blow also,
the more he draws back his arm, with greater force he strikes. And even
so (neither more nor less) says Fortune with those on whom for a time she
smyleth. For, the longer a man remains in her love and favor, the more cruel
and bitter she shows herself to him in the end.

And therefore I would advise every wise and Sage person, that when Fortune
seems best of all to favor him, and to do most for him, that then he
should stand most in fear of her, and least of all to trust her deceits.

Therefore (Sir) nake no small account of this my Book, little though it be.
For you know, that doubtless (as experience teaches us) of greater price and
value is a little spark of a Dyamond, then a greater ballast.

It forces little that the Book be of small or great volume, since the
excellency thereof consists not in the number of leaves more or less, but
only in the good and grave sentences that are amply written therein.

For, every Author that writes, What the Author or writer of books should
aim at.
to make his book of great price and show, ought to be brief in his words,
and sweet and pleasant in his matter he treats of, the better to satisfy
the mind of the Reader, and also not to grow tedious to the hearer.

And (Sir) I speak not without cause, that you should not a little esteem
this small treatise of mine, since you are most assured, that with time all your
things shall have end, your Friends shall leave you, your goods shall be
divided, your self shall dye, your favor and credit shall diminish. and those
that succeed you, shall forget you, you not knowing to whom your Goods and
Patrimony shall come: and above all, you shall not know what conditions your
heirs and children shall be of. But for this I write in your royal Historic
and Chronicle of your laudable virtues and perfections, and for that also I
serve you as I do, with this my present work, the memory of you shall
remain eternized to your Successors for ever.

Chilo the Philosopher being demanded whether there were anything in the world
that Fortune had not power to bring to naught, answered in this sort. Two
things only there are, which neither Time can consume, nor Fortune destroy: And
that is the renown of man written in books, and the verity that is hidden.

For though truth for a time lie interred, yet it resurgeth again, and
receives life, appearing manifestly to all. And even so in like case the
virtues we find written of a man, do cause us at this present to have him in
as great veneration, as those had in his time, that best knew him.

Read therefore (Sir) at times I beseech you, these writings of mine, albeit I
fear me you can scant borrow a moment of Time with leisure once to look upon
it, being (as I know you are) always occupied in affairs of great
importance, wherein me thinks you should not so surcharge your self, but that
you might for your commodity and recreation of your spirits, reserve some
private hours to your self. For sage and wise men should so burden themselves
with care of others toil, that they should not spend one hour of the day at
the least (at their pleasure) to look on their estate and condition.

As recounteth Suetonius Tranquillus of Julius Caesar, who notwithstanding his
quotidian wars he had; never let slip one day, but that he read or wrote
some thing.

So that being in his Pauillion in the Camp, in the one hand he held his
lance to assault his enemy; and in the other the pen he wrote withal, with
which he wrote his worthy Commentaries. The reasonable man therefore calling to
mind the straight account A wise man reserueth some time for his profit and
recreation.
that he must render of himself, and of the time he has lost, shall always
be more careful that he lose not his time, then he shall be to keep his
treasure: For the well employed time is a mean and help to his sal salvation:
and the evil gotten good a cause of his eternal damnation.

Moreover yet, what toil and travel is it to the body of the man, and how
much more peril to the living soul, when he consumes his whole days and
life in worldly broils, and yet seely man he cannot absent himself from that
vile drudgery, til death does summon him to yield up his account of his life
and doings.

And now to conclude my Prologue I say this book is divided into two parts,
that is to say, in the first ten Chapters is declared how the newcome
Courtier shall behave himself in the Princes Court, to win favor and credit
with the Prince, and the surplus of the work treats, when he has achieved
to his Princes favor, and acquired the credit of a worthy Courtier: how he
shall then continue the same to his further advancement.

And I doubt not, but that the Lords and Gentlemen of Court, will take pleasure
to read it, and namely, such as are Princes familiars, and beloved of Court,
shall most of all reap profit thereby, putting the good lessons and
aduertisements they find heretofore written in execution. For to the young
Courtiers it shows them what they have to do: and puts in remembrance also
the old favored Courtyer, (living in his princes grace) of that he has to be
circumspect of. And finally, I conclude (Sir) that of all the Treasures,
riches, gifts, favors, prosperities, pleasures, services, greatness, and
power, that you have and possess in this mortal and transitory life: and by
the Faith of a true Christian I swear unto you also, that you shall carry no
more with you, then that only Time, which you have well and virtuously
employed, during this your Pilgrimage.

THE ARGUMENT OF THE BOOK: ENTITVLED, THE Favored Courtyer: wherein the
Author shows the intent of his work; exhorting all men to study good and
virtuous Books, utterly rejecting all Fables, and vain trifling stories, of
small doctrine and erudition.
AVlus Gellius, in his Book De noctibus Atticis says: That after the death of
the great Poet Homer, 7-famous cities of Greece were in great controversy, one
with the other: each one of them affirming that by reason the bones of the
said Poet was theirs, and only appertained Le^rned men greatly honored in
times past.
to them, all 7. taking their oaths, that he was not only borne, but also
nourished and brought up in every one of the^. And this they did: (Supposing
that they never had so great honor in any thing, but that this was far greater
to have educated so Excellent and rare a Man as he was. Euripides also the
philosopher born and brought up in Athens: traveling in the realm of Macedonia,
was sudde^ly stricken with death, which woeful news no sooner came to the
Athenians ears (declared for a truth) but with all expedition they dispatched
an honorable Embasie: only to entreat the Lacedemonia^s to be contented to
deliver them the bones of the said philosopher: protesting to them that if they
would frankly grant them, they would regratifie that pleasure done them: and if
they would deny them, they should assure themselves they would come and fetch
them with the sword in hand.

K: Demetrius held Rhodes besieged long time (which at length he won, by force
of arms) and the Rhodia^s being so stubborn that they would not yield by
composition, nor trust to his princely clemency, he commanded to strike off
all the Rhodians heads, and to raze the city to the hard foundations. But when
he was let understand, that there was even then in the City Prothogenes, a
Philosopher and Paynter, and doubting least in executing others, he also
unknown, might be put to the sword, revoked his cruel sentence and gave
straight commandment forthwith they should cease to spoil and deface the
town further, and also to stay the slaughter of the rest of the Rhodians. The
divine Plato being in Athens, advertised that in the city of Damasco, in the
realm of Palestine, were certain books of great antiquity, which a
Philosopher borne of that Country left behind him there: when he understood it
to be true, went thither immediately, led with the great desire he had to see
them, and purposely (if they did like him) afterward to buy them. And when he
saw that neither at his suit, nor at the requests of others he could obtain
them, but that he must buy the^ at a great price.

Plato went and sold all his patrimony to recover them: and his own not being
sufficient, he was feign to borrow upon interest of the common Treasury to
help him: so that notwithstanding he was so profound and rare a Philosopher
(as indeed he was) yet he would sell all that small substance he had only to
see (as he thought some pretty new thing more of Philosophy As Ptolomeus
Philadelphus king of Egypt, not contened to be so wise in all sciences as he
was, nor to have in, his Library 8000. books as he had nor to study at the
least 4. hours in the day, nor ordinarily to dispute at his meals with
Philosophers, sent nevertheless an Embassage of Noble men to the Hebrews, to
desire them they would be contented to send him some of the best learned and
wisest men amongst them, to teach him the Hebrew tongue, and to read to him
the books of their Laws.

When Alexander the Great was borne, his father King Philip wrote a notable
letter immediately to Aristotle, among other matters he wrote, there were
these, I let thee to understand. The letter of K. Phili, to Aristol at the
birth of his son Alexander.


O greatest Philosopher Aristotle (if thou know it not) that Olimpius my
wife is brought to bed of a son, for which incessantly I give the Gods
immortal thanks, not so much that I have a son, as for that they have given
him me in thy time. For I am asassured he shall profit more with the
doctrine thou shall teach him, then he shall prevail with the Kingdoms I
shall leave him after me.

Now by the examples above recited, and by many more we could allege, we may
easily consider with what reverence and honor the ancient Kings used the
learned and virtuous men in their time. And we may also more plainly see it,
since then they held in greater price and estimation the bones of a dead
Philosopher, then they do now the doctrine of the best learned of our time.
And not without just occasion did these famous and heroycall Princes joy to
have at home in their houses, and abroad with them in the field, such wise and
learned men, whilst they lived, and after they were dead to honor, their
bones and carcases, and in doing this, they erred not a a jot: For whosoever
accompanies continuallly with grave and wise men, enjoys this benefit and
privilege before others, that he shall never be counted ignorant of any:
therefore continuing still our first purpose, let us say, that whosoever will
profess the company The benefit that accreweth by companying, with wise men.
of sober and wise men, it cannot otherwise be, but he must maruellously profit
by their company: for being in their company, they will put al vain and
dishonest thoughts from him, they will teach him to subdue and resist al sudden
passions and motions moved of choler: by the^ they shall win good friends, and
learn also never to be troublesome, or enemy to any, they will make him forsake
all sin and vice, declaring to him what good works he shall follow, and what
he shall most fly and eschew: they will let him understand how he shall
humble and behave himself, in prosperity, and they will also comfort him in
his adversity, to keep him from all sorrow and despair. For though a man be
never so careful and circumspect, yet has he has always need of the council
of another in his affairs: if therefore such a person have not about him good,
virtuous, and sage men, how can it otherwise be, but that he must stu^ble often,
and fall down right on his face, having no man to aid or help him.

Paulus Dyaconus says, that albeit the Affricanes were wild and brutish
people, yet had they notwithstanding a law amongst them, that the senators
amongst them, could choose no other Senator, if at the Election there were not
present a philosopher.

So it happened on a day amongst the rest, that of many philosophers they had in
Carthage, amongst them there was one named Apolonius, who ruled for the space
of 62. years, all their Senate with great quiet, and to the contentation of all
the Senators, which to show themselves thankful to him, erected in the market
place so many images of him, as he had governed their Commonweal years, to
the end the fame and memory of him should be immortal: and yet they did
dedicate to their famous Hannibal, but one only image, and to this Philosopher
they set up above 60. Alexander the great, when he was most bent to bloody
wars, went to see and speak with Diogines the Philosopher, offering him great
presents and discoursing with him of diverse matters. So that we may justly
say, This good Prince of himself took pains to seek out wise men to
accompany him, electing by others choice and advise all such, as he made his
Captains to serve him in the wars.

It is manifest to all, that Dyonisius the Syracusan was the greatest Tyrant in
the world: and yet notwithstanding his Tyranny, it is a wonder to see what
sage and wise men he had continually in his Court with him: And that, which
makes us yet more to wonder of him is, that he had them not about him to serve
him, or to profit one jote by their doctrines and counsel: but only for his
honor, and their profit, which enforces me to say, concurring with this
example, that since Tyrants did glory to have about them Sages, wise, and
worthy men: Much more should those rejoice, that their works and deeds are
noble, and freeharted. And this they ought to do, not only to be honored
with them openly, but also to be helped with their doctrine and counsels
secretly.

And if to some this should seem a hard thing to follow, we will say, that
worthy men not being of ability and power to maintain such Wisemen, ought
yet at least to use to read, at times, good and virtuous books. For by reading
(of virtuous Books) they may reap infinite profit. As for example: By
reading (as I say) these Good Authors, the desire is satisfied, their
judgment is quickened, idleness is put away, the heart is disburdened, the
Time is well employed, and they lead their lives virtuously, not being bound to
render account of so many faults, as in that time they might have committed.
And to conclude, it is so good an exercise, as it gives good example to the
Neighbor, profit to himself, and health to the soul.

We see by experience, after a man takes upon him once the Study of holy
Scriptures, and that he frames himself to be a Divine, he will never
willingly thenceforth deal in any other studyes: and all because he will not
forgo (the great comfort and pleasure he receives) to read those holy
sayings. And that causes, that we see so many learned and wise men (for the
more part) subject to diverse diseases: and full of Melancholic humors. For,
so sweet is the delight they take in their Books, that they forget and leave
all other bodily pleasure.

And therefore Plutarche writes, that certain philosophers being one day met
at the lodging of Plato, to see him: and demanding what exercise he had at that
time? Plato answered the^, thus. Truly my brethren, I let you know, that even
now my only exercise was, to see what the great Poet Homer said. And this he
told them, because that they took him even then reading of some of Homers
books, and to say truly, his answer was such, as they should all look for
of him. For to read a good book, in effect is nothing else, but to hear a
wise man speak,

And if this our judgment and advise seem good unto you, we would yet say
more, that you should profit more to read one of these books, then you
should to hear speak, or to have conference with the Author him self that
made it: For it is without doubt, that all Writers have more care and respect
in that their pen does write, then they have in that their tongue does utter.
And to the end you should not think we cannot prove that true that we have
spoken, I give you to understand, that every Author that will write, to
publish his doing in print, to lay it to the show, and judgment of the world,
and that desires thereby to acquire honor, and fame, and to eternize the
memory of him, turns many books, conferreth with other wise and learned men,
addicteth himself wholly to his book, endeavors to understand well, often
refuses sleep, meat and drink, quicneth his spirits, doing that he puts
in writing exactly with long advise, and consideration, which he does not when
he does but only speak and utter them, though often in deed (by reason of his
great knowledge) in speech unawares there falls out of his mouth, many godly
and wise sentences. And therefore God has given him a goodly gift that can
read and him much more that has a desire to study, knowing how to choose the
good books from the evil. For to say the truth, there is not in this world
any state or exercise more honorable and profitable then the study of good
books. And we are much bound to those that read, more to those that study, and
much more to those that write any thing, but most doubtless to those that make
and compile goodly books, and those of great and high doctrine: for there are
many vain and fond books, that rather deserve to be thrown into the fire,
then once to be read or looked on: for they do not only show us the way to
mock them, but also the ready mean to offend us, to see them occupy their
brains and best wits, they have to write foolish and vain things, of no
good subject or erudition. And that which is worst of all yet, they are
occasion, that diverse others spend as much time in reading their jests and
mockeries, as they would otherwise have employed in doctrine, of great profit
and edifying, the which to excuse and defend their error, say they did not
write them for men to take profit thereby, but only to delight and please the
Readers, to pass the time away merrily, whom we may rightly answer thus: That
the reading of ill and vain books, cannot be called a pastime, but aptly a
very loss of time. And therefore Aulus Gelius in the fifteenth of his book
writes, that after the Romans understood the Orators and Poets of Rome, did
give themselves to write vain, voluptuous, and dishonest books, causing
Enterludes and Poetical Comedies to be played, they did not only banish them
from Rome, but also out all the parts of Italy: for it beseemed not the Roman
gravity, neither was it decent for the Weal public, to suffer such naughty
books among them, and much less for to bear with vicious and lascivious
governors. And if the Roman Panims left us this for example, how much more
ought we that are Christians to continue and follow it, since that they had no
other Books for to read save only Histories, and we now a days have both
Histories, and holy Scriptures to read, which were granted us by the church,
to the end that by the one we might take some honest pleasure and recreation,
and with the other procure the health of oursoules.

Oh how far is the Commonwealth nowe-adayes digressed from that we write and
counsel, since we see plainly, that men occupy themselves, at this present,
in reading a number of Books, the which only to name I am ashamed. And therefore
said Aulus Gelius in his 14. book, That there was a certain philosopher wrote a
book of hie and eloquent style, but the subject very hard and diffuse to
understand: which Socrates, and other philosophers hearing of, commanded
immediately the Book to be burned, and the Author to be banished: by which
example we may well perceive, that in that so perfect and reformed University,
they would not only suffer any Lascivious or vicious book, but also they
would not bear with those, that were too hawtie and vainglorious in their
styles, and whose matter was not profitable, and beneficial to the
Publike-weale. That man therefore that walloweth in idleness lap, that vouchsafes
not to spend one hour of the day to read a grave sentence of some good Book,
we may rather deservedly call him a brutish beast, then a reasonable creature.
For every wise man ought to glory more of the knowledge he has, then of the
abundance of goods he possesses. And it cannot be denied, but that those
which read virtuous Books, are ever had in better favor, and estimation then
others. For they learn to speak, they pass their time without trouble, they
know many pleasant things, which they after tell to others: they have audacitie
to reprove others, and every man delights to hear them, and in what place or
company soever they come, they are always reverenced and honored above
others: every man desires their knowledge and acquaintance, and are glad to
ask them counsel. And that, that is yet of greater credit to them is, that
they are not few in number, that trusts them with their body and goods.

And moreover (I say) that the wise and learned man which professes study,
shall know very well how to counsel his friend, and to comfort himself at all
times, when need does serve, which the foolish ignorant person can not do:
For he cannot only tell how to comfort the afflicted in adversity, but also
he cannot help himself in his own proper affairs, nor take counsel of
himself, what is best to do.

But returning again to our purpose (we say) because we would not be reproved
of that we rebuke others of, we have been very circumspect and advised: and
taking great care, and pains in our study, that all our books and works, we
have published, and compyled, should be so exactly done, that the Readers might
not find any ill doctrine, nor also any thing worthy reproof. For the dishonest
books, made by lascivious persons do give (deservedly) evident token to the
Readers to suspect the Authors: and troubles the judgments of those, that
give attentive care unto them.

And therefore I counsel and admonish him that will enterprise, and take upon
him to be a writer, and a setter forth of Books, that he be wise in his
matter he shows, and compendious in the words he writes: and not to be
like to diverse Writers, whose works are of such a phrase and style, as we
shall read many times to the midst of the book, ere we find one good and
notable sentence, so that a man may say, that all the fruit those reap for
their pain, watches, and travel, is none other but only a mere toye and
mockery, they being derided of every man that sees their works.

That Author that undertakes to write, and afterward prostrateth to common
judgment the thing he writes, may be assured that he sets his wits to
great travel and study, and hazardeth his honor to present peril. For the
judgment of men being variable, and diverse (as they are indeed) many times
they do meddle and enter into judgment of those things, whereof they are not
only not capable to understand, but also less skillful to read them.

Now in that book we have set out, of The Dyall of Princes: and in that other
we have translated of the Life of the Roman Emperors, and in this we have
now set forth Of the favored Courtiers, the Readers may be assured, they
shall find in them goodly and grave sentences, whereby thy may greatly profit,
and they shall not read any words superfluous, to comber or weary them at all.
For, we did not once license our pen to dare to write any word, that was not
first weyed in true balla^ce, and measured by just measure. And GOD can
testify with us, that without doubt we have had more pain to be brief in
the words of our books we have hitherto made, then we have had to gather out
the invention, and grave sentences thereof.

For to speak good words, and to have good matter and wise purposes, is the
property of one that naturally is modest, and grave in his actions: but to
write briefly, he must have a deep understanding.

When at the Font of the Printers Form, we first baptized the Book of Marcus
Aurelius, we entitled it The Dyall of Princes: and this therefore that we
have now made and added to it, we call it (more for briefnes) The favored
Courtyer: which portendeth the whet-stone and instruction of a Courtyer. For if
they will vouchsafe to read, and take the fruitful counselles they find
written herein, they may assure themselves, they shall awaken out of the
vanities, they have long slept in: and shall also open their eyes, to see the
better, that thing wherein they live so long deceived. And albeit indeed this
present work shows to you but a few contrived lines, yet GOD himself does
know, the pains we have taken herein has bin exceeding great, and this for
two causes: the one for that the matter is very strange and diverse from
others; the other, to think that assuredly, it should be hated of those that
want the taste of good discipline. And therefore we have taken great care, it
should come out of our hands well reformed and corrected: to the end that
Courtyers might find out many Sentences in it, profitable for them, and not
one word to trouble them.

Those Noblemen, or Gentlemen, that will from henceforth have their children
brought up in the Courts of Princes, shall find in this Book, all things
they shall need to provide them of: And those also which have been long
Courtyers, shall find all that they ought to do in Court.

And such also as are best favored of Noble Princes, and carry greatest
reputation of honor with them, shall find likewise excellent good counsels, by
mean whereof, they may always maintain and continue themselves, in the
chiefest greatness of their credit and favor: so that it may well be called
a Mithridaticall Electuary: recuring and healing all malignant opilations.

Of all the Books I have hitherto compiled, I have Dedicated some of them unto
the Imperial Majesty, and others, to those of best favor and credit with
him: where the Readers may see, that I rather glory to be a Satyr then a
Flatterer, for that in all my sentences they cannot find one cloked word, to
enlarge and embetter my credit and estate. But to the contrary, they may read
an infinite number of others, where I do exhort them to govern their person
discreetly and honorably, and to amend their lives thenceforth.

When I Imprinted the Dial of Princes, together with Marcus Aurelius, and
brought them to light. I wanted not backbiters and detractors that began
forthwith to tear me in pieces; neither shall I want at this present (as I
believe) such as will not spare with venomous tongues, to poison my work: But
like as then I little wayed their slanderous speeches of me, even so much
less do I now force what they can say against me, being assured they shall
find in the end, they have ill spoken of me, and my poor works, proceeding
from them rather of a certain envy, that gnaweth their heart, then of any
default they find in my doctrine, comforting my self yet in the assurance I
have, that all their spite shall one day have an end, and my works shall ever
be found good and perdurable

The end of the Argument.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE DYALL OF PRINCES, COMPILED BY THE LORD ANTHONY
Gueuara, Bishop of Mondogueto:
CHAP. I. That it is more necessary for the Courtier, (abiding in Court) to be
of lively spirit and audacity, then it is for the Soldier, that goes to
serve in the wars.
PLutarch, Pliny, and Titus Liutus declare that King Agiges one day requested
the Oracle of Apollo to tell him, who was the happiest man in the world: to
whom answer was made, that it was a man they called Aglaon, beknowne of the
Gods, and unknown of men.

This King Agiges making then search for this man through all Greece, who was
called Aglaon, found at length that it was a poor Gardner, dwelling in
Archadia, who being of the age of threescore and two years, never went above a
mile from his house, keeping himself and his family continually with his only
labor and tillage of his Garden. Now albeit there were in the world of better
parentage and lineage then he, better accompanied of servants, and tenants,
better provided of goods and riches, higher in dignity, and of greater
authority then he: yet for all this, was this Aglaon the happiest of the world.
And this was, for that he never haunted princes Courts, neither by envy to be
They are often times most known that least seek acquaintance
overthrown, nor yet by avarice to be overcome. For many times it chances to
men, that when they would least give themselves to acquaintance, then come they
most to be known: and when they make least account of themselves, then comes
there an occasion to make the^ to be most reputed of: For they win more
honor, that despise these goods, honors, and riches of this world, then those
do, that continually gape, and seek after the same. And therefore we should
more envy Aglaon, with his little garden, then Alexander the Great with his
mighty Asia: For true contentation consists not in having abundance, but in
being contented with that little he has.

It is a mockery, and worthily he deserves to be laughed at, that thinks
contentation lies in having much, or in being of great authority: for such
ways are readier to make us stumble, yea and many times to fall down right,
then safely to assure us to go on our way.

The punishment that God gave to Cain for murdering of his brother Abel was,
that his body continually trembled, and he ever after wandered thorough the
world: so that he never found, where he might enhabite, nor house where he
might harbor. And albeit this malediction of Cain was the first that ever God
ordained, I durst affirm notwithstanding, that it remains as yet until this
present day amongst Courtiers, since we see them daily travel, and run into
strange Countries, daily changing and seeking new lodgings.

Which makes me once again to say, that Aglaon was counted happy, and for that
only he never romed No misery comparable to that of the Courtier
far from his house: For to say truly, there is no misery comparable to that
of the Courtier, that is bound daily to lie in others houses, having none of
his own to go to. And he only may be called happy, that puts not
himself in danger to serve others.

Julius Caesar being counseled to wayre upon the Consul Sylla, to the end
that by serving, or being about him, he might do himself great good, and it
might be very profitable to him, answered thus: I swear by the immortal
Gods, I will never serve any, in hope to be more worth, and greater then I am:
For this I am sure of, that where Liberty is exiled, there might nor power can
prevail.

He that forsakes his own Country where he lived at ease, and in health and
the place where he was known and beloved, the neighbors of whom he was
visited, the friends of whom he was served, the parents of whom he was
honored, the goods wherewith he maintained himself, his wife, and children
(of whom he had a thousand pleasures and consolations) and that comes to
serve and dye in the Court. I cannot say otherwise of him, but that he is a
very fool, or that he comes to do penance for some notable crime he has
committed: And therefore not without great cause was this name of Court,
(which in our tongue signifies short) Why this name Court was adhibited to the
Palace of Princes.
adhibited to the palace of Princes, where indeed all things are short, only
envy and malice excepted, which continue long.

He only desires to be a Courtier, that as yet has not tasted the sweetness
and pleasure of his own house, nor has yet proved and seen the troubles and
pains of the Court: For he that knows them, figheth when he is called to the
Court; and weepeth when he is kept long there. I have studied in times past in
the Universities, preached in the Courts, praying in Religion: and now I dwell
upon my Bishopric, teaching and instructing my Diocesians: but I dare say, of
all these four states recited, there is none so straight and painful, as is
to follow the Court.

If I studied at the University, I did it of free will to be wiser: but only
in the Court I spent my time, to be more worth then I was. But the greatest
time I consumed in Religion, was to say my prayers, and to bewail my grievous
sins.

In the Court I only gave my self to suspect my neighbor, and invented to
build great Castles of wind (with thought) in the air. And therefore I return
once again to say, that it is a greater trouble and vexation for to become a
Courtier, then to be a religious person: For It is more difficult to be a
Courtier then a religious person.
in religion it suffices to obey one but in the Court he must serve all. And
in religion also they are apparrelled with less cost and charges, and to the
greater contentation of the person, then they are in the Court. For a poor
Gentleman Courtier is bound to have more change and suits of apparel, then
the falcon feathers. The religious persons go always to dinner, and find
their meat on the Table, ready prepared for them, without any thought taken of
their part, what they shall have: but fine Courtiers many times rise out of
their bed, without ever a penny in their purse.

And albeit religious persons all their life take great pains in rising at
midnight to serve God: yet have they great hope after their death, of the
heavenly rest and comfort: but poor Courtiers, alas what should I say, hard is
their life, and more perilous their death, into greater danger truly puts
he himself, that becomes a Courtier, then did Nasica, when gee was with the
Serpent, then King David with the Philistines, then the Southsayers with Euah,
then Hercules with Antheon, then Theseus with the Minocaure, then King Menelaus
with the wild Bore, then Corebus with the Monster of the marish, and then
Perseus with the monstrous whale of the sea: For every one of these valiant me^
were not afraid but of one: but the miserable Courtier stands in fear of
all: For what is he in Court, that seeing his near Kinsman or dearest friend,
more in favor or credit then himself, or richer then he, that wishes not his
friends death, or at the least procures by all means he can, he shall not
equal, nor go even with with him in credit or reputation: One of the worst
things I consider, and see in Courtiers is, that they loose much time, and
profit little: For the Many a Courtier spends his time all.
thing wherein they spend their days, and hestow the nights, for the most part
is, to speak ill of those that are their betters, or excel them in virtues:
and to undo those that are their equals and companions: to flatter the
beloved, and among the inferior sort to murmur one against an other: and
always to sigh and lament for the times past.

And there is nothing that provoke Courtiers more to complain, then the
daily desire they have to see sundry and new alterations of time: For they
little weigh the ruin of the Common weal, so they may enlarge and exalt their
own estates. Also, it is a thing of course in Court, that the rejected and
fauourlesse Courtiers, meet together, murmuring at their Princes, and
backbiting their councellers and officers, saying, they undo the Realm, and
bring all to naught. And all this presupposed, for that they are not in the like
favor and estimation that they be in, which bears office and rule in the
Commonweal: And therefore when it comes in question, for a Courtier to
advance himself, and to come in credit in the Court, one Gourtier can scarsly
ever trust an other.

On the other side, me thinks that the life of the Court is not the very
life in deed, but rather an open penance. And therefore in my opinion, we
should not reckon Courtiers alive, but rather dead, buried in their life.

For then the Courtier ever finds himself plunged with deaths extreme
passious, when he perceyueth an other The life of a^ Courtier, an open penance.
to be preferred and called before him, Alas, what great pity is it to see a
hapless and unfortunate Courtier; for he seely soul awaketh a thousand times
in the night, tosseth from side to side of his bed, sometime upright he lies,
lamenting his iron hap, now he sigheth for his native soil, and sorroweth
then for his lost honor: so that in manner he spends the whole night in watch
and cares, imagining with himself all the ways he can, to come in credit
and favor again, that he may attain to wealth and preferment before others;
which makes me think, that it is not a pain, but a cruel torment: no
service but tribute: and not once only, but ever: that the body of the poor
miserable Courtier abides, and that (in despite of him) his wretched heart
does bear.

By the Law of the Court, every Courtier is bound to serve the King, to
accompany the beloved of the Court, to visit noble men, to wait upon those
that are at the Princes elbow, to give to the vshers, to present the Auditors,
to entertain the Wardens and captains of the Ports, to currey favor with the
Harbingers, to flatter the Treasurer, to travel and speak for their friends,
and to dissemble amongst their enemies.

What legs are able to do all these things? what force sufficient to abide
these brunts? what heart able to endure them? and moreover, what purse great
enough to supply all these devises? I am of opinion, there was never any so
foolish, nor merchant so couetons, that has sold himself in any fair, or
exchangde himself for any other Merchandise, but only the unhappy Courtier,
who goes to the court to sell his liberty, for a little wind, and vain smoke
of the court.

I grant that a courtier may have in the court plenty of gold and silver,
sumptuous apparel, favor cresite, and authority: yet withal this
abundance ye cannot deny me, but he is as poor of liberty, as rich of
substance or credit. And therefore I dare boldly say this word again, for one
time the Courtier has his desire in Court, a thousand times they will enforce
him to accomplish others desires, which neither please nor like The Courtier is
abridged of his liberty.
him. Surely it comes of a base and vile mind, and no less cowardly, for
any man lightly to esteem his liberty, and fondly to embrace bondage and
subjection, being at others commandment.

And if the Courtier would answer me to this, that though he serve, yet at
least he is in his Princes favor. I would replye thus, Though he be in
favor with the Prince yet is he notwithstanding slave to all his other
officers, For if the Courtier will sell his horse, his moyle, his cloak, his
sword, or any other such like whatsoever, he shall have ready money for all,
saving for his liberty, which he liberally bestows on all for nothing. So
that he seems to make more estimation of his sword or appaarrell he
sells, then he does of his liberty which he gives: For a man is not bound
to travel at all, to make himself master of others, more then pleases him:
but to recover liberty, or to maintain it, he is bound to dye a thousand
deaths.

I speak not these things for that I have read them in my books, but because
I have seen them all with mine eyes, and not by science, but by experiennce:
and I never knew Courtier yet content in Court, much less enjoying any jot of
his liberty, which I so much esteem, that if al men were sufficient to know
it, and knew well how to use it, he would never for any Treasure on earth
forgo it, neither for any gage lendi^, were it never so precious.

Yet is there in Court besides this an other kind of trouble, I have not yet
touched, and that is not small. For often times thither comes of our friends
which be strangers, whom of necessity, and for honesties sake: the Courtier
must Lodge with him at home, the Court being already full pestered. And this
happens often in such a time, when the poor Courtyer has neither Lodging of
his own, to lodge them in: nor happily six pence in his purse, to welcome
themwithall.

I would you would tell me also, what grief and sorrow the poor Courtyer
feels at his heart, when he lodges in a blind, narrowe-lane: eats at a
borrowed table, sleeps in a hired bed, and perhaps his Chamber having no
door to it: yea, and for the more part, his apparel and armor, even to the
very Sword in gage. Then when any Friends of his comes out of the country
to lie with him, (he being so poor, and also a stranger in an other man's
house) how is it possible he should accept into his company any others, and
perhaps as needy as he?

Sometimes he were better, and had rather bear his friends cost, and charges
(being altogether unable) yea, and to find him all his necessaries (what shift
so ever he made) then he should suffer his Friend or stranger to come home to
his house, to know and see the misery he lives in. For more is the honest
heart and good nature ashamed and grieved, to discover his misery, then it is
to suffer and abide it. Commonly the Courtyer being alone, An honest heart is
more grieved to show his misery then to suffer it.
is content with a little couch, one mattresse or quilt, one flock-bed, with one
pillowe, and one pair of sheets, with one couerlet, with one drying pan, one
grid-yron, one spit, one kettle, one basine, with one candle-sticke, and with
one pot: which he cannot do, if any stranger or friend of his come to him: For
then he must for his reputationsake hang his Chamber, dress up his bed, and
furnish it better, and must also provide for a thousand other such trifles he
stands in need of. And if it fall out his Host and goodman of the house will
not lend him these things or that perhaps he has them not (as it chances
often) he shall be compelled to borrow upon a pawn, or to hyre of others: whereas
if he were alone with his own people, he would right well be contented with
his small ordinary.

And when a stranger comes to see him, he must be at greater cost and charge:
so that he shall spend more at one dinner or supper, then he had done before
in three days. And therefore doubtless the Courtyers are at more charges with
their Friends, that come to see them, then they are with themselves. For the
honorable and worthy Courtyers had rather fast an other time, then to show
himself at this pinch needy and hard, and after to be mocked of his
acquaintance.

Oh now many men are there in the world that waste and spend in one day all
that they have traveled to get together in many? Not for that they esteem not
their goods, and desire not to keep them: but only for a little vain glory,
to get them the name of a free-harted and liberal man: dealing honestly among
his friends.

Also as great is the trouble to the poor Courtyer, when the Court remoueth
The Courtyer subject to much trouble.
often from place to place. For, the^ he must truss-vp his baggage, lode the
moyles, and hyre carts to carry it, afterward pray the cofferer to pay him:
the Harbingers to prepare him a lodging, and then he must first send one of his
men to see if the lodging be mere for him. Furthermore, Courtyers have
occasion often times to be angry with the carters, and Muletters, for loding
too much, or too little: and for coming too late to the lodging, and many
times also, they must Ride at noone-dayes, and in the greatest heat, and
sometimes in rain, dew, tempest, or in other il weather (whatsoever it be) for
that the Carters and Carriers will not loose their journey.

And admit that all this may easily be carried, is it therefore reasonable or
meet, the poor Courtier should spend at one voyage, or removing of What
epences the Courtier is at.
the Court, all the profit and spare he has made in six months before? And
what shall we say also, of the stuff and moueables that the poor Courtier of
necessity must buy in every place where the Court remains, as chaires,
tables, forms stools, water pots, platters, dishes, and other small trash.
that would cost more the carriage, then the buying of them anew. And to
conclude, all things pertaining to Court are painful, unpleasant, and
chargeable for the poor Courtier: For if he should carry always with him,
all such things as be necessary, and that he should need: in carriage they are
broken or marde, or being left behind, they are in hazard to be stolen or
lost: for he that will be a continual Courtier, must be of a bold and stout
courage: For he shall be forced hourly to leave of his own desires, to
please and content others, changing and shifting to diverse places, and strange
lodgings, and often times of servants and new family, daily increasing his charge
and expense.

And truly, if that which is gotten and gained in Court be worth much: much
more does that exceed that is spent in Court, and these expenses are rather
lavish, then moderate: disordered, then well spent: for in effect Courtiers
spend more with strangers they receive into their lodgings, then they do with
their ordinary servants they keep. Albeit that, that Courtiers lose and leave
behind them at every removing of the Court, be but of small account or
importance, yet it is notwithstanding both grief and displeasure to them: for
indeed there is no house so richly furnished, and replenished with moueables,
but that the Lord or Master of the house, will chafe to see a dish or glass
broken, or spoiled.

Yet there is an other discommodity in removing of the court, for some Courtiers
there are that be so poor, that for want they can hardly follow the Court, and
others also that are rich, are compelled to bear many of their charges, with
whom they are in company with by the way: and some of those are so rude and ill
brought up, that they had rather bear their charge all their journey, then
once again to have them in their company. But a Godsname, what shall we say
yet of the wretched Courtier, whose Coffers and horse are arrested at his
departing for his debts? Truly I lie not: for once I saw a Courtiers moile
sold for her prouender she had eaten and that money not sufficient to pay the
host: the Courtier remaining yet debtor of an overplus; the poor man was
stripped even of his cappe and gloves for the satisfaction of the rest.

Also there is an other sort of needy Courtiers, so troublesome and importune,
that they never cease to trouble their friends, to borrow money of their
acquaintance, some to find themselves, some to apparel themselves, others to
pay their debts, others to play, and others to give presents: so that at the
removing day, when they have nothing wherewith to pay nor content their
Creditors, then they are sued in Law, and arrested in their lodging, and the
The misery that Courtiers are subject unto
Creditors many times are not satisfied with their goods, but do take
execution also of their bodies, laying them in fast prison, till they be paid
and satisfied, of their whole debte.

Oh what folly may be thought in those, that cannot moderate their expenses,
according to their ability? For to say uprightly, he should cut his Garments
according to his cloth, and measure his expenses with his revenues: and not
following his affection and desire. For, the Gentleman How Courtyers ought to
order their expenses.
or Courtier in the end has not the mean nor commodiitie to spend as the
Countryman has, that lives at home at else in the country, and spends
such commodities as he brings into his house, but the courtier consumes in
court not his own alone, but also that of others.

And therefore in Court or elsewhere, let every wise man be diligent to bring
his affairs to end: but yet let him so moderate and use his Expenses, as he
shall not need, nor be driven to morgage, and gage that he has. For he that
feasteth and rowteth with others purse, of that that is lent him, cannot choose
but in the end he must break, and deceive his creditours.

Therefore all worthiemen, that love their honor, and fear reproache, ought
rather to suffer, hunger, cold, thyrst, care, pain, and sorrow, then to be
had in the checke-roule of ryotous and prodigal spenders, trustlesse of their
promises, and suspected of their words.

There is yet another great trouble, in the court of Princes, and that is the
exceeding dearth of victuals, the unreasonable want of houses, and the great
price of horses: for many times they spend more for straw, and litter for
their horse, then they do in other places for hay, oats, and bread.

And further, if the Courtyer be a poor gentleman, and that he would feast
and banquet his friends or companions, he shall spend at one dinner or supper
so much that he shall be constrained to fast a whole week after. Therefore if
the Courtyer will be well used in following of the Court, he must not only
know, and speak to, also love, and inuit at times, the Butchers, Vittlers,
Fruitrers, Keepers, and Fosters, Fishmongers, and Poultrers, and other
purueyers of the same:: Of whom he shall always have as much need of his
provision, as he shall have need of the judges to show him Justice when he
shall need it. For meat, bread, wine, wood, hay, oats, and straw, are
commonly very dear it Court; for few of all these things are to be bought in
Court, but of others infinite things to be sold, to profit and gain the poor
Courtyers, that else had no shift to live.

And yet is there a little more trouble in Court, and that is: that continually
letters are sent to the Courtier The trouble courtyers have with Friends,
from his Friends, to obtain of the Prince or his Counsel, his dispatch in
his private affairs, or for his servants or tenants, or other his friends.

And many times these suits are so ill welcome to the courtyer, that he had
rather have pleasured his friend with a piece of money, then they should have
laid upon him so weighty a matter.

And besides this, there is yet another trouble: that the bringer of this
letter must needs lie at the Courtyers house attending his dispatch: So that
the Courtyer delaying his friends business, augmenteth his grief, and keeping
the messenger there, increases his charge. And if perchance his business be not
dispatched, and the suite obtained, those that wrote to him will not think he
left it off, for that he would not do it or take pains therein: but for that
he wanted favor and credit, or at least were very negligent in following
their cause. And that that vexes them throghly yet is, that their parents and
friends think (which are in the country far from Court, that this Courtyer
has all the Courtyers at his commandment, that he may say and do what he
will there.

And therefore his Friends, when they have occasion to employ him in Court,
and that they write unto him, touching their affairs: and that he has now
taken upon him the charge and burden of the same, seeing himself after unable
to discharge that he has enterprised, and cannot as he The grief of the
courtyer, that cannot pleasure his friend.
would satisfy his friends expectation: then he falls to despair, and
wysheth he had been dead when he first took upon him this matter, and that
he made them believe he could go through with that they had committed to him,
being impossible for him having small credit and estimation' amongst the
Nobility and Councillors.

Therefore I would never council him that has Brethren, Friends, or other
near Kinsfolks in Court, to go seek them out there, albeit they had matters
of great weight and importance: on hope to be dispatched the sooner, by their
credit, favor, and suite. And for this cause, for that in Court there is ever
more private malice and envy, then in other places: wherefore they cannot be
revenged, the one of the other, but must tarry a time: and when they see
opportunity, they set in foot to overthrow, and secretly to put back their
adversaries suite.

Now lo, these things, and other infinite plagues do light upon these
unfortunate courtiers, incredible happily to any, but the old and experienced
Courtyer.

If the old and wise Courtier would count all the favors and mischances: the
dearth and abundance: the frendships and enmities: the contentation and
displeasures: and the honor and infamy he has endured in the Court: I
belieeue assuredly we should not be a little sorry for that body that had
suffered so much: but much more for that heart that had abidden all those
storms and broils.

When the Courtyer sees that he is not heard of the Prince, nor spoken to of
the beloved and favored of the The mishaps of the Court are more then the
favors.
Court: and that the Treasurer does not dispatch him, and the Cofferer keep
back his wages: it is a misery to see him, and on the other side, a pleasure
and pastime to hear what he says: cursing the wretched life of this world.
And even then, in his heat and rage, he teareth and blasphemeth GOD: and
swears accursedly, that thenceforth he will forsake the vain abuses of
Court, and leave also the Trompries of the deceitful world, avowing to
enclose himself within precinct of Religious walls, and to take upon him also
religious habit.

Alas, if I fetched as many sighs for my sins, as Courtyers do for their
mishaps and disgraces: what a number would they come to? For a Courtyer,
incontinent that he feeleh himself sick, that he is alone, and rejected of
his Friends in Court, he becomes so heavy and pensive, that with his deep
sighs, he pierces the heavens on hye: and with his flowing tears he
moystneth the Earth below. So that a man might more easily number the troubles
of the stout and hardy Hercules then those which the Courtyer daily suffers.
And besides those many we have recyted, yet further, these also we can
recite: that their servant rob them: their Purse-bearers consume their
money: ieasters and counterfeit knaves lie ever upon their reward: women pick
their purses, and strumpets and bawds spoil them of all. But what shall I say
more to you? If the poor Courtyer be full of feathers, every man plumes him:
but if he want Wings, there is no man hasty to plume him. And to conclude, in
Princes Courts you shall find no such trade of life, whereby you may satisfy
every man: For if the Courtier speak little, they will say he is but a fool,
and if he be too large of tongue, they will say he is a glorious fool, if he
be free in expenses, they will say he is a prodigal fool, if he be scarce of
his purse, they will say he is a covetous miser, if he be alone, and solitary
at home, they will account him an hypocrite: and if he visit others often, they
will say he is a bold and troublesome man, if he have any train of men
following on him, they will say, he is a proud man, and if he go without
company, that he is poor and miserable. So that of Court, this may rightly be
said: That it is a very Theater, where one mocketh and grinneth at another,
and yet in the end they (all in a manner) find themselves scorned and deceived.

Now discoursing also of sleep, does the Courtier always sleep as much as he
will? no surely, but as The Courtier wants many things he would have.
much as he may.

And touching his meat, has he always that he likes? no truly, but he is
forced to be contented with that he has. And as for his apparel, is he
clothed according to his will? no, no, but according to others fancies.

O unhappy Courtier, that he spends the most part of his miserable life, in
combing his head, washing his beard, wearing fair and brave house: varnishing
his sword and dagger, blacking his boots, providing him of cloakes, buying him
cappes, furring him gowns, and fitting himself with other small and needful
trifles: wasting in them all his own goods, and that of his friends.

I am not of that mind and opinion that others are, that say there are none in
so great liberty as Courtiers be, which should not be said, and much less
credited, since we see by daily proof, if they be in service, they are as
slaves.

If they be not in service with the King, or other noble men, they live in
poor estate. Now let every man say what he will, where poverty reigns there
liberty can have no place. And there is nothing in the world deerer, then that
we buy with entreaty, and not with money. And therefore we must confess, that
Princes Courts are meeter to exercise the youth, then for the aged to live
there without rest: For young men have more hardines, to away with the pains
and troubles of the Court, then they have years, to seek the griefs and
displeasures, they receive thereby.

Now go to the Court that list, procure office and authority that will: for
hitherto, I never met or spoke with man that was contented with the Court: For
if he be crept in favor, he fears every hour to fall, and lose his credit:
if ever he be once out of favor, and in disgrace, he despaireth, he shall
never return again into favor; and if he that goes to the sea, commits
himself first to God before he take ship; much more ought he to do it, that
goes to dwell in Court: For in the Sea, of a hundred ships, there do not
perish ten: but Few purchase favor in the court
of a thousand Courtiers, there comes not three in favor.

CHAP. II. Of Courtiers braules and quarrels, with the Harbingers for ill
lodging.
After Lucullus the Roman his return from Asia, in an Oration A speech of
Lucullus, and may well be applied to every Courtier.
he made before the Senate, he said thus: I swear unto you by the immortal
Gods (Fathers conscript) that in all this my journey I felt no pain, nor
trouble, neither for the conduct and government of mine army, nor for the
rebellion of the people, nor for the absence of my friends, nor for the war
of the enemies, neither for the long time, nor yet for the peril of my life:
For all these things are incident to Soldiers and men of war, and common to
rulers in peace. But if you be desirous to know what was my trouble, and that
which grieved me most, it was on the remembrance of the quiet rest I had at
home: For as you know right well (Sacred Senate) during the time as a man
lodges in other men's houses, he is never at liberty.

And this word of Lucullus me thinks every Courtier might well apply to
himself, for that he is always bound to do service to the Master of the
house where he lodges, yea although he receive a thousand injuries of him:
yet therefore it is not lawful for him to anger or displease him in any thing:
Therefore in very ill and unlucky hour is the Courtier arrived, when he must
take his journey in stead of rest, travel for quietness, misery for abundance,
bondage for liberty, and pain for pleasure. And albeit Courtiers abide many
pains and troubles, yet this me thinks is the greatest, and least
tolerable, when they must be lodged: reasoning of the pains, displeasures,
fortunes and mishaps that men suffer. Little is that my pen does write
herein, and much less that my tongue does speak in comparison of that the
woeful heart does abide. O how many things are there, that are felt even at the
very bottom of the heart, and yet dare not the tongue once utter them? Truly,
how poor a house soever the courtier has in the Country, he should more
esteem it, then the best lodging that ever he met with in Court; or else
where. For at home he does and commands all that he will: but in an other
man's house, he must take all that is given him.

A pilgrim or Traveler shall come into a City, where he shall see fair and
goodly Churches, stately buildinges, rich gates, high walls, paued streets,
large market places, provision enough abundance of victuals, and numbers of
strangers: and when he has seen all this, he does so little esteem of them,
that to return again to his poor home, he trauelleth though it be all the
night.

And therefore we should not wonder at those, that do not greatly Courtiers
are rather grieved then relieved with the princely pompes of the Court.
stray from their house, and that are but seldom in many places: but we might
well have him in suspicion, that continualy wandreth through strange Countries
and houses: for notwithstanding the great wonders he sees: and the great
conversation of amity, he has, or can find, yet in the end they are only
the eyes that are fed with the sight of other things, and not the heart that is
contented with his own: and also to see in Princes Courts great treasure and
riches, bringes us commonly more grief then delight: and the more his eyes are
fed with view of fair dames of Court, and princely pomp thereof, the greater
sorrow assaulteth his heart, he may not still enjoy the same, And therefore
the renowned Focion, the Athenian captain, answered once certain men, that
said there were to be sold in the Marketplace of Athens goodly stones, and
rich jewels worthy the sight, howbeit hard to be bought, being held at so
hie a price by the Merchant that sold them. From my first youth (said this
philosopher) I made an Oath, never to go see any City, unless it were to
conquer it, and yield it subject to me: neither to go see Jewels, that I
could not buy.

The great Emperor Traiane was much commended, for that he never took toye in
his head, to go see any thing, but for one of these 3. causes, that is to say:
either to imitate that he saw, to buy it, or else clearly to conquer it. Oh
worthy words of Focion and Traiane, and very meet to be noted and retained.

Now to speak more particularly of the troubles daily heaped on their The
particular troubles of the^ which follow the Court.
necks that follow the Court, and that are to be lodged in diverse places, and
strange houses. I say that if the poor courtyer do depart at night from the
Court, to repair to his lodging, he finds often times the host of his house
and other his guests at home, already in their beds, and fast a sleep: so that
it happens sometimes he is feign to go seek his bed in another place, for
that night. And also if he should rise early in the morning, to follow his
matters: or to wait upon his Lord or Master, his Host perhaps and his
household are not yet awake, nor styrring to open him the door.

And further, if his Host be angry and displeased, and out of time: who shall
let him to lock his doors, the day once shut in? and who should compel him
to open his doors before it be broad day?

Truly, it is a great hap to be well lodged about the Court, and much more to
meet with an honest Host. For it happens often, that the great pleasure and
contentation we receive, being lodged in a fair Lodging is lightly taken from
us, by the hard entreaty, and straight usage of the Host of the same.

And in this is apparent, the vanity, fondnes, and lightness of some Courtyers,
that rather desire, and seek for a fair and pleasant lodging: then for a
good and profitable.

The ambition of the Courtyer is now grown to so great a folly, that he
desires rather a fair lodging for his pleasure, then a commodious or
profitable for his family. For admit The Ambition of the Courtyers.
the Harbinger do give them a good and commodious lodging, if it be not
sightly to the Eye, and stand commodiously, they can not like of it, by no
means. So that to content them, the Fouriers must needs provide them of a
fair lodging to the eye, though little handsome to lodge in: and yet sometimes
they will hard and scant be pleased with that.

And if the Courtyer be of reputation, and beloved in Court, I pray you what
pain and trouble shall the poor Harbinger have to content his mind, and to
continue in his favor? For, before master Courtyer will be resolved which of
the 2. Lodgings he will take: the fair and most honorable, or the mean and
most profitable, he bleedeth at the nose for anger, and his heart beats and
leaps a thousand times in his body. For, his person would have the good and
commodious Lodging: and his folly, the pleasant and fair.

I never saw dead man complain of his grave, nor Courtyer content with his
Lodging. For, if they give him a Hall, he will say it wants a chimney, if
they give him a chamber, he will say it lacks an inner-Chamber: if they give
him a kitchen he will say, it is too low and smoaky, and that it wants a
larder, if they give him a stable, that it wants a spence or storehouse, if
they give him the best and chiefest parts of the house, yet he says, he
wants small and little houses of office, and if he have access to the well,
he must also have the commodity of the Base-Court.

And in fine, if they give him a low paued Hall, to cool and refresh him in
summer, he will also have a high borded Chamber for the winter, and possible
he shall not have so many rooms at home in his own house, as he will demand
in his lodging abroad. And therefore many things suffers the Courtier in his
own house, that he will not bear with all in an Inn, or an other man's house.
And it may be also, that the Harbingers have provided them of a fair and
goodly lodging, where he shall command both master, stuff, and al other
things in the house: and yet the Courtier shall mislike of it, finding fault it
is too far from the Court, and reputeth it half a dishonor, and an impairer
of his credit, to be lodged so far off, since others that are beloved, and in
favor in Court in deed, lie hard adjoining to the Court, or at the least not
far of: For this is an old said saying, The nearest lodged to the Court,
commonly the best esteemed of the Prince.

I have seen many Courtiers offer large gifts and rewards, to entreat the
Harbingers to lodge them near the Court: but I never saw any that desired to
be lodged near the church; and this comes, for that they rather glory to be
right Courtiers, then good Christians.

And therefore Blondus recites in his book De declinatione Imperit, that a
Grecian called Narsetes (a Captain of Justinian the Great) was wont to say often,
That he never remembered he Many rather glory to be right Courtiers tken good
Christians.
went to the sea, nor entered into the Palace, not began any battle, nor
counseled of wars, nor mounted on horseback, but that first he went to the
Church and served God.

And therefore by the doings and saying of Narsetes, we may gather that every
good man ought rather to incline to be a good Christian, then to give himself
to arms and chiualry to be a right Courtier.

It happens many times, that after the Courtier be come to his lodging, he
likes of it well, and is well pleased with all: but when he has been in
others lodgings, and has looked upon them, straight way he falls out of
liking of his own, and thinks himself ill lodged to others. And this
misliking grows not of his ill lodging but of an inward malice and spite he
has, to see his enemy preferred to a better then his own: For such is the
secret hate and envy, in Princes Courts (a thing common to Courtiers) that they
disdain not only to thank the Harbingers for their care taken of them, in
placing them in good lodgings: but they must also complain and speak ill of
them, for the good lodgings they have given to their Adversaries, and
companions better then that of theirs.

There is also a foul disorder in Court among the Harbingers, in appointing
lodgings: and little modesty besides in Courtiers in as king them: For such
there are, that many times, neither they, nor their parents have any such
lodgings at home in their own houses, as they will demand only for their
horsekeepers and servants: But the great pain of the Court is yet, that such
nouels as come newly to the Court, they say they are of great estimation in the
Country, rich and of an ancient house, and his Father of great authority and
estimation; and when the truth is known, his fathers authority, and first
estimation was, of good laborers, and husbandmen, their only rents and
revenues consist, in that they got by the daily swet and labor of their
persons, and their power and ability, in the rents of an other man's goods, and
their liberty, in service and subjection of those that gave them wages, and
hired them by the day. And would to God their blood were not tainted with some
other notable blot.

There is a plague also in the Court which always dureth, and never leaves
The Courtyer of least calling proves most troublesome.
Court, and that is, that those that are always least worth, and are of least
calling, do presume, and take upon them most, and also are worst to please of
all others.

And this they do (their power being small) that they would supply, that in
words and countenance, which they want in deeds and effects. Ilye if I saw not
once in the country of Aragon, a Gentleman that hired a whole house, where
himself and his family were very well lodged, and commodiously: and after that
I remembered, I met with him in Castilla, where he could not content himself
with the charge of eight houses, besides his first he was appointed to: and
the occasion was, for that in Aragon he paid for that house he had, and for
these he paid nothing: So that of an others purse, every man coueteth to show
his magnificence, and to declare his follies: but when they defray their own
charge they are as hard as flint, and go as near to work as may be-

It is very true, that if there be any disorder and trouble to be lodged in
the Court, it comes also for the most part of the Harbingers, without whom
the Courtiers could never be well lodged, although the Prince had commanded
they should be lodged near him. Albeit in the court a man may easily exempt
himself from the Princes counsel, and justice of the same, having no suits
there, and from the counsel and affairs of wars, being no captain: From the
Sinod All Courtiers subiectto the authority of the Harbingers.
of the Spirituality, being no Ecclesiastical person: and from that of the
Indians, going to no Magitians, from the conuentions of Merchants, keeping
safely their Merchandise: and from the correction of the Lord high Marshall of
the Court, not being foolish and insolent: yet nevertheless, there is no
Courtier (be he never so high or great in favor) that can avoid himself
from the Harbingers authority, but he must needs come under his lee, being in
their power to dispose the lodgings as they think good: to lodge them
honorably or meanly, to please or displease them, to lodge, or dislodge them.
And if the Courtier happen at any time to quarrel, or fall out with them: I
warrant him he shall be remembered of the Harbingers in his lodging, and possibly
a Horsekeeper (yea perhapps his enemy) shall be better lodged then he, or else
he may seek his lodging in the streets, where he will: For all other injuries
or offenses in Court, whatsoever, the Courtier may easily redress them by
justice, but for those he receives of the harbinger, he must take them
quietly, and be contented with them: For otherwise we should not only offend
them, but iniure our selves, and make them provide us of no lodging: so hereby
we should utterly be dislodged, and unprovided. And therefore they bear with
many things in that office, which they would not do in any other office: as
for example: Those kind of officers must be much made of, of others well
entreated, accompanied, feasted, flattred, followed, yea many times served and
waited upon. I mean in serving their turn, anointing their hands, and
always enriching their gloves with sompeece of gold or silver: and alas the
silly Courtier that has not such soueraign ointment in his box, to cure these
above recited sores, but only to serve his own turn: if he be not How a
courtyer may make the Harbinget his friend.
his kinsman, or near allied, let him yet at least get acquainted with him,
and make him his friend: an easy thing to bring to pass, if he do not vex
him, nor give him overthwart language, and sometimes he must inuit him to
dinner and supper: For in the court there is no goodness gotten, neither by the
King, by the beloved, by the noble men, by the honorable of his Council,
Treasurers, nor yet by the Harbingers, but in suffering them, and doing them
always good and acceptable service. And if perchance the Harbingers wrong you,
and do you displeasure, or that they should say, you were troublesome and
importunate: yet be you wise for to bear with them in any case, and seem not
to hear them: For what loses the Courtier, if he bear now andthen with a
few crooked words at the Harbingers hands? marry by forforbearing them, he
happily comes to be lodged the better.

Suppose the Courtier be not always lodged to his mind and desire, should he
immediately complain of them, or murmur at them? no sure, he he should but so
doing show himself of small education. For what skilleth it, though among many
pounds of good meat, the Butcher sometimes mingle a morsel of liver, lungs,
or lights of the Beast. And therefore a man should not blame the poor
Harbingers so much as they do: for they are not commanded of the King to build
new lodgings, but such as they are, to divide them among the train of his
Court: So that they do lodge Courtiers in such as they find, and not in those
they would, adding thereto, that they have regard unto their estates and
demerits, and not to the affections and wills of the persons they lodge. For
it were more reason they should appoint the greatest and best lodgings, to the
noblest pesonages, and eldest servants of Court, then to the late and new come
Courtier, whose youth can better away How the Harbinger is to appoint his
lodgings.
with an ill nights lodging, then the gray hayres of the old Courtier.
Otherwise, the service of the old Courtier that has spent his young years in
Princes Courts (to the great pain and trouble of their persons) and in his
service, should for guerdon be paid with ingratitude, if he should not be
preferred to the best commodious lodging for his ease, and also the first to be
advanced by the Prince before the young Seruiture.

Now if it be honest and reasonable, that the Harbinger have great
consideration to the merits of him that he lodges: Even so it is fit, the
Courtier should weigh the press of the Court, and incommodious place, where
the Harbingers are constrained to lodge them: knowing that to day the Court
remoueth to such a place where there are happily six thousand houses, and to
morrow perhaps there are not a thousand, therefore if in such a place he find
but narrow Fustian to make him a doublet: let him take patience till such time
as they remove to another place, where they shall find broad cloth enough to
make them large clokes.

CHAP. III. How the Courtier should entreat his host or master of the house
where he, lies.
THe good and civil Courtier must also The Courtier must entrear his host well
where he lies.
entreat his Host well where he lies: for else, if he come into his lodging
brauling, and thretning, it may be, that besides he will keep his heart and
good cheer secret from him, he will not also open his chamber doors to him.
There are in the Court such hare-braines and vnvndiscreet persons, that have so
little regard and respect to their honest hosts, that they do nothing in their
lodgings, but revel and keep ill rule, and do even what they list, as though
the house were theirs to command, and not given them only for lodging:
Whereof springs two exceeding evils, the one that they offend God: and the
other, that the Prince is also il served. For the house is not given them to
command, but only appointed for them to lodge in.

We read in the life of the Emperor Seuerus, that he ordained in Rome, that
if the owner of the house did entreat his guest and stranger ill, or that he
did him hurt or displeasure, the stranger should accuse him before the Justice,
but in no wise braule nor quarrel with him in his own house:

Plutarch in his Politikes also recites, that in the Temples of the gods, in
the Realm of Dace, there was no liberty or safety for malefactors, save in
their their own proper houses, which served them for their only refuge, and
inviolable assurance: for they thought that within the entry and gates of the
same, none other but the Lords and Masters of the house might pretend any
jurisdiction or Segnory.

Now, if among the Daces, no officer or Justice could lay hold, or punish any
man, so long as he kept his, house: me thinks it is against all reason and
humanity, that the Courtier should once offer his host an injurious or
unseemly word.

Plato being one day reproved of his friends, for that he would not rebuke his
host Denis the Siracusian, who at the first received him very courteously, and
afterward used him ill: answered them thus.

My friend, to be angry with fools that show us pleasure, to take revenge of
children, whom we have brought us, to beat a woman, with whom we must be
familiar, and to brave and braule with those, in whose houses we are lodged,
neither the Philosophers of Greece ought to counsel him, nor the noble heart
once to think to do it.

I cannot deny, but that there are some hosts very rude and uncivil, that it
is in manner an impossible thing to bring him to any honesty or civility.
Howbeit, notwithstanding, I would wish the noble and worthy Courtier to take in
jest, all the wrongs and injuries done, or said to him by his host, or at the
least to seem, as though he heard them, not at all, otherwise, from the day
the Courtier falls out with him, he may even withal think presently to
depart his house, and to seek him a new lodging: for he can never be quiet
in his lodging, where the goodman of the house, and he cannot agree. And
wheresoever the fine Courtier shall lodge, let him never stick at the charges
of a lock to his chamberdore, a hatch to the window, a degree or two to the
stayres, a rope for the well, a harth to the Chimney, nor for a caseme^t to the
window: for these are but trifles, and they cost little though he leave them to
the house: ^ow the Courtier may make his host beholden to him.
yet with these trifles he binds his host, and makes him beholding unto him.
Also he may not forget sometime, to send home cates to his host, and to inuit
him to dinner to him, and likewise if his host did present him with any thing,
he must accept it in very good part, and thank him much for it: For other
while, by small presents, great friendship is obtained.

The discreet Courtier must also forbid his Pages and servants to come into
his Hosts garden, to spoil his fruit, or to gather his flowers, to steal his
hens, or to break any thing of his: That they pull not up the pauements of
the house, paint his walls with coals or chalk, that they rob not his
Doue-house, nor make any noise to steal his Coneyes, to break his glass
windows, and to hurt or mar any thing about his house: For if many times they
refuse to lodge strangers in their houses, it is not for want of lodging, or
that the Masters should comber them: but for the displeasures and shrewde
turns they receive by their pages, and servants daily: Yet shall chance many
times that a Citizen that has a fair new house, goodly white walls, and trimly
painted, shall have a Courtier come to lodge in his house, that shall have such
a train with him of servants, young children and their Nephews, which are so
foolish, proud, and so rechles: that they break the forms, throw down
Tables, paint and bedawd the walls, beat down doors, run thorough the
seelings, steal the birds, and do a thousand other mischiefs and unhappy
turns, so that the poor owner of the house had rather lodge an other time
Egyptians and beggars, then such rude and harmeful Courtiers.

And therefore I have seen in the Court, by reason of the servants disorder,
and ill rule, the masters commonly ill lodged, lodgings denied them, or after
they had them to be quite taken from them.

One of the necessariest things a Courtier should have, is to keep quiet and
well conditioned servants: otherwise it is to be thought (as indeed the common
saying is) the house to be ill governed, where the family and servants are so
ill conditioned and disordered.

And touching this matter, Aulus Gelius, De Noctibus Atticis says, that when
Cornelius Gracchus was returned to Rome, after he had been Consul a great
while in the Isles Baleares, he said these words before all the Senate. It
is necessary for Courtiers to keep quiet servants.


You know (Fathers Conscript) I have been Chief Justice and Consul thirteen
years: during all which time I swear to you by the immortal Gods, that to my
knowledge I never did wrong to any man, neither any servant of mine displeasure
to any, nor done any thing that was not lawful to be done in the house where
I lay.

Phalaris the tyrant, when he received any displeasure of the Agrigentines, he
caused his servants to lodge in their houses with them, for the one and the
other were so wicked, so unthrifty, such quarrellers and brawlers, that he
could not work them a greater spite nor displeasure, then for to lodge them
here and there in their houses.

There be also in the Court some Courtiers, that are esteemed of every man to
be of so evil behavior and demeanor, their servants and family of such lewd
and naughty conditions, that their hosts are thoroughly resolved either not to
receive them into their houses, or if they be compelled to it, to absent
themselves for the time of their being there: rather then to suffer such
injuries and wrongs, as they are sure they must take at their hands.

The Courtier must consider that The Courtier is to command his servants
courteously to ask of his Host all needful things.
sometimes he has need of a bottell of water to drink, a broom to sweep his
chamber, a platter or dish to serve him withal, of a Table cloth and napkins,
and of a towell for his hands, and his face, of a stool to sit on, and some
kettle for the kitchen: and in such case he should charge his servant
courteously to ask these things of his host, and not to take them perforce and
unasked.

Every man desires to be Master in his own house, and be he brother,
cosen, or friend, he will not suffer him to bear as much rule in his own
house, as himself. So that he will be less offended with the hurt and loss
of those things that he has lent, and were gently asked him: then with those,
which unknown to him by force, and against his will, they have taken from him,
yea though they do bring the^ afterward whole and sound again.

And this our liberty is so much set by, that we shall see sometimes a man for
his pleasure, play and lose a hundred Crowns of gold, and say never a word:
and on the other side, if one break the least glass in his house, he will
cry, and rage to the heavens, I remember when I was a Courtier, and went to
visit an other Courtier, a friend of mine, that was sick in his lodging. I
fell a chiding, and rebuking the host, for that I found him exclayming and
crying out of the Pages, which playing at the ball, had broken him a little
lamp of glass, and he answered me thus: I cry not sir, for the loss of my
Lamp, which is a half penny matter, nor for the oil that they spilt, worth a
farthing, but only for the liberty they rob me of, and for the small account
they make of me.

The good and wise Courtier may not be too familiar with his Hosts wife, nor
suffer his servants to be busy with the maids of the house, more then to
speak to them for their necessaries: for in this case, they should less hurt
the Master of the house, to ransacke and spoil his house, and all that he had
in it, then to take from him his honor and good name. To cast the beds on the
flower, to break the doors and windows, to vnpaue the stone, to paint and
black the walls, or to make any noise in the house, are all of them things,
yet sometimes tolerable, though not honest nor civil: but to take his wife,
and to abuse her, it is neither lawful nor possible to dissemble it, much
less to suffer it: for it were too much shame and reproach to the husband to
abide it, and high treason and crime abominable for the Courtier to do it. Now
since men are frail, and that they cannot, nor will not subdue their passions
and filthy motions of the flesh, there wants notwithstanding, not women in
Princes Courts, whose love and friendship they may easily embrace, which though
they were all commanded to avoid the Court, and the verge of the Court, yet it
could not be chosen, but some might secretly continue still in Court, to
entertain the Courtly Courtiers. For if in the Court, there Too many women
about the Court.
be kept a table of play two months only in the year, all the year long
besides they find the streets full stored of common women, when the year is
most plentiful, and fruitful of all things, yet still there lacks some
provision of victuals in the Court, but of such women, there is never no want,
but rather to many.

And therefore we have not said without great reason, that it were too much
treason and dishonestie for the Courtyer to fall in Love with his Hostess: For
in doing it, he should do her husband too much wrong, defame the wife, and
offend her Friends and neighbors, and utterly undo himself.

For Suetonius Tranquillus recites, that Julius Caesar caused a Captain of
his to be beheaded, only for slaundering and defaming of his Hostess, the
which he did not, tarying for the complaint of her Husband, nor the accusation
of any other.

And the Emperor Aurelianus, seeing one of his men at a window one day
pulling his Hostosse by the sleeue, caused his hand to be stricken off
immediately: although both his Hostess and he swore, he did it but in jest,
and to no other intent.

Plutarch in his Book De Matrimonio says: that there was a law among the
Licaonians, that if any stranger did but only talk with his Hostess, his
tongue should be cut out of his head, and if he had passed further, that he
should then loose his head.

Macrobius also in his Saturnales, recites, that amongst the Romans it was
reputed a great infamy, if any man came, and praised the beauty and manners
of the Mistress of the house, where he Lodged: For, in praising her, he lets
them understand he knew her: and knowing her, he spoke to her, and speaking to
her, he opened his heart to her, and this doing, he planely defamed her, and
made her to be evil reported of.

Aulus Gellius writes, that the like punishment was inflicted on him that had
carnal participation with any of the Vestall virgins: the self same was also
executed on him that procured any infamy to his Hostess, where he was lodged.

Which punishment was, either to be cut in the midst, and quartred in four
parts, or else to be stoned to death alive.

The good Courtyer must also have The care the Courtier ought to have of his
Apparel.
an other great regard, and that is, to command his servants to look well to
his Ryding-apparell, and such as are lent him of Courtyers, to wear
otherwhiles, to see that it be kept clean, and well-brushed, and above all
safely delivered where it was borrowed.

For commonly the hors-keepers have the horses lowsing-cloathes and their
Masters Foote-cloath more neat and cleanly, then the Grooms and Pages of the
Chamber have his Apparel: and this proceeds of their great sloth and
negligence.

And truly this passes the bounds of shamefast degree: yea, and comes much
to charge the Courtyers conscience, the small account he has, so to let his
garments and Apparel, and all other his moueables, to be spoiled and lost.

And this happens very often by the negligence of their pages and servants:
which now throws them about the Chambers, dragges them upon the ground: now
sweepes the house with them, now they are full of dust, then tattred and torn
in pieces: here their hose seam-rent, there their shoes broken: So that if a
poor man come afterward to buy them, to sell again, it will rather pity
those that see them, then give them any courage to buy them. Wherefore the
Courtyer ought not to be so careless, but rather to think upon his own
things, and to have an eye unto them. For, if he go once a day to his stable
to see his horses, how they are kept and looked too, he may likewise also take
another day in the week, when he may find leisure to see his Wardroppe, how
his Apparel lies.

But what patience must a poor man take, that lends his impleme^ts and
apparel to the Courtiers? that never lays them abroad a sunning, to beat
out the dust of them, nor never lays them in water, to wash and white them,
be they never so foul. And albeit the beds and other implements lent to the
Courtier, be not of any great value, yet it is not fit they should be
thrown at their tail, and kept filthily: for as charily and daintily does a
poor laboring, and hus, bandman keep his woollen coverlet, and sets as
much by it, as does the jolly Courtier by his quilt, or ouerpaine of silk.

And it chances often times also that though at a need the poor man's bed
costeth him less money, then the rich man's bed costeth him: yet does it serve
him better, then the rich and costly bed serves the Gentleman or Nobleman. And
this to be true, we see it by experience, that the poor husbandman or Citizen
sleeps commonly more quietly, and at his case, in his poor bed and cabben,
with sheets of towe, then does the Lord or rich Courtier, lying in his hanged
Chamber and bed of sickness, wrapped in his finest Holland sheets, who still
sigheth and complains.

And finally, we conclude, that then when the Court remoueth, and that the
Courtier departs from his lodging where he lay, he must with all courtesy
thank the good man and How the Courtier is to demean himself at his
departure from his lodging.
good wife of the house for his good lodging, and courteous intertainment he
has had of them, and must not stick also to give them somewhat for a
remembrance of him, and besides, give certain rewards among the maids and men
servants of the house, according to their ability, that he may recompense them
for that is past, and win their favor for that is to come.

CHAP. IIII. What the Courtiers must do to win the Princes favor.
DIodorus Siculus says That the honor and reverence the Egyptians used
ordinarily to their princes was so great, that they seemed rather to worship
them, then to serve them, for they could never speak to them, but they must
first have license given them.

When it happened any Subject of Egypt to have a suite to their Prince, or to put
a supplication to them, kneeling to them, they said these words:

Sovereign Lord, and Mighty Prince, if it may stand with your Highness
favor and pleasure, I will boldly speak, if not I will presume no further,
but hold my peace.

And the self reverence and custom had toward God, Moses, Aaron, Tobias,
David, Solomon, and other Fathers of Egypt, making like intercession when they
spoke with God, saying, Domine, mi Rex, Si inueni gratiam in oculis tuis,
loquar ad Dominummeum.

O my Lord and King, if I have found favor in thy sight, I will speak unto
thee: if not, I will keep perpetual silence: For there is no service ill,
when it is grateful and acceptable to him, to whom it is done: as to the
contrary none good, when it pleases not the party that is served: For if he
that serves be not in his masters favor he serves, he may well take pain to
his undoing, without further hope of his good will or recompense. Wherefore
touching that I have said, I infer, that he that goes to dwell and abide in
the Court, must above all, endeavor himself all he can to obtain the princes
favor, and obtaining it, he must study to keep him in his favor: For it
should little prevail the Courtier to be beloved of all otherr, and of the
Prince only to be misliked. And therefore Alcamidas the Grecian, being once
advertised by a friend of his, that the Athenians did greatly thirst for his
death, and the Thebans desired his life: he answered him thus: If those of
Athens thirst for my death, and them of Thebes likewise desiring my life, I can
but be sorry and lament. Howbeit yet, if K. Philip my sovereign Lord and
Master, hold me still in his grace and favor, and repute me for one of his
beloved, I care not if all Greece hate and malign me, yea, and lie in wait
for me.

Indeed sir, it is a great thing to get into the princes favor, but when he
has gotten it, doubtless it is a harder matter to know how to keep it: For
to make them love us, and to win their favor, we must do a thousand manner
of services: but to cause them to hate and dislike of us, the least displeasure
in the world suffices. And therefore the pain and trouble of him that is in
favor in the Court is The troble of him that is in favor in the court is
great.
great, if he once offend, or be in displeasure: For albeit the prince do
pardon him his fault, yet he never after returns into his favor again: so
that to conclude, he that once only incurreth his indignation, he may make
just reckoning never after, or marvelous hardly to be received again into
favor. Therefore says the divine Plato in his books De Republica, That to
be a King and for to reign, to serve and to be in favor, to fight, and to
overcome, are three impossible things, which neither by man's knowledge, nor by
any diligence can be obtained: only remaining in the hands, and disposing of
fickle fortune, which does divide, and give them where it pleases her, and to
whom she favors best.

And truly Plato had reason in his saying, for to serve, and to be beloved is
rather hap and good fortune: then industry or diligence.

Since we see often times, that in the Court of princes, those that have served
but three years only, shall be sooner preferred and advanced, then such one,
as has served perhaps 20. or 30. years, or possible all his life time.

And further, he shall be both displaced, and put out of service, by means
of the other. And this proceeds not through his long and faithful service he
has done, but only by reason of the good hap that follows him.

Although Plato tells, that to get Realms and Seigniories, to overcome
battles, and to be favored and beloved of princes, be things granted to us,
rather by hazard and fortune, then by force of good works and laudable acts,
or by long toyling in painful service: yet the Noble and stout heart
therefore should not cease at any time to enterprise, and manfully to execute
in every occasion presented to him, to atchieue to fame, and honor: neither
for any pain and labor to lose the hope to obtain his pretended purpose: for
men sometimes Want of audacity hinders good fortunes.
lose many things, rather through timerousnes, and want of audacity, then for
that they lack good happ or fortune. To see in the Court of princes some to
be richer, more honored, more noble, more esteemed, better beloved, more
waited upon, better served, and better welcome then others, and more seared
then others: we may by these tokens know, that fortune has not used to reward
those with such favors and preferments, which live at home idely, and much
less Courtiers, who live in Court with all pleasure and delicacie, wherewith
they are never wearied.

Let no man be so fond to think that fortune is so bountiful and liberal,
The reason why fortune rayseth some, and throws down others
that for his authority or only thought, she will be once moved to lift him
out of misery, to exalt him to higher place and dignity, without some secret and
private respect had to his virtue: For when she many times upon a sudden
rayseth any to high and great estate, it comes by the merits of him that is
exalted, or through the displeasure of him that is thrown down, in whose room
she has placed an other in favor with her. As we read of Julius Emilius,
for a time high in favor, and afterward in great disgrace with the Emperor
Constantius, in whose place and room succeeded afterward an other named
Alexander, who being one day reproved by some of his friends of ingratiude
toward them (that said they were causers and furtherers of his honor and
preferment) answered them in this manner: Masters, if I am come into such
favor with the Emperor, my good and gracious Lord, succeeding in the place of
Emilius, truly it was more by reason of his deserved fall, then by your
obtained means or requests: Fortune and his heavy destiny, having so willed and
ordained it, more to overthrow and displace him of his room and credit he was
in, then to advance and prefer me to the same.

The which I say, to advise the Citizen and Gentleman that goes to the Court
to be a Courtier, to the end he be not fickle headed, and light of belief, to
think that immediately he shall come to such authority, that he may easily
command all that he will: neither that he should so much despair, and be
hopeless, but that by time (in serving well) he might come to be in as great
favor, as any other about the Prince.

We see daily such change and alterations in the Commonweal, and fortune to
turn her unstable wheel so often, that many times the administration of the
Common weal is in his hands and rule, of whom before they made little or none
account: and therefore I say to you, and again return to tell you, that the
Courtier that seeks to come into his Princes favor, and to be beloved of
him, and The course he must take that would be in his Princes favor.
that coueteth to be well reputed of in Court, must endeavor himself to be
very honest, and as near as may be, faultlesse of life, and true and faithful
in his charge or office he takes upon him: For the good opinion that men have
of a man, is ever the first degree to attain to the Princes favor: For there
is no man in the world, of whatsoever estate or condition he be, so vicious
and lascivious, but at the least he desires to have an honest and virtuous
man in his house: so that a man may say, that the good, and godly life is the
readiest mean and way (where ever the person be) to bring him soonest into the
Princes favor, and to make him to be beloved generally.

Wherefore Phalaris the Tirant writing to an Emulator of his, said these words
unto him: I confess, thou art an honest man, but thou will not deny me also,
that all those thou keep in thy house, be wicked persons, and of an evil
life: a thing which in my house thou shall find all contrary: For although I
am a Tirant, at least yet I love, that no ill disposed person eat bread in my
house: So though I am laden with many vices: yet am I accompanied also with
many wise and learned men.

The divine Plato came from Greece into Scicilia, only to see Dionisius the
Syracusan, and not Plato himself alone but also diverse other Philosophers, in
company with him, whom he did not only honor and entreat well, but also saw
they wanted nothing fit, or necessary for them.

Many times Dionisius was wont to say these words. I am Captain of the
Rhodians, since I defend them from the Affricans, and king of the Affricans,
because I govern them: and friend of the The saying of Dionisius to Plato and
other Philosophers that came to visit him.
Italians, because I offend them not: and Father of the Philosophers, because I
help to relieve them in all their necessities: and the Scicllians call me a
tyrant, because they see I leave not to punish them, and keep them under.

By these two examples we may gather, that the tirants being friends to
virtuous and honest men, much more and of necessity ought the good and just
Princes to be. Also the Courtier must take great heed he be not arrogant, and
a liar, a flatterer and dissembler: for those and such like faults are rather
woods and bypath, utterly to lose a man: then a plain high way to bring him
into favor and credit. And although by chance there have been some, that with
all these faults have notwithstanding crept into favor: yet we will show them
a hundred, that only for those vices have been cast out of favor and credit
both: For commonly, all those that by the favor of wicked Princes begin to
be great, and of some honor, and that study by all disshonest and unlawful
means to continue and keep themselves in credit and favor: Albeit for a time
we see them reign and flourish in prosperity: yet that lasts not long,
neither is it perpetual, but a time comes again, when we see them fall, and
quite cast of, to their great shame and utter undoing.

There are many that knows and understands the Princes Court but meanly,
or not at all, which believe that for being well spoken, and being careful and
diligent in their business and affairs, they should the sooner for that come in
favor and credit before others: but in the end their hope and imagination is
nothing, not aunswering any thing their desire: for as there are in Court many
green heads, and graceless couertures, which are of no reputation, nor any
thing set by, neither deserving to be well thought of: so are there many wise
heads and beloved Courtiers, greatly esteemed and reputed of.

And this for their own good demerites, and by means also of the others
wicked abuse and disorder. Sue tonius Tranquillus recites, that Scilla the
Consul, being a mortal enemy of the Marians, (of which faction was also
Julius Caesar) said: that from Caesar's infancy, his wisdom made him more to
be feared and wondered at: then ever his stout and valiant courage he showed.

Plutarch writing to Tratan, said. I assure thee (Sovereign Prince) I do
more esteem and honor thy person, then I do care for all thy Empire besides:
For I have seen thee do a thousand good things to deserve it, but I never saw
thee once desirous to have it.

And sure in my opinion, I verily think there is no better Alchemy in Court,
to grow to sudden Wealth, and to acquire the Princes favor: then that the
fame of his good life should rather resound his praise to the Prince thereby to
make him known unto him: then the respect of his Noble house or progeny.

That Courtier also that craves his Princes grace, must take heed in any wise
he be not companion with rash and hasty persons, whose unstable heads
mislike of every state, still deprauing all other virtues. Such Fellow-mates
and companyons, the wise Courtyer must in any case refuse to be conversant with.

I must advise him also, he beware he be not rash of speech, nor that he
speak ill of any man. For, it is a right kind of treason, to detract or
backebyte our Friends: and much more the Prince, to whom we wholly owe our
duty and allegiance. And therefore the wise and virtuous Courtyer must fly
from this company as far as he Backbyting is a kind of treason, especial^y
against princes.
can, that are possessed with such vain humors and passions of mind: For
such kind of men, will never counseli us to serve well, nor to beware of
liberal speaking, but will rather infect us, and bring us to their naughty
vain humor, and make us be deemed as bad as themselves (though we be not
so,) only for keeping them company.

Like as in Commonweals, there are seditious heads, which move and and stir
up the poor Commons to rebellion: even so in Princes Courts, there are the
like factious heads, that seek to win good will of courtiers: and so to
stir up their minds also, to tumult and sedition: which because they have no
way to come up, and grow in favor, do detract, and speak ill of those that are
in Favor and authority.

One of these abiects, and inferior sort, shall go to the house of another, (in
like disgrace and discredit that himself is in:) and there these companyons
shall open their throats against the Prince, and his Court: saying: The King
cares not for his Subjects: Talking of the high minds and countenaunces of
the beloved and favored of Court: of the affections of the Counsel, of the
parciality and enmity of the Court: of the want of munition for wars, and of
the fall and decay of the commonwealth: and thus with these leaud and uncomely
discourses, they spend the long and doleful nights of Winters season; and
therewithal also, the long and hot Sunnydayes of Summers time.

Adrian the Emp: being once in formed, that there met and assembled together
daily, at the house of one Lucius Turbon, a number of the seditious and The law
of A drian the Emperor againest sedicious persons.
factious sort of Rome, which were offended with him, and conspired against
him: to prevent them of insurrection, proclaimed presently through Rome, and
enacted it for a law, that all Courtyers, that assembled there, should lose
their heads, and all the Romans should be banished.

All this that we have spoken, is to banish vices from Princes Courts if it may
be: For now-adayes, as there are many houses of ordinary Tables, and and
numbers of Dycing-houses, for all manner of play: so is there also in the
Court, besides the Groom-porters, other Chambers where they meet, to murmur at
each man's doings.

And as there are some that say: Go, Let us go to such a man's house, and
there we shall find Play enough: and Good fellowshippe, to pass the Time
away as we will, etc. Even so these others say, Go, we will go to such a
chamber, and there we shall meet with our companyons and good-fellowes, where
we may talk liberally, and at our pleasure, without check or control of
any.

In famous be that house, where there is no other exercise, but play and riot:
and accursed be that, where they cannot occupye themselves, but in defaming
and back-byting their Brethren and neighbors. For to conclude, it were less
evil to play, and loose their money, then to rob and spoil his neighbor of
his good name.

Now to get into the Princes favor, it helps much to consider, wherein the
Prince takes his chiefest delight, and whereto he is best affected: whether to
Music, Hunting, Flying, Ryding of horses, or Fishing, running, or Leaping: or
any other actiuitie whatsoever it be. And his Affect and desire (being once
known and observed) he must give himself wholly to love that the Prince
loves, and to follow that that he follows. And as Noble Princes commonly are
given to their wills, to like of some pastimes, better then others: so do they
show themselves more favorable and gracious, to some of their servants, then
others: and rather to those whom only they see conform and agreeable with their
affections, then to such as are always most diligent and painful about them,
to do them the best service they can.

The curious Courtyer may account him self happy, if he can frame him self
to commend that the Prince allows, and likewise to disalow of that the
prince misliketh: and though perhaps he were many times of the contrary
opinion: he may well think and believe to himself what he likes best, but
in no case to utter that he thinks, nor yet to make any countenance to the
contrary.

The Emperor M: Aurelius never drank other then red wine: and because he was
informed, that Torquatus the Roman for his sake, did not only refrain from
drinking Whitewines, but did also plant his vynes with red-grapes: he made him
Censour of Rome, and gave him the ward of the gate Salaria in the said City.

In eating and drinking, in hunting, and Tilting, in peace and in war, in
youthful sportes, and grave matters: the wise Courtyer must always follow the
steps and will of his prince, and imitate him in the same, the best he can.

And if it be beneficial for the Courtyer, to obtain the favor of his
Prince, and to be esteemed of him: let him in no wise enterprise to talk to
much unto him; For, by continual frequenting the Prince, it cannot otherwise
fall out, but he shall both trouble him, and be thought a proud, arrogant, and
an importunate fool of him. And if the Courtyer has no grave and weighty
matters to move the Prince in, to what purpose does he seem to molest and
importune the King?

We say in weighty matters to communicate with him. For to talk with the
Prince, and to trouble his ears with tryfles and matters of small moment, he
should be reputed of the hearers a rash man: and of the King himself, held
but for a witles fool.

Let us consider a little what is fit for the Courtyer to do, and what
becomes him best, and whether it be lawful for him to conferrs with the
Prince, and then we shall come to know, if it be decent for him to speak often
to the Prince?

Therefore to go to the King to speak ill of any man, I think no wise man will
offer to do it: and if it be to give him secret intelligence of anything: he
must first doubt, whether the King will believe him or no? and to think to
counsel him, it is a token of a light head: and to presume to sit with the
Prince, and to be merry with him, to pass the time away, let every man beware
he run not into that error, nor that he once prease to do it.

To send to reprove a Prince, I know not what he is that would be so foolish
hardy, as once to dare open his lips against him. And to slatter him (if the
Prince be wise, he will understand him) and if he, find him once, it is
enough to turn the Flatterer to great displeasure: yea, and to put him quite
out of favor with him. And therefore to live in surety, and avoid these
dangers, me thinks it is best to speak but seeldome unto him. Lucullus was a
great friend to Seneca, and was also Governor of Scicilia, and demanding one
day of Seneca, What he might do that might be acceptable to Nero his Lord and
Master. Seneca answered him thus.

If thou desire to be acceptable to Princes, Do them many services, and give
them few words.

And so likewise the divine Plato said in his books de Repub That those that
have to move the Prince in any thing, in any case be brief: for in delating
too much, they should both comber the prince, and make him also not give
attentive ear, neither could he have leisure to hear them nor patience to
tarry them. And he said further, Those matters and subjects they treat with
princes in, and that are used to be told them, ought to be grave and
sententious: either tending to commodity of the wealepublike, to his honor or
profit, or to the service of the King, to whom he speaks.

These counsels and aduertisements of Plato and Seneca (in my poor opinion)
deserve to be noted and had in memory. And notwithstanding all that I have
spoken, I say yet further to you, that there is nothing disposes the prince
better to love and favor his servants, then to see them diligent in service,
and slow in speaking. For to reward him only that seeks it by means of his
tongue, and by words: It is only in our free wills to do it: but to
recompense him that by his diligent service, only craves a good turn, and
not in words, we are in conscience bound to it: And hereof springs the
vulgar proverb: The Good service dema^ds recompense, though the tongue be
silent.
good service is demand sufficient, though the tongue be silent.

CHAP. V. What manners and gestures become the Courtier when he speaks to
the Prince.
WHen the Courtier determines to speak to the Prince, he must first show
himself unto him with great reverence, before he come at him, and if the the
King be set, he must kneel to him upon one knee, with his cappe in his left
hand, holding it neither too far, nor too near his body, but rather
downwards toward his knee, with a good grace and comely fashion, not too
lustily, nor too much boldly, but with a set shamefast gravity, putting
himself on the left hand of the prince to speak with him, whether he be
sitting or standing: For placing our selves on the left hand, we leave the
King on the right, as duty wills us: For the right hand belongs ever to the
best person.

Plutarch says, that in the banquets the Kings of persia made, they sat him,
whom they loved, and made most account of, cheek by cheek, and on the left
hand of the prince, where the heart lies: saying, that those whom they loved
with their heart, should be set down also on that side the heart lay, and in
no other place.

Blondus says to the contrary, that the Romans did honor the right hand so
much, that when the Emperor entered into the Senate, no man durst ever put
himself on his right hand. And he says moreover, that if a young man were
perchance found sitting on the right hand of an old man, or the Setuant on the
upper hand of his master: the Son on the right hand of his Father, or any
Page, Prentice, or Serving man, on the vpper-hand of a Burgeis or citizen: they
were no less punished by Justice for that fault and offense, then if they had
done any notable crime or delict.

Whosoever will speak unto the Prince, must speak with a soft voice, and not
too hastily. For if he speak too loud, those that stand by, shall hear what
he says to the King: and in speaking too fast, the King shall not easily
understand what he says. And he must also, ere he speak unto the Prince,
premeditate long before what he will say to him: and put into him good words,
and aptly placed: For, wise men are more careful what words their Tongues
should utter, then what their hands should do.

There is a great difference betwixt speaking well and doing well: For in the
end the hand can but strike and offend: but the Tongue can both offend and
defame.

Even when the Courtyer is telling his tale to the Prince, let him be advised
in all his actions and gestures, and that he play not with his cap from one
hand to an other: much less that he behold the Prince too earnestly in the
face. For in the one he should be taken for a fool, and esteemed in the other
for a simple Courtyer.

He must take great heed also, that he spit not, coffe, nor hawke, when he
speaks to him: and if it be so he be constrained by Nature to it, then let
him hold down his head, or at least turn at one side, that he breath not in
the Kings face.

Pliny writing to Fabatus, says: that the Kings of India, never suffered any
man (in speaking to them) to approach so near them, that their breath might
come to their face. And they had reason to do it, to avoid strong and unsavory
breaths, growing rather of the indisposition of the stomach, or of the
putrefaction of the Lungs, or of the corruption of the brain.

And if the Courtyer have to speak with the King after dinner or supper, Let
him beware he eat no Garlycke, nor Onyons, nor drink wine without Things to
be eschewed of him that would speak with the King.
water. For if he savor of garlic or onyons, the King may think he lacks
discretion, to come with those Sents to his presence: or if his breath were
strong of Wine, that he were a drunkard.

He must be very circumspect also that when he speaks to the King, he
speak not with his Head, as well as with his Tongue: nor that he play not
with his hands, nor his feet, nor that he stroke his beard, nor wink with his
eyes: For such fond countenances and gestures, do rather become a Fool or
iester, then a civil or honest Courtyer.

And in his discourse with the prince that he exceed not in superfluous
words, more then shall only be needful, and touching his matter: and not to
seem in his prefence to deprave, or detract any man. He may honestly allege,
(and that without reproache) that service he has done him: but not to lay
before him others faults and imperfections.

For, at such a time it is not lawful for him to speak ill of any man, but
only to communicate with him, of his own affairs. And he may not go so far
also, as to remember him with too great affection, the blood spent by his
Ancestors in his service: nor the great acts of his Parents: For this only
word said to the Prince, I did this, better pleases, and likes the Prince,
then to tell him a hundred other words, of that his predecessors had done.

It pertayneth only to women, and they may justly crave recompense of the
Prince for the lives of their husbands lost in the Princes wars: but the
valiant and worthy Courtier ought not to demand recompense, but for that he
only has done by pearsing In what sort the Courtier is to demand recompeuce
of the prince
lance, and bloody sword.

He must beware also that he show no countenance to the King of
insatisfaction, neither to be passioned in casting his service in the Princes
teeth saying, All others have been recompensed save only him, whom the Prince
has clean forgotten: For Princes will not that we only serve them, but that
we also (at their wills and pleasures) tarry for recompense, and not to have
it when we gape, or are importune for it.

Howbeit, it is lawful notwithstanding, humbly and lowly, without choler or
passion, to put the Prince in remembrance of all that we have done for him,
and of the long time we have spent in serving him. Also the curious Courtier
shall not show himself to dislike at all of the Prince, neither by heaping of
many words, to induce him to hear him with the better good will: For men's
hearts are so prone to ill, that for one only unpleasant or overthwart word
spoken to them, they lightly forget a thousand services done them.

Socrates being one day demanded what he thought of the Princes of Greece,
answered: There is no other difference between the names, and propeties of the
gods, and that of princes, but that the gods were immortal, and these mortal.

For these mortal princes use in a manner the like authority here in earth,
that the Gods immortal do in Heaven above.

Saying, further also, that I always was, am, and will be of that mind, that
my mother Greece remain a common weal.

But since it is determined to be governed by princely Monarchy, I wish them
in all, and for all, to acknowledge their obedience and allegiance to their King
and Sovereign: For when they would otherwise use it, they may be assured,
they shall not only go against mortal Princes, but also against the eternal
God.

Suetonius Tranqutllus says, that Titus the Emperor being advertised that the
Consuls would kill him, and usurp his Empire, answered thus wisely.

Even as without the divine will and providence I could never have possessed
the Imperial Crown: so without their permission and suffera^ce, it lies in
no man's power to deprave me of it: For to us men it pertayneth only to keep
the Imperial jurisdiction, and to the gods alone to give and defend it: Which
we have spoken, to the end no man presume to be revenged of his Prince,
neither in word nor deed: for to speak ill of him, we should rather purchase
us their high indignation and displeasure, then procure us any cause or
suggestion to be revenged of him.

Let the good Courtier be also advised, that in talking with the Prince he be
not too obstinate, to contend with the Prince, or any other in the Princes
presence: For this name of arrogant and self willed, becomes not the person
of a wise Courtier: For The Courtier should not be obstinate.
we know, that in sport, and argument every man desires to overcome, how
trifling soever the matter be: And therefore we read in the Life of the
Emperor Seuerus, that Publius the Consul iested one day with Fabritius his
Companion, and told him he was in love.

Whom Fabritius answered: I do do confess, it is a fault to be in love, but
yet it is a greater fault for thee to be so obstinate as thou art: for love
proceeds of wit and discretion, but obstinacy comes of folly and great
ignorance.

If perchance the King ask the Courtiers opinion in those matters, they
discoursed, if he know his opinion to agree with the Princes, Let him therefore
tell it him hardly: but if it be contrary, let him hold his peace, and not
contend against him, framing some honest excuse to conceal his opinion. How
princes are to be spoken to, if they be in an error.
But if perhaps the King were obstinate, and bent to his opinion in any thing,
and that through his self will, and obstinacy, he would do any thing
unreasonable or prejudicial to his Commonwealth, and that great detriment
might come thereby: yet for all this, in such case the Beloved Courtier should
not at that instant be too plain with him, to let him understand his error,
neither yet should he suffer him altogether to pass his way untouched, but in
some fine manner and proper words (as may become the place best) to give him to
understand the truth.

But to use it with more discretion, he shall not need before them all to open
his whole mind, but to keep his opinion secret, expecting a more apter time,
when the King shall be apart in his Privy Chamber, and then franckely to tell
him his whole mind, with all humility and reverence, and to show him the
plain truth, without keeping any one thing from his knowledge: For otherwise
in telling the King openly, he should make him ashamed? and in dissembling his
fault also privily, he should not be admonished of his error committed.

Now therefore let our conclusion be, that the Courtier that proceeds in his
matters, rather with opinion and obstinacy, then discretion and judgment,
shall never be in favor with the Prince, nor yet beloved in the Court: For it
is as necessary for the Courtier, that will seek the favor of the Prince, and
love of the Court, to impose his tongue to silence: as it is to dispose his
body to all manner of service.

I know there are some such rash, indiscreet, and arrogant fools, that as much
do boast and rejoice to have spoken indiscreetly to the King, and without
respect of his princely Majesty: as if they had done some marvelous thankful
service, with whom, truly no man ought to be greatly offended, for such fond
bosts and vants as they make, and much less also with that that happens to
them afterward: The Courtier also must be well advised, How the Courtier must
demean himself, when his Prince sporteth before him.
that albeit the king for his pleasure do privily play with his hands, or
jest with his tongue with the Courtier, and that he take great pleasure in it:
yet that he in no case presume to do the like (yea, thoogh he were assured
the Kings Majesty would take it well) but let him modestly behave himself, and
show by his words and countenance, that he thinks the Prince does honor
him, in pleasing his Majesty to use those pastimes and pleasant devises with so
unworthy a person as he is: For the Prince may lawfully play, and sport
himself with his Lords and Gentlemen: but so may not they again with him:
For so doing, they might be counted very fond and light.

With a man's companions and coequals it is lawful fot every man to be merry
and play with all: But with the Prince, let no man so hardy once presume
further, more then to serve- honor, and obey him. So that the wise Courtier,
must endeavor himself always to come in favor by his wisdom, and courtly
behavior, in mattsrs of weight and importance: and by great modesty and
gravity, in things of sport and pastime: Therefore Plutarch in his Apothegmes
says, That Alcibiades amongst the Greeks a worthy Captain, and a man of his
own Nature, disposed to much mirth and pleasure, being asked once by some of
his familiar friends, why he never laughed in Theaters, Banquets, and other
common plays where he was, answered them thus: Where others eat, I fast?
where others take pain and play, I rest me, and am quiet: where others
speak, I Where wise men are best known.
am silent, where they laugh, I am courteous, and jest not: For wise men are
never known but among fools and light persons.

When the Courtier shall understand, or hear tell of pleasant things to be
laughed at, Let him in any case (if he can) fly from those great laughters and
fooleries: that he be not perhaps moved too much with such to^es, to laugh
too loud, to clappe his hands, or to do other gestures of the body, or
admirations too vehement, accompanied either with a rude and barbarous manner
of behavior, then with a civil and modest nobleness: For over great and
excessive laughter was never engendered of wisdom, neither shall he ever be
counted wise of other that uses it.

There are also an other sort of Courtiers that speak so coldly, and laugh so
drily, and with so ill a grace: that it were more pleasure to see them weep
then to laugh. Also to novel or to tell tales to delight others, and to make
them laugh, you must be as brief as you can, that you weary not and comber not
the Auditory, pleasant, and not biting, nor odious. Else it chances
oftentimes, that wanting any of these conditions, from jesting they come many
times to good earnest. Elius Spartianus in the life of the Emperor Seuerus
says, that the said Em-Emperour had in his Court a pleasant fool, and he
seeing the fool one day in his dumpes and cogitations, asked him what he ayled
to be so sad? The fool made answer: I am devising with my self what I
should do to make thee merry. And I sw are to thee my Lord Seuerus, that for
as much as I What disposition should be in a Princes Iester.
weigh thy life so dear, possibly I study more the nights for the tales I
shall tell thee in the morrow after, then do the Senators touching that they
must decree on the next day.

And I tell thee further, my Lord Seuerus that to be pleasant and delighting
to the Prince, he must neither be a very fool, nor altogether wise: But
though he be a fool, yet he must smatter somewhat of a wiseman: and if he
be wise, he must take a little of the fool for his pleasure.

And by these examples we may gather, that the Courtier must needs have a
certain modesty and comely grace, as well in speaking, as he must have a soft
and sweet voice in singing: There are also some in Court, that do not spare to
go to Noble men's bords to repast, which being in deed, the unseemly grace it
self: yet in their words and talk at the boorde, they would seem to have a
marvelous good grace, wherein they are often deceived. For if at times the
Lords and gentlemen laugh at them, it is not for any pleasure they take in
their talk but for the ill grace, and uncomely gestures they use in their
talk.

In the banquets and feasts, Courtiers make sometimes in the Summer, there are
very often such men in their company, that if the wine they drank took their
condition, it should be drunk either colder or hoter then it is.

CHAP. VI. How the Courtier should behave himself to know, and to visit the
Noble men and Gentlemen, that be great with the Prince, and continuing still in
Court.
THe Courtier that comes newly to the Court, to serve there, must immediately
learn to know those that are in authority and favor in the Court, and that
are the Princes Officers: For if he do otherwise, neither should he be
acquainted with any Noble man or Gentleman, or any other of the Princes
servants, neither would they also give him place, or let him in when he would.
For we be not conversant with him we know not, and not being conversant with
him, we trust him not, and distrusting him, we commit no secrets to him: He
that will come to favor in the Court must be acquainted with all the Courtiers
in the Court.
So that he that will come in favor in the Court, must make himself known,
and be friend to all in general.

And he must take heed that he begin not so suddenly to be a busy suitor
in his own private affairs: or for his friend, for so he shall be soon
reputed for a busy soliciter, rather then a wise Courtier. Therefore he that
will purchase favor and credit in the Court, must not be careful to
prefer men's causes, and to entermeddle in many matters: For the nature of
Princes is, rather to commit their affairs into the hands and trust of grave
and reposed men, then to busy and importunate soliciters: The Courtier also
may not be negligent to visit the Prelates, Gentlemen and the favored of the
Court, nor to make any difference between the one and the other: and not only
to visit their parents and friends, but his enemies also: For the good
Courtier ought to endeavor himself the best he can to accept al those for his
friends at least, that he cannot have for parents and kinsfolks: For amongst
good and virtuous Courtiers, there should never be such bloody hate, that they
should therefore leave one, to company with another, and to be courteous one
to another.

Those that be of base mind, do show their cankred hearts by forbearing to
speak, but those that be of Noble blood and valiant courage, begin first to
fight, ere they leave to speak together. For there is also an other sort of
Courtiers, which being sometimes at the Table of Noble men or else where, when
they hear of some quarrel or private displeasure, they show themselves in
offer like Lions: but if afterward their help be craved in any thing, and
that they must needs stand by their friend, and draw on his his side, then they
show themselves as still as Lambs, and gentle enough to be entreated.

Amongst other the new come-Courtier has to be acquainted withal, he must
learn to know those the Prince favors, and loves best, on whom he must
wait and attend upon, and do all the service he can, without grudge and
disdain: For there is no King, but far off on him, has an other King, that
still contrarieth his mind, and preuenteth him of his intent and pleasure: And
ever A Prince has alwais some favorite:
near unto him some, whom he loves and favors, that may dispose of the
Prince as he lists. Plutarch writing to Traian said these words.

I have, O Traian, great pity on thee: for the first day thou tookest upon
thee the Imperial Crown of the Roman Empire, of a free man thou thraldest
thy self to bondage: For only you other Princes have authority to give
liberty to al others, but never to grant it to your selves: saying moreover,
that under the color of royal liberty, you shall remain more subject then
your own subjects that ever obey you: For if you command many in their houses,
also one alone after commands you in your own Court.

Now although many commanded the Prince, or that he would follow the counsel
but of a few, or that he loved one above an other, or that he consented one
alone should govern him, the good Courtier need not once to open his mouth to
reason of the matter: For so it might easily fall out, he should begin out
of hand to feel in the Court, of what importance it were to enter into such
discourse of the Prince, and afterward to go home to his own house, to end it
with tears.

First,, to purchase the high indignation of the Prince: Secondly, to be The
inconveniences that follow the needles reasoning of that the King allows.
disdayned of the Court: Thirdly, to be cast quite out of favor: Fourthly, to
be exiled and banished the verge of the Court: and fifthly, and lastly, to end
the rest of his woeful days in a vile and miserable place.

Now if it be hard to compass to get into the Princes favor: I think it no
very ill counsel that at least he seek to be in favor with him, that is in
the Princes favor: For oftentimes there comes as much displeasure to us,
being ill willed of those the Prince does esteem and favor: as there does by
the princes own indignation that reigns ouet us: For that we talk of
princes, comes not all to his ears (and but seldom) unless the matter be
slanderous, and offensive to his Majesty. But to the contrary, we no sooner
speak of those that be in favor, and beloved of the prince, but they are not
only with speed advertised what was spoken of them: but they further divine,
what we thought of them.

Therefore my friend Courtyer, since it lies not in thee to diminish or impair
his credit, that is in favor with the Prince, and beloved in the Court:
neither to displace his matters, and suites he takes in hand and that thou
have no authority to reform and govern the Commonweal, nor to redress the
wrongs and injuries received, I would wish thee to follow my counsel.

If thou spy the faults and imperfections of the Court that thou rather
suffer and abide them, in keeping them secret: then to seem to reprove them
openly, when thou see Noble-Princes contented to dissemble, and cover them
privily.

It is therefore the sounder counsel to follow and serve those that are in
favor and credit, then to pursue them in word or deed.

And therefore the Courtyer must be very choice with whom he is familiar, to
whom he speaks, whom he Between words spoken and the intent with which they
were spoken is great difference.
trusts: who hears him, and of who^ he receives all his intelligence.

For there is great difference between the words that are spoken, and the
intent and meaning, with which they were spoken. For, the bowels and entrails
of Courtyers are so damnable, and their hearts so crooked, and diuerted from the
right pathway of bounty and goodness, that the new and ignorant Courtyer
shall think himself much profited by their aduises, and admonitions, when
indeed they shall but deceive him: and shall think he was well counseled,
when he shall find himself the most deceived in the world, and in greater
anger then before.

There are some also so little contented with the Prince, and so ill recompensed
for their service, that they are not only not his friends, but they practice
secretly to purchase him more enemies.

And when the Courtier sees, that be that is in favor and credit, does It is
best for the Courtier to be (...) friendship with all, if can possible.
in deed stick close with him vnfaynedlie, what need he care then, though all
the rest be his enemies. And the good Courtier must consider, that he goes not
to the Court to revenge injuries, but only to purchase honor and profit. To
whom also I give counsel, that he be not enemy to him that is in favor, nor
friend to his enemy: and yet it shall be best for him to be friend to all,
and enemy to none, if he can possible.

Whosoever desires to be well thought of in the Court, and to be beloved of
Courtiers, it is better for him to suffer injuries done him, then he him self
to be a procurer of them to others. And for the injuries, detractions and
mutinings, that they shall raise against the favored of the Court, no man
ought to trust any other person then himself, since that for the most part whom
they do trust (when he shall have need of the good report, and credit of him
that is in favor with the Prince, thinking to do him a piece of great
service) he he shall not care to unfold to him, even the bottom of his
friends secrets, which were committed to him in great secrecy.

He must also consider that he cannot possibly in a short time grow in
favor with the Prince, nor come also to be accepted for a friend of him that
is in favor about the Prince: but the sooner to hasten his good fortune, he
must acquaint himself thoroughly with the Officers and servants of the beloved,
and do them a thousand pleasures daily, as well in courteous words as in
serving their turns also with money or jewels, presenting them ever with some
pretty small token from him, to have him in mind, and to remember him to their
masters: for the true order of this disorder, is in effect to be rather friend
to their servants, then familiar or beloved with their masters that are in so
great favor: he must also be informed, which of his Servants (that is in
estimation with the Prince) is in best credit with his Master, and him he must
seek to make his friend above all other his fellows: for even as the Prince
has a servant whom he loves, that leads him altogether: There is no man,
but gives more credit to one then another.
even so likewise has the favored Courtier, a servant about him that
commands him. There is no will so free and liberal, neither any lord so
high and absolute, nor Judge so upright a Iusticer, but in the end, he gives
more trust and credit to one, then to another.

And hereof proceeds most commonly, that we love not those we ought to love,
but those whom we fancy most. Now therefore following our intent, touching the
visitation of the Courtiers, he must lay watch and consider well to procure
knowledge: First, if any such Noble men, or other his friends, which he has
denotion to visit, be occupied, or withdrawn to their bedde-Chambers, for
some private business of theirs: for if it were so, they would rather think
he came to trouble them, then to visit them.

And therefore he that is wise, in visiting his friends, may not be too
importune upon them, to prease into their bedde-chamber, neither to be too
tedious and unpleasant in his words. There are some so solitary, that would
never be visited, and others, that desires to be visited every day: Others
there be, that would the visitation should be short: Others, that take
pleasure to hear a long discourse, that he would his Tale should never be
ended, So that the Courtyer must look into the natures of men, and so to frame
his visitations, according to the conditions of their mind: and to remember
his visitations to great grave men, be not so often, and daily that they be
troublesome to him, nor so seldom, that they may think them strangers, and
that they had forgotten him.

That only deserves the name of a true visitation, where the person visited,
Wherein true visitation of our betters or friends consists.
may not be troubled with importunacie: nor the visiter may diminish any part
of his credit and estimation, and also that he prejudice not his own
commodity in his affairs.

I speak it for some, that are so troublesome in their visitations, and so
foolish and tedious in their words, not knowing how to make an end: that we
may better call them troublesome, envious, and impudent, then honest visiters,
and faithful true friends.

And therefore we should leave them so contented we visit, that they should
rather be angry to loose our company, then that they should complain of our
importunity: giving them rather occasion to meet us with a pleasant
countenance (when we enter into their house, then to make them hide
themselves, or fly from us, when they see us) and say they are not within.

And me thinks indeed where we have not great and straight Friendship, or else
some affairs of great importance, that touches us much, it should be
sufficient to visit our friends and acquaintance, once in a month: and where
they would see more oftener, let us tarry till they complain and find fault,
and send to us, to let us understand it, and not that we be so ready to come to
offer and present our selves unto them, unless the necessity of our cause do
urge us. There are some persons so indiscreet in being visited, that when
others do come to see them, either they make The indiscretion of some that are
visited.
the gates to be shut upon them, or they cause their servants to say, they are
nor within, or else they get them out at the back door, or they feign that
they are a little acrased, only to avoid and fly from these troublesome and
babbling visiters: So that they had rather see a Sargeant enter into their house
to arrest them for debt, then to be cumbred with these loathsome and prating
visiters.

Also it is not fit to go see their friends at unlawful hours, as about
dinner or supper time: for those that are visited, will rather think they come
to dine or supp with them, then of eurtesie and good will to see them: It
happens sometimes, that many are brave and rich in apparel, that keep but a
poor and mean ordinary at their Table, sparing from their mouth to lay it
upon their backs: and therefore they are very loath and offended that any of
their friends or familiars should take them at meals to judge of them: for
they think it less pain to fast from meat secretly, then that their scarsity
should openly be discovered:

Also the Laws of honesty and ciuility do not permit any man to enter into
the house, hall or chamber of an other, without knocking, or calling first at
the door: for that only privilege to come in the house suddenly, and speak
never a word, belongs to the Husband or Master of the house.

Also it is not good to go see his friend when he is at play, for if he be a
loser, it cannot be but he will chafe, and be in choler, in his mind with his
friend to come then to trouble him, and to let him of his play: and if happly he
were a winner before his friend came to see him: and afterward chance to be a
loser again: he will lay, the occasion of his loss upon his friend that came
of good will to see him, and say that he turned his good luck away from him,
and that he came but to trouble him, taking it rather for an offense and
injury done him, then for any good love or duty showed him.

If our friend in like manner whom we go to visit, come out of his chamber to
receive us, not bidding us come into the Chamber, nor to sit down, but
standing to talk with us, without any other courtesy or entertainment, we
may easily perceive by this his manner of entertainment that he gives us
good and honest leave to depart when we will.

The Wise and fine Courtier, will as easily find and understand him by his
signs, as he will do sometimes by his words,

Also the Courtier must take great The discretion the Courtyer is to use in his
courtesy.
heed, that in seeming to use courtesy he happen not to make some foolish
countenance in pulling off his cappe, in making courtesy, coming into the
Hall, or taking a stool to sit down, lest he be therefore marked and
mocked of the standers by, or noted for proud or presumptuous, for to stay or
let at these Trifles, a man rather gets the name of a glorious, light, and
proud, then of a grave and sober man.

All things touching conscience, ciuility and honor, the good Cour, tier
should always have in memory, and before his eyes, when he shall discourse
with his Lord, or visit his friend. And for the first beginning of his
discourse, and talk with him, (after they are set down together) he must ask
him how his body does, and whether all his house be merry and in good health:
for it is the thing that we must first procure for our own private commodity:
and secondly, desire it for our friends.

Also in the Courtyers visitations he may not be too curious, or inquisitiue
of news, neither ouer-busie to tell news: for after his Friend were once
aduertized of the truth, it might be lightly, he would thank him for his
coming, and commend him for his courtesy: and not-withstanding blame him for
his news, and count him a Liar.

And if it happen we find the party whom we visit, sad, comfortles, and in
some necessity: although he were not our Friend, yet for that he is a
Christian, we ought to comfort him with words, and to seek also to help and
relieve him with somewhat.

Lycurgus in his Laws he made and ordained, that it should not be lawful for
any man to come to see a prisoner, but he should help to deliver him: nor any
poor man, but he should relieve him: nor any sick or diseased person, but he
should help and comfort him, to his able power.

And truly me thinks Lycurgus had great reason to make this Law: since One
gift in necessity is better then a thousand words.
we see that in experience, that a man's mind, for one only thing that is
given him, is better contented and satisfied, then with a thousand words that
they can speak unto him.

And if his house whom they go to visit, and where he dwells, be his own
inheritance, and Fee-simple: or that he has it by Lease, or purchase, or that
he has builded it out of the ground: or if he have repaired, or new coated
it: the Courtyer must pray him to let him see it, and when he has seen it,
he must greatly commend it to him: for all mortal men have this common-fault
and humor, that they must be praised for their doings, and not reproved for
their faults.

Further, if they visit any sick person, they must remember they speak but
little unto him, and that but softelie, and in pleasant matters, etc: for
otherwise it should seem (and they will also believe) he came to see him,
rather to aggrauate his sickness more, then to comfort him.

We must ever make short visitations, not only with the sick and diseased,
but the whole and found. And then the good Courtier must take his leave of
them, when he is even in his most pleasant discourse, to the end, they may
entreats him to tarry longer, and not to tarry till they seem to license
him, by outward signs and ceremonies, and he that shall go visit another,
let him take heed he be not so long and tedious in his talk, that the person
whom he visits do rise before him: For it were too plain a token he were
weary of his company, and long tarrying, since he rose before him to give him
ocasion to depart.

If his wife whom he visits be not a sister, or kinswoma^ of the Courtiers
that visites him, or that they be not of very familiar acquintance together,
he should not once seem to ask for her, much less to desire to see her. For
as Scipio says, A man should not trust any to see his Wife, Two things which a
man should not trust any with.
nor to prove his sword.

It is also a custom used among Courtiers, that when they go to any man's
house to see him, before they light off their horse, they send to know whether
he be within or no.

And when the Courtier takes his leave of him he has visited, he must not
suffer the Gentleman for to bring him out of his Chamber to accompany him, much
less to come down the stayres with him: which if he use in this manner, the
other shall be bound to thank him for his coming, and shall commend him for
his ciuility.

And if it happen when we go to visit some Noble man, or other beloved of
the Court at his lodging: and that at our coming he is ready to com out of
his house to ride abroad in the fields to take air, or to ride unto the
Court, for to solicit some of his affairs: or to ride abroad in the town
for his pleasure, the diligent Courtier must willingly accompany him, and offer
him all the service he can: and so he shall deserve double thanks of him,
the one for his coming, and the other for his gentle offer and company.

To visit the Princes servants, it is not the manner (for that they are
always occupied in the Princes service) neither shall they have such time of
leisure as other have. And because they have no time commodious to see them at
home at their own houses, yet at the least the good Courtier must needs
accompany them at times when they go abroad. For there is more reason the
esteemed Courtier should make more of him that accompanies him, then of the
other that is too importunate and troublesome to him.

CHAP. VII. Of the good countenance and modesty the Courtier should have, in
behauing himself at the Prince or Noble man's Table in the time of his meal.
THose that are abiding still in Princes A custom wherein the Courtier may
lavish hia reputation.
Courts, must in any case go seldom or not at all abroad to others Tables,
but always to keep their own. For that Courtier that runs from Table to
Table, to eat of others cost, to have his meat free, is not so sparing of his
purse, as he is too prodigal and lavish of his good reputation.

Therefore Eschines the Philosopher being demanded one day what a man should
do to be counted good he answered thus: To become a perfect Greek, he must go
to the church willingly, and of good devotion, and to the wars of necessity,
but to feasts and banquets, neither of will, nor of necessity, unless it be to
do them honor and pleasure that do inuit thee.

Suetonius Tranquillus writes that the Emperor Augustus prohibited in Rome,
that no man should enuite each other to feast or banquet with an other: but if
his friend would do him that honor to come to his feast, that then he should
send him home to his house, of that meat he should have ^ad at the feast, and
banquet with them at their houses.

And when he was asked of certain of his friends, what he meant to make this
Law, he gave them this answer: The cause that moved me, good friend, to
forbidd plays and banquets in Rome was, because in play, no man kept himself
from swearing, and terrible blaspheming the name of God: and in banquets every
man is given to de^ect and defame his neighbor.

Cicero recounteth of Cato the Censor, that he lying on his death bed: at the
mercy of God, should say these words: Four things I remember I have done in my
life, wherein I have rather showed my self a voluptuous, and negligent
Barbarian, then a wise and good Roman Citizen, for the which I find my self
sore grieved.

The first is this, For that I spent a whole day, and forgot to serve the Gods,
and did not profit my common Wealth in any thing, which I should never have
done: For it is as great a dishonor for a Philosopher to be counted an idle and
negligent person, as it is for a noble heart to be counted a rank coward.

The second is, for that safely I might once have gone by land, and perillously
When a wise man may put himself in peril.
I hazarded my self upon the water. A thing which well I should have let
alone: for never no wise man should ever have put himself into peril, unless
it were only for the service of the Gods, for the increase of his honor, or
for the defense of his Country.

The third is, that I opened once a great secret, and matter of importance to a
woman, which I ought less to have done then all the rest: For in grave
matters, and things of counsel. there is no woman capable to give counsel, and
much less to take it, and least of all to keep it secret.

The fourth was, that another time I was contented to be overcome by a friend
of mine, that earnestly invited me to his house to dinner, and thereupon I went
with him, which I should not have done: for to say the truth, there was never
famous nor worthy person that went to eat in an other man's house, but that
he diminished his liberty, hazarding also his gravity and reputation to the
rumor and brute of others.

The which words being so wisely spoken by the prudent Cato, were well worthy
to be noted and carried away, and so much the more, that being now drawing to
his last home, and even in his last breathing hour, he only spoke of these
four things, and no more: whereof, although he were a Roman, yet he showed
to us a repenting mind.

But woe is me, that albeit I do bear the name of a Christian, yea, and and
that I am so indeed, yet in that last day when Nature summons me: I fear me,
and believe assuredly, I shall have cause to repent me, of more then four
things.

Now by these things heretofore recyted we may easily conjecture, that albeit
we are contented to be entreated and requested in many things, yet in this
only to go to others tables to feast, and in strange houses, we should not
be entreated, but rather compelled and against our wills.

And where the Courtyer is forced by importunacie to accept the bidding, How
he that is bidde^ to a feast may purchase tha^k^ of the bidder.
without offering himself before, he deserves as great thanks of the bidder
for his coming, as the other did in bidding him. For if it should not be so,
it should seem rather a dinner for staungers, that travel by the way, then
for Noblemen and Gentlemen, that come from the Court.

For that day the Courtyer grants to dyne with any man, the same day he
binds himself to be beholding to him that bids him: for although he come to
him of good will, yet to acquit his courtesy done him, he is bound of
necessity.

Also it is a small reputation, (and worthy great reproach) that a Courtyer
make his boast he has eaten at all the Tables and Officers bordes in the
Court, and no man can say he has once been at dinner or supper with him at
his own house.

And truly I remember I knew once a Courtyer that might dispende above two
hundred Ducates by the year, who told me, and assured me he never bought
stick of wood, to warm him within his chamber, nor Pot to sees his meat in,
neither spit to roast with all, nor that ever he had any Cater for his
provision, save only that he had made a register of many Noblemens bords:
amongst whom he equally divided his dinners and suppers. By means whereof he
saved all his charges, save only his men's Boordewages.

But what vileness or discurtesie could equal the misery and shame of this
careless Courtyer? Sure not that of the meanest and poorest Slave of the
world, that lives only by his hire: No, it deserves not to be compared To
what end we should desire riches.
unto it. For, to what end desire we the goods of this world, but that by
them we may be honored, relieve our Parents and Kinsmen, and thereby also win
us new Friends? what state or condition soever he be of, that has enough and
abundance, we are not bound to esteem the more of him for that, nor to do him
the more honor, but only for that he spends it well, and worshipfully, and
for his honor, if he be honorable.

And this we speak of Gentlemen, as of Citizens. And he that in Court makes
profession to Dine at othermens Tables, I dare undertake if they dine betimes
on the Holliday, he will rather lose Service in the morning, then Dinner at
noone. And if any Friend come to lie with these sort of Courtyers, and that he
be but newly come the Court, straight-wayes he will have him with him to
dinner: and bring him to salute the Gentleman, where he dines that day, saying:
That he was bold, to bring his Kinsman and Friend with him, to salute him:
And all this is not so much, to bring him acquainted with him, as it is to
spare his meat at home for them both.

And yet they have an other knacke of Court finer then this: They flatter the
Pages and Servants, because they should ever give them of the best wine at the
Table: and with certain familiar nods, and sweet words, they entertain the
Lords, Shewers, and Caruers, and make much of them: that they should set before
them full dishes and of the best and daintiest meat.

There are also some of these Courtiers, that to be well waited upon at the
fable, and to make them his friends, do sometimes present the Steward with a
velvet capp, the shewers with a pair of washed or perfumed gloves, the Pages
with a swordgirdle: and the Butlers or Cupbordkeepers with some other pretty
reward or devise.

And it chances often times in noble men's houses, that there are so many
guests to dine and suppe with him daily, that many times the board will not
hold them all by a great number; which when they once perceive, to see how
quickly, and with what speed the Courtiers take their places to set them down,
and to be sure of a room: It is a world to see it.

But oh, I would to God, they were Many not (...) to serve God, as their own
bellies.
so happy and diligent to go to the Church, and hear a Sermon, as they are
busy to get them stools, to sit at the Table.

And if perhaps a Courtier come late, and that the Table be all ready full,
and the lurch out, yet he will not be ashamed to eat his meat
nevertheless: For albeit he cannot be placed at his ease, yet he is so bold
and shameless, that rather then fail, he will sit of half a buttocke, or
behind one at the Table.

I remember I saw once at a Noblemans Table, three Courtiers sit upon one
stool, like the four sons of Amon, and when I rebuked them for it, and
told them it was a shame for them: They answered me merrily again, that they
did it, not for that there wanted stools, but to prove if need were, if one
stool would hold them three.

Such may well be called greedy gluttons, and shameless proulers, without
respect or honesty, that when they are dead, would be buried in the highest
place of the Church: and when they are alive, little force at whose table they
sit, or how they sit, little regarding their honor or estate.

Truly, for him, that is poor and needy, to seek his meat and drink, where
he may come by it best: it is but meet: but for the gorgeous Courtier, bedeckt
with gold, buttoned and be iewelled, ietting in his veluets, and silks, to
beg and seek his dinner daily at every man's board, being nobly and
honorably entertained of the prince, and able to bear his countenance: what
reproach, defame, and dishonor is it to him?

He that uses daily to run to How he is welcome that is a common runner to
other men's Tables.
other men's Tables, is often times forced to sit lowest at the board upon a
broken stool, and to be served with a rusty knife, to eat in foul dishes,
and to drink for a change hot water, and wine, more then half full of Water:
and to eat hoar bread, and that that of all others yet is worst of all, every
one of the servants looks over their shoulder on him, and are angry with him
in their minds.

Truly, he that with those conditions goes abroad to seek his dinner, were
better in my opinion, to fast with bread and water at home, then to fill his
belly abroad. But such men's reward, that haunts men's houses in this manner, is
this in the end, that the Noblemen to whose houses they come to, are offended
with them, the Stewards of the house murmur at them, the pages and servants
mockes them, and laughes them to scorn: The Tasters and Cup-bearers chafe with
them in their minds: The Cupborde keepers wonder at them, the Clerks of the
Kitchen thinks them importunate and shameless creatures. Wherefore it
follows (whosoever will observe it) that so soon as the servants once see
him come into the dining Chamber, some of them hides the stool where he would
sit down, others set before him the worst meat of the board, and the filthiest
dishes they have: and therefore he that may have at home at his house, his poor
little pittance well dressed, a fair white Table cloth, a bright knife, new and
white bread, wood and candle in the winter and other necessaries: if he like
better to go from Table to Table, from kitchen to kitchen, and from one
Butterie to another, I will suppose he does it for great spare and hardiness,
or for want of honesty and good manners.

Now he that keeps an Ordinary house, and remains always at home, may dine
if it be in the summer season, in his shirr, if he list, he may sit when he
will, and where it pleases him, he drinks his wine fresh, and has the flies
driven from his Table with the ventola, he disdayneth the Court and Noble men's
boordes, keeping his own as f^anke and as sparing as he list, and no man to
gainesay him: yea and after meat he is at liberty to sit still, and take his
ease, or to walk abroad in the shade as he will. And in Winter if perhaps he be
wet, he straight shifts him, and changes all his clothes, gets him a furred
Nightgown on the back of him, and a pair of warm slippers, to heat his
cold seet withal: he eats his meat warm and smoking hot, and takes that he
likes best: he drinks white wine, red wine, or claret wine, as he thinks best,
and needs never to care for them that behold him.

And therefore so great privileges as those be of liberty, the Courtyer
should never refuse to buy them for his money much less for the gain of a
meals meat he should leave to enjoy them, etc.

But if the Courtyer will needs determine to visit Noble-mens-bords, he must
be very wary that incomming to a Noble-mans Table, he do not so much
commend his Fare and Ordinary, that he complain of other men's Tables where he
has sed. For, How he is to demean himself, that will visit noble means Table.
it is a kind of Treason to defame and slander those, whose houses they are
wont to visit often.

And when he is set at the Table, the Courtier must behave himself modestly,
he must eat temperately, and finely, he must alay his wine with water, and
speak but little: so that those that are present cannot but praise him for his
Temperancie and sober diet, but also for his wisdom and moderate speech.

To feed mannerly is to be under stood, not to blow his nose in his napkin,
nor to lean his elbows upon the Table: not to eat to leave nothing in the
dish, not to find faults with the Cooks, saying: The meat is not enough, or
not well dressed For, it were a great shame for the Courtyer to be noted of
the wayters, to be a bellygut, and to be counted a grosse-feeder.

There are some also that make themselves so familiar, and homely in the house,
that they are not contented with that is served them in the Dishe, but
shamefully they pluck that unto them that is left in other dishes: so that
they are esteemed for ieasters, no less saucy then malepert in their order,
then infatiable in their beastly eating

The good Courtyer must also take heed he lay not his arms too far on the
Table, nor that he make any any noise with his teeth, nor tongue, nor smacke
with his mouth when he eats, and that he drink not with both his hands on
the cup, nor cast his eyes too much upon the best dishes, that he know nor
tear his bread with his teeth, that he lick not his fingers, nor have done
eating before others, nor to have too greedy an appetite to the meat or sauce
he eats, and that in drinking he gulpe not with his throat. For such manner
of Feeding, rather be comes an Alehouse, then a Noblemans-Table. And
although the Courtyer can not go over all the Dishes that comes to the board,
yet at least let him prove a little of every one, and then he must praise the
good cookry, and fine dressing of them all. For commonly the Noblemen and
Gentlemen that inuit Many love to have their cheer and attendance commended.
any to their board, take it discourteously and are ashamed, if the invited
praise not their meat and drink they give them, and not only the noble men
are ashamed of it, but also the other Officers that have the charge to see it
well dressed, and in good order.

Always he that eats at an other man's table, to do as he ought should
praise the worthiness of him that bad him, (yea though perhaps he made a lie)
and commend the great care and diligence of his Officers in furnishing his
Table with so good meats, and in setting it forth in so good order.

I say not without a cause, that sometime a praise with a lie may well stand
together, since we see some Noblemens Tables so slenderly furnished, and that
his Ordinary should seem rather a Preparatiue supper and diet, for a
sickeman, that means to take physic in the next morning, then an Ordinary,
or dinner for Easter Day.

And therefore (I say) that right the Lords and Masters are pleased, when they
hear their Officers and Servants commended. For they choose most commonly such
a Steward as they know to be wise, and courteous of nature: a Treasurer true and
faithful: a Purueyer, expert and diligent: a Butler, hasty and Melancholy:
the Groom of his chamber, painful and trusty: his Secretary, wise and
secret: his Chaplain simple: and his Cook, fine and curious.

For many think it more glory to have an excellent cook in their house,
then to have a valiant Captain, to keep a strong place or hold. They are
contented in Court that Noblemens-chapleins be rather simple then otherwise,
or well-learned. For if if he read but little, he has the sooner said
service, and therefore also is more sit to dredge and do service about the
house.

Now therefore continuing our begun purpose, the Courtier that eats at other
men's Tables, must see he drink little, and that his wine be well delayed with
water.

For wine tempered with water brings Wine tempered with water bringth 2.
commodities.
two commodities: the one, it makes him sober that drinks it, and shall not
be ouerseene, the other, he shall not distemper himself, that the wayters
have any occasion to laugh at him. If he should hap sometimes that he found the
wine well watered before, that it had stood a pawling long, or that it were
somewhat sharp or sower, or that the water weree too hot: the good Courtier
should not therefore immediately complain and find fault at the table, for so
he should shame the servants, and make them angry with him, and also displease
their master.

Truly, it is a grief to suffer it; to see that he that has nothing at home
in his own house, either to eat or drink, will yet look to be well used at
an other man's house: and is never satisfied. I speak it for certain,
indiscreet Courtiers, and wanting judgment, that being at any man's boorde
(without any shame) dare disprayse the Cooks, and speak ill of them, if
perhaps the taste of their pottage and meat mislike them, and that it be not
good, and acording to their appetite: And of the Butlers, if the wine be not
cold and fresh: Of those that weight about: if every thing they call for, be
not done at a beck and quickly, of the Stewards of the house, if they be not
served immediately: and of the boys and Pages, if they give them not drink
suddenly: Of the Caruers, if they carue them not to their liking: and also with
the Clerks of the Kitchen, if they see them not served with meat enough, that
there be enough left upon the table. So that the Noble men's officers (for the
more part) have more trouble and displeasure, by the discontentation of those
that come to their Masters Table, then they have by the evil words their
Masters speak to them. And for this respect therefore no man ought to be so
bold, as once to open his lips to complain No man ought to complain of
want at another table.
of any want in an others man's house, as if they serve him with Claret wine,
rather then with white: or with white then claret: For a right and perfect
Courtier should not set his appetite in the taste or variety of wines, or meats
in an others house.

I grant that it is very fit and lawful for young Courtiers to run well, to
leap far, to throw the bar of Iron, to dance well, to ride a horse well,
to manage, and give him his carrere well, and to turn well, to handle his
weapon well, and to break a staff well, and otherwise to help himself with
all manner of weapons: but for one to defy another in drinkking, it should be
a great sacrilege of the Courtier.

The Scithiens as ratifieth Trogus Pompeins, were so sober and modest in eating
and drinking at their meals, that it was a foul fault among them for to
break wind or belch.

And therefore now a days, we find few Scithiens, but many drinkers, which
depart from the Feast so sull fraught, as immediately when they are come home,
they unload their charged stomach, and lay open all that have eaten and
drunken: wherefore he that uses to drink clean and pure water, is at more
liberty the^ those that drink wine simply without compound: for excessive
drinking of wine, does not alone trouble and distemper the brain and judgment
of the drinker: but further discovers to you great and horrible vices.
Therefore yet touching our matter, I say once again that it is fond to dispute
an argument, to prove which of the wines were best, pleasant and most sweetest,
and which is oldest or newest, sharp or hard, soft or sweet, clearest or
darkest, or of best taste or quickest savor. For to judge of the taste of
wines, and to know the goodness and perfection of it, rather (to say truly)
belongs to a Tauerner or Vintner, then rightly to an honest Courtier. And it
is fitter, and more decent also for him, to talk of arms and chiualry, then to
deal in discourse of Bacchus feasts, what a mockery and foolish niceness is
it of him, that not only drinks water alone, but also cannot drink in that
cup, where there has been wine filled before.

He shall also be very circumspect that is bidden to a strangers house, that
he drink not so deep at a draught, that he leave nothing in the cup,
neither that he drink so long as he has breath, and the water stand in his
eyes again: For the grave and sober Courtier should never drink till he
might no more, nor till there were none lest.

And when he is at the Table, he should not enter in argument, and dispute
with any, neither should he be obstinat in opinion, and much less use
uncomely talk, and he must also bridle nature much, that he cry not out in in
laughing, as some do: for like as it sounds to his reproach, to be noted a
glutton and drunkard, it is in like case far worse to be a fool and a Iester.
Also it prevails little that a courtier be moderat and honest in eating, if
he be What talk should be used at the Table.
dishonest and insolent in his talk: for many times it happens at noble men's
table, that they take more pleasure in some, then in other some, not to see
them eat and drink well, but to hear them tell lies, and to be pleasant at
the boorde. Therefore as we have said, the wise Courtier should praise and
commend all that he sees served at another man's table, and it is not lawful
for him to dislike or disprayse it.

And further because he is fedd at an other man's charge, he must of necessity
take all in worth that is given him, and set before him, and not to look to
have that that he desires. And when there is any question moved at the table,
of the best and most delicate dishes, and of the sinest Cooks, and of the new
kinds of broths and sawces, and from whence the fattest Capons come, it shall
not be fit for the wise Courtier to say in that all that he knows and
understands: For how much honor it is for him to be able to talk in
martial feats or chiualy: so much more dishonor and reproach it is to him, to
be skillful in dressing of meats, and all to fill the belly.

I remember that being one day at a Bishops board, I heard a Knight make great
boast and vaunt, that he could make seven manner of fricasies, four kinds
of Pyes, twelve sorts of sawces, and ten of fruit tartes, and twelve diverse
ways to dress eggs: but for to hear him tell these tidings, was not to be
accounted of so much, as the gestures and countenances he made in telling them:
For he did lively show with his hands the present making of them, the eating of
them, and the right tasting of them with his tongue.

And because it happneth many times that in some Noble man's house, there is not
like fare and entertainment that an other has, the civil Courtier To whose
table it is best for a feast hanter to resort.
should not be so dishonest as to make report he leaves the Noble man's Table,
to go to an others that is better served. For the worthy courtier should not
haunt that Table where he fares best, but where he finds himself best
welcome, and esteemed. Ah how many noble men and knights sons are there, that
spare not to go to any man's board for his meat and drink, yea, though it
fall out they be their fathers enemies: and they do it not in respect to
reconcile them, and their fathers together, but rather for a good meals meat,
or more aptly to say, to fill their bellies with dainties.

CHAP. VIII. what company the Courtier should keep, and how be should
apparel himself,
THe wise Courtier both in court, and out of court, and in all places where he
comes, must take great regard he accompany Ill company loses a man's credit.
with none but with wise and virtuous men. For if he do not, he cannot win
nor acquire such honor by his well doing, as he shall lose his credit, by
keeping ill company.

And therefore he shall enforce himself always to be in the presence and
company of virtuous and noble men, and shall confer with the most grave,
wise, and honest Gentlemen of the Court: For using this way, he shall bind
them to him, by reason of his daily access to them, and he shall purchase
himself a good opinion of them, besides the good example he shall leave to
others to tread his steps, and sollow his course. For what is more true, then
when a young Gentleman comes newly to the court, you shall see immediately a
company of other young fools, a company of amarous squires, light and idle
persons a company of troublesome Iesters, and covetous praters, besides other
young frye in the Court, that when they know a new come Courtier, namely,
(being, of great living) They will seek to attend upon him, and train him to
the lure of their affects and manner, bidding him to like of their qualities
and conditions.

Wherefore cunningly to shake of the route of these needy, greedy retainers, he
must altogether feed them with fair words, and show them good countenance,
and yet notwithstanding seek by all policy he can to fly their fellowship and
company.

Noble men's sons, Knights sons, Wherefore Noblemen, Knights and Gentleme^s
sons are sent to the Court.
and Gentlemen's sons, may not think their friends sends them to the Court,
to learn new vices, and wicked practices, but to win them new friends, and
obtain the acquaintance of noble men, whose credit and estimation, with the
Prince, may honor and countenance them, and by their virtues and means, may
after a time be brought into the Princes favor, and daily to rise in credit
and reputation amongst others.

Therefore such fathers as will send their children to the Court, unless they
do first admonish them well how they ought to behave themselus, or that they
recommend them to the charge and oversight of some dear and especial friend
of theirs, that will reprove them of their faults, when they do amiss. I say
they were better to lay yrons on their feet, and send them to Bedlam, or such
other like house where mad men be kept. For if they be bound there in yrons,
it is but to bring them to their wits again, and to make them wise: but to
send them to the Court loose, and at liberty without guide, it is the next way
to make them fools, and worse then mad men, assuring you, no greater danger
nor injury can be done to a young man, then to be sent to the court, and not
committed to the charge of some one that should take care of him, and look
straightly to him. For otherwise it were impossible he should be there many
days, but he must needs run into excess and foul disorder, by the means
whereof he should utterly cast himself away, and heap upon their parents
heads continual curses, and griefs, during their lives.

And therefore their Fathers, supposing after they have once placed their
sons in the Court, that they should no more carke nor care of them, nor
reckon to instruct them, to be wise and virtuous, find when they come home to
them again, that they are laden withvices, ill complexioned, worse
apparrelled, their clothes all tattered and torn, having vainly and fondly
spent, and played away their money, and worst of all forsaken their Masters,
leaving them displeased with their service.

And of these I would admonish With whom the young Courtier should accompany
himself.
the young Courtier, because he must of necessity accompany with other young
men, that in no case he acquaint himself with vicious and ill disposed
persons, but with the honest, wise, and courteous: amongst whom he shall put
upon him a certain grave, and stayed modesty, fitting himself only to their
companies, being also apt and disposed to all honest and virtuous exercises,
decent for a right Gentleman, and virtuous Courtier, shuning with his best
policy, the light foolish, and vain toys of others.

And yet notwithstanding this, my intent and meaning is, not for to seem to
persuade or teach him, to become an hypocrite, but only to be courteous,
honest, and well beloved of other young Gentlemen: winning this reputation with
all, to be esteemed the most virtuous and honestest among them, gallant and
lively in his disports and pastimes, of few words, and small conversation
amongst bosters and back-byters, or other wicked and naughty persons: not to
be sad among those that are merry, nor dumme, among those that talk wisely,
and of grave matters: nor to believe he should be accounted a trim Courtyer,
to take his book in his hands to pray,, when others will take the ball to play,
or go about some other honest recreations or pastimes, for exercise of the
body.

For, in so doing, they would rather take him for a Fool, and an Hypocrite,
then for a virtuous and honest young man. Being good reason the child should
use the pleasures and pastimes of a child: young men disportes and acts of
youth: and old men also, grave and wise recreations fit for them. For in the
end, do the best we can, we cannot fly the motions of the Flesh, wherein we
are What vices the young Courtyer should eschew.
borne into this world.

These young Gentlemen -Courtyers must take heed that they become not
troublesome, importunate, nor quarrellers: that they be no filchers, liars,
vacabonds, and slaunderers, nor any way given to vice.

As for other things, I would not seemeto take from them their pastime and
pleasures, but that they may use them at their own discretion. And in all other
things lawful and irreprouable, observing times and hours convenient, and
therewitall to accompany themselves with their fellows and companions.

Also the young Courtyer that comes newly to the Court, must of necessity be
very well apparelled, according to his degree and calling, and his servants
that follow him well appointed. For in Court men regard not only the House
and family he comes of, but mark also his Apparel, and servants that
follow him.

And I mislike one thing very much, that about the Court they do rather honor
and reverence a man, brave and sumptuous in apparel being vicious, then they
do a man that is grave wise, and vertuous-And yet nevertheless, the Courtyer
may assure himself of this, that few will esteem of him, either for that he
is vertouus or nobly borne, if he be not also sumptuously apparelled and well
accompanied: for them only will every man account and esteem of him.

Wherefore I durst take upon me to swear, if it were possible, to take oath
of our bodies, that they would swear they needed them not, much less desire
so large compassed gowns, that every puff of wind might swell the^ as the
sails of a Ship: neither so long that trayling on the ground, they gather
dust; and cast it into our eyes.

Howbeit I think now-adayes these fine men wear them large and wide, and
women long, with traynes upon the ground: because in the Court and elsewhere,
no man makes reckning of him that spends but orderly, and only upon
necessaries to go cleanly withal: but him they set by, that is prodigal,
excessive, and superfluous. And who that in his doings and apparel is
moderate, and proceeds wisely, they hold him in Court for a miserable and
covetous man's and contrarily, he that is prodigal and lavish in A mean ought
to be used in apparel.
expense, him they count a noble and worthy person. Albeit the Courtyer be come
of a Noble house, and that he be young of years, rich, and wealthy, yet would
I like better he should use rather a certain mean and measure in his apparel
(wearing that that is comely and Gentlemanlike) then others of most cost and
worship. For, like as they would count him a fool for wearing that he could
not pay for: so they likewise would think him simple, if he ware not that
that become him, and that he might easily come by.

His apparel should be agreeable with his years, that is to say, on the holy
days some more richer and brauer then on the work days: and in the Winter of
the hotest furs: in the summer light garments of satin and damask: and to
ride with, some others of lesser price and more durable: For as the wisdom of
man is known by his speaking: so is his discretion decerned by his apparel.

Let not the poor Courtier study to wear or devise any new or strange
fashioned garment, for if he be of that humor, he shall quickly undo
himself, and give others occasion also to follow his light and vain invention.

There are now a days found out so many strange ways to dress meat, and so
many fashions and patterns of apparel, that now they have universities of
Taylers and Cooks.

What more greater vanity and lightness can there be then this? that they will
not suffer the mothers gowns to be made fit for their daughters, saying that
they are old, and out of fashion, and that they use now a new kind of
apparel and attire far from the old manner. And notwithstanding those
gowns be it a manner new, good, whole, clean, rich, and well made, and
without weme, yet their daughters must needs have new gowns at their Whence
new fashions in apparel proceed.
marriage. So that we may aptly say, that a new folly, seeks always a new
gown, namely, when they are light persons, without wit and discretion. And I
pray you, is it not a goodly sight in the Court, to see a foolish Courtier
wear a demi cappe, scant to cover the crown of his head, to have his beard
merquizotted, a pair of perfumed gloves on his hands, his shoes cut after the
best fashion, a little curted cappe, his Hose fair pulled out, his doublet
sleeves bravely cut and pinct, his rapier and his dagger gilded by his side:
and then on the other side, the pestilence of penny he has in his purse, to
bless him with: and besides he is deep in the Merchants book for all those
things he has taken up of credit of him.

Their nagges foot clothes would not be so little and narrow, that should seem
a Friars hood, neither so great and large as the foot cloths of Bishops moyles.

Also the Courtier must see that his footcloth be good and whole, clean, and
without spot, not tattered and seame rent.

This we speak, because there are some miserable Courtiers that have Who may
be rightly termed a Courtier.
their footclothes thread bare, broken and seem rent, foul and durty, narrow,
and all dug full of holes with spurs. And therefore no man deserves to be
called a right Courtier, unless he he fine and neat in his apparel he
wears, and also courteous and civil in his words and entertainment.

And yet touching the rest of the furniture of their horse or gelding, their
harness and trappes must be kept black and clean, and they must look that
the reins of the bridle be not broken nor unsown, which I speak not without
cause: for there are a number of Courtiers that at Primero will not stick to
set up a jest of a 100. or 200. crowns, and yet will think much to give their
poor horsekeepers 12. pence, to buy them a pair of reins. And truly the
Courtier (in my judgment) that is content to tie his horse with vntagged
points, to see his fire smoke when he should warm them, to ride with broken
reins, and to cut his meat at the table with a rusty knife, I would think
him base borne, and rudely brought up. When the Courtier will ride his horse,
let him look ever before he take his back, that he have all his furniture
fit for him, his maine and tail finely combed, A good order for it (...)
great noties.
his stirroppes bright glistering, his stirrops leather strong, and his saddle
well stuffed, and above all, let him sit upright in his seat, and carry his
body even, swaruing of neither side, holding his legs still, and keep his
stirrup.

For this name to be called Chiuallier (signifies in our tongue a rider of a
horse) came first because he could ride and manage his horse well. And when he
would stir his legs, to spur his horse, let him beware he stoop not
forwards with his body, and when he does spur his horse let him not spur
him low, but hie in the flanks, and whether he will run or stand still with
his horse, let him always have his eye upon the reins, that in no case the
raines go out of his hand.

And in giving his horse a carere, let him not writhe with his body, nor be
too busy in beating or spurring his horse often: For in his carere, to know when
to spur him, when to give him head, or to pull him back again, and to
stop him. I have seen many take it upon them, but few indeed that ever were
skillful, and could do it well.

Now the Courtier being mounted on horse or moyle, without his rapier by his
side, seems rather a Physician that goes to visit his sick patients, then
a Gentleman of the Court, that for his pleasure and disport rides abroad
through the streets: and if he were by chance entreated by some noble man to
accompany him, or to ride behind him through the streets: every honest Courtier
ought not only to do it, but unasked to be ready to offer himself to wait
upon him, and ^o go with him willingly.

And let the fine Courtier beware that in giving his hand to a Gentlewoman he
be not gloued, and if she be a horseback, that he talk with her bare
headed, to do her the more honor, and if she ride behind him, and they
chance to discourse together, let him never look back upon her to behold her,
for that is a rude manner, and a token of ill education.

And one common courtesy there is among Courtiers, that when they are in talk
with Ladies and Gentlewomen, and entertaining of them, they suffer them to do
with them what they will, to reign over them, and to be ouercommed in
argument of them, and they hold it good manners to do them service, when they
have any occasion offered to serve them. And when he shall accompany any
Gentlewoman to go a visitation with her, or to talk abroad for their pleasure
through the streets, he must ride fair and softly, and if she should happen
to keep him so long in talk till she should alight, the good Courtier must
bear it courteously, and make a good countenance, as though it grieved him
nothing, since we know very There is almost no end of a woman's talk.
well, that when women begin once to talk, it is impossible for them tomake
an end, unless they be ouerta^ken with night, or prevented by ^om^ other
accident.

He that will be a Courter, must wear his shoes black and clean, his hose
straight to his legs, and his garments without plight or wrincle, his sword
fair varnished, his shirts finely wrought, and his cappe standing with a good
grace. For the chiefest thing of Court is, that noble men be rich in
apparel, and the right Courtiers to be fine and cleanly. It is not decent
for a man to wear his slippers so long that the cork be seen, nor his
garments till they be torn, nor surre till it be bare before, nor shyrtes till
they be worn out, nor his cap till the turffe be greasy, nor his coat till
it be threed-bare, nor his girdle till it be halfe-broken.

For, the Courtyer may not only wear his Garments to content himself, but
also to like others, that shall behold it.

And after that he is once determined to go to the Court, he must suppose
to go thither well Apparelled, else sure they will not account him to be a
right Courtyer. For in this case, the excuse of poverty may not be alleged:
for they will think them rather miserable, then poor courtyers.

The good Courtyer may not spare in Where the Courtier should spare and spend.
Court, to spend afterward at home: but he must pinch at home, to be liberal
afterward in the Court.

And yet once again I return to recite, that for a Courtyer to come into the
Princes favor, he may not any way be sparing or miserable, but rather
honestly liberal, and bountiful. For seldom-times concur these two things
together: to be miserable, and yet with his misery, to attain to the Princes
favor.

I remember I saw once a friend of mine in the Court wear a Ierkin, faced at
the collar with Martens, and they were all bare and greasy, and there was a
certain Portingale in the Court (a pleasant companyon) that came to this
Gentleman, and asked him properly, What fair Furs they were he ware about
his neck? and this gentleman answered him, Martins: Martins Sir, says the
Portingale: Me thinks they ore rather like surres of Ash-wendesday, then of
Shroue-tuesday: And finely this Portingale compared Mardi (that is Tuesday) to
his martin furs: and so likewise his martin furs to Mardi.

And sure he had great reason not to praise them, but greatly to rebuke him
for them. For, it had been more for his honor and worship, to have had the
collar of his Ierken lined with fair white lamme, then with such old, stale,
dyrtie, and sweatie martins.

The bruches that our Courtyer must wear in his cappe, must be very rich, and
excellently well wrought, and his Deuse or Motto, that he will have about it
so curious, that though every man may read it, yet few shall understand what
it means. For such Devises are ever lightly grounded of vain and fond toys:
and therefore they should be so much more secret and obscure. For sure the
fault is great enough in a man to devise it, though he do not bewray it.

Also his Servant that waytes upon him, must needs go handsomely
apparelled, and fine and neat in their How the Courtiers servant should be
apparrelled.
clothing. For, it is a small honor for the Master to be well apparelled, if
he let his servants go beggarly.

There are many Courtyers that have their men following them with thread bare
clokes, torn cotes, foul shirts, broken hose, and rent shoes. So that these
poor seruing-men, if for one month they wear that their master gives them
for three other months they wear their own proper flesh.

It is no wise man's part, but a mere folly to keep a greater train then he
is able: For that Courtier that has always many servants waiting on him, and
they going tattered and torn having no good thing to put on their backs (or at
least that they have is but mean and simple) shall sooner win the name of a
broker, that prefers other men to service, then of a Master that keeps
servants himself:

The good Courtier must give unto all his servants that serve him, either
apparel or wages: for that servant that serves only in house for bare meat
and drink, shall never serve truly while he does serve.

And therefore let the Courtyer look well to it, that he entertain no man
into his service, but that first he agree with him for standing wages: unless it
be that he be some nephew, or Kinsman, or some of his dear friends: or else
in the end, if he be a Nobleman, (unless he do so) he shall find that at
the years end he shall spend him more, then if he gave him ordinary wages,
and besides they will not be contented with him, although it be to his greater
charge.

Also let him consider well, if it happen that (when he has need of
servant to wait upon him) some brother or Neighbors child be offered unto
him, whether he shall receive him or no. For after he has received him in his
house, either he shall be compelled to bear with his faults, and disorders
he shall do, or else desirous to rebuke and reform him, or to send him home
again: he shall but win anger and displeasure of his Father, or his proper
kinsfolks. Surely such Courtyers as take those kind of men into their service,
have a great deal of pain and trouble with them. And truly it is too great a
cruelty, that the Courtyer, should be driven to bear the dishonestie of his
man that serves him, when his own Father could not away with his conditions.

Some Fathers are so much blinded, and besotted with fatherly affection, and
difficulte besides to please, that they are not contented that the courtyer
has received their son into his service, and that he entreat him as if he
were his own kinsman: but further, they would have the Courtyer his Master,
to bear with all his saucy deshonesti^es, and leawdnes: and if they cannot
frame the young man to their mind, as they would have him; yet at least they
would have his master to pity him, for that he is butyoung, and has no
knowledge, and for a while to wincke at all his faults, in good hope of a
better amendment.

The Courtier may not only see, that his men be well in apparel, but he must
provide also that they have meat enough to put in their bellies: For the
servants that are starued for meat, are wont to do small service, and besides
that to complain much. Let him beware also he do not take into his service
any lewd persons, busy bodies, and unquiet men, cutpurses, ruffians,
quarrellers or whoremongers: if he find that he has such in his house, let
him turn him out of service straight; for by keeping such mates in his house,
his house shall never be well ordered, there shall ever be quarrelling and
swearing amongst them, and besides that, the neighbors and common people shall
be offended.

Let the good Courtier foresee that he have no cards nor dice in his house to
occupy the servants: For those thriftles servants that are given to play,
begin first to play, and afterward they learn to steal Let the Courtier
be well advised also when he chideth with his servants, that he be not too
loud, that his voice may be heard abroad, as all the Hosts and Inne-keepers
are: For in being too loud, he should be more dishonored then blamed, for
the ill words he gives his man. Let him take heed also that he do not call
his servants drunkards, thieves, villains, Jews, nor other such like names of
reproach.

For those and other like discourteous words are of small correction, add yet
they bring displeasure, and disdain enough. And if the Courtier cannot give
bountifully and pleasure his officers and servants that are about him, yet at
least (howsoever the World go) let him not be behind with them in paying them
their whole wages due to them: for so it might lightly happen, that the
servants would begin to make complaints of him, and that unhappily in the end
he might come to die with misery in his enemies hands.

There is no enemy in the world so cruel, nor so much to be feared, as the
servant that is not contented with his Master, for as he is the thief of the
house, so knows he very well what piece of his Masters harness is wanting
for his body to set on him, when he would in that place have an arrow for his
token.

Therefore so soon as it comes to the Courtiers ears, that any of his
servants complain of him, either let him give him all that he would have or put
him out of his house immediately: For if he do it not, let him be assured that
that servant will never leave till he have put in discord with his friends,
and defame with others. And above all things we have spoken of yet, the
Courtier must chiefly look what his man is he trusted with his honor? for in
this case many are wont not only to be deceived, but also many times scorned.

And there are many that will put their goods into the hands and trust of a
man, but their honor and things of greatest weight and importance, they will
sooner commit to the trust of a young foolish, and simple Page, then of a wise
and stayed man. And therefore how much more his business is of weight and
importance, so much less should it be reveled to the secrecy of a boy.

And if he do otherwise, I can assure him, he shall sooner be spoken of of
every man, then he shall have his business dispatched.

The Courtier must also have his chamber well hanged, and finely kept, and
clean, and his house and family all in good order, and every man quiet: For
the cleanness of the house, and ciuility of the servants, are a great token
and witness of the nobility of the master.

In the Courtiers Chamber where he lies, the bed must first of all be made,
and the cloth before the door let down, the chamber swept, the hangings and
other stuff that is there in good order, with some perfumes, or other sweet
odors, so that it should laugh upon a man that comes into it: for there are
some in the Court so filthy, and so ill furnished of hangings, and other
stuff, that if any man come to see their chambers, they seem rather sheep
coats, then Courtiers Chambers.

CHAP. IX. Of the wise manner the Courtier should have to serve and honor the
Ladies and Gentlewomen: and also to satisfy and please the Vshers, and Porters
of the Kings house.
LEt the good Courtier A good caveat for Courtiers.
be always circumspect, that he seek not any favor at the Justices hands
but that that is lawful: For if either he be denied, he shall return with
shame, or being granted, he shall leave his conscience to gage, In suits and
controversies between men of Religion in the spiritual Court, Let him in no
case deal: For at the first show they seem very easy to the Judge, but when
they come to the vnripping of the matter, to judge of them then they are
matters of great charge and conscience.

There were many Towers in Jerusalem, to any of which the devil might have
brought JESUS CHRIST, to have persuaded and tempted him, to have thrown
himself down: howbeit he would not bring him but to the pinnacle of the Church,
to let us understand thereby, that he took more pleasure in one sin done in
the Church, or of holy persons, then of ten committed in the world, and of
worldlings.

And notwithstanding the Courtyer does not see that the reason is of his side
that is recommended to him, he need never pass for that, to entreat for
him, or to charge his own proper conscience: as for example.

If any man entreat him to speak to the Judge, or to write him a letter. For
many times we see the judges make The custom of many judges.
much more account of one only word or letter from him that is in favor and
estimation with the Prince, then they will of the Religion and and Justice of
another man. And always write in this form: Right Worshipful, or Honorable:
the Letters of favor that shall be requested of you, etc. That by those words
the Judge may know, that for that they were requested and besought, and not
that it should seem you write for affection: For doing otherwise, that that you
shall write to him to satisfy others in, he will think that you do it,
because either for reason, or duty, he should perform your Letters.

The like consideration and modesty the good Prince should have in that he
does command: the like and selfsame should the esteemed and favored of the
Court observe in his requests he makes. For many times the requests of the
beloved in Court are with more celeritie performed, then the commissions of
the Prince are accomplished.

Let the Courtyer always have in his mind also, that if he meet with an
Nobleman or Knight by the way, he do in any condition return with him and
keep him company: although the Nobleman or Knight strive with him, not to
have him got back with him: yet let him not suffer himself to be overcome; to
let all men know, that notwithstanding the Nobleman or Knight pass him in
degree or Apparel, yet he shall not exceed him in courtesy and civility.

Now this courtly company is only to be understood to be offered the Knight
when he rides into the City of pleasure, and not when he goes alone: and
shows by his for-head an unpleasant countenance, troubled in his mind. Yet
the Courtyer nevertheless must offer himself to accompany him, which if he
do accept, he may not then withstand or importune him to do it: For where he
should think to be accounted courteous, they would repute him a troublesome
man.

When the Courtyer shall accompany any Nobleman of the Court, let Contention
for place in accompanying a noble man.
him not then seem to contend with other Courtyers for place and honor in
his presence, who should be before, or behind another.

For this strife coming to the Noble-mans ear whom they accompany, it might
easily happen that that company, that came to wait upon him, and to do him
honor and service, should then seem to dishonor and offend him.

Little knows he what honor means, when in these trifles he seeks it.
For the wise and courteous Courtyer, has not only to seek honor with them,
with whom he rides cheek by cheek: but also with those that are beloved of
the Prince. Now when the Nobleman is accompanied, and that he is come hard by
the Court, your Courtyers be ready to alight off your horse, quickly before
him: and when he shall likewise take his horse again, be as ready to take
your horse back before him: For doing thus, you shall be near about him when
he lights off his horse, and afterward help him when he mounteth on his
horse again.

If perhaps at the coming in of a Chamber, the Lords servants want
consideration, or that they remember not to hold open the cloth over the door,
the good and diligent Courtier should suddenly put himself before him, to lift
and hold it up: For many times it is as great an honor for a Courtier to be
accounted one of good manner and bringing up in the Court, as out of the Court,
it is to be reputed a great and famous Captain in wars.

And since the Courtier is determined to accompany some noble man to the Court,
he is also bound by the Laws of the Court to wait upon him home again,
which if he do, the Noble man shall be more beholding to him for the
attendance he has given upon him, then for his company to ride with him.

If any come to speak with the courtier that were equal with him in degree, A
point of ^ood man^^s to be observed in ^aring or ^eaking to ^ur superiors.
or meaner of calling or condition then himself, it is one of the first and
chiefest points of ciuility and good manner, not to suffer him to open his lips
to speak to him, before he have his cappe on his head, for one to talk
commonly with the other with his cappe in his hand, is of great authority and
reverence, as from the duty of the subject to the Prince, or that of the
servant to the Master.

The good Courtier must ever speak again to him that speaks to him, do him
reverence that does him reverence, put off his cappe to him, that puts off
his, and this he must do without any respect that he is his friend or foe:
for in the effects of good manners, no man ought so much to be an Enemy, that
the enmity should break the bounds of courtesy and humanity. It is rather
fit for common persons, then for Courtlike gentlemen, in so mean things to
show their enmity.

For to say truly, the good Courtyer should not show the enmity of the
heart, by putting on, or pulling off his Cap, but by taking sword in hand to
revenge his quarrel.

And if the Courtyer were in the Church, Court, or in the Chapel of the
Prince, and set, and an other gentleman happily comes in the same place where
he is, he must do him the courtesy to give him the place and seat and to pray
him to sit down: yea, and if there were no other place fit for the gentleman
to sit in, and that of courtesy also he would not offer him that injury to
accept it: yet at the least let the Courtyer do what he may, to make him take
a piece of his stool, that parting with him his seat, the other may also come
to part with him his heart.

If those that were set hard by the Courtyer begun to talk in secret
together, He is ill taught that listneth to other men speaking in secret.
he should rise from thence, or go a little aside from them. For, in the Court
they will say he is ill taught, and brought up, and wants civility and good
manners that will seem to harken to any bodies tales or secrets.

The Courtyers must have frienship also with the Porters, to open him the
Court-gates that are kept fast chained in, that they be contented to suffer
their Moyle or Foot-cloth-nagge to enter into the vtter-court.

And the like must be practiced with the Gentlemen-ushers of the Chamber, and
Captain of the Guard, to whom he must do a thousand pleasures, that they may
respect his person, and let him come in when he will. and the next way to win
his friendship, and to continue them friends, and to be welcome of them, is to
feast them otherwhiles: sometimes with a banquet, but especially not to fail
them with a new-yeares gift, on New-yeares day, what Trifle or present soever
it be.

That Courtyer that is not acquaynted with the Vshers, and does them no
pleasures, may be well assured that those above in the Hall, will make him
tarry in the vtter-Court: and those that stand at the gate of the Cheyne, they
will make him light in the mire. With the Vshers of the priuie-Chamber, he
must needs deal honorably withal, as to come and see them sometimes, and to
do them much honor, in giving them some fair jewel or presenting them with a
Gown, or Coate-cloth of silk or velvet. And thus he shall be assured, they
will not only let him into the priuie-chamber: but they will also procure him,
to speak with the Prince, at his best leisure.

To make the yeomen of the Guarde also that make gentlemen give place, and
stand a loose off-from the Prince, it cannot be but very profitable for the
Courtyer to have them his friends. For many times they may help us to a fit
place to talk with the King, it is such a trouble and charge to speak with
the Prince, that if we have not greaat Friendship with these we have spoken
of, and that we do them some pleasures before we come to the Court they will
shut the doors against us, and we shall come home ashamed of our selves.

For, a Courtyer to be acquaynted with the Ladies and gentlemen of the Court,
it is rather of pleasure then of necessity: albeit it be true, that the
young-Courtyer, that serves not some Lady or Dame in the Court, shall be
rather blamed of his shamefastness, and Cowardly heart, then approved for his
modesty and gravity.

In deed for a young-Gentleman that is rich, noble, and free-harted: it is an
honest and comely entertainment, to become some Ladies servant of the Court:
But for him that is poor, living in disgrace, and out of favor, let him
utterly fly the love of Courtly Dames, and stick to the poor-friends ship of
devout Nuns. For the property of Courtly Mistresses, is to empty What the
property of courtly Mistresses is.
their seruants-purses, and the manner of religious-Nunnes, to beg always of
him that visites her.

The Courtyer that offers himself to serve any Lady or gentlewoman in
court, does bind himself to a straight religion: For sometimes he must kneel
by her of one knee, sometimes he must stand upon his Feet before her, and
always he must have his cap in his hand, and he may not speak to her, unless
she command him first: and if she ask any thing of him, he is bound to
give it her straight, if he can: and though she frown upon him, yet he may
not be angry with her - so that the Courtyer must needs employ his whole
person, and goods, in serving of her, that he loves. For, the Courtyer that is
married, surely it is not fit for him to love any other woman then his wife:
neither is it honest for the woman to be served with any married courtyer, For
these manner of loves are to no other end, but for him to be merry with her,
and for her to get somewhat of him.

Let the Courtyer be very wise, and beware that he do not love and serve such
a gentlewoman whom he cannot obtain to his wife: For otherwise it should be a
great corsiue to his heart, and a more shame, to see another before his eyes to
enjoy her, and eat of that fruit, which he had now to his great cost and
charges, made now a fruitful Orch-yard.

And if it happen that his Mistress whom he serves be nobly borne, very fair
of complexion, pleasant of condition, of good grace and behavior in her
conversation, very wise and fine in her doings: he may be well assured, he
shall never forget this grief, and sorrow, and so much the more, if he did
love her with all his heart and unfeignedly.

There is great difference between that we lose, and that we have: For if the
heart lament for the loss of that we have, it bewayleth bitterly to lose that
we love. Also the Courtier must be advised that he tell not to any that his
wife has told him, or any thing that has passed secretly between the^, For
women are of such a quality, that for any thing they do, they would never
hear of it again willingly, and those secrets, that another commits to them
of trust, they can never keep them secret.

There is a Law common between women and their Lovers: for if they go abroad,
their lovers must attend upon their persons, and if they buy any thing in the
street as they go, they are bound to pay for it. And if they be too late
abroad, they must provide them of torches to bring them home with; and when the
Court remoueth from place to place, theirs is the charge, to defray their
expenses by the way: and if any do them injury, they are bound to revenge
their quarrel: If they fall sick, they must do them a thousand pleasures and
services: if any challenge be made in Court, of tilt, turney, or barriers,
they must be the first and best mounted and armed above others (if they may
possible) with all, not forgetting their Ladies colors and devise, offering
themselus nobly to perform the challenge, giving them to understand, that for
their sakes, they neither fear to adventure their lives, nor spare for any
charge to do them all honor and service. with out doubt, we may speak it
truly, that he puts himself to great peril and danger (whatsoever he
be) that serves women.

But when the wise Courtier is now become a servant to any Lade, he must
beware in any case he entertain or serve any other then his mistress: for if
he did it otherwise, he should raise a mortal hate and discord between
these women: by reason whereof many slanders and broiles might ensue.

It is a natural thing to all women, The nature of women in hating or loving
to man.
that to hate any man, a hundred will come to agree in one opinion: but to love
him, you shall not find two of one mind. The good Courtier must covet the
best he can to be always at the making ready of the King, and at meat, and
that for two causes: The one for that he may be ready to do him service, and
the other, for that at such a time they shall have an apt time to treat with
the Prince in any thing he will, if he have any occasion of business with him.
And when the King is either at his meat, or that he be putting on his
apparel, let the good Courtier be circumspect he come not too near the Table
where he sits, nor that he touch the Kings apparel he wears on: for no
man ought once to presume to be so hardy to meddle with his meat, or his
apparel, unless he be Shewer or Chamberlain, And if in this time of repast,
or making him ready, there were present any Iesters or fools, that said or did
any thing to make them laugh.

The good Courtier must take heed that he laugh not too loud, as in such
cases many are wont to do: For in such a case the Prince would be better
pleased at the modesty of the Courtier, then at the knavery of the fool.

The honest Courtier must not have a fool his friend, nor his enemy, for to
make him his friend, he is too dishonest, and to be his enemy, he is too vile
and cowardly. I wish the Courtier not to be angry with him: what soever he
does: for many times it happens that the friendship of a wise man does not
so much benefit The friendship of a wise man does not so much good, as a
fools displeasur does hurt.
or pleasure, as the enmity and displeasure of one of these fools does hurt.
And if he will give them any thing (as he must needs) let him beware he give
him not occasion to condemn his conscience, and that he stop their mouths:
For the Courtier that is Christian, shall give as much more to the poor to
pray to God for him, as he shall give to others to speak well of him to the
king.

When the King sneeses, and that the Courtier be present, he must straight
put off his cappe, and bow himself in a manner to the ground, but for all
that he must take heed, he say not, Christ help you, or God bless you, or
such other like: For to do any manner of courtesy or honor: is pertinent only
to Courtiers: But to say, Christ help, or God bless you: is the Country
manner.

And if the King by chance should have any hair or feather to fly upon his
clothes, or any other filthy thing about him: none but the chamberlain only
should take it away, and none other Courtier should once presume to take any
thing from his back, or to touch his garment, neither any other person,
unless it were in case to defend him.

When the king is set at the table, the Courtier may not come into the Kitchen,
nor much less lean upon the surueying boorde: For though he did it perhaps
but to see the order of the survey, and service of the Prince: yet it may be
suspected of some, he meant worser matter, and and thereby they should judge
ill of him. If the Prince have a felicity in hawking, the Courtier must
endeavor himself to keep a cast or two of good Falcons, and if in hunting,
then he must have good Greyhounds. And when he is either a hawking or hunting
with the King, he must seek to serve him so diligently that day, that he may
both find him game to sport with, and procure for himself also favor at the
Princes hand.

Many times Princes are so earnest of their game, and so desirous to kill that
they hunt, that they are wont boldly to chase the beasts they hunt, and
pursue them so, that oftentimes they lose the sight of the rest, In such a case
the good Courtier must ever have his eyes upon him, and rather seek to follow
the King, then to take pleasure in hunting of other beasts: for in that case it
shall be a better hunting for him to find out the King, and to be with him,
then he should take pleasure in being alone with the Heart.

It may happen lightly, that the king galloping his horse upon the rockie
stones, he might stu^ble at such a stone, as both the King and his horse should
come to the ground: and at that time it could not be but very profitable to the
Courtier to be present: For it might so happen, that by means of the Princes
fall (he being ready to help him) he might thenceforth begin to grow in
favor and credit with the Prince.

The most part of those that delight to go a hunting, are wont commonly to
eat their meat greedily, and drink out of measure, and besides to shout and
make a wonderful noise, as they were out of their wits: which things the
grave, and wise Courtier should not do: for they are rather fit for vagabonds,
and idle persons, that set not by their honesty: then they are for the honest
Courtier, that only desires and endeauoreth by modesty and wise behavior to
become great, and in favor.

CHAP. X. Of the great pains and troubles the Courtier has that is toilde in
suits of Law, and how he must suffer, and behave himself with the Judges.
THere are in the Court also diverse kinds of men, that be not Courtiers,
Diverse and sundry sorts of Courtiers,
and Princes servants, but only are Courtiers of necessity, by reason of suites
they have with the counsel. And these manner of Courtiers have as much need of
counsel, as of help: for he that has his goods in hazard, has also his
life in ieopardy.

To speak of the diverse and subtle ways of suffering, it is no matter worthy
to be written with ynke, but only with lively blood: For indeed if every one
of these suitors, were forced to abide for his faith, and believe those pains,
troubles, and sorrows, that he does to recover his goods, as much cruelty as
tortures should Vaglioditi, and Grauata have, as ever had Rome in times past.
In my opinion, I think it a hell to continue a long suter. And surely we may
believe, yea and swear to, that the Martyrs executed in old time in the
Primitive Church (which were many in number) did not suffer so much, neither
felt such grief to loose their life, as does now a days an honest man, to see
himself deprived of all his faculties. It is a great trouble and charge to
recover any thing, but in the end of these two effects, a wise man suffers
and feels more the displeasure he receives, then he does the goods he
spends. And in my judgment to strive and contend is nothing else, but to
bring matter to the heart to sigh and lament: to the Eyes to weep, to the Feet
to go, to the Tongue to complain, The heavy hap of those that are in Suits
of Law.
to the hands to spend, to entreat his Friends to favor his cause: and to
command his servant to be careful and diligent, and his body to labor
continually.

He that understands not the conditions of contention: I will let him know,
they are these which follow, Of a rich man, to become poor: of a merry man, to
be made sad and Melancholy: of a free man, a bondman: of a liberal man, a
covetous man: of a quiet man, an unquiet person: and of a htaefull, a desperate
person.

How is it otherwise possible, but that the hapless Poor Suter must become
desperate? seeing the Judge looks upon him with a frowning counteuaunce: his
goods to be demanded of him wrongfully: and that now it is so long a time he
has not bin at home, and knows not as yet whether Sentence shall be given,
with him, or against him.

And besides all this, that the Pooreman in his lingering Suit has spent so
much, that he has not left him six pence in his purse. If any of these
troubles be enough to bring a man to his end, much more shall they be to make
the poore-man desperate, and weary of his life. So diverse are the effects, and
successes seen in matters of Suits, that many times there is no wit able to
dyrect them, nor goods to bring them to end. Nay, we may boldly and truly
say, that the Laws are so many, and diffuse of themselves, and men's judgments
so simple to understand them: that at this day there is no Suite in the world
so clear, but there is found another law to put that in doubt, and make it
void. And therefore the good and ill of the Suter, consists not so much in the
reason he has, as in the Law which the Judge chooses to give judgment of.

It is well that the Suter believe and think that he has right, but the
chiefest thing of importance is, that the Judge also, desire that he have his
right. For, that Judge that favors my cause, and desires to do me
Justice, he will labor and study to seek out some Law that shall serve my
turn, to restore me again to my right.

To contend, is so profound a science, that neither Socrates to the Athenians,
nor Solon to the Greeks, nor Numa Pom pylius to the Romans, nor Prometheus to
the Egiptians, nor Lycurgus to the Lacedaemonians, nor Plato to his Disciples,
nor Apolonius, to the Poets of Nemesis, nor Hiarcus to the Indians, could ever
teach it them: and much less could they tell how to find any way to write it
in the books of their Commonwealth.

The cause why these famous men did not find it, was because this Science
could not be learned by studying of diverse books, nor by traveling through
diverse countries, but only by framing great Suits and Processes, and by
infinite charge, and expenses of money.

Happy, yea truly, and most treble happy were those ages, in which they
neither knew, nor yet could tell, what strife or contention meant. For, indeed
from that time hitherto, the world has fallen to decay, and chiefly since men
have grown to quarrel, and each one conte^ded with his neighbor.

Plato was wont to say, that in that Commonweal where there were found many
Physicians, it was also an evident token that there were many vicious people:
and likewise we may say, that in that City where there are many Suitors, it is
to be thought it follows also, that there are many ill disposed-people.

That only may be called a blessed and fortunate Common Weal, where men live
quietly, and have not to do with Justices nor Judges: for it is a true rule,
when Physicians are much frequented, and Judges much occupied, that amongst
that people, there is little health, and less quiet. But to return to the
troubles of our Suitors: I say, that the Disciples of the famous Philosopher
Socrates, were not bound to be silent in Athens above two years: but the
unfortunate Suitors What misery the poor Clyents and Suitors are subject unto
were bound to hold their peace ten years, if their suites did continue so
long. For albeit the Judge do them open injury, yet they may not seem to
complain, but rather say, he thinks he has done him the best justice in
the world.

And if for his mishap or plague of his offenses, he would not so approve and
speak them, let him be assured, the Judge will perceive it by his
countenance, and afterward let him know it by his judgment.

Some Suitors say, they are great Sinners, and I say they are Saints: For of
the seven deadly sins that are committed, only of three they are but to be
accused: for in the other four (although they would) they do not give him
time nor leave to offend How can the Suitor ever offend in pride, since he
must poor man go from house to house with his cappe in his hand, and all
humility to solicit his cause?

How can he ever offend in Avarice, since he has not many times a penny in
his purse to buy him his dinner: nor to pay for the infinite draughts and
Copies proceeding out of the Chancerie?

How can he offend in sloth and idleness, since he consumes the long nights
only in sighs an complaints, and the whole day in trotting and trudging up
and down.

How can he offend in Gluttony, since he would be content to have only to
suffice nature, and not to desire pies nor breakefasts, nor to lay the Table
every day? That sin they most easily and commonly offend in, is ire, and
indeed I never saw suter patient, and although he be angry, we may not
marvel at it a whit: For if ever once in the end of half a year he happen to
have any thing that pleases him, I dare be bound every week after he shall
not want infinite troubles to torment and vex him.

These men also offend much in envy: for indeed there is no man that pleades
but is envious: and this proceeds many times, to see an other man, by favor
dispatched of his suit, that has not continued only two months in Court a
suter: and of his that has continued above two years since it began, not a
word spoken. They offend also in the sin of backebiting, and murmuring
against their neighbors: For they never cease complaining of the partiality of
the Judges, of the slothfulness and timorousnes of his Counselor, that pleads
his cause at the bar: of the little consideration of the Attorney, of the
payments of the Notary, and of the small courtesies (or rather rudenes) of the
officers of the Judge: So that it may be well said, that to strive in Law, and
to murmur, are near kinsfolks together.

The Egyptians were in times past plagued only with ten plagues, but these
miserable and woeful suitors are daily plagued with a thousand torments. And the
difference betwixt their plague and these is, that the Egiptians What torments
are incident to those that have suits in law.
came from the divine providence and these of our poor suitors, from the
inueution of man's malice.

And it is not without cause, we say, that it is man's invention, and not
divine: For to frame inditements, to give delays to the party, to allege
actions, to deny the demand, to accept the proof, to examine witnesses to
take out process, to note the declaration, to prolong the cause, alleging well,
or proving il, to refuse the judge for suspect, to make intercession, to take
out the copy of the plea, and to call upon it again with a 1500. doubles.

Surely, al these are things that neither God commands in the old
Testament, neither Jesus Christ our Savior does allow in his holy gospel. The
writings of Egypt, although they were to the great loss and detriment of the
Seigniory of the Egyptians, yet were they nevertheless very profitable for the
liberty of the Egyptians: But the miserable Plaintifes, are yet in an other
great extremity; for notwithstanding the plagues and miseries the poor
wretches suffer daily, yet do they leave their souls buried in the Courts of
Chauncery, and cannot notwithstanding have their goods at Liberty.

And if the plague of the Egyptians was by rivers of blood, frogs, horse flies,
death of cattle, tempests, leprosy, Locusts, mysts, flies, and by the death of
the first borne children. The plague of the Plaintifes is to serve the
Presidents to bear with the Auditors to entreat the Notaries, to make much of
their Clerks, to please the Counselors, to follow their heels, that must open
their causes to pray the ushers, to borrow money, to go from house to house,
to solicit their Atturneyes, all these things are easily to tell, but very
hard to suffer: for after they are once proved and tried by experience, they
are enough to make a wise man contented, rather to lose a piece of his right,
then to seek to recover it by any such extremity: For he may be well
assured, that he shall never want fair countenance, sugared words and large
promises: but for good doings it is a marvelous wonder, if ever they meet
together.

And therefore before all other things it is necessary he pray to God for his
own health and preservation: and next to him, for the preservation and long
continuance of the Judge, if he will obtain his suit. Therefore I advise him
that has not the Judge for his friend, to beware, as from the Devil, he does
not commence any suit before him: for to dispatch him the better, either he
will find the means to make his case very dark, or at the least he will
prolong his suit as long as he please.

It skilleth not much whether the Judges be old or young men, for both with
the one and the other, the poor plaintiff has enough to do. If they be old
men, a man shall travel long ere he will hear his cause. If they be young men,
he shall wait long also ere he can inform them of the very points of his
cause. An other great discommodity yet follow these old Judges, that being
ever sickly, and of weak nature, they never have strength nor time in manner to
examine their cases.

And as those that have lost now a great piece of their memory, only trusting
in forepassed expenses, they presume to dispatch their suites as lightly,
without further looking into A Judge not to trust too much to his memory.
them, or thoroughly examining them, as if they had already advisedly studied
them. And peradventure their case is of such importance, that if they had
looked upon it very well, they could scantly have told what to have said in it.
And I would not that when any case should be determined, and judgment given
upon my matter, that the Judge should benefit himself only with that he had
seen, or read before.

For although experience be a great help to the Judge to give the better
judgment upon the matter, yet notwithstanding he is to study a new to
understand the merits of the cause. It is also a great trouble, and dangerous
for a man to practice with new Judges, and to put their matters into their
hands, who only were called to the place of a Judge, being thought learned and
fit for it, and so brought to rule as a Magistrate: For many times these
young Judges, and new Physicians although they want not possible knowledge yet
they may lack a great deal of practice and experience: which is cause that
one sort makes many lose their lives before they do come to rise in fame: and
the other undo many a man, in making him spend all that ever he has.

There is yet besides, an other apparent danger, to have to do with these new
and young experienced judges: for when they come to sit newly in judgment, with
their other brethren the Judges, having the law in their mouth to serve all
turns, they do but only desire and study to win fame and reputation
amongst men, and thereby to be the better reputed of his brethren.

And for this cause only when they are assembled together in place of Justice
to give judgment of the pleas laid before them, they do not only enlarge
themselves, in alleging many and diverse opinions of great learned men, and
book cases. So that the Hearers of them may rather think they have studied to
show their eloquence and learning, then for to open the decision and judgment
of the cases, they have before them.

And for final resolution I say, that touching Pleas and Suits, I am of
opinion, that they should neither trust the experience of the old Judge, nor
the learning and knowledge of the young. But rather I reckon that man wise,
that seeks by little and little to grow to an agreement with his adversary,
and that tarieth not many years to have a lingering, yea (and possibly) an
uncertain end.

Also I would (in some sort) exhort the poor Plaintise, not to be
ouer-curious, to understand the qualities of the judge, as a man would say, If
he be old, or young, if he be learned or privileged, if he be well studied,
or but little, if he be a man of few or many words: if he be afflicted or
passionate, tractable or self willed? For, possibly being too inquisitiue to
demand of any of these things, it might happen (though he did it unawares,
yet he should find them afterward all heaped togethers in the person of the
Judge, to his hinderance and damage in decyding his cause.

The wise Suter should not only not seek to be inquisitiue of the judge or his
conditions: but also if any man would seem to tell him of him, he should give
no ear to him at all. For if it come to the Judges ears he enquireth after
his manner of living, and condition, he will not only be angry with him in
his mind, but will be also unwilling to give judgment in his favor.

The poor Siuter shall also meet with Terrible Judges, severe, intractable,
chollericke, incommunicable, and inexorable, and yet for all this he may not
look upon his nature, nor condition: but only to regard his good conscience.

For, what need he care if the Judge be of severe and sharp condition, as
long as he may be assured that he is of good conscience.

It is as needful for the upright and good Judge, to have a good and pure
Conscience: as it is to have a skillful head, and judgment in the Laws. For,
if he have the one without the other he may offend in malice: and if he have
that without the other, he may offend also in ignorance.

And if the suter come to speak with the Judge, and he by chance find him a
sleep, he must tarry till he awake, and if then he will not, or he cannot
give ear unto him, he must be contented.

And if he caused his man to say he were not within (notwithstanding the suter
saw him) he must dissemble it: yea, if the servants give him an ill answer,
he must take it in good worth: For the wary and politic suter must not be
offended at any thing that is done or said to him, till he see the definitive
sentence given with him, or against him.

It is a marvelous trouble also to the suter to choose his Counselor: for
many times he shall choose one that shall want both law and conscience. And
some others shall choose one that though on the one side he lack not Law, yet
on the other he shall be without both soul and conscience: And this is
apparently seen, that sometime for the gain of twenty Nobles, he shall as
willingly deny the truth, and go against his own consciedce, as at another
time he will seek for to maintain Justice.

It is true there are many other Counselors also that are both wise and
learned, and yet notwithstanding, they know the Law, they can by no means
frame it to his Clients case, wanting device and conuayance to join them
together.

And so it happens many times that to compare it to his Clyants case, he
conuaieth him so unfitly as of a plain case it was before, It is now made
altogether a fold of infinite doubts. I grant that it is a great furtherance
unto the Clyants, to have a good and wise Counselor* but it is a great deal
more for their profit, if they can give a sound and profound judgment of his
case.

For, it is not enough for the Counselor to be able to expound the Law, but
it is behouefull for him to apply it to his purpose, and to fit it to Time,
and Place: according to the necessity of his cause.

I have known Counselors my self, that in their Chayres and Readings in
their Halls, have seemed Eagles: The weak knowledge, of some Counselors
they have flowne so high in their doctrine and interpretations; but afterward
at the bar where they plead and in the face of their Court, where they should
best show themselves, there they have proved themselves very capons.

And the only cause of this is, because they have gotten by force of long
travel and continual study, a knowledge to moote, and read ordinarily their
Book-cases in their chaires by common-practise, and putting of them each to
other.

But when they are taken out of common-trade, and high beaten way, and brought
to a little pathway straighted, to a Counsellers-room, at the bar, to plead
his Clyents strange and unknown case (much contrary to their Booke-cases
before recited) then stripped of their common-knowledge, and easy seat in
chair, they stand now naked on their feet, before the iudgement-seate, like
sense-lesse creatures, void of reason and experience.

But now to supplye these imperfections of our raw Counselors, and to further
also our Clyents cause the better: we will that the Clyent be liberal, and
bountiful to his Counselor, (thereby the better to whette his wit, and to
make him also take pains, to study his ease thoroughly) being true, That the
Counselor gives Law, as he has reward. And that the Counselor also be
careful of his clyents cause, and to go through with that he takes upon
him, and truly to deserve that he takes of every man, For else they will say
(and who can blame the poor souls) That they are better takers, then good
dispatchers: A foul blot, to so great a virtue

But well, we will compare them to their Brothers, the Physicians; who The
Lawyers and Physicians to be compared together.
deal with their sick Patients, as the Lawyers do with their poor clyants.

For, if you give him not a piece of gold or two in his hand, at each time of
his visitation, to restore the languishing body: he cares as little for the
preservation of his health, whether he live or dye, as the Lawyer does for his
clients case, whether, whether it go with him or against him.

Moreover, my pen cease not to write of the great troubles, displeasures,
iourneyes, expenses and travels, that the poor suitors have with their
Counselors daily, as with their Atturneyes, Soliciters, Clerks, Officers,
Registers, and Sealers, for want of matters to write on: but only for that
they are so tedious matters, and so foul examples, that they deserve rather to
be remedied then written.

Therefore leaving this Law Discourse, and returning again to the private
affairs of the Courtier, abiding still in Court, I say, That the Courtier must
learn to know the Noble men and chief Officers of the Prince, As the Lord
Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, the Lord Marshall, the Lord Steward, the Lord
Chamberlain, the Lord Prive Seal, The Treasurer, the Controller, The master
of the Horse, The vice Chamberlain the Secretary, the captain of the Guard,
and the Coferer. And he need not force to weigh their stock and family,
whether they were rich or poor, humble or proud, stout or fearful, nor
regard their qualities and complexions, much less their persons, save only
their authority and office they have, And to say truly, it cannot be chosen,
but we must come before these Judges and Officers, sometimes to beseech and
pray them, now for our own private causes, then for the misrule and offense of
our servants, and also for the importunancy of our friends in their matters,
to labor them for justice and favor. And for this cause me thinks it is a
wise part of the courtier to get into favor with the counsel, and other
officers of Justice, and to obtain their good wills with continual attendance
of them, in doing them service at a need, and also to entertain them with
some small presents, to continue their favor.

First, before we begin to trouble them, w^e must be acquainted with them,
visit them, and present them with somewhat: For indeed it is a cold and unfit
thing to crave favor at a Judges hands, whom we never knew, nor did any
service to.

The wise Courtier must beware also not to importune the Noble men and his
friends so much, that for every trifling thing he would have them to go to
the Judges, to solicit and entreat for him, which I speak, because I know
there are some so indiscreet, that daily do importune the Judges so much, and
for such trifles, that afterward with shame they are repulsed and denied in
matters of great weight and importance.

And there are some also that solicit their matter with gravity, and others
with importunity, to whom I will be so bold to say, and to tell them of it
also, that importunacie shows the simplicity of the Suitor, and gravity, the
honesty of the worthy Knights, and Gentlemen Courtier.

It is but well done, and meet, for the Courtier that is a Suitor, to be
diligent to solicit his cause, and to follow it thoroughly, but yet without
troubling or importuning too often the Judges: For if once the Judges know him
for an importunate and cumbersome suitor, they will not only not speak with
him when he comes, but also they will not let him come in at the gate, when
they see him coming to them.

And if he happen to go home to the Judges house, and that he tell his tale
to him standing, let him in no wise care to sit down, and that his words he
speak to him be few, and his memorial he gives him brief: For observing
this order, he shall at that time be easily, yea willingly and courteously
heard of him, and shall How the poor (...) should demean himself, when he
comes before the Judge.
make him think that hereafter also he will use the like order with him.

When he sees that the Judge is troubled, and that his head is occupied, let
him in no case at that present offer to trouble him, or to speak to him in his
matter.

For admit he were contented to hear you quietly (though half unwilling) and
to suffer you to tell your tale: yet it is impossible he should wholly
understand your case, his head being otherwise occupied.

And it is needful also to show you, that though the Judge seem to be a
little Melancholy, or Collericke: yet the Suitor need not let for that to
speak to him, to open his case: yea, and to seek to hold in with him still:
For many times we see the Melancholy, and illdisposed Natures, appeased and
overcome with the courteous and gentle conversation.

I remember touching this matter, I went once to the court to solicit the
Judge, to pray him to dispatch my friends matter, and that he might have
justice. And took my friend with me.

And the Judge answered us both, that with all his heart he would dispatch
him, and swear, and swear again to him, that he should have justice, and that
with right good will, he would keep his right all he could.

Nay sir, said my friend to him, whom the case touched: I thank you sir, very
much that you will dispatch me quickly: but where you say, that you have a
great desire to keep my right and justice, I utterly appeal from that
sentence: For I come not sir, and if it please you, to follow your heels, and
to wait upon you to solicit my cause, to the end you should keep my right,
and detain it from me: but that you should give it to me.

For I promise you this sir, if you once give it me, I mean never to trouble
your worshipp hereafter with the keeping of it again, but will discharge you
quite.

And now after all these things we have spoken, I conclude, that whosoever
curses his enemy, and seeks revenge of an injury done him, Let him not
desire to see him poor and miserable, neither hated nor ill willed of any
other, dead, nor banished: but let him only beseech God for to plague him with
some ill suit: For a man cannot devise to take a greater revenge of his enemy,
then to see him entangied in a vile suit to follow the Cour, or to attend in
Chauncerie.

CHAP. XI. The Author changes his matter, and speaks to the beloved of the
Court, admonishing them to be pacient in their troubles, and that they be not
partial in the affairs of the Common weal.
THe Courtier shall do well and wisely (and chiefly if he be noble, and
beloved, to pass over the injuries done him, and to bear them patiently, and
never for to give any words to any that shall offend him; For the officers of
Princes can by no other means so well assure their offices and authority they
have, as by doing good continually to some and to suffer others, no way making
any countenance How every wise and prudent Courtier should behave himself.
of displeasure for the injuries done them by others.

And if it happen (as many times i does) that a follower and hanger on of the
Court, having spent all that he has, and driven now to seek a new bank,
chance to speak dishonest words, and frame great quarrels against the Kings
Officers; In this case the Courtier and wise Officer should never answer him
with anger and displeasure, and much less speak unto him in choler: For a
man of honor and respect, will be more grieved with a dishonest word that is
spoken against him, then he will be for the denial of that he asks,

Those that are beloved, and beliked of Princes, above all other things ought
to be very patient, courteous, and gentle in all things: For all that the
followers of the Court, and suitors cannot obtain in the Court, let them not
lay the fault to the Prince that denied it them, but only to the favored of
the Prince, and those about him for that they never moved it to the Kings
Majesty: nor once thought of the matter, as the poor Suitors supposed they
had. The pains and troubles of Court are infinite and insupportable. The
Courtiers pains insupportable.


For, how quiet soever the Courtyer be, they will trouble and molest him, if
he be pacient, they will be impacient and in storms, saying: That such a man
spoke ill of him, and seeks continually to defame him.

Which things we will the Courtyer hear with patience, and dissemble with
wisdom. For the wise Courtyer should not be angry for the ill words they
speak of him, but only for the vile and wicked acts they do unto him.

Let not the Courtyer and Favorite of the Prince be deceived, in thinking that
doing for this man, and for that man, and in showing them favor: that for all
that, he can bind or stay their tongues that they speak not ill of him, and
their hearts, that they hate them not extremely.

For, the Enemy receives not so much pleasure of that the Courtyer gives
him, as he does grief and displeasure for that that is behind yet in the
Courtyers hands to give him.

Now in the palaces of Princes, it is a natural thing, for each man to
desire to aspire, and to creep into the Princes favor: to be able to do
much, and to be more worth then others, and to command also. And as there are
many that desire it, so are they very few in number, that by their virtues and
demerits come to obtain that high favor.

It is a thing most sure and undoubted, that one alone, enjoying his Princes
grace and favor, shall be hated in manner of the most part of the people.

The more they are Rich, Noble, and of great power, that are beloved, and
accepted of Princes: so much the more ought they to be circumspect, and to
live in fear and doubt of such disgraces, and misfortunes, that may happen to
them, since all and every man's eye is upon them: and that they are the more
enuyed, for that they can do much; and desire also to take from them that
authority and credit they have, and to spoil them of such treasures as they
possess, or have gotten by the Princes favor.

And in this case the Favorite of the Court must not trust in the pleasures
he has done them: neither in the favor he has showed the^: much less the
feigned friendships they seem to bear him, and that he thinks he has gotten
of them: neither must he trust too much his Friends, Neighbors, and Kinsfolks,
no nor his own Brethren: But let him be assured, that all those that are not
in the like rank of Favor, and estimation that he is, (be he of what degree
or parentage he will be, yea, and as near a kin as may be) they will all
be in that his very mortal foes.

Authority to command, being the chief and highest point of honor and whereto
every man seeks to aspire, and which was cause that Pompey became the deadly
enemy of Julius Caesar his father in Law, Absolon of David his natural father,
Romulus of his brother Remus, Alexander of Darius, who showed himself before a
father in love, in bringing on him up, and Mark Anthony of Augustus Caesar his
great friend. So that I say, it may well be said, that after disdain and
cankered ire, have once possessed the delicate breast of man only concerning
honor and commandment, that it is never thenceforth recured of that infested
sore, neither by gifts and promises, and much less by prayers and requests.

It is true the accepted of the prince may well be free from all thyrste and
hunger, cold, and heat, wars, plague, and poverty, and from all other
calamityes and troubles of this our wretched life, but he shall never be free
from detractions of venomous and wicked tongues, and from spightfull and
envious persons. For no less is Envy joined to favor, then is thyrst to a
burning ague.

In this case it is impossible but that the Courtyer should receive many times
displeasure and disgraces in the Court, but not to give ear to these
detracters, and ill-speakers of men.

To remedy these things, the Courtyer must needs seem to let them know by his
looks and aunswers, that he is more offended with them, that come and tell
him these lewd tales: then with those that in deed did truly report them of
him.

This counsel would I give the courtyer, that what ill so ever he hears
spoken of him, I would wish him not seem to know it, and much less to be
angry withal, nor once give a distasteful word to the reporters thereof.

For, his choler ouer-paste, the evil words he has spoken to them in his
anger, may turn him to more displeasure, then he has done him hurt that
caused him speak these words.

And therefore surely to bridle the Tongue, is rather a divine then a humane
virtue: and chiefly in that instant, when the heart is maistered and subdued
with Chollericke passions. For afterward it happens many times, that being
quiet again in our minds we are sorry for that we have spoken in our anger:
yea, against them that have angered us.

If the Courtyer should weigh every word that is spoken against him, and
esteem every thing that is done to him, he should purchase himself a
continual and sorrowful life: yea, and out of measure, a troublesome and
unpleasant, since Princes courts are ever full of Serpents-tongues, and venomous
hearts, and that it lies not in man's power to let, that the hearts of men hate
us not, and that their tongues speak not ill of us.

I would advise the Courtyer to take all the ill that is spoken of him, in
sport and mirth, and not in anger.

Seneca said (and that wisely spoken) that there is no greater revenge to
punish an injurious word, then to A worthy saying of Seneca.
seem to laugh at it; For it is a thing more natural and proper to women,
then men to desire to take revenge of words, with the like words again: since
the noble heart that esteems his honor, must not have his hands in his
tongue, but his tongue in his hands.

O how many have we seen, both out of Court, and in Court, the which for no
other respect, but to revenge one only silly word, that touched them not much,
would put themselus, their goods, and fame in peril: and yet in the end had
not that revenge, which they desired, but rather redoubled it against
themselves, in loosing their fond and vain attempt. Therefore to conclude
those that will be great in favor and estimation in the Princes Court, and
those also that are now in favor and credit with the Prince, and that desire
to continue, and persevere in his favor still, must not make account of any
words spoken to him, or offenses done him: for all that are in favor have
need to suffer, and no occasion to report.

Till this present day I never saw any that received any hurt or detriment by
being patient: but being impatient, I have seen numbers cast the^selus away:
you must also know, that in all places, where troops and companies of people
be, there is always ever discords and diversities, in opinions and judgments
of men, So that it happens many times in a commonweal, yea, and it meets
sometimes in one house, that all shall be of one blood and kindred, yet in private
wills; and affections, mortal enemies. Kindred are not always friends.


And therefore, sure it is a thing worthy to be noted, and no less to be
wondered at, to see the fathers with the sons, the Uncles with the nephews,
the graund-fathers with the children, the sons in Law with their fathers in
Law: and Brothers with their brothers: and sisters, the one to be as far
different from the other as white and black, and as much friends as the dog
and the cat. And all this is caused only, for that they are rather wedded to a
self-will and opinion they haues, then they are adicted to love and affect
that that nature binds them to.

We see also many young Courtiers, that though they be virtuous and Noble,
(having inherited and succeeded in Nobility of blood their Ancestors) by
means whereof they are honored and reverenced: and possessing also the
greatness, and abundance of their goods and riches, (which makes them wealthy,
and maintains them honorably) enjoying the Noble parentage for which they are
regarded, having many friends and servants that do them great service and
pleasure. And all in respect of their Noble Ancestors: and yet notwithstanding
al these great things we have spoken, they follow their own inventions and
imaginations, which their Ancestors, knowing, would have fled: and hate and
mislike that, they, doubtless, being alive would have followed.

And therefore it is rather a token of lightness then of good will, for one to
leave to help and relieve his own friends and kinsfolks, to succor and do
good to strangers, or others, whom he never knew, nor can tell what they are.
For I assure you, that one of the greatest losses and mishaps that can come to
a Noble house, is to have new friendship and parciality with strangers and
men unknown. That Gentleman that gives himself to follow such a one as
pleases his fantasy best, and that leaves to leave to those whom his
Ancestors heretofore both loved and liked: shall see those old friends, not
only leave and forsake him, but clean give him over to his will: and shortly
after shall find his substance and faculty consume and waste away; besides,
the honor of his house to be brought to utter decay and oblivion.

And this we have spoken, only to advise the Princes Officers, and such as
have credit and authority, that they do not with favor support and aid any
partial sect: namely, that that concerns the state and body of
Commonwealth: for the esteemed of the Prince, more easily, and with less
occasion, do undo themselves, and lose the credit they have won: by reason
of their partialiteis and factions they maintain, then they do for their
daily benefits and suits they importune the Prince in.

Wherefore the servants and Officers of the Kings house, although they be in
good favor with the Prince, and that it please him to like well of them, yet
they may not so hardly support any to do hurt to others, and so absolutely, as
if they were the Lords and Princes themselves.

For albeit it pleases the King to call them, to honor, and to enrich them
with goods and possessions, yet the King cannot, nor will not like that they
shall be suborners of factions, and quarrels amongst their subjects in the
Commonwealth.

And yet nevertheless it happens many times, that those that see themselves
only in favor above others, will presume to do violence and wrong to others,
trusting to their great favor they are in, that that shall suffice to cloak
and hide any fault they shall commit, which they never ought to think, nor yet
for any respect in the world to do. For such vnhaply might be the crime they
do commit, that although it be in the Princes power to do great things for
them, yet he could not at that time with his honor excuse their offense, nor
seem to protect them in their lewdness, without great murmour and
discontentation of his subjects.

I know very well, that in Court the minds, affections, and opinions of
Courtiers are so diverse and variable, and notwithstanding the beloved of the
Prince endeavor himself all he can possible to please and content every man
in Court, yet of all impossibilities, it is a thing most impossible ever to
attain to it, to win all men's good wills.

Nevertheless, he must so trimly and wisely behave himself in all his
doings, that those, at least, whom he cannot with all his policy and device
make his friends, have not yet any just occasion given them to be his enemies.
I see there is no mean, no reason, no device nor policy of man, favor nor
negligence, that can defend the honored and esteemed of Court from detraction
and envy.

Therefore I will boldly give him this advice with him that in matters of
Justice and other public affairs, he bear himself so upright, that
notwithstadding they repine at his authority and credit: yet that they have
no cause offered to complain of him.

The Courtyer is forced to complain when his own familiar companyons and
fellow-seruants of the Prince, in his matters of contenion or quarrel step
between them, not to part them, but rather to the contrary to contend with
them, and join in demand of that they strive for: which the luckles Courtyer
is very apt to know, although he dares not discover it.

For many times he supposes it less evil to suffer the persecution of the
enemy, then to fall into the disgrace of the beloved, and esteemed about the
Prince.

For the reputed of the Prince, commonly think they do much for the
Commonweal, in bearing and favoring some, and in punishing and persecuting
others.

For those that are of great authority, professing honor and reputation, and
that fear shame: would rather themselves to be defamed and rejected, then to
see their enemies advanced, or prefered to the favor of the Prince, or of the^
that be in favor with the prince: And the beloved or officers of the Prince may
not think, that the favor they give to one against an other, can be kept
secret, and that it cannot come to light: for in so doing they are deceived:
For in deed there is nothing more manifest or known in the Commonwealth, then
the doings and practices of those that are in favor and authority, yea even to
the very words they speak:

Those that are agrieued, and have to complain of some injury done them, or
also those that are even the familiars of the favored, and that do but aspire
daily to grow in greater credit with their Prince then others, do not see any
thing said or done to others, that are in better credit, then themselus, be it
in eating, drinking, watching, sleeping, in play, being quiet or busy, but
they suddenly go and report it, and tell it to some other that is in favor, to
enter and to increase always into greater favor and trust with them.

If there happen any discention or enmity amongst the people in the common
weal or realm, the esteemed of the Court must beware in any case, they put
not in their hand: and if they do at all, that it be but to pacify them, and
to make them good friends again, and not to discover the^ worse then they
were before: For if he do otherwise, all these quarrels in the end shall cease,
they being reconciled together, and now made perfect friends and to him they
will all show themselus open enemies.

And therefore it behooves the favored of Princes to behave themselves so wisely
toward them that are at discord and variance together, that both the one side
and the other should be glad and well pleased, to make him arbitrater between
them, to decide both their causes, without any suspicion that they have of him,
be it never so little, of partiality, of either part.

The same day that the favored of the Court shall take upon him to bear any
private affection to any of the Common weal, and that he rather lean to one
party, or to an other: the self same day and hour he shall put in great
hazard his person, and not without great danger to loose his goods, together
with the favor and credit of his Prince. And the secret enemies he has,
through the envy they bear him, should suffice him, yea rather too much, by
reason of his favor and credit; without seeking any new enemies, for that he
says or does. Such as are great with the Prince, and that fly the passions,
affections, and partialities of the Commonweal, may be assured they shall be
beloved served, and honored of all: but if they shall do the contrary, they
may trust to it likewise, that their enemies will be revenged of them, because
they did pursue them: And their friends also will complain of them, because
they did not favor their cause as they ought. Therefore let not the beloved
think, if he dare believe me, that by having only the favor of the person of
the Prince, it is enough for him to govern and rule the whole Realm at his
pleasure: For although it cannot be denied, that to have so great a friend as
the person of a King, it is a great advantage and commodity, and that he may do
much: yet we must grant also, that many enemies are able to hurt us, and do
us great injury. And therefore my advise should be, that every wise man,
having one friend, should beware to have an other enemy.

CHAP. XII. That the officers and beloved of the court should be very diligent
and careful in dispatch of the affairs of the Prince, and Commonwealth: and
in correcting and reforming the servants, they should also be very circumspect
and advised.
SVurely it is a great servitude and trouble Great servitude and trouble to
live in the Court.
to live in court, continually, but it is far greater when it is enforced of
necessity, by reason of suits and troubles, and yet greatest and most
intolerable, when they cannot obtain a short and brief dispatch according to
their desire; for waying well the manner and conditions of the Court, that
Suitor may reckon himself happily dispatched, every time that he is quickly
dispatchd, although his dispatch be not according to his mind. And I speak it
not without a cause, that he may reckon himself well dispatched when he has
his answer: For without comparison, it is less ill of both: for the poor
Suitor that attends on the Court, to be presently denied his Suit, then to
continue him long with delays, as they they do now a days, the more is the
pity.

If the poor Suitors that go to the Court, did know certainly that the delay
made in their Suites were for no other occasion but for to dispatch them well,
according to their desire, although it were not so reasonable, yet were it
tolerable, the pains and trouble that they abide. But if the poor miserable
and wretched creatures have great trouble in traversing the Law, and abiding
their orders: obtaining it nevertheless in the end with great labor and
toil: yea and contrary to their expectation: have they not yet matter enough
trow ye to complain of? yes sure, enough to make them despair.

Whatsoever he be therefore that goes to the Court to be a Suitor for any
matter of import, let him determine and think with himself he shall not
obtain his suite, even as he would have it: For if he shall feed himself with
certain promises, made in private, a thing common to Courtiers, to promise much,
and perform nothing, with other vain and foolish thoghts: the great hope he
shall conceive of their smokes of Court, must needs give him afterward
occasion to despair when he sees the promise unperformed. The court is a Sea
so deep, a pilgrimage so incertaine, that there we daily see naught else, but
Lambs swim with safety in the deepest chanel, and elephants down in the
shallowest foord. To go sue, to serve, to travel, and to solicit in the Court
of Princes, may aptly be likened and compared to those that put too many rich
jewels to the Lottery in open market: in which it happens very often, that he
that has put in a 100. lots, shall not happen perhaps of one, and an other
that only has but in one, fortune shall so favor him, that he shall ever after
be made a rich man. The like we may say to him that has lived so long in
Court, that he has not only got him a beard, but it is also now become a
gray beard: and yet in all this long time of his service, he has not gotten
him any certainety, or stay of living to live honestly, withal to maintain
his aged years in quiet: and he may well say, that all the lots have been
unfortunate to him which he put in adventure. It is true that to be called a
good and virtuous man, it suffices to have a sharp wit, and good head: but
to become rich, he must only have good fortune. And this is plainly seen in
the Court, that some in 4. months will grow great like a Melon, and some other
in 40. years will never bear but little fruit like a palm tree.

We have told you all these things, to this end, only to remember those that
go to the Court of Princes, to follow any fuite, or to continue a A lesson for
him that means to be a Courties.
Courtier still, that in any case they carry a purse with them, full of money,
and a heart armed with patience. Oh what pity is it every way to see him that
is a Suitor in the Court, to be long haled with a tedious suite, and in the
end not to obtain any partof his desire, without a little pleasing wind of
court: for if he will have his suite go forward, and take good success, and
have it speedily granted, he must first buy it of God with bitter tears, and
after of the king with humble intercession, of the Secretaries with promises,
and of the vshers with presents, and of the beloved, and in authority, with
infinite service: so that to conclude, far greater is the reward they crave
then the value, of the favor or benefit they bestow.

If I have discoursed unto you sufficiently what the unlucky Suitors have done
and do: you shall further know what they think and do imagine, as it falls
out true.

The sely souls they pass the nights in watch, devising continually: not in
what Church the next day they may hear the divine Service, but only by what
means they may procure to come to the Favorites of the Court, to speak one
word unto them.

The poor Suter (unskillful of courtly practice) belieueth, that when he has
once exhibited a bill or memorial of his Suit, to the Master of Requests: or
that he has spoken a word or two, to any one in favor with the Prince, that
straight-wayes, without further delay he shall be dispatched of his Suit, and
that he shall not need to sue any more. But alas, they are deceived, and
prevented of their expectation.

For, the unhappy Suter shall be no sooner out of his sight, but they
presently forget all that has bin said unto them: yea and peradventure his
mind so occupied, that his bill of Memorial is also torn in pieces, and his
Suit and bill committed to flying air.

The affairs of the wars are done by force and necessity, and those of
Friends by Good Will: but those of the By what means affairs are dispatched.
miserable Suitors of the Court, by money or great importunity.

So that it follows, that hardly any man obtayneth the end of his Suit, (be
his Right never so good) without great diligence, and painful toil. And many
times the poor Suter of the Court departs from his own house, and goes to
the Court, on hope and deliberation to be dispatched in two months: and
afterward the poor miserable man shall spend above six months there without
dispatch. But all this is nothing, to the grief and displeasure he shall
feel in the end, if with better judgment he measure and consider, the
pleasure and felicity he might have had at home, with the troubles and
displeasures he abides in the Court. For, making account with his purse, he
shall perhaps find all his money spent, ere his suit in manner be begun.

I told you but of a little wonder, to tell you that all his ill consisted in
the emptying of the purse. For, indeed I should have said better, and more
truly: telling you that he had sold his Nagge, laid his Sword in gage,
baratted his cote and cloak, and of two shyrts he brought, the one he sold:
so that the poore-man has no more left to chop, nor sell. And yet moreover,
me thinks I tell you little.

If I show you not also, that after he has consumed all his Money that he
brought in his Purse, sold, chopped, and laid to gage all the Apparel that
he had, he is notwithstanding all this enforced for debt, to gage to his
Host, all that remains behind, to satisfy him for his lodging. So that when he
comes home to his own house, he may say truly: That he comes home weary,
ashamed, consumed, and all that he has at gage.

He that determines to be a suter at the Court, is wont before he go from
home, to make account what he will spend every day ordinarily: but what he
shall spend extraordinarily, against his will, that he never reckons of.

And therefore I would counsel him for the best, if he put ten crowns in his
purse, for ordinary charges, let him also put ten crowns more for
extraordinary. For, it is impossible he should ever keep an order and
measure in so great a disorder. For many times courtiers are compelled for
their honor and reputations sake, to inuit their hosts and owners of the
lodgings where they lie, and besides the great charges they are at the way, yet
come there unbidden to dinner and supper a company of Iesters, players of
Enterludes, Minstrels and Musicians, or other pleasant companions, whom he
cannot refuse and turn away for honesties sake, but must needs make them eat
and drink besides the reward they look for.

So that when he has made his account of ten or twenty shillinges charges for
his dinner or supper, let him look in his purse, and he shall find these
mates have picked up in rewards as much as the whole charges of his dinner or
supper besides.

Moreover, they are daily visited of their friends and kinsfolks, and victuals
are so dear, and of so excessive price, that to make their provision at the
best hand, they must send out posts and Lackyes into all parts to be their
Puruayers. And yet are they further recharged, that many times their servants
rob them of all their money, and run their way when they have done, and
sometimes they must new array themselves, all which things the Courtier (in
respect of his estimation) is bound to do thoroughly, and with the best manner,
or else to sequester, and banish himself from Court and Courtiers life. It is
true that a poor Gentleman or other Suitor (that of necessity must follow the
Court) knows very well the cause that moves him to be a Courtier, and
attendant on the court; but yet he shall not know what his charge and expense
will be about that suite.

If he have any favor or credit in the Court, he may happily obtain a
quick and ready dispatch, and so perhaps save some part of his money in his
purse he determined for to spend, without which, he shall not only be
enforced to borrow, but to send a new messenger to his house for more money. O
more is the pity, how many have I seen in Princes Courts spend all that ever
they brought to the Court to follow their suit, and yet could not be dispatched
in any thing they came for, save in stead of their money they consumed, they
purchased them great troubles and displeasurs bewayling their lost time, and
vain expense.

And it is to be considered also, that if it be a great difficulty to speak to
the Prince in our matter, to the President of the Council, to the Master of
the Requests, and to the Privy Council, to the Marshals of the house, to the
Treasurers, to the Cofferers, and to the fouriers, and to the favored of the
Court, it is far greater and more trouble to entertain, and content their
servants and officers.

For I dare assure you, you shall sooner and more easily win the love of the
Master, then you shall obtain the favor and good will of the Servant.

Princes are contented if we obey How the servants and Officers of the Court
must be entreated.
them; the favored of the court if we serve them: but the servants are never
contented, nor in quiet, if they see we do not entreat them, and worship
them. And surely, I will not tell you a true tale, and will lie a word to you.
In those days when I my self was also a Courtier in the Court of Princes, it
stood me upon many times rather to trouble the masters, then to pray the
servants. If perhaps for penance of his sins) the suter show himself
importunate in his affairs, and that he presume to daresay to him some nipping
or vnpleasa^t word, let him be well assured, he will not be revenged on him,
to hurt him with sword or lance: but only in holding back his pen, to delay
him in his dispatch: For I remember, that once being but a poor priest, I was
entreted by the Procter of a Province to say him a dozen of Masses for a great
Noble Man, and in great favor and estimation in the Court, that had his matter
in his hands, and he Conjured me very earnestly, that I should not lay them
for the health and salvation of his soul, but only that GOD would inspire
him, and put into his mind to dispatche him quickly of his business. Therefore
as we have spoken of the one, it is reason we should also speak of the other.

And therefore I say, that there are some of these Officers and Clerks of
Judges, Magistrates, Counselors, Secretaries, Treasurers, Marshals, Fouriers,
and other Officers also of the Court, that are so wise, and men of such honesty
and civility, that the discourtesies and wrongs sometimes their Lords and
Masters do unto us: they do the best they can either to take them from us
quite, or at the least to lessen or diminish them. For the contrary also,
others there are so proud and shameless, such tatlers, and vile persons, and so
unconscionable with all: of whom, as it is a great pleasure for us to see that
they write, and to hear that they can speak so well, and promise so
liberally, only to win your money, and to pick your purse: so it is a great
spite to us, and more shame and reproach, and infamy for them, when
afterward we see the contrary effects of their fair words, and fained
promises, wherewith they seed us continually.

And adding thereto also, we see many times that such a young Courtier, in
less then four years that he has remained in service with a Noble man, or
other officer of the Kings in the Court, has gotten by his practice and
policy a fair moile of great price: with her harness all guilt, his coffers
well filled, his tent for the field, with a field bed and other furniture to
it, his carpets on his Table, his cloths of Tapestrie over his doors, his gowns
richly furred for the Winter, and those of Satin and Damask, and Taffeta for
the Summer: and yet notwithstanding all this glory, he may possible keep a
Curtezan for his pleasure, and maintain her.

All which things considered, and put together, is impossible he should do it
by the gains of his pen, or service, but only by dishonest means, and
robbing of his Master. I saw once in my presence a poor Suter, offer the
Clerk of a Secretary, eight Rials of silver for to dispatch him of his suit,
and he refused them flatly, and would none of them, by no means,
notwithstanding, the poor man turned him up the bottom of his purse, and
showed him that he had but only four Rials left to bring him home withal: So
the poor man came to me, and entreated me for to speak to this Clerk for
him, to persuade The intolerable exaction of a Secretaries Clerk.
him to take his money he offered him, and to dispatch him since he had no more
lest then he showed him. And I did so: And this worshipful Clerk made me
this dishonest answer.

Sir, beholdmy face and complexion, and you shall find that it is all of
golde' and not of silver. For I swear to you, by our blessed Lady of Lancet,
that it is more then two years that I received for my pains no other but
gold, and not silver laid in my hands.

It cannot be but that servant, that vaunts himself to have a face of gold,
will one day put his Masters face in the mire.

Now albeit we see the Kings officers, and others peradventure under them, to
ride on their nags with their foot clothes, to be brave in apparel, to be
rich in Jewels, and happily to have a hundred Crowns in his purse, we should
not marvel of it at all: but if we have cause to think any thing ill in
them: it is for that many times they play away more money fondly, then would
serve any other man to spend in all his necessaries.

That officer or Clerk that has not above a hundred Crowns in his purse, and
that in a night plaieth away two hundred crowns, what judgment shall a man
give of him? but that either he deceyueth others in his office or he steals
and pilfreth from his master or Lord, or else he exacteth upon the poor Suitors
and racks them with all extremity, without conscience and honesty, and that he
will have it on them, even with plain brawling? Yea and though these good
fellows be liberal in play (as you have heard) yet I warrant you they are
not spare of diet neither, but if they call their friends at a time to their
table in the Hall, or else bid their Curtezan to some Garden, you may be
assured they want no dainty meats, nor delicate wines to please their liking
lust: yea peradventure with more copy, and better meat and drink then their
Masters or lords have any.

Here could I mate them with like companions to themselves, that merchants
prentizes, which for their lavish expense, their excessive play, their lusty
banqueting and feasting, otherwhile their secret friends in gardens, and
blind tauernes, come not behind them at all in delicacy of fare, and in
sumptuous expense, but rather go before, and leave them far behind.

And how think you, can these foul riots be borne by any likelyhoode of the
prentices own ability? Nay sure, of the Masters cost (as best able) whose
purse paieth for the good cheer, though he good man fare at home but thinly.

But well, since it touches not our matter, I will return again where I
left. All these things notwithstanding, they are dishonest, they are sometimes
tolleruble, and to be borne, so that with these faults they would be diligent
to dispatch men, and easily to talk withal.

But alas, for pity, we see that for all these complaints they hear, and for
all the requests and entreaty, that may be made to them, they will never take
pen in hand before the poor suitor take his hand out of his purse, that they
may feel him a little.

We have spoken all these things to admonish, remember, and beseech the
favored of the Prince, and other their officers, that neither themselves nor
their servants under them, be long and slow in dispatching such things as they
have charge, and chiefly of poor and miserable Suitors. For if we consider the
qualities and conditions of men, We see that to many Suitors it were less
detriment and more profit, to be answered quickly (though they were denied)
then dispatched slowly (as to have it granted) to their great charge and long
trouble: Truly, me thinks it is a great secret of God to know, why all those
that are Suitors in the Court of Princes, and those also whom we sue to are
all mortal. And all the Suites that we labor for, seem, yea, to say more
truly, are immortal.

And hereof we see a daily experience, that the Suitors dye, and their Some
suitors dye, but their suites never have end.
suites live for ever, being never determined. O excellent Art, and fine device
of suite, that Courtiers are wont to use, that are grateful to Princes, as for
familiar example.

They find a way to put in a thousand manner of lets to hinder and delay the
suits, because that when by tract of time, they have more then half despayred
the hopeless Suitors: they then to revive them again, and to make their
honor seem the greater, dispatch them even in a moment, without let or delay,
and to the suitors whole contentation. It is good reason the Noble Prince have
a regard of the things he gives, and to whom they grant them: and likewise
of the Time and place. For, in receiving favor for a good turn, at the
Princes hand, they sometimes make more account and estimate of the Liberality,
and bountiful mind of the Prince, then they will do of the gifts themselves.

Sure it is a good thing, and laudable, for those that are continually about
the person of the Prince, that they be easy to be spoken withal, pacient to
hear, wise in aunswering, of good fame in their life, and ready to The
favored of the court ought to be easily spoken with.
dispatch and do good.

For being otherwise, they may be well assured they shall show the mark and
white for their enemies to shoot their piercing shafte at, and shall give the
Suitors also occasion to complain and speak ill of them.

And therefore to cut them short, I give them this counsel, that in those
things they are besought, that they be not too hard to be entreated: and in
that they are requested, that they be never too strange, nor drawing back,
much less covetous: and in those things that are given them, they be never
unthankful: and with those that they are daily conversant, that they be very
well advised and considered: and those things whereof they are advertised,
that they endeavor themselves to keep it in mind and memory, and never to
forget it. And if they shall do otherwise, let them assure themselves, and trust
unto it, that if they in time of suite shall shut the doors against the poor
suitors, that the common people also will never open their hearts once to serve
or love them: Princes servants should so govern themselves, that though there
were found some ill persons that despised them, for that they might do much,
and were of great authority: yet that there might be many others also honest,
that should praise and commend them for the great good they do.

That man that is envied, dispraysed, defamed, disloued, and all thought of of
all, should think it lesser ill to die honestly, the^ to live with shame and
in disgrace of every man: For to say truly, me thinks no man could live a
more bitter and hard life, although he abode many sorrows, then to see him
disliked generally of the common weal.

It is an honest and natural thing for men to endeavor themselves by all
diligence and industry to get much but it should be far better, and much
more worth, to procure themselves good will: For in effect, nothing does more
satisfy and glad the heart, and makes it more quiet, then to think that he
is beloved, and well accepted of all.

It is a most certain Rule, that the foes and enemies of the favored
Courtiers, never join in friendship with others, but with those whom they
know to be full of passions and quarrels like themselves.

Of which detractors, if any one happen at times to go to the house of the
honored of the Court, upon any occasion of suite, and that they cannot
presently speak with them: they will not say, I warrant you that he was busy,
and could not speak with him, but that he was so proud, and so haughty, that
he would not once hear nor see them.

We are so willing and forward in wishing well, and so selfe-willed and
obstinate in hating, that upon a light occasion many times we do love those
we love, and with as much less occasion we defame and speak il of those we
hate. Therefore the favored of Princes shall do great service to GOD, and much
profit to the Commonweal, if they give order to dispatch all Suitors (high or
low) speedily: Since it is to the King only that they impute the denial of
their Suits, but for the delays and prolongation of them, that only they lay
to the charge of the Favorites, and beloved of Princes.

And those that are great with the Prince, may not excuse themselves, by reason
of the numbers of matters they have in their hands, For if he be alone, and
that it lie in his hands only to dispatch all, and that he is not able to
satisfy them all, it cannot be but that some one of his Friends will
advertise the King that he cannot do all: and how the people complain, and
the poore-Suters find themselves agrieued: which purchase him great enemies
and yll-willers, by reason the Commonwealth is so altered.

So that he shall not tarry long, but the Prince understanding of these
complaints, will join a companyon with him, to ease him of some part of his
pains. And therefore the Noble princes and great Personages, should admonish,
and warn the Officers well, (whom they take to dispatch matters) that they be
wise and Learned men, virtuous, and of good life: and that they be not too
partial in their doings, nor too sharp and rough in their aunswers. For many
times there happen more Troubles, and sinister vnlooked-for-chaunces, to
Princes, and Noble-personages, for the discourteous languages of their Officers
and deputies, etc: then for any evils that they themselves do commit.

And therefore those that are in favor and Authority with the Prince, What
persons should be chosen for governors.
must of necessity foresee, to choose under them such persons, to whom they
give the care and charge of their affairs and businesses, to dispatch men's
matters and Suits, that they be liberal of condition, pleasant in their
conversation, courteous in aunswers, true in their wrytinges, easy and diligent
in their dispatches, very honest and modest in that they give or take: and
sincere and perfect in all their other virtues, if it be possible.

So that they may ever be more careful to get Friends for their Lord and
Master, then money. For, like as the life of the master of the Ship
consists, and depends in the only guiding and judgment of the skillful
Pylote, and the conscience of the Judge in his Constitute, the goods of the
Merchant in the just dealings of his Factor, and the victory of the Noble
Prince, in his valiant Captain: Even so likewise does the honor of the
favored consist in those he has chosen officers under him for the dispatch
of men's affairs.

And although the servant of the beloved be no partaker with his Master of his
favor with the Prince, yet he is a coadiutor to him, to support his credit
and favor, and many times also a ready mean utterly to undo his Master, and
to dishonor him for ever.

The like watch and care the good Bishop has over his flock, for to preach
unto them the Gospel of Jesus Christ: the self same ought the magistrates and
higher powers have to their Officers that are under them, in taking heed they
be not slow and negligent in dispatching such business as as they have in
charge, that they be not dishonest of life, presumptuous in demanding, and
false in their writing: for the least of these faults suffices utterly to
undo the Servant, and also to defame the master.

And therefore so soon as the beloved of the Court have any suspicion in the
World, or inckling, be it never so little, that his Servant is grown to be
proud, dishonest, and of a naughty conscience, he ought not only immediately
to correct him for it: but to put him out of his service forthwith, and to
turn his coat over his ears. Otherwise they will murmur so much at the
servant that does all these faults, as at the Master that will not see them,
and suffers them. Therefore the reputed of Court, must first see, and peruse
over the writings and doings of their servants and Secretaries, before they
dispatch them out of their hands and to moderate their gain with reason that
is due to them.

Otherwise their enemies might justly say, that they keep not such under them,
to dispatch poor men that sue to their Masters, but rather to spoil and rob
them.

And therefore they were better to augment their wages they give those officers
and servants, then to consent or dissemble with their theft: For so doing, the
servant can never rise in wealth, but the Master must needs diminish in honor.

It may happen many times, that the esteemed of the Court shall be so occupied
in the affayrs of the Common weal, that he cannot though he would give audience
to the Suitors.

But when they are thus occupied that they cannot in deed, they must then
command their servants and officers, that they courteously entreat them, and
hear them, and not check or rebuke them, and call them importunate suitors:
For it is no reason, that for dispatch of their business, the poor souls
should be laden with injurious words.

CHAP. XIII. That the beloved of the Court beware they be not proud and high
minded: for lightly they never fall but through this wicked vice.
We read that Rhehoboam succeeded his Father in 12 realms that were his,
although they were but small realms, who being requested and exhorted by the
grave The cruelty of Rhehoboam, and his punishment.
aged men of his Realm, to be courteous and temperate, and not greedy, nor
auaricious in recovering the tributes and subsidies the other Realms gave him,
and to be merciful, and pitiful in punishing the offenses committed,
answered them thus.

My Father beat you only with simple whippes, but I will not scourge you with
whippes, but plague you with Scorpions: for my little finger is greater then
was his whole arm.

Which happened very ill to him, that for to chastise the proud and arrogant
words he spoke to them, and to punish him for his wicked doings and enormities
committed, they afterward revolted against him, and took from him eleven of
his Realms and all his friends forsook him: so that as he augmented in
greatness of his fingers, he diminished as much in his Realms and riches.

So great was the pride likewise of King Pharaoh, that not contented that God
had pardoned him his sins, and with the ten plagues he had sent him, did yet
notwithstanding resist and pursue the people of Israel.

Wherefor the sea that was made a plain passage and high way, for the
safeguard of the children of Israel his enemies, was prepared a sepulture for
him and his.

Pompey the Great also being in Asia, when it was told him that he should levy
his power, and prepare his men to be in readiness to resist the battle that
Julius Caesar came to give him, with a great fury he stamped his foot upon the
ground, and proudly spoke these words.

Next to the Gods I fear no man, no not all mortal men, although they all
were bent against me, my power being so great, that I am able to destroy
Julius Caesar, and all his power coming against me: And not only the Realms
of Asia shall fight for Pride was the overthrow of Pompey, and many other
Princes.
me, but also I will command the ground that I tread on to rise against him.

But what was the fatal end of Pompeyes pride? His Captains lost the battle,
his children their Realms and Seigniories, and he in fine his head, Rome her
Liberty, and his friends their lives.

The Emperor Domitian also was so vicious in his doings, and so proud in his
thoughts, that he openly commanded the Governors and Magistrates of his
Realm in all their Edicts and proclamations to say these words:

Domitian, our God, and our Prince, commands that this thing be done: But
lo the final end of his pride, in taking upon him the name of a god, by
consent and counsel of his wicked wife Domitia, he had seven deadly wounds
given him in his bed with a dagger. And thus woefully he ended his glorious
life.

Plutarch also recounteth that king Demetrius was the proudest Prince that ever
reigned; For he was not contented to see himself served of all men like a
great and mighty Prince, as he was, but he made them also honor him as a god,
And he would not suffer any strange Ambassadors to come into his presence,
but they should be apparrelled like Priests.

Haman was also very familiar with the King Assuerus, and although all those of
his Realm did him great service, and that strangers had him in great
veneration, and did honor him maruellously, yet was there a glorious
Mardocheus, that would never do him reverence, nor once put off his cappe to
him: by reason whereof this Haman that was in so great favor commanded a
gybbet of fifty yardes high to be set up for Mardocheus, whom he would have
hanged on that gibbet, to be revenged on him for the injury he had done him:
But the Divine will of God was such, and fortune did permit it, that on the same
Gallows Hamon thought to have put Mardocheus to death, on the self same
himself was hanged.

Themistocles and Aristides were 2. famous men among the Greeks, and because
they were both great Princes and Philosophers, and had in great reputation of
all those that knew them, there was such a secret emulation and ambition
between them, the one to reign over the other, that both aspiring, each to
command other, there followed great disorders and oppressions of the subjects
of their Commonweal.

Wherefore Themistocles moved with pity and compassion of so great a Tirant,
which for their sakes, their Common weal endured, one day in the Market place
before all his people with a loud voice, he spoke these words.

Know you, O you people of Athens, that if you do not lay hands on my
exceeding presumption, and on the over great ambition of Aristides, that our
Gods will be offended, the temples will fall down to the hard foundation, our
treasures will be consumed, our selves destroyed, and our commonweals
brought to utter ruin and decay. Therefore once again, good people, I say,
bridle these our inordinate and unspeakable affections betime, lest the reins
laid in our necks be run too far. O golden words of a Prince, and
worthy eternal fame.

Lucanus also, when he would reprove the pride and presumption of the Roman
Princes said, that Pompey the great could never abide to have any for his
companion or equal with him within Rome: And Julius Caesar also would never
suffer that there should be any greater in the World then himself. And
therefore to discourse a little of this abominable and horrible vice of pride,
we have not without great reason laid before you these approved examples,
before we begin to reprove it: For in all things the examples we show you,
are wont to move us more, then the reasons we seem to tell you of. For that
which I have seen, for that I have read, and for that I have heard say also of
others I am most assured and resolved thereof, that by the only cause of this
wicked sin of pride, proceeds the ruin and utter decay of all our greatest
Pride the ruin and decay of all things.
things and affairs of this life for by all other sins a man may indeed
descend and decline from his degree and state of honor and estimation: but by
this only sin he cannot choose but he must fall down flat to the ground.

They find out the midst and center of the earth, the depth of the sea, and
the highest tops of Riphey Mountains, the end of the great mount Caucasus,
and the beginning of the great flood Nile, and only the little heart of man,
touching desire to rule and command, can never find end.

The insatiable covetousness is such, that it cannot be contented with the
things we have, but only with those we repute of less price: Likewise
Ambition and pride to command, cannot be contained within bounds, but only
by obeying: For never no vice can have end, if he that have it, do not leave
it, and banish it from him.

After Alexander the Great had conquered all Asia, and had subdued the great
India, he was one day reproved of the great Philosopher Anacharses, The speech
of Anacharses the Philosopher to Alexander.
who told him these words. Since thou art now, O Alexander, Lord of the earth,
why do thou weary thy self so much in thy affairs, as no pain seems
troublesome to thee? To whom Alexander answered. Thou have told me many
times, Anacharses, that besides this world, there are also three others. And if
it be so as thou say, how great a reproach and infamy it were to me, that
being three other worlds, I should be Lord but only of one. Therefore I do
daily sacrifice to the Gods, that though they take me out of the life of this
World, yet at least they will not deny me of so glorious a conquest. I
confess that the Scriptures excepted I have no words so rise in memory as
these, whereby may easily be perceived, that for to quiet and to content a
proud and haughty heart, the seigniorie of the whole World is not yet
sufficient, and how ended the pride of this glorious prince? even thus.

He that hoped for to conquer, and to be Lord of three other Worlds, did
not rule this one only above three years. We may boldly say this, and swear
it, and may also plainly prove it, to any that desire to see it, that he
wants both wit and knowledge that takes upon him to be proud and
presumptuous: For the more he looks into himself, and reconsidereth and
considers his state and calling, and what he is, he shall find in him a
thousand occasions, fit to humble him, but never a one only to make him
proud and naughty. How great, rich, mighty, noble and worthy soever the person
be, every time that we happen to see him, and that we have no acquaintance of
him.

And that we desire to know what he is, we do not ask of what Element, of
what Sea, of what Fire, of what Planet, of what Climat, of what Sun, of what
Moon, nor of what air, but only of what Country he is of, and where he was
born: For we are all of the earth, we live in the earth, and in the end we
have to turn into the earth, as to our natural thing.

If the Planets, and the beasts could help us with the Instrument and benefit
of the tongue, they would take from us the occasions of vain glory: For the
stars would say, that they were created in the firmament, the Sun in the
Heavens, the birds in the air, the Salamander in the fire, and the fish in
the water: but only the unhappy man was made of earth, and created in the
earth. So that in that respect, we cannot glory to have other kinsfolk nearer
to us, then are the worms, the flies, and horse-flyes. If a man did consider
well what he were, he would assertaine us that the fire burns him, water drowns
him, the earth wearies him, the air troubles him, the heat grieves him, the
cold hurtes him, and the day is troublesome to him, the night sorrowful,
hunger and thirst makes him suffer, meat and drink filles him, his enemies
daily follow him, and his friends forget him: So that the time a man has to
live in this wretched world, cannot be counted a life, but rather a long death.

The first day, we see one borne, the self same we may make reckoning that he
begins to dye: and although that person lived amongst us a hundred years
after in this world, we should not say therefore that he lived a long time,
but only that he tarried a great time to dye.

Therefore that person that has his life tied to so many tributes, I cannot
devise, or think with my self why, or wherefore he should be proud. But now
returning again to our purpose, let us say, and exhort the servants and
familiars of Princes, that they take heed they be not proud and
presumptuous. For it seldom happens, that the favored of Kings and Princes
fall out of favor and credit for that they have, or can do much, nor for
that they crave and desire much: but for that they are too bold and presume too
much. For in the Court of Kings and Princes, there is nothing more hurtful and
less profitable, then pride and presumption: For often times the ouerweening of
the Courtier, and the foolish vain pride The favorites of princes ought to
beware of pride.
and reputation, he has of himself, bringes him to be in the Princes
disgrace, and makes the people also to be offended and angry with him: For till
this day we never saw, nor heard tell of any that ever got into the Princes
favor and credit, for that he was proud and high minded, but only for that
he has showed himself an humble, obedient, courteous, loving, and a
faithful servant. I would be of this mind, that the Courtier that sees he
is received into favor in the Princes Court, should ever wax better in
serving well, then grow worse in presuming too much.

And I dare boldly say and affirm that it is a mere point of Folly, by his
pride and rashness to loose all that in one day, that by great good Fortune
he has attained unto in many years.

And though that the Favored Courtyer (subject possible to his Fantastical
humor) be sometimes overcome with choler or carnal desire, drawn with
avarice, and addicted to the gorge, enuironned with envy, plunged in sloth
and ydlenes, or some other vice and imperfection, it shall not skill much,
neither be any great wonder: since all mankind is subject to those passions:
and neither the Prince, nor the Commonweal, will reckon much of that.

For, of all these faults and vices, there can come no greater hurt unto him,
save only that the common people would murmr against him. But his pride and
Peacockes glory once known and espied, every man casts his eyes upon him,
to behold his Princely gate, and curses him, in word and deed.

Therefore let a man be in as great favor as he can devise to be, as worthy,
Noble, Rich, and of as great power and authority as he desires to be: I never
saw any ill in all my life, if with all these virtues he were proud and
high-minded, but in the end he was persecuted of many, and hated and enuyed
of all.

For those that are in greatest favor about the Prince, have secret enemies
enough to hinder their credit, although they do not purchase now, to accuse
them of their pride and presumption. And as we are taught by experience, the
burning coal cannot only be kept alive, except it be covered with the hot
ymbers thereon. I mean, that the favor of the Prince cannot be long
maintained, without good bringing up, and civil manners, gentle
conversation, and Familiarity.

The great men of authority about the Prince, run eftsoons into great and
many dangers: and this happens, because they would not be reproved in any
thing whatsoever they do, much less hear any words that should displease
them, neither can they abide to be told of their faults, much less suffer to
be corrected for them.

Neither do they suffer willingly to be counseled in any thing, be it of
never so great weight and importance, neither would they have any companion
with them, in favor with the Prince: but they desire to be both on the right
hand of the Prince, and on the left: still they only would be the favored of
the prince, and none other: aspyring to govern them, in all their doings, and
to be thought and reputed the sole and only rulers of the affairs of the
prince, and his commonweal, and to be believed in all things of the prince,
and to be obeyed also of the common people.

Those therefore that are continually resident in the Courts of princes, and
that have the chiefest rooms and Offices in the Court, let them well consider,
and keep in memory this one word, which I will tell them: And that is this as
follows*

That the first day they take upon them to be superintendents and governors
of the Commonweal, even in the selfsame day they shall put in hazard their
honor, favor, and credit, how great soever they be. For, with great
difficulty are the least things the prince himself comandeth, executed or done
in his Realm, or Commonweal: and therefore may the favored of the Court see,
how much more hard it is for him to rule, (as sole and absolute Lord) the
affairs of the Realm, and to be obeyed in the Commonweal: since the King
himself cannot do it, by his Regal authority.

And therefore the less he shall desire to meddle with the affairs of the
people, the more shall he live in quiet and contented: For naturally the common
people are so unstable, and uncertain in their doings, unthankful of
benefits received, and so ungrateful of a good turn done them: that the
beloved of the Court, or any other person in favor with the Prince can never
do any thing for the people (be it never so well) but they will speak ill,
and mislike of him, and find fault with some of his doings.

It is impossible that those, that will command many things in the Court of
Princes should always do their things so, but they should sometime tread awry.

And admit their faults be but light, and of small moment, yet they may be
assured there will be enough that will both open them to the common weal, and
tell them also secretly to the Prince alone.

For those that seek to divorce the favored of the Court from the Prince, do
not complain or find fault for that they are more in favor with the Prince
then others, but they will show they take it in ill part, they have more
authority and command then others in the Commonweal: Saying, that by mean
of their place and authority, and under color of good zeal, to minister
justice, they give commonly foul and injurious words, far unfit for the
authority of the person, and worthiness of the place: so that it cannot be
otherwise chosen, but that continuing this disorder, they must needs make the
king suspect them, and besides that bring a discord betwixt the king and those
that he favors, and make him maruellously offended with them: For in the
end, Princes would always be served, and obeyed, but not ruled and commanded.
And it is a most true saying. Overmuch familiarity breeds contempt. which
although it may be borne, between men of like degree: and coequalitie, yet is
it not tolerable, between the prince and the favored of the Prince. But rather
every day, hour, moment, that the Favored Courtyer enters into the Princes
palace, or into his priuy-chamber, he ought ever to do it with as great
courtesy, reverence, humility, and honor, and in speaking to the King, as if
he had never spoken with him, nor seen him.

So that he should let all men see, that though it please the Kings Majesty to
make of him, and to accept him into his favor, yet that he leave not to serve
him, and do him that duty that all other servants do, and are bound to do.

The safest and most certain way to maintain those that are sublimated, and
exalted in the Courts of Princes, and to raise up and bring those to
aucthority that are low and of base condition, is: that the esteemed repute
himself ever a Servant, and that the servant never vaunt nor boast himself to
be favored or esteemed.

The familiars of Princes ought ever to beware that there come no complaints
The favorites of princes ought to beware of complaints.
of them to the Princes care: For, as a drop of Water, by Time and continual
Fall, comes to pierce the hardest stone: so it might happen that the numbers
of complaints might be occasion for the prince to withdraw his favor and love
from the Courtier again. If his only services were sufficient to induce the
Prince to favor and love him: so the number of his subjects complaints against
him, were occasion enough to make him mislike him, and and put him out of favor
clean, changing his love and favor, to hate and discredit. For it is a
certain thing, that when the Prince does look well into his own doings, he
had rather be be loved of all, then served of one alone.

The honored Favorite of the Court may not so much regard the honor and
credit he is called to by his prince as the baseness and poverty he was in,
when it pleased the king to like of him and that he came first acquainted with
the King.

For, if he did otherwise, it might so happen, that like as Fortune had brought
him to that high estate he had: So Pride might overthrow him again, and bring
him as low as he was before: For, I should have said more truly a great
deal, saying: That it would have made him fall down right: being the
property of Fortune, to suffer the baser sort (whom she has caled to honor)
only to return them to their mean estate and calling, they were of at first,
and never to leave the favored of the Prince, and men of authority (nor never
satisfied) till she has thrown them down headlong into extreme misery,
never to rise again.

Agathocles (first the son of a Potter, and afterward made king of Scicilia)
whilst he lived, he ever used this manner, that in his treasury or jewel
house, yea, and also at his Table, amongst all his cups and dishes of gold and
silver, he had also some of Earth amongst them: and being asked the occasion,
why in so great a Treasury and mass of gold and silver, he had so vile and
base a thing as Earth?

He answered thus.

I drink in golden cups, and eat in Earthen dyshes, to give thanks unto the
Gods, which of a Potters-sonne that I was, brought me to this Royal estate of
A worthy speech of Agathocles K: of Scicilia.
a mighty King. And I do it also, to have ever more cause to be humble and
lowly, and to fly Pride. For, it is an easier thing, and more likelyer, for a
king to become a Potter, then for a Potter to attain to the greatness and state
of a king These words of Agathocles were ever worthy to be noted and had in
^^nory, since we see plainly that to give a man a fall, a little stone
suffices to make us stumble, and fall to the ground, but to raise us up
again, we must needs help us with power of hands and feet. It may well be,
that this brave Courtier and favored of the Court, before he came to this
degree of honor, was but of a mean house, and b^fuly borne: and besides that
esteemed of few, for his nobility of blood: of an unknown Country, of poor
parents, of small substance, and no better nor otherwise favored of fortune in
his birth or lineage: of all which things he has no cause to be ashamed, but
rather to glory, and praise God: For he shall ever be more esteemed in the
Court, and well thought of, to remember from whence he came, and to regard his
first estate: then he shall, if he wax glorious, and high minded, by reason
of the favor he is at this present, utterly forgetting his first rising.

Titus Liuius recites, that the renowned Roman Quintus Cincinnatus, before he
came to be made Captain of Rome, he was taken out of the fields a laboring
man, plowing and tilling the ground. And this so noble a person being occupied
in great affairs of the common weal, either in provisions, or munitions, or
in expeditions of war, was wont to sigh before all the Captains and say:
Alas, who could tell me now any news how my Beefes do in my graunge, my
sheep in the mountains, and whether my servants have provided them of Hay
and Pasture for to keep them the next year.

Surely it is to be thought, that whosoever speaks these words with his
mouth, must needs have little pride in his heart.

And undoubtedly he proved his words true, and showed, that he spoke as he
thought and in good earnest without intent of jest: since afterward returned
home again to follow the plough, to plant his vines, and to see his own
things governed, leaving behind him a perpetual testimony of his noble and
worthy doings. And his common Weal also greatly enriched by his famous acts.

Saul was King of Israel, and taken fot a God, and was anointed of Samuel, his
Father a poor husbandman of the Country, and he from his youth brought up in
that trade, for to hold the plough, and yet when he was King, he never
disdayned for to plough his ground, to sow his oats, and to drive his beasts,
now to pasture then home again: So that the good King did glory this day to
hold the plough, and to morrow to fight with his sword.

When Fortune therefore shows her self enemy to any, and that from great
dignity and high calling, she overthrows him, and brings him to low and
mean estate: It is then that he has good cause to complain of fortunes
cruelty, and to bewail his wretched hap, ashamed to see his loathsome misery.
But when she works contrarily, and from mean estate brings him to great
honor and credit, that must needs be great honor and glory to him. Therefore
I say, let them beware that bear rule and authority in the Court, that they be
not proud, glorious and high minded, neither otherwise detected of any kind of
vice, though they be never so much in favor and estimation. Since Fortune
shows most her spite against the proud and disdainefull heart, rather then
to the humble and meek.

To stop the enemies mouth, there can be found no better means, then for the
beloved of the Court not to be proud and presumptuous, since no man is found
so mad or Foolish in the same, as once to dare to say, I accuse this man,
because he is in favor and estimation: but he may boldly do it, when he
sees indeed that he is a proud vainglorious fool.

If we see the favored of the Court offended with one another, we will say,
It is but heat, if we see him eat too much, we will say, it is but of a
good stomach. If he rise late, we will excuse him, and say, It was late ere he
went to bed, and that he was weary with watching. If he play often, we will
say, he does it for pastime: if he be careful in keeping that he has
together, that he is wi^^ and pollitike: If he speak much, that he is a
pleasant man, and given to be merry: If he speak little, that he is wise and
modest: If he spend much, that he is liberal and bountiful: but if he be
glorious and proud, what shall a man say on him, and with what honest means
Pride of all other faults inexcusable
can we excuse him? Surely let others look. For I know not.

Truly, for all other faults and errors of men, they may honestly be excused,
save only that of pride. For, though many times we commit other offenses, it
is but through frailty: but if we offend in Pride, it comes of a great folly,
and want of discretion.

And for the contrary, the lowly and courteous condition of Courtyers, do not
only depresse and refist the detractions and murmurings of their Enemies, but
does enforce them against their wills to say well of them. For, GOD does
suffer many times, that the perverse Nature and condition of one, is subdued
and overcome by the good and gentle usage of another.

Therefore the beloved of the Court should take great heed that they show not
themselves proud in their words, and much less in their ceremony o^, which
they use in Court: as in going up the stayres, in entering in at the doors, in
taking the stool to sit down, and also in the putting off his Cap, etc. And
though perhaps he that shall read these our aduertisementes, will think
them rather precepts for Children, then for men: yet I will answer him
nevertheless, that they are very necessary for those that are in favor in
the Court, and for all other Courtiers, without the use of which he may happily
nourish a venernous serpent in his breast.

And therefore not without great reason we have spoken that we have, that of
too little heed taking, sometimes there may follow great trouble to the
favored Courtier. For many times they murmur more against him, in not putting
off his Cappe; when he is courteously saluted, then they do, if they deny
their favor, when they are requested.

If one Courtier leave to do, courtesy to another, they say he does it not,
for that he bears him ill will, but for want of bringing up But if he be
great with the King, then they say it is not for want of good manners, but for
that he is too proud.

To say truly, it is an unhappy life, the life of the beloved in the Court,
since they attribute all their faults and errors to folly, although they
committed them rather through negligence, and want of foresight, then of
pretended malice, or ill will, as it is taken and thought.

Gneus Flacous a Noble Roman, going in company with other Romans to visit a
sick man, and coming also to an other Roman to see the same sick person
likewise, and being no place commodious in the Chamber, where the last might
sit down, neither any stool left to sit down upon: they say, he rose off
from his stool, and gave him place that came last.

The which humanity and courtesy was afterward published among all the
Romans, and after also greatly praised of the Writers.

And the Romans also, being uery true, grave, curious, and worthy of great
faith and credit in all that they wrote, it is to be credited, that that act
of courtesy was much noted and esteemed, since they would write it in the most
noble and Heroical acts of their Commonweal.

When the favored Courtier is accompanied with Knights and Gentlemen of the
Court, that brings him to the Court, and it happens any to go up the degrees
before him, he should not pass for that, much less show any token that he
made any rockning of it.

For to say the truth, it is no great matter for him to go up before him on
the degrees of stoue, since he went before al, on the degrees of favor. What
matter is it to the favored or Officer of the Court, to see an other enter in
at the stayre door before him, if afterward when they shall come where the
King is, he shall go into the Privy Chamber, at one that indeed is in favor
and beloved, and the other shall stand without like a sheep?

And to conclude, I say, if I were in the number of those that are thus
beloved, and favored of the King: I would in the Kings Chamber use my favor
and credit, and abroad, all courtesy and ciuility.

CHAP. XIIII. That it is not fit for Courtiers to be too covetous, if they
mean to keep themselves out of many troubles and dangers.
AVlus Gelius, and Pliny render true testimony in their writings, that the
honesty of the Romans was so great in their eating, and their modesty in their
maintayning of themselves such, that they did not suffer any Roman Citizen to
have more houses then one to dwell in, nor but one gown to put on his back,
one horse to ride upon, nor above two yoke of oxen to till his land, Titus
Liuius, Macrobius, Cicero, Plutarch, Salust, Lucan, Seneca, Aulus Gelius,
Herodian, Eutropius, Trebellius, Vulpitius, and all the other Roman Writers,
do never cease to praise the ancient Roman poverty, saying the Commonwealth
of Rome, never lost one jot of her greatness and honor, during the time that
they went abroad to conquer other Realms and Dominions: but only since they
began to gather treasure together.

Lycurgus the Philosopher, who The laws of Lycurgus, King of the Lacedaemonians.
afterward was King of the Lacedaemonians) ordained in his Laws he made, that
no neighbor should have any more goods then an other, but that all houses,
lands, vines, and possessions, gold, silver, apparel, moueables, and
generally of all other things whatsoever, should be indifferently holden among
them to the common vtility of all.

And being asked, why he would not consent that the Common weal should have
her own private commodities and particulars, answered thus:

The pains and travels men endure in this mortal life, and the great
troubles and disorders that come daily to the Common weal, chance not so much
for that men have need of living to maintain themselves with all, but for
that they do desire to leave their heirs and successors. And therefore I have
appointed every thing in common among subjects, because that during their lives
they might have honestly to maintain themselves withal, and that they should
not leauy any thing to dispose by will after their deaths.

Herodotus says also, that it was decreede by the Inhabitants of the Isles
Baleares, that they should suffer none to come into their Country to bring them
any gold, silver, Jewels, or precious stones. And this served them to great
profit: For by means of this Law, for the space of four hundred years that
they had great wars with the Romans, the Carthagenians, the French, and the
Spaniards, never any of these Nations once stirred to go about to conquer
their land, being assured that they had neither gold nor silver, to rob, or
convey from them.

Promotheus that was the first that gave Laws to the Egyptians, did not
prohibit gold nor silver in Egypt (as those of the Isles Baleares did in
their territories) neither did he also command that all things should be
common, as Licurgus: but also commanded, that none in all his Kingdom should
be so hardy once to gather any mass or quantity of gold or silver together,
and to hoord it up. And this he did upon great penalties: for as he said,
Avarice is not showed in building of fair houses, neither in having rich
moueables, but in assembling and gathring together great treasure, and laying
it up in their coffers.

And Plutarch in his book, De Consolatione, says also, That if a rich man
dyed among the Rhodians, leaving behind him one only son, and no more
suruiuing him, they would not suffer that he should be sole heir of all that
his Father left: but they left him an honest heritage, and living, to his state
and calling, and to marry him well withal, and the rest of all his Fathers
goods they dissipated among the poor and Orphans,

The Lydians, that neither were Greeks nor Romans, but right barbarous
people, had a law in their common weal, that every man should be bound to
bring up his children, but not to be at charges in bestowing the^ in marriage:
So that the son or daughter that was now of age to marry, they gave them
nothing to their marriage, more then they had gotten with their labor.

And those that will exactly consider this laudable custom, shall find that
it is rather a Law of true Philosophers, then a custom of barbarous people:
Since thereby the children were enforced to labor for their living, and the
parents also were exemted from all manner of covetousness or avarice, to heap
up gold and silver and to enrich themselves.

Numa Pompilius second King of the Romans, and establisher of their Laws and
decrees, in the law of the seven Tables which he made, he left them order
only, which way the Romans might rule their Commonweal in tranquillity, and
put in no clause nor chapter that they should make their wills, whereby their
children might inherit their fathers goods. And therefore being asked why he
permitted (in his laws) every man to get as much goods as he could, and not to
dispose them by will, nor leave them to their heirs: He answered, because we
see, that albeit there are some children that are unhappy, vicious, and
abominable, yet are there few fathers, notwithstanding this, that will deprive
and disinherite them of their goods at their death, only to leave them to any
other here? and therefore for this cause I have commanded that all the goods
that remain after the death of the owner of them, should be given to the
Commonweal, as sole heir and successor of them: to the end that if their
children should become honest and virtuous, they should then be distributed to
them: if they were wicked and unhappy, that they should never be owners of
them, to hurt, and offend the good.

Macrobius in his book De somno Scipionis says, that there was in the old
time, an old and ancient Law amongst A Law amongst the Tuscans, worthy to be
observed.
the Tuscans duly observed, and kept, and afterward taken up of the Romans,
that in every place, where soever it were (in town or village) within their
territories, on newyeares day, every man should present himself before the
Judge or Magistrate of the place he was in, for to give him account of his
manner of life, and how he maintained himself, and in these examinations they
did accustom to punish him that lived idely, and with knavery and deceit
maintained themselves, as Minstrels, Ruffians, Dicers, Carders, Iuglers,
Coggers, Foyster, Coseners of men, and filching knaves, with other loytering
vagabonds and rogues, that live of others swet and toil, without any pain or
labor, they take upon them to deserve that they eat.

I would to God (if it were his will) that this Tuscan Law were observed of
Christians, then we should see how few they be in number, that give them selves
to any faculty or science, or other trade, to live by their own travel and
industry: and how many and infinite a number they be that live in idle sort.

The divine Plato in his Timee says, that although an idle man be more
occasion of many troubles and inconveniences in a Commonweal, then a covetous
man, yet is it not always greater: for the idle man, and that gladly takes
his ease, does but desire to have to eat: but the covetous man does not only
desire to eat but to be rich and have money enough.

All the eloquence and pleasant speech that the Orators studied in their
Orations, the Lawyers in their Law, and the famous Philosophers in their
doctrine and teaching, was for no other cause, but to admonish and persuade
those of the Commonweal, to take very good heed in choosing of their
governors, that they were not covetous and ambitious, in the administration of
their public affairs.

Laertius recites also, that a Rhodian jesting with Eschines the Philosopher,
said unto him.

By the immortal Gods, I swear to thee, O Eschines, that I pity thee to see
thee so poor, to whom, he answered, By the same immortal Gods I swear to
thee again, I have compassion on thee, to see thee so rich. Since riches bring
but pain and trouble to get them, great care to keep them, displeasur to
spend them, peril to hoorde them, and occasion of great dangers, and
inconveniences to defend them: and that that grieueth me most, is, that where
thou keep thy treasure fast locked up, there also thy heart is buried.

Surely Eschines words seemed rather spoken of a Christian, then of a
Philosopher. In saying, that where a man's treasure is, there is also his heart:
For there is no covetous man, but daily he thinks upon his hid treasure,
but he never calls to mind his sins he has committed.

Comparing therefore those things we have spoken, with those things we will
speak: I say, that it becomes the favored of Princes to know that it is
less seemly for them to be covetous then others: For the greatness of their
favor ought not to be showed only in being rich, but also in being noble and
worthy.

Plutarch shows, that Denis the Siracusian coming one day into the Chamber
of the Prince his son, and finding great riches of gold and silver that he
had given him, he spoke very angerly to him and said: Thou have been far
fitter for a Merchant of Capua, then to be as thou art the Kings son of
Scicilia, since thou have a wit to gather, but not to spend. Which is not
fit nor lawful for thee, if thou will succeed me after my time in my
Kingdom.

And therefore I do remember thee, that Kingdoms and high estates are not
maintained with keeping of riches, but also with giving and honorably bestowing
them well.

And to this purpose also recites Plutarch, that Ptholomeus Philodelphus A
worthy saying of Plutarch.
was demanded why he was so slow, and with so great difficulty received the
services of others, and was so liberal, and noble in giving, and granting
favors: he answered, I will not get reputation amongst the gods, nor good
renown amongst men for being rich, but only I will be praised and esteemed
for making of others rich, and having under me rich subjects.

These words that Ptholome said to a friend of his, and those that Denis spoke
to his son: me thinks the beloved of the Court should not only be
contented to read them, but to seek to keep them still in mind: since by
them we may manifestly see, that Riches are evermore profitable for a man that
owes them, and gives them bountifully: then to have them, and with
covetousness to hoord and lock them up in their Coffers: And the favored of
Princes should not be envied, for the goods that they can get by their favor
and credit, but only for the good that thereby they may do to their friends
and Kinsfolks.

For they are those that with others goods, make the people slaves unto them.
What greater Nobility can there be in this world, then to make others noble?
What greater riches then to make others rich? and what more liberty then to
make others free? The glory that the Princes, and those that they esteem, and
have in their favor ought to have, should not consist in getting together much
goods, but in winning many servants, and friends.

Great are the privileges that the noble and liberal men have, for their
children are obedient unto them, their neighbors love them, their friends do
accompany them, their servant serve them faithfully, strangers visit them,
and the enemies they have dare not speak against them: for although they spite
at their greatness and favor, yet they dare not once presume to rebuke or
reprove their liberality. Phalaris the Agrigentine, Denis the Syracusian,
Cateline the Roman, and Iugurth the Numedian: These four famous tyrants did
not maintain their states and royal kingdoms with the virtues they had, but
only by force and ample gifts they gave:

So that we may well say, that in the world there is no stone so
Philosophical, nor hand so liberal as Treasure and Riches: since that in
giving it, good-men become great, and Tirants thereby are supported.

I would those that are Princes Familiars would note well this word, that is,
that great Favor joined with much covetousness, is a thing impossible to
continue long in any. For, if he mean to keep himself in favor, he must
needs fly Avarice: and if he will He that will be a Courtyer must shun
covetousness.
needs stick to Avarice, he must of necessity loose his Favor. There is no
better means for him that seeks the Princes Favor, to get into favor, then
to serve him diligently, and to trouble him but seldom.

The Kings Officer that serves him in his house, must endeavor to make the
King know that he serves him more for the Love he bears him, then for any
gain or profit he hops at his hands. For, in so doing, the King will not
only with his favor and benefits bestowed on him, treat and handle him as
one he loves, and makes account of, but also love him, as if he were his own
son. It is most just, the beloved of the Prince, love and honor the prince,
with all his heart, since he loves him, and needs not.

Those that are beloved, made of, and favored in Brinces Courts, should make
great account of it, and therefore they should serve willingly. For, the love
we bear to Princes, comes commonly rather of the necessity we have of them,
then of our own proper wills. But the love of Princes to us, comes of mere
good will, and not of necessity.

If any man do accompany me, speak to me, and serve me: it is only in
respect that I ever give him, and for that he hops I will give him in time
to come. And to such a man I might truly say, he rather flattereth, then
loves me. The esteemed of the Court must note, if it please them that though,
the Prince have others about him, whom he favors and loves, as well as
himself, that he be not therefore offended not displeased a whit. For else all
those he sees accepted into favor with the prince, he would make them his
enemies: and because they may avoid this inconvenience, they must take it in
very good part. For albeeit the Prince give his favor to one alone, yet he
imparteth his gifts to diverse.

Those that newly begin to rise in the Court, and to do much: may not even
upon a sudden show themselves to be Rich: but only study daily to A good
caveat for young Courtiors.
increase in favor. For, every time that the Courtyer does assure me he does
not diminish in favor, I will be bound to him he shall never be poor.

The way they must observe in the Court to be great, and to be able to do is
this: That is, to visit often, to suffer, to present, to persevere, to be
beloved, and to continue in the princes favor: Which I assure you, is a great
secret, and right Alchymine of court, suddenly to rise in favor, and to be
rich, and all in short time.

By this I infer that the wise man ever desires to be in favor, before he
covet to be Rich: but the Fool and Idiot desires first to be Rich, and then
in favor last.

Not few but many we have seen in Princes Courts, which though Fortune in
short time has exalted to the first degree of Riches, and made them chief in
favor, yet within short space after, she has made them also loose their
Riches, and fall from the top of their pretended honor and dignity.

It is most certain that if one have enemies in the Court, only for that he
is in favor, he shall have as many me: if being in favor, he be also Rich.
For we are all of so ill a condition, in things that touch our particular
profire, that all that we see given to others, we think suddenly taken away
from our selves.

We have heretofore said, that it is not fit for the Courtyer, and those that
are in favor, to command for his profit all that he list, neither all those
that he may. And we now at this present, do also advise them to take heed,
that they do not accept and take all that is offered and presented, although
they may lawfully do it. For, if he be not wise in commanding, and moderate
in taking, a day might come that he should see himself in such extremity,
that he should be enforced to call his Friends, not to counsel him, but rather
to help and succor him.

It is true, that it is a natural thing for a Courtyer that has twenty crowns
in his purse, to desire suddenly to multiply The covetous desire of some
Courtiers.
it to an 100. from a 100. to 200. from 200. to a 1000. from a thousand to
2000. and from 2000, to an hundred thousand.

So that this poor wretched creature is so blinded in covetousness, that he
knows not, nor feels not, that as this Avarice continually increases and
augmenteth in him, so his life daily diminishes and decreaseth: besides that
that every man mocks and scorns him, that thinks The true contentation
consists in commanding of Money, and in the faculty of possessing much
riches, For to say truly it is not so, but rather disordinate riches troubles
and grieueth the true contentation of men, and awaketh in them daily a more
appetite of Covetousness.

We have seen many Courtiers rich and beloved: but none indeed that ever was
contented, or wearyed with commanding, but rather his life should fail him
then Covetousness. Oh how many have I seen in the Court, whose legs nor feet
have bin able to carry them, nor their body strong enough to stand alone, nor
their hands able to write, nor their sight has served them to see to read,
nor their teeth for to speak, nor their jaws to eat, nor their ears to
hear, nor their memory to travel in any suite or matter, and yet have not
their tongue failed them to require presents and gifts of the Prince, neither
deep and fine wit to practice in Court for his most avail and vantage. So
incurable is the disease and plague of avarice, that he that is sick of that
infirmity, can not be healed neither with poverty, nor yet be remedied with
riches: Since this contagious malady and apparent danger is now so commonly
known, and that it is crepte into Courtiers, and such as are in high favor
and great authority by reason of this vile sin of avarice. I would counsel
him rather to apply himself to be well thought of, and esteemed, then to
endeavor to have enough.

Also Queen Semiramis was wife to king Belius, and mother of king Ninus, and
although by nature she was made a woman, yet had she a heart never otherwise
but valiant and Noble: For after she was widow, she made her self Lord by
force of arms of the great India, and conquered all Asia, and in her life time
caused a goodly tomb to be made, where she would lie after her death, and
about the which she caused to be graven in golden Letters these words.

Who longs to swell with mass of shining gold,
And crave to catch such wealth as few possess, An Epitaph of Queen
Semiramis.

This stately Tomb let him in have unfold,
Where endless heaps of hateful coin do rest.
Many days and kings reigns past before any durst open this Sepulcher,
until the coming of the great Cyrus, who commanded it to be opened. And
being reported to him by those that had the charge to seek the treasure, that
they had sought The covetousnes of King Cyrus rewarded with deceit
to the bottomless pit and Worlds end, but treasure they could find none nor
any other thing, save a stone where in were graven these words.

Ah hapless Knight, whose high distracted mind,
By follies play abused was so much:
That secret tombs the carcass could none bind,
But thou would reaue them up for to be rich.
Plutarch and also Herodotus which have both written this history of Semiramis,
do show and affirm, that Queen Semiramis got great honor by this jest, and
King Cyrus great shame and dishonor.

If Courtiers that are rich, think and believe that for that they have money
enough, and at their will, that therefore they should be far from all
troubles and miseries, they are deceyned: For if the poor soul toil and hale
his body to get him only that he needs, much more does the rich man torment
and burn his heart, till he be resolved which way to spend that superfluity
he has. Jesus, what a thing is it to see a rich man, how be tormenteth
himself night and day, imagining and devising with himself whether he shall
with the money that is left, buy leases, milles, or houser, anuities, vines, or
cloth, lands, teneme^ts or pastures: or some thing in see: or whether he shall
enrich his son with the thirds or fifts: and after all these vain thoughts,
Gods will is, for to strike him with death suddenly, not only before he has
determined how he should lay out or spend this money, but also before he has
made his will.

I have many times told it to my friends, yea, and preached it to them in the
Pulpit, and written it also in my books, that it is far greater trouble to
spend the goods of this world well, and as they ought to be spent, then it is
to get them: For they are gotten with swette, and spent with cares. He that
has no more then he needs, it is he that knows well how to part from
them, and to spend them: but he that has abundance, and more then needful,
does never resolve what he should do.

Whereof follows many times, that those which in his life time were Who
knows who shall enjoy his riches after his death.
enemies to him, shall happen to be heirs after his death of all the goods
and money he has. It is a most sure and certain custom among mortal men,
that commonly those that are rich (while they are alive) spend more money
vainly in things they would not, and that they have no pleasure in, and
wherein they would lest lay it out: and after their death they leave the most
part of their inheritance to those whom they loved least: for it happens many
times that the son which he loves worst, enheriteth his goods, and that
son which he loved best, and made most of, remains poor.

Therefore continuing still our matter, I say, that I know not the cause why the
favored of the Court desire to be so rich, covetous, and insatiable, since
they alone have to get the goods, where afterward to spend them, they have
need of the counsel and advise of many.

Let not those also that are in favor with the Prince, make too great a show
openly of their riches, but if they have abundance, let them keep it secret:
For if their lurking enemies know not what they have, the worst they can do,
they can but murmur: but if they see it once, they will never leave till they
have accused him.

To see a Courtier build sumptuous houses, to furnish them with wonderful and
rich hangings, to use excess and prodigality in their meats, to have their
cupbordes maruellously decked with cups, and pots of gold, and silver, to see
infinite presents brought into his house, and to be greedy of money, and to
have a great train of servants to wait upon them: All these are things not
only to make the^ murmur and repine at, but also when time and place serves
to condemn and accuse them to the Prince. And this were but little to murmur
at them and accuse them: so that they did not defame them, and diminish their
honor and reputation: For they tell it abroad afterward, either that they are
corrupted with presents, or that they do rob and steal from the Prince
their master.

And therefore I return once again to admonish them, and specially the
officer of the Court, that they shall not need, neither is it requisire they
make any ostentation of their riches: if they be wise at least: For besides
that every body will murmur against him, they will not spare to bring it to the
Princes cares quickly, so that by misfortune it might happen to him, that the
King would do that with his servant, that the hunter does often with his beasts
he takes, that many times he cherishes him, and gives him meat to eat,
not to bring him up, but to fat and kill him for his own eating.

CHAP. XV. That the favored of the Court should not trust too much to their
favor, and credit they have, nor to the prosperity of their life. A worthy
Chapter, and full of good doctrine.
WHat reputation Paul the Apostle had amongst the Christians, the like had the
great Cato the Judge, among the Romans, who in the progression of his life,
proceeded so honestly, and in the government of the public weal was so just,
that he deserved that this Epitaph should be written upon his Palace gate.

O Cato great, whose everlasting fame,
Amidst the earth still lives with honor due,
Was never none could thee oppress with shame, An Epitaph of Cato, written
over his gate.

For judgment wrong, whereby the guiltless rule,
Was nere none, durst press to thee with suites,
Or fill thy hands with bribes, or flatter thee,
Whereby thou should not show the worthy fruits
Of justice, zeal, as Judges all should be.
Among all the noble and renowned Romans, he only would never suffer statue
or Image of his, to be set up in the high Capitol. Whereat diverse maruelling,
and imagining diversely what was his meaning, he being one day in the Senate
said to them these words openly.

I will they shall seek the good works I have done, by which I did deserve
that my Image should be erected in the Capitol, then to give the^ cause to go
search and enquire what lineage I was of, what was my life, with intent to pull
down my Image: For it happens many times, that those whom inconstant fortune
from a low estate has raised up to high degree and step of honor, do
become afterward by the same occasion rather defamed, then praised: for there
are many that are reverenced, and honored openly, by reason of their honor
and dignity they have at this present, of whom they make a jesting stock
afterward when they see them fall.

Lucan says, that Pompeius would say many times, when he would speak of
these worldly things: My friends, I can tell you a true thing, whereby you may
know the little occasion we have to trust humane felicities. Example you may
see in me, which attained to the Roman Empire, without any hope I had ever to
come unto it: and afterward also not mistrusting any thing, even suddenly it
was taken from me, and I deprived of it. Lucius Seneca being banished from
Rome, wrote a letter to his mother. Albuina, in which he did both comfort her,
and himself, and wrotte thus. O my dear mother Albuina, I never in all my
life believed or trusted vnstabel Fortune, although there have bin many peaces
and leagues made betwixt her and our house: for if at a time the trayteresse
consented, that for a space I should be quiet, and at rest, she did it not of
good will she had to leave to pursue me, but for to give me a more cloaked
severity: For when she sees we think our selves assured, then with all her
force and fury she gives us the assault, as if she came to assault the
Enemies Camp: And I tell thee further, yet (good mother) that all the good
she wrought in me, and the honor she heaped on me, and all the faculties
and abundance of riches she brought to my house, he told me she gave them
freely, but I always answered her, I did accept in way of impressed, and not of
gift. Her promises therefore she offered me the honor she laid upon me, and
the riches she gave me, she laid them up in such a corner of my house, that
either by day, or by night, she might at her pleasur when she would take them
all from me, without that she should trouble at all therefore my judgment,
or that she should sorrow my heart a whit: And because thou should know how
I did esteem of fortune, I tell thee, that I ever thought it good, never to
let any thing come within me, ^or into my heart, but only near unto me and so
I was contented to esteem it, and to keep it under good safety, ^^^ not that
I therefore applied, and gave all my affection and mind unto it: I was glad to
have fortune my friend, but if I lost her, I was never sorry for her.

Finally, I conclude, that when she came to assault me, and to rob my house,
she might well convey all that was to put in the Arc, but not that she could
ever carry away the least sigh of my heart. They say that K. Philip father of
Alexander the Great, being advertised of three great victories The speech of
Philip K. of Macedonie.
happened in sundry places to his Army, kneeled down on both his knees, and
holding up his hands to the heavens, said, O cruel fortune, O merciful gods I
beseech you most humbly, that after so great a glory and victory as this, you
have hitherto given me: you will moderate your correction, and punishment,
which after this I look for that you will grant me, that you punish me with
pity, and not with utter destruction and ruin. And yet he added this further to
his words.

Not without cause I Conjure thee Oh Fortune, and do beseech you immortal
Gods, that you will punish me favorably, but not to undo me: because I am
assured, that overmuch felicity and prosperity of this life, is no more but a
prediction and presage of a great calamity, and an ill ensuing hap.

Truly all the Examples above recited are worthy to be noted, and to be kept
always before the eyes of our minds, since by them we come to know, that in
the prosperity of this our thrawled life, there is little to hope for, and much
to be afraid of.

It is true we are very frail by nature, since we are borne frail, we live
frail, and daily we fall into a thousand fraylties: but yet notwithstanding
we are not so frail, but we may if we will resist vice.

And all this comes only, because one sort of people follows an other, but
one reason seldom follows another.

If we fall, if we stumble, if we be sick, if we break our face, are we
sure (that serving as we do the world) that the world will recure and remedy
us?

No sure, it is not so. For the remedy the world is wont to give to our
troubles, is ever notwithstanding greater trouble then the first: so that they
are like unto Searing-yrons, that burn the flesh, and heal not the wound.

For the world is full of guile and deceyte, and subtle to deceive, but very
slow to give us remedy. And this we see plainly. For if it persuade us to
revenge any injury received, it does it only in revenging of that, to make us
receive a thousand other injuries.

And if sometimes we think we receive some comfort of the world, of our
pains and troubles of the body, if afterward ouer-lodeth our minds, with a
Sea of thoughts and cogitations. So that this accursed and flattering world
makes us believe, and persuades us the right and perfect way, and in the end
we are cast unawares into the Nets of all wickedness, privily laid to ensnare us.

How great soever a man be in favor with the king, how noble of blood how fine
of wit, and how wary soever he be, let every man be assured that practices
in the world, he shall in the end be deceived by him. For, he costeth us very
dear, and we sell our selves to him good cheap.

I told you but little, to tell you we sold our selves good cheap, for I
should have said better, in saying we have given out selves in preye wholly to
him, without receiving any other recompense. And in deed they are very few,
and rare, that have any reward of him: and infinite are they that serve him,
without any other recompense, more then an idle, foolish, and vaine-hope.

Oh Traiterous World, in how short a time do thou receive us! and
afterward with a glimce of an Eye suddenly do put us from thee: thou
gladdest, and make us sorrowful, The uncertainty of this worlds felicity.
thou call us to honor and abasest us, thou punishest us, and do us a
thousand pleasures.

And finally I say, thou do make us so vile, and poysonest us with thy vile
laborers, that without thee, we are yet ever with thee: and that that grieves
us worst of all is, that having the Thief in the house, we go out of the
house, to give him place, and make him owner. When the world knows one once
that is proud and presumptuous, he procures him honor: to another that is
covetous, riches: to another that is a glutton, good meats: to an other that is
carnal, the commodity of women: to another that is idle, quiet and ease: and
all this does the Traiterous World, to the end that after, as Fish, whom he
has fed, he may lay the net of sin upon us, to catch us in.

If we would resist the first temptations the World offreth us, it is
impossible he durst so many times assault us. For to say truly by our small
and weak resistance, increases his ouergreat audacitie.

I would these Lovers of this world would but tell me a little, what (...) or
what Hope they can hope of him, Why they should suffer so many e^cumbers,
broils, and troubles as they do?

To think the World can give us perpetual life, it is a mockery, and
extreme madness to hope of it. For we see when life is most dear to us, and
that we are lothest to leave the world, then arriueth Death (in an unhappy
hour) to swallow us up, and to deprive us of all this our worldly felicity.

To hope that the World will give us assured Mirth: even this is also a madness.
For the days excepted, we must lament, and the hours allottod out to
complain, alas, we shall see but a small surplus of Time left, to laughe and be
mertie.

I can say no more, but exhort every man to look well about him, what he does,
and that he be advised what he thinks. For when we think and believe we
have made peace with Fortune, even then is she in battle against us. And I do
assuredly believe, that that I now prepare my self to speak even presently,
shall be read of many, but observed of few: and that is, that I have seen
those come out of their own proper houses, mourning and lamenting that had
spent and consumed all their time in laughing and making good cheer, and
serving this miserable world: which is but only a giver of all evils, a ruin
of the good, a heap of sin, a tyrant of virtues, a traitor of peace and
war, a sweet water of errors, a river of vices, a persecutor of the virtuous,
a comb of lies, a deviser of novelties, a grave of the ignorant, a cloak of
the wicked, an oven of lechery: and finally, a Charibdis, where all good and
noble hearts do perish, and a Sylla, where all Noble desires and thoughts are
cast away together.

For it is most certain, that this Worlding that is not content with this
World, and that leaves his first estate, and that takes upon him a new manner
of life, and changes from house to house, and from Country to Country: he
shall never notwithstanding content himself, nor quiet his mind.

And the cause hereof is, that if a Worlding depart out of his house, never to
come again into it, there are yet at hand immediately other ten licentious
persons, that do but watch to enter into his house. Speaking more particularly,
I say, that in the Court of Princes they account them happy and fortunate, that
be in favor with the Prince, that have great affairs in Court, that be rich
and of power: that be served and honored of every man, and that take place
and go before every man: So that it may be said, that the common people do
not call those fortunate, that deserve to be fortunat: but only those that have
enough. But the ancient Philosophers were not of this mind, and much less are
the wise and virtuous men at this day: For we see that in the Court of Princes
many lack favor, rather then life, others lack both favor, and life
together, and others not only their life and favor, but also their goods and
faculties. So that, all that their favor and credit have given them in many
years, and by sundry griefs and troubles, they come afterward to lose them
even upon a sudden, and in short time: I grant notwithstanding that it is a
great honor, profit, and furtherance, for the Courtier to be in his Princes
favor, but nevertheless he cannot deny me, but that it is a dangerous thing
also: For naturally a great familiarity, brings also a great envy with it,
since the beloved of the Princes is commonly evil willed of the Common weal.

And that which is most dangerous is, that to obtain the favor of his Prince,
he must so behave himself: that his service must be more rare, better, and
exquisite, then all others: and otherwise, to fall in disgrace, and to make the
Prince forget all the good service he has don him his whole life time, he
need but the least displeasure Examples of many Favorites of Princes that have
come to untimely ends.
and fault he can commit.

Eusenides was maruellously beloved with Ptolomey, who after Fortune had
exalted and brought him to honor, and that he was grown to great wealth, said
one day to Cuspides the Philosopher these words.

O my friend Cuspides, tell me I pray thee of thy faith, is there any cause in
me to be sad, since Fortune, has placed me in so great authority, and
honor, as she can devise to do, and that the King Ptolomey my Lord, has now
now no more to give me: he has already been so bountiful to me?

To whom the Philosopher answered, saying: O Eusenides, if thou were a
Philosopher, as thou art a beloved servant, thou would tell me an other
tale, then that thou tellest me now: For although King Ptolomey has no more
to give me, know thou not that spightfull fortune has power to take away
from thee many things? For the noble heart feels more grief, and
displeasure, to come down one stayre, or step, then to clime a hundred.

Not many days after these words passed between Cuspides and Eusenides, it
happened that one day King Ptolomey found Eusenides talking with a Lemman or
Curtesan of his, which he loved dearly, whereat he was so much offended,
that he made her straight drink a cup of poison, and caused him to be
hanged before his own gates.

The Emperor Seuerus had one in so great favor and credit, which was called
Plautius, and he loved him so extremely, and trusted him so much, that he
never read letter, but Plautius must read it, and he never granted
commission or license to any man, but it must pass under Plautius Seal:
neither did he ever grant anything, but at the request of Plautius, nor did
make wars or peace, without the counsel and advise of Plautius.

The matter fell out so, that Plautius entering one night into the Emperors
Chamber with a privy coat, his ill hap was such, that a little of his breast
before was open, whereby was spyed the male: which Bahhian seeing, being the
Emperors eldest Son, said unto him these sharp words.

Tell me Plautius, Do those that are beloved of Princes use to come into their
Bed-Chambers at these hours, Armed with yron-coates? I swear unto thee by the
immortal Gods, and so let them preserve me in the succession of the Empire:
That since thou come with iron, thou shall also dye with iron: Which
presently took place. For, before he went out of the Chamber, they struck off
his head.

The Emperor Commodus (that was son of the good Emperor Marcus Aurelius)
had a Servant called Cleander: a wise and grave man, old, and very pollitike:
but withal, a little covetous.

This Cleander was often times requested of the Praetorian company, that is to
say of the whole band of soldiers, that he would command they might be paid
their pay due unto them: and to persuade him the better to pay it: they showed
him a bill, signed from the Emperor, to which he answered: That the Emperor
had nothing to do in the matter. For, although he were lord of Rome, yet had he
not to deal in the affairs of the Commonweal.

These discurteous and unseemly words related to the Emperor Comodus, and
perceiving the small obedience, and respect of duty that Cleander showed to
him, he commanded forthwith he should be slain to his great shame, and that
all his goods should be confiscate.

Alcimenides was a great renowned King among the Greeks, as Plutarch writes
of him, and he favored one Pannonius entirely well, to whom only he did not
commit his person, his trust, but also the whole affairs and doings of the
common weal, and he might dispose of the goods of the king, at his will and
pleasure, without leave or license. So that all the Subjects found, they had
more benefit in serving of Pannonius then in pleasing of the King.

Therefore the King, and the beloved Pannonius playing at the ball together,
they came to contend upon a Chase, and the one said, it was thus: the other
said it was contrary: and as they were in this contention, the king commanded
presently those of his guarde, that in the very place of the Chase where
Pannonius denied, they should strike off his head.

Constantius the Emperor also had one whom he liked very well, and made much
of, called Hortentius, which might well be counted a Princes darling, for he
did not only rule the affairs of the common weal, of the palace, of wars,
his goods, and person of the Emperor: but also he was ever placed above all
the Ambassadors at his table. And when the Emperor went in progress, or any
other journey, he ever had him to his bedfellow.

Thus things being in this state, I tell you, it happened that one day a Page
giving the Emperor drink in a glass, the glass, by mishappe fell out of the
Pages hand, and brake in pieces, whereat the Emperor was not a little
displeased and offended. And even in this evil and unhappy hour, came
Hortensius to the king to present him certain bills, to the sign of hasty
dispatch, which was a very unapt time chosen (and the Emperor yet contented to
sign it, could neither the first nor the second time, because the pen was
ill fauouredly made, and the ink so thick, that it would not write, which
made the king so angry, that even presently for anger, he commanded that
Hortensius head should be stricken off.

But to the end we may come to the knowledge of many things in few words, I
will show you how Alexander the Great slew in his choler his dear accounted
Cratherus, and Pirrhus king of the Epirotes, Fabatus his Secretary.

The Emperor Bitillion his greatest friend Cincinnatus Domitian the Emperor,
Rufus of his Chamber. Adrian the Emperor his only favored Ampromae.
D^cclesian his friend Patritius, whom he loved as himself, and always called
him friend and companion.

Diadumeus, Phamphilion his great Treasurer: for whose death he was so
sorrowful, that he would have made himself a way, because he caused him to
be so cruelly slain.

All these above named, and infinite others also, some were Masters, some
Lords, some kings, and some of great authority and favor about Princes, by
whose tragical histories and examples we may plainly see, that they did not
only loose their goods, favor, and credit, but also upon very light occasions
were put to death by sword: Therefore mortal men should put no trust in
worldly things, since that of little occasion they become soon great and of
much less, they suddenly fall, and come to worse estate then before.

And therefore king Demetrius asking one day Euripides the Philosopher, A
worthy saying of Euripides the Philosopher.
what he thought of humane debility, and of the shortness of this life,
answered.

Me thinks, O king Demetrius, that there is nothing certain in this unstable
life: since all men living, and all things also that serve them, endure daily
some clipse. And hereunto replied suddenly Demetrius and said:

O my good Euripides, thou had said better, that all things vegitiue, and
sensitive, and each other living thing does not only feel the Eclipses force,
and change from day to day, but from hour to hour, and minute to minute.
Meaning king Demetrius, by these words he spoke, that there is nothing so
stable in this world, be it of what state or condition it will be, but in the
twinkling of an eye, is ready to run into a thousand dangers and perils: and
albeit we be all subject (of what state or degree so ever we be) to sundry
and diverse thrals, and mishaps, yet none so near neighbors to them, as those
that are in highest authority, and greatest favor with Princes: For there are
many that shootes to hitte down the white of their favor, but few that being
down, will once put it up again, and restore it to his place,

For to live a contented life, a man had need to want nothing, neither to have
any occasion to trouble him: But the things that trouble us in this vale of
misery, being so many, and of such abundance, and those things contrarily so
few, and rare to come by, that we need and want: we may justly account this
life woeful and miserable above all others: For sure far greater are the
grieves and displeasures we receive for one only thing we want, then the
pleasures are great we have for a hundred others, whereof we have abundance.
Besides that, the familiars of Princes cannot think themselves so mighty and
fortunate, that any man may presume to call them blessed or happy.

For if some serve and honor them others there are that persecute them: and if
in their houses they have that flatter them, and make much of them: there want
not in the Court others that murmur at them, and speak ill of them.

And if they have cause sometimes to rejoice that they are in favor: so have
they likewise continual trouble and fear that they shall fall, and be put
out of favor: And if they glory to have great treasure, they sorrow also to
have enemies.

And if the services and company they have, do delight them, the continual
business they have do vex them: So that we may say of them, as of plastering
houses, which are never so fair, but they become black with some spotte in
time, and worms and other vermin do eat and wast them.

If there be none that dare once admonish these great men in authority, and
tell them their faults by words of mouth: yet I will take upon me to do it
with my writing, and say: That they speak nothing but that it is noted: their
steps they tread are seen: every morsel of meat they eat is marked, they
are accused for the pleasures they take, and all things that they have are
observed: All the pleasures that is done them is registered, and all ill that
they know by them is published.

And finally, I conclude, that the The favorites of the Court compared ^o a
game at Tables.
favored of Princes, are a game at tables, whereat every man plays: nor with
Cards, nor Dice, but only with serpents tongue.

And therefore I have said it, and once again I return to say: that all
those that are accepted of Princes must live continually very wisely, and
advisedly in all their doings: for it is true, and too true, that every man's
tongue runs of them, and much more if they had time and opportunity, like as
they defame them with their tongues, so would they offend them with their
hands.

We do not speak this so much that they should look to defend their life:
but to foresee that they may preserve their honor and goods from peril, and
to give them by this precept a good occasion to look about them.

For to put them in disgrace with the King, all the days of their Life, (to
their utter undoing and overthrow, the King need but only for to give ear
and attention to his enemies.

CHAP. XVI. The Author admonishes those that are in favor, and great with the
Prince, that they take heed of the deceipts of the world, and learn to live,
and dye honorably, and that they leave the Court before age overtake them,
WHen king Aldericke kept Seuerine the Roman Consul Prisoner, otherwise named
Boethius: that Consul complained much of fortune, saying, alas Fortune, why
have thou forsaken me in my age, since thou did favor me so much in my
youth, and that I had served thee so many years, why have thou left me A
Diseourse betwixt Fortune, and the Consul Seuerius.
to the hands of mine enemies.

To which complaints Fortune made answer thus. Thou art unthankful to me, O
Seuerius, since I have used my things with thee in such manner, as I never used
the like with any other Roman. And that this is true, I tell thee. Consider, O
Seuerius, that I made thee whole, and not sick: a man and no woman, of
excellent wit and understanding, and not gross and rude, rich and not poor,
wise and not foolish, free and not bound, a Senator, and no Plebeian, noble and
valiant, and not cowardly, a Roman, and no Barbarian, or stranger borne: in
great, and mean estate, a grave man, and no light nor vain person, fortunate,
and not unlucky, worthy of fame, and not oblivion: to conclude I say, I gave
thee such part in the common weal, that thou had good cause to have pity
of all others, and all others cause to have spite, and envy at thee.

Again replied Seuerius to this answer and said. Oh cruel and spightfull
Fortune, how Liberal thou art in the things thou speak, and resolute in the
things thou disposest: since always thou do what thou will, and seldom
that thou ought?

And thou know there is no such mishappe, as to remember a man has once
been Rich, and Fortunate in his Time: and to see himself now brought to
extreme misery. Hear Fortune thou oughtst to know it, if thou know it
not, that he that never was rich, scant knows his poverty.

But alas for pity, he that was rich, and had once all pleasures and ease,
does sorrow much for the present extreamitie, and bewayleth the fore-passed
felicity. And I tell thee also, and thou ought to believe me, that we
repute them more happy whom thou never exaltest nor gave honor unto: then we
do those whom thou have called to high Honors, and afterward have
ouer-throwne them, and brought them lower, and in worser state then before. And
as for me, Oh Fortune, I tell thee truly, I think no man fortunate, but him
that never knew what good-fortune meant.

And this was the discourse betwixt Fortune, and the Consul Seuerius. By which
we may perceive and comprehend, that truly none may be thought unfortunate and
miserable, but such as have been before in great honor and reputation: and he
cannot be thought abased of his state, or countenance, if he were not before in
prosperity, and favored of fortune. So that we may well say, That never no
man in this world was so free, as he that never suffered Fortune to enter into
his gates.

I have been desirous to tell you of these things, because that such as are in
favor and credit with Princes, should not reckon too much of their favor:
neither that those that are not in favor with them, should be sorry for it a
whit.

For the great authority and credit that a man has by the Court, is in this
mortal life in the end nothing else then as a little worm in an apple, a
wizell in the corn, and a magot in pease: which without, seem very good and
within they are all rotten and eaten.

Princes authority above all others is most supreme: for they are not subject
to the Censors and Judges, to reprove them of their words and sayings: neither
to magistrates, to whom they should render up any accounts of their doings,
whereof proceeds, that as they have free will to love, so have they a free
liberty to hate, and absolute power to punish.

Therefore those that are in favor in Court, and they that shall read this How
suddenly the favors of princes change.
wrytings of mine, must well consider what we mean by all those things we have
spoken: whereby they shall easily know, that Princes are no less apt to hate
him to day, they loved yesterday: then to love him to morrow, whom they hated
the other day.

The first and chiefest point the Courtyer ought to observe, is to fear GOD,
above all: and to follow the profession and life of a good Christian.

For in the end they live in Court with more safety, having a good and pure
conscience, then with all the great credit and favor they can have.

And therefore let every Courtyer believe me, as well in favor as out of faour:
That it is the best and surest way to obtain the goods of this world, as also
for the preservation of their souls, to esteem and make account of holy
Scriptures and Gods commandments And if he do otherwise, it shall happen
many times unto him that in the dispatch of his weyghtiest affairs, and
needful businessos, even when he shall think his matters brought to a
prosperous end, and that it is without all doubt of dispatch: then steps in
crooked fortune with her wonted poison against him, and either makes him in a
manner begin his suite new again, or at least overthrow it quite: For there
are in Princes Courts many times certain suites that have a good and better
end then looked for: and contrarily many others that are at the point of
dispatching, and yet by sinister accident clean overthrown, and succeeding
contrary to their assured expectation.

And yet notwithstanding it seems to the suitor, that the cause hereof
comes, either through the soliciters negligence and default, and little care
to follow it, or else through the malice and ill will of the favored of the
Court, that took upon him the suite: and yet neither the one, nor the other
was cause of the disorder: but only the divine providence of God, to admonish
us that in all our actions and doings it little preuayleth us to move the King
or his Officers in all our matters, if we do not deserve at Gods hands to
obtain it. And therefore said the divine Plato in his Timeon, that those that
have honor and prosperity in this life, have as A worthy saying of Plato,
much need of good counsel, as the poor afflicted creatures have of help and
remedy. And surely, it was wisely and profoundly spoken of him: For as need
and misery in this wretched life brings men to despair: so likewise we see
prosperity induce men to forget themselves and their state. And that which I
have hitherto spoken of, and that I hope yet to speak, none can understand nor
conceive, but such as once in their time, in their Navigations had a fortunate
and prosperous Wind: And afterward turning contrary, even at the Shore side
have cast them on Rocks and utterly perished them.

To the end that those in reading my wrytings, may yet lament and mourn for
pity: where the others can but only read, and go no further.

If we compare and put together the Rich with the poor, the sorrowful with
the merry, the Fortunate with the unfortunate: the favored, with the banished,
the virtuous and noble, with the vicious and defamed: we shall find without
doubt the number of those far greater, that could rise again being down,
and had taken a fall: then those that keep themselves in the authority and
favor, that Fortune had brought them to.

I have not said it a few times, but every moment I would return to say it
again, that this Traiterous world in all his doings is so deceytfull, and
Fortune in all that she promises so doubtful, that they make them believe
whom they make Rich, beloved, and raise to high estate, that they do it but to
honor them: and afterward contrarily they spinne a thousand deceipts and
trumperyes, to make them sooner fall to the ground.

Surely I have seen but few, and I remember I have read of none, unto whom
Fortune ever showed herself so benign and courteous, that ever put a man in
his chiefest top of prosperity, and favor, but in few days after, she
took his life from him, or at least in the end of his journey, she made him
run into some secret disgrace or mishappe.

And therefore I would that the Courtyer that obtayneth favor in the Court,
and Riches in the Commonwealth: that he should reckon and esteem them as lent
him, but not given him: And that he should so govern the things of fortune, as
he would that man whom he trusted not at all. A worthy saving of Seneca.


For, as Seneca says: No man is afflicted with Fortune, But he only that
trusts to her, without fear or suspect at all of her. For Courtyers, and
those that are in great favor and authority ought to know that like as in the
deepest seas soonest perish the ships, and as on the highest mountains the
Sun has always least force and power: and as in the greenest boughs is
soonest hidden the Fowlers little net, to catch the silly Birds: And as with
the fullest bayts of meat the Fish are soonest taken, and that with great
force the wind does blow on highest trees, and as the most proud and stately
buildings, the Earthquake does most hurt and soonest overthrow them: Even so
by this I mean, that Fortune never strove to throw down any, but such as she
had made great in honor and favor.

For, I do not take it for great good lack (though all things succeed to be
favored of the Court, better then he looked for) nor to see them brought by
their friends to great estate and honor, For albeeit fortune for a time
dissemble with him, it is not for that she has forgoten him, but afterward to
give him a greater punishment.

Those that will marvel at that I will speak even now, it proceeds of
nothing else, but wanting wit, and capacity, to understand it.

There is no greater sickness in this world, then to be in health: No greater
poverty, then never to have need of any thing. And there is no greater
temptation, then to be never tempted Nor there can be no greater sadness, then
to be always merry: Nor greater danger, then never to be in danger. For many
times it so happens, that where a man thinks to pass over a dangerous
flood safe enough, his horse falls over head and ears, and drowneth his
Master, or he escapes hardly.

Socrates being one day demanded A true saying of Socrates.
which was the most sure and certain thing of this life? Answered thus: There
is nothing more certain in this life: then to account all things uncertain he
has: nor among Riches any greater, then to have life and health: But if the
life be doubtful and unquiet, what surety or certainty may be found in it?
Surely none.

King Agesilaus being requested of certain of his Grecian captains, to go see
the Olympiade, in mount Olympus: where all the philosophers did assemble to
dispute, and where all the Rich men of the country came to buy and sell any
thing, he answered them.

If in mount Olympus they sold and exchanged sorrow for mirth, sickness for
health, honor for infamy, and life for death. I would not only go to see it,
but I would also spend all that I The speech of king Agesilaus.
am worth, and that I have: But since the buyer is mortal, and the thing also
he buyeth condemned to death, I will buy nothing in this life, since I can
not carry it with me, into my grave.

Yet is there another deceit, which the poor Courtyers fall into daily: and
that is, that in living many years, they think and assuredly believe in the
end to light of a time, when they hope to have ease and rest, which is a
mockery to think it, and extreme madness to hope for it. For if their years
grow by ounce, and ounce, their sorrows and troubles increase by pounds.

Who can deny, but that milk that is kept many days does corrupt and
becomes sower and sharp? Yea, the garments that are now very old, and have
been long worn (without that ever moth does touch it) does in the end also
become rags and dust.

By this therefore I do infer, that if it be a most certain thing for young
men to dye quickly, then much more should old men be assured that they have no
long time to live.

And there are many in the Courts of Princes also, that find themselves so
laden with sins and wickedness, that they think assuredly, that in changing
their age, time, and fortune, they shall not only leave their vices, but shall
be discharged also of many grieves and troubles. Which we see afterward
happen contrary to them.

For there is no way so plain in this world, but there is some ascent or
descent for us to go up to the top, or some River for us to pass over: or
some terrible mountain to fear, or some crooked ill-fauoured way, to loose us
in, or some Cave or hole to fall into.

Those also that think certainly that the Sun cannot lose his light, nor
that the Moon can be eclipsed, nor that the stars may be darkened, and that
the earth shall not cease to bring forth, the seas to flow, the water to run,
the fire to burn, and Winter to be cold, let them also be assured, that man
cannot be excused to suffer and abide much. For sure it is impossible he
should pass one day without some trouble or sinister hap of Fortune.

And the greatest trumpery and deceit that Courtiers for the most part are
abused in, is, that the more they wax in years, the more they enter daily
into greater affairs and business, with a vain hope and assurance they have
to dispatch them, and bring them to such end, as they list or desire. But
afterward when they come The folly of old Courtiers.
to look into their matters, it is the will of God, and their deserts to
procure it, that the poor old men find (when they think to go home to their
houses) that they see death approach near them, and they afterward are
carried to be buried in their graves.

O how many are there in Court, that become aged men, by long serving in Court,
with a vain hope afterward in their age to depart from the Court, and to
repose their aged years in their own houses, in quiet and tranquillity, which
abuses them very much.

So that they may be called Christians in name, and thoughts, but right
worldlings, and Courtyers in doings. And therefore many times I reproved diverse
old Courtyers my Friends, for that they did not leave the Court when they
might have left it with honor, and commodity: tellling them it was more then
time now they should depart from the Court, seeing that Age and gravity had
stolen upon them.

Who could not tell how to answer me, nor what to say, more then they would
within a short time, go home to their houses, with deliberation and intent to
take their ease at home, for the better health of their persons, which they had
not till then: and so to seclude them from all doings, save only in the
morning when he rises, to go to the Church and serve GOD: and from thence to
go unto the Hospitalls, to visit the sick and diseased, to seek out the
poor Orphans and widows amongst his Neighbors, and to make peace between
neighbor and neighbor, and to relieve the poor.

And albeit they have told me this tale many a time and often, yet I never saw
any of them put it in execution with good will.

And I saw once an honorable and rich Courtyer, who was so old, that for very
Age he had never a black hair on his head, nor any Teeth in The foolish
opinion of an old Courtier.
his mouth, neither any Children, or Sons or Daughters to inherit his good:
who notwithstanding was of so foolish and fantastical opinion, (brought to
that kind of madness by his sins) that he swear unto me, that for the
discharge of his Conscience only he would never leave, or give up his Office
he had in Court, to change that servile trade and course of life, for to
obtain his quiet rest at home. Thinking assuredly, that enjoying rest at home,
in his own house, he might easily be damned, and abiding the pains and
service of Court, he believed undoubtedly he should be saved.

Surely we may aptly say, that this old Courtyer was more then a Dotard, and
that he had marred the call of his conscience: since he believed that it was
a charge of Conscience to depart the court.

The ambition to do much, and the covetousness to have much, makes the
miserable Courtyers believe that they have yet Time enough to live, and to
repent themselves, when they will.

So that in the Court, thinking to live two years only in their Age good men:
they live fifty, and three score years, naughty and wicked persons.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes says that Eudonius that was Captain of the
Greeks, seeing Zenocrates reading A worthy saying of Plutarch.
one day in the university of Athens, he being not of the age of eighty five
years, asked what that old man was and it was answered him, that it was one of
the Philosophers of Greece, who followed virtue and serched to know wherein
true Philosophy consisted: Whereupon he answered, If Xenocrates the
Philosopher tell me, that he being now eighty five years old, goes to seek
virtue in this age, I would thou should also tell me what time he should
have left him to be virtuous.

And he said moreover, in those years that this Philosopher is of, it were
more reason we should see him, do virtuous things then at this age to go and
seek it.

Truly we may say the very like of our new Courtier, that Eudonius said of
Xenocrates the Philosopher, the which if he did look for other threescore
years, or threescore and ten to be good, what time should remain for him to
prove and show that goodness.

It is no marvel at all, that the old Courtiers forget their Native Country
and bringing up, their Fathers that begat them, their friends that showed
them favor, and the servants that served them: but at that I do not only
wonder at them, but also it gives me cause to suspect them, is, that I see
they forget themselves. So that they never know nor consider that they have to
do, till they come afterward to be, that they would not be.

If the Courtiers which in Princes Courts have been rich, noble, and in
authority would counsel with me, or at least believe my writing, they should
depart from thence in time, to have a long time to consider before of death,
least death unawares, and suddenly came to take execution of their lives.

O happy, and thrice happy may we call the esteemed Courtier, whom God has
given so much wit and knowledge to, that of himself he do depart from the
Court, before fortune A good Caveat for Courtiers.
has once touched him with dishonor, or laid her cruel hands upon him: For
I never saw Courtier, but in the end did complain of the Court and of their ill
life that they led in Court. And yet did I never know any person that would
leave it for any scruple of conscience he had to remain there, but peradventure
if any did depart from the court, it was for some of these respects, or
altogether, that is to say: Either that his favor and credit diminished, or
that his money failed him, or that some has done him wrong in the court, or
that he was driven from the court, or that he was denied favor, or that his
side and faction he held with, had a fall, or for that he was sick, for to
get his health, he went into the Country.

So that they may say, he rather went angry and displeased with himself,
then he did to lament his sins: If you ask privately every Courtier, you
shall find none, but will say he is discontented with the Court, either
because he is poor, or afflicted, envied, or ill willed, or out of favor, and
he will swear and resweare again, that he desires nothing more in the
World, then to be dismissed of this Courtiers travel and painful Life: But
if afterward perchance a little wind of favor be but stirring in the Entrey
of his chamber door, it will suddenly blow away all the good and former thoughts
from his mind. And yet that, which makes me to wonder more at these unconstant
Courtiers, and unstable brains, is, that I see many build goodly stately
houses in their country, and yet they neither dwell in them, nor keep
hospitality there: They graffe and set trees, plant fruits, and make good
Gardens and Orchards, and yet never go to enjoy them: they purchase great
Lands and possessions, and never go to see them.

And they have offices and dignities given them in their Countries, but they
never go for to exercise them.

There they have their friends and parents, and yet they never go for to talk
with them. So they had rather be slaves and drudges in the court, then lords
and rulers in their own country: we may justly say that many courtiers are
poor in riches, strangers in their own houses, and Pilgrims in their
Country, and banished from all their kindreds.

So that if we see the most part of these Courtiers, backbite, murmr
complain, and abhor these vices they see daily committed in Court.

I dare assure you, that this discontentation and dislyking proceeds not only
of those vices and errors then see committed, as of the spite and envy they
have daily, to see their Enemies, grow in favor and credit with the Prince.
For they pass little of the vices of Court, so they may be in favor as others
are.

Plutarch in his book De exilio, shows, that there was a Law amongst the
Thebanes, that after a man was fifty years of age, if he fell sick, he
should not be helped with Physicians. For, they say, that after a man is once
arrived unto that age, he should desire to live no longer, but rather to hasten
to his iourneys end,

By these examples we may know that infancy is, till vii. years: Childhood
to xiiii. years: Youth to xxv. years: manhood till xl. and Age to
three-score-yeares. But once passed threescore, me thinks it is rather time to
make clean the nets, and to content themselves with the Fish they have till
now, then to go about to put their nets in order again to fish any more. I
grant that in the Courts of princes all may be saved: and yet no man can deny
me, but that in princes Courts there are mo occasions to be damned then saved.

For, as Cato the Censor says: The apt occasions bring men a desire to do ill,
though they be good of themselves. And although some do take upon them and
determine to lead a godly and holy life, or that they show themselus' great
hypocrites: yet am I assured notwithstanding that they cannot keep their
tongue from murmuring, nor their heart from envying. And the cause hereof
proceeds, for that there are very few that follow the Court long but only to
enter into credit, and afterward to vaxe rich, and grow in great authority.

Which cannot be without bearing a little secret hate and envy against those
that do pass them in this favor and authority; and without, suspect and
fear of others, which in (...) are their equals and companions. It were a good
counsel for those that have (...) the Court or Princes till they be (...) old
and gray headed, that they should determine and live the rest of their years
as good Christians, and not to pass them as Courtiers: so that though they
have given the world a meal, yet they should in the end give the brain to
Jesus Christ. I know every man desires to live in Princes Courts, and yet they
promise they will not dye in Court. And since it is so, me thinks it is a
great folly and presumption for such men to desire to live long in such state,
where they would not dye for all the gold in the world.

I have lived in the Court many years, and at this present I have forsaken it
quite: wherefore I dare boldly say, that if once a man come to enjoy a qui
life, and reposed rest, I am assured he would for ever hate and dislike to be a
Courtier longer.

But like as these senseles Courtiers (...)
remember not the Life for to come, but only account of their vain and
Courtly Life present, reputing that the most blessed and happy of any other.

So God seeing their folly and their fond addicted mind to the vanity of
Court to plague them, and scourge them there withal, withtheir own rod,
does great them no other nor better rest, then that they only enjoy in Princes
Courts, and so feeds them with their own humor. And therefore it is very
truly said. That rest and contentation never ends into a (...) house.

O you worthy and Noble Courtiers, O you blessed and favored Courtiers, I will
remember you, yea and again remember, that you presume not to cut or pull off
the wings of Time, since you neither shall have time nor mean to pluck one
feather from him: much less the least knowledge how to do it.

And therefore it is said, Ill cutteth the knife if the edge be broken, and
ill can he gnaw bones that lacks his teeth.

And if he seem good unto you and me also, That to day it is Time to gather
the fruit of the vine of our youth, Let us go now again to seek it about by
the means of our amendment.

And if the Pipe or Caske wherein we should put our Wine be fusty, with the
malignity and perverseness of our wicked doings. Let us season them with new
and better Wine of good and holy desires. And now to conclude, if to sequester
themselves from Court, it be a wholesome Counsel for Courtiers: much more
wholesome and necessary it is for such as bear sway and reputation about the
Prince. For other Courtiers do daily live in hope to enlarge their countenance
and credit, and to grow in favor and authority: But these Darlinges and
Beloved of Princes are continually afrade to fall, and utterly to be put out
of favor.

CHAP. XVII. Of the continency of favored Courtiers, and how they ought to
shun the company and conversation of dishonest women, and to be careful
quickly to dispatch all such as sue unto them.
TItus Liuius, and Plutarch writes, that the Romans had in In what veneration
the ancients held them that were continent.
such veneration those men that lived chaste, and those women also that
professed virgins Life, that they erected statues of them in the Senate house,
carrying the^ thorough the City in triumphant chariots, recommending themselves
to their devout prayers, and giving them great gifts and presents: and finally
adored them as gods: and this was their reason, in that they honored them as
gods: for that they being of flesh, and living in flesh, did leave to use the
works and instinct of the flesh, which they held a thing more divine then
humane.

Filostratus says, that Appoloneus Thianeus was borne without any pain or
grief to his mother in all her travel. And that the gods spoke to him in his
ear, that he raised the dead to life, healed the sick, knew the thoughts of
men, diuined of things to come, how he was served with Princes, honored of
the people, and followed of all the Philosophers: and yet they did not make so
great a wonder of all these things spoken of him, as they did for that he was
never married, and moreover never detected with the knowledge of any woman
living, much less suspected.

Whilst Carthage was environed with siege on each side, a Virgin of Numidia
taken prisoner, was presented to Scipio, and she was very fair: which Scipio
notwithstanding, would not only not deflower, but set her at liberty, and
married her very honorably.

Which act of his was more apprised of the Roman writers, then was his conquest
of Numedia, the restoring of Rome her liberty, the destruction of Carthage, the
succor and relief given to Asia, and the enobling of his Common wealth: For
in all these enterprises he still fought against others, but in the effects of
the flesh, he fought against himself. And therefore he must needs be
marvelous wise, and of good judgment, that can subdue the desires and motions
of the flesh: For we do as much covet to follow these carnal desires, as we
are apt to our meat when we are hungry. Cruel and bitter are the assaults
of the flesh to the spirit, and wonderful is the pain the Spirit abides, to
resist the motions of the same, which by no means can be overcome, but by
eschewing the occasions thereof. As in brideling the desires, punishing the
flesh, living with spare diet, increasing learning, giving himself to tears
and altogether shutting the gates of our desires.

O if this vice of the flesh came of abundance of heat, or rage of blood, we
might soon remedy it with letting our selves blood: If it were any sickness of
the heart, it should be cured by interior medicines: If of the liver, we
would refresh it with ointments.

If of Melancholy humor, we would wash away all the Opilations. If of choler,
we would procure easy purges: But alas, it is a disease so far from pity,
that it misliketh we should call for Physicians, and cannot abide we should
offer it any remedy.

It cannot be denied, but that civil war is most grievous and dangerous in
a Commonwealth: But much more perilous is that at home, betwixt the husband
and the wife: but most ieoperdious of all is, that a man has within himself:
For we cannot reckon any other our enemy, but our own desires.

I remember I saw once written in a Courties house these words, which truly
deserved to be written in golden Letters: and the words were these:

The dreadefull Warves that I alas sustain, A worthy sentence, and worthy to
be engraven in every man's heart.

Where blind desire, becomes my mighty foe:
Against my self, perforce my self does strain
The wreckfull Gods, vouchsafe it do not so.
Surely, he that wrote this for his word, we think he was no fool, nor
evil christian, since he neither sought for money, nor by sleight of wit
procured to deceive or beguile neither he called his friends to help him to
withstand his enemies, but only craved remedy against his dishonest and vain
desires. And undoubtedly he had reason: for a man may easily absent himself,
it is an impossible thing. And therefore me thinks it is a thing more to be
lamented then written, to see that a multitude of corporal enemies, cannot
vanuquish us, and yet notwithstanding when we are alone, and think nothing of
it, this only vice of the flesh, does not alone make us stumble, but fall down
on the ground: for neither to become religious, a friar, nor to dwell in
churches, nor to be shut up in cloisters, to sequester our selves from the
world, nor yet to change state and condition: For all this I say, I see none
of al these things help us mortal men, to defend us from this vice and
sin. But the further we seek to fly from it, the more danger we find to
fall into it. And albeit to avoid other vices and sins it shall suffice us to
be admonished: yet against that alone of the flesh, it behooves us to be
armed. For there is no sin in the world, but there are means for men to
avoid it: This only excepted of the flesh, wherewith all we are overcome, and
taken Prisonners. And to prove this true it is apparent thus.

Where reigns Pride, but amongst the Potentates? where Envy but amongst
equals? Anger, but amongst the impacient? Gluttony, but amongst gourmands?
avarice, but amongst the Rich? sloth, but amongst the idle? And yet for all
these, the sin of the Flesh, generally reigns The sins of the flesh goes
beyond all other.
in all men.

And therefore, for not resisting this abominable vice, we have seen kings
lose their kingdoms, Noblemen their Lands and possessions: the married wives
their auowd faith: the religious nuns, their professed virginity: So that
we may compare this sin, to the nature and condition of the venomous
serpent, which being alive stings us, and after he is dead, offends us with
his noisome stink.

Examples by David, who for all his wisdom could not prevail against this
sin: nor Solomon, for all his great knowledge: nor Absolon for all his divine
beauty: nor Sampson, with his mighty force: which notwithstanding the great
Fame they had, for their renowned virtues: yet through this only defect they
lost all: accompanying with harlots and licentious women. Into which shameful
fellowship fell also Holofernes, Haniball, Ptholomeus, Pyr-Pirrhus, Inlius
Caesar, Augustus, Marcus Antonius, Seuerus, and Theodorius, and many other
great Princes, with these above recited: the most part of the which we have
seen deprived of their Crowns, and afterward themselves have come (to their
utter shame and dishonor, on their knces to yield themselves to the mercy of
these their infamed lovers, craving pardon, and forgiveness.

Many grave Writers of the Grecians say, that the Ambassadors of Lidia coming
one day into the chamber of Hercules, upon a sudden to speak with him, they
found him lying in his Curtesans lap, she pulling his rings off on his
fingers, he dressed on his head with her womanly attire: and she in exchnnge
on hers bedect with his royal crown.

They write also of Denis the Syracusian, that albeit of nature he was more
cruel then the wild beast, yet he became in the end so tractable, and
pleasant, by means of a Curtezan his friend called Mirta, that she only did
confirm all the provisions and depeches of the affairs of the Weal public,
and he only did but ordain and appoint them. And if the Histories written of
the Goths deceyne us not, we find that Antenaricus the famous king of the
Goths, after he had triumphed of Italy, and that he had made himself Lord of
all Europe, he became so far in love with a Lover of his called Pincia: the
whilst she combed his head, he made clean her slippers.

Also Themistocles, the most famous Captain of the Greeks, was so enamoured
of a woman he had taken in the Wars of Epirns, that she being afterward
very sick: when she purged her self, he would also be purged with her: If
she were let blood, he would also be let blood: and yet that that is worst
to be liked, is, that he washed his face with the blood that came out of her
Arm: so that they might truly say, though she were his prisoner, yet he was
also her slave and subject.

When King Demetrius had taken Rhodes, there was brought to him a fair
gentlewomen of the City, which he made his friend in love: and this love
betwixt them, in time grew so great, that she showing her self upon a time to
be angry with Demetrius, and refusing to sit near him at the Table, and also
to lie with him: Demetrius utterly forgetting himself, and his royal estate,
did not only on his knees pray her to pardon him, but also embracing her,
conueighed her in his arms into his chamber.

Myronides the Grecian, albeit he had made subject to him the kingdom of
Boetia, yet he was notwithstanding made subject with the beauty of Numidia
his lover. He enflamed thus with love of her, and she likewise stricken with
covetous desire of his goods, in fine they agreed, that he should give her all
the spoil he had won in the wars of Boetia: and that she should let him
lie with her in her house only one night.

Hanniball made wars xvii. years with the Romans, and in all that time he
was never vanquished, till he was overcome with the Love of a young maiden in
the city of Capua: which proved a most bitter love to him: since thereby it
happened, that whereas he had so many years kept in subjection all Italy:
he now was made a subject at home in his own country.

Plutarch in his book De Republica, writes: That Phalaris the Tyrant would
never grant a man any thing that he desired: neither ever denied Plutark de
Repub.
any thing that a dissolute Woman requested.

No small, but great disorder happened to the Commonweal of Rome by the
occasion of the Emperor Caligula, who gave but 6000. Sexterces only to
repair the Walls of Rome: and gave otherwise for furring one one gown alone
of his Lemmans, a 10000. sexterces.

By all these examples above recited, we may easily understand, how dangerous
a thing it is for the Courtier to have friendship and acquaintance with women
of so vile a faculty: For the woman is of like quality, that a knot tied of
cord is, which is easily tied of sundry knots, and very hardly afterward to
be undone again.

Heretofore we have besought Courtiers, and the favored of Princes, that they
should not be so liberal in commanding: and now once again we pray them to
beware of fornication and adultery; for albeeit this sin of the flesh be not
the greatest in fault, yet it is the most dangerous in fame.

There is no King, Prelate, nor knight in this World so vicious, and dishonest
It is impossible that the Courtier that lives disordinately, should continue
in fa^uour with the Prince.
of life, but would be glad to have honest, virtuous, and well conditioned
servants, so that it is impossible therefore for the favored Courtier, living
dishonestlie, to continue any long time in favor with his Prince: For we have
seen many in Princes Courts, and Commonweals also, that have lost their
honor, favor, and riches, not for any pride they showed in themselves, nor
for envy that they had, nor for any treasure nor riches that they robbed, nor
for any evil words that they should speak, neither for any treason that they
committed, but only through the evil fame that went of them for haunting the
company of naughty women: for women be of the right nature of Hedgehogs, which
without seeing or knowing what they have in their heart, do notwithstanding
draw blood of us with their pricks.

And let not any man deceive himself, hoping that if he did commit a fault
through the flesh, that it shall be kept from the Princes cares, or that it
shall not be blazed abroad in the Court. For this sin is of such a quality,
that though it may be hidden within Curtains: yet it cannot be kept silent
with tongues.

How wise and sly soever a woman be, yet at all times when she gives ear
unto men's requests, even at that prosent she resolves to impart the whole
with some friend of hers. For these women do glory more, to be the friend of
a Courtier, then to be a true wife unto their husbands. I have my self seen
in Princes Courts many (...), very humble, courteous pitiful, patient,
charitable, wise, devout, and otherwise marvelous honest, and yet amongst all
these I never found any one secret. And therefore that a man will have
published to the World, let him (...) tell it a woman in ^^e at secret.

(...) should come to (...) that we (...) women carry (...) heads a forest of
hayres, a coyre, a hood, gimm^^ hanging at their ears, partlets upon their
shoulders, smockes on their bodies, petti(...), kertles, hose, clokes, (...),
hatts, chains, braslets, rings, p^umes offethers in their hands, and many
other trinkets not named: al which they carry lightly upon them and think it
no burden: and yet they cannot abide in no case to keep or carry one secret
in their breast. Alas, what pity is it to see those affected Courtiers, what
means they use to win a Ladies favor, what pleasant purposes and discourse
they put forth unto them, what bitter signs they let fall, what service they
offer them, what Jewels they give them, what castles in the air they promise
them, what sorrows they feign, and what lies they make them believe: and these
silly women (by nature proud and foolish) are with a few gifts overcome, and
with a few flattering words beguiled.

Now let this Courtier and his Lady continue this mutual friendship between
them, one, two, three four, or five years, though perhaps not fully these
years complete neither many months also, and you shall see in the end
undoubtedly a marvelous breach, and hate betwixt them.

For this amorous Courtier, that so dearly seemed to love his Lady, will now
make court a fresh to others, to dislike that heretofore he loved, and fly
from her whom erst he followed, abhorring that once he delighted in,
misliking the taste of those meats that once were sweet and pleasant to him:
and cannot abide her face now, whose Image before he had engraven in his mind.

So if he before had spent 3. years service in making her his Mistress, he
spends now 6. other years in the Courtiers must beware of dishonest women.
forgotting of her.

And therefore these Noble Courtiers and Beloved of Princes must beware they
make not these young and dishonest loves common in every place: For the sweet
and fragrant Rose which they seek to gather, continues scantly one hour: but
the pricks and plagues of the pearsing thorn, rests hidden in their flesh,
their whole life time after.

A man erreth in nothing more in this World, then in taking to his charge a
dishonest woman: For if he will bring her with him to the Court, she shall
shame him, put him to an unreasonable charge, besides the burden of his
conscience.

And if afterward he would put her away from him, she will not depart for any
thing: and if he would compel her to it, ere she depart it will be all the
Court over: so what things have past betwixt them two alone in secret, shall
afterward be known of every man abroad. And therefore we have not
causeless told you, that it must needs be a marvelous expense to the
Courtyer to bring his lover with him, in the Court. For he must always be at
the charges to keep a page, maid, or gentlewoman, to wait upon her.

He must content the Hostess of his house to lodge her secretly, please the
Marshall to seem not to know of it, the Harbinger that he prepare him a good
lodging, the page that he be diligent, and at her hand: and her self also
must have to live withal. So that the expense and charge he shall be at with
her, must needs far exceed all the benefits and commodity he has by the
Court.

And besides that, he may assure himself, that this their lewd and fond
love cannot long endure, neither can care also of her self be kept secret.
For, either his Hostess that lodged her, or the Bawd that procures their
meetings, or the page that brings commendations and messages betwixt the^, or
the neighbors that see him frequent the house, or the servant that shall
suspect him, or the mother that sold her unto him, in the end will bewray
their secret practice and friendship. Whereof springs afterward disdain,
and from disdain, to defame each other: So that of extreme Lovers they were
first, they afterward become mortal Enemies:

And therefore the Wiuell is not so hurtful to the Corn, nor the locust to
the Oats, nor the worms to the vines, nor maggots to the fruit, nor the moths
to the garments, as the woman is to a man, that once was his friend, and now
become his enemy. For like as in time of her love, she robbed and spoiled him
of all his goods: so likewise in the time of her hatred, she deuoureth all his
good fame and reputation.

But what shall we say of the man that contenteth not himself with one friend
alone, but like an insatiable leacher takes upon him to keep another. Truly I
cannot tell what to say of this man, but that it had been better for him he
had never been borne, then to have kept company with such vile and common
women. For he shall never appease the first, neither with anger, nor flattery:
nor humble her with presents, nor can expel her hatred with promises, neither
please her with cherishing of her, and much less shall overcome her with
threats.

The Ocean sea is not so dangerous, nor the sword of the tyrant so cruel,
neither lightning so sudden nor Earthquakes so horrible and fearful, nor
Serpents so venomous as a What danger follows the courtier that keeps leawd
women.
Harlot, when she does but suspect her friend loves another beside her self:
for she cease not to defame him, and to follow the other, to raise a slander
amongst her neighbors, to complain to his friends, to bewray the matter to
the Justice, to quarrel with Officers, always to have spies for him in every
place, as if he were one of her mortal enemies.

Oh would to GOD the Courtyer would esteem as much of his conscience, as his
Lover makes account of his person: happy were he. For, I dare assure him, if
he know it not, that she spyeth out all the places he goes to, and counts
every morsel of meat he eats, and becomes jealous of all that he does,
and of all those whose company he frequenteth: yea, she deuiseth and
imagines all that he thinks. So that he that seeks a cruel revenge of
his enemy, cannot do better then persuade and induce him to love one of these
wellconditioned gentle-women.

Now let him think that he has great wars, and by his evil hap has made
her his enemy, which heretofore he so entirely loved: For any man that
esteems his honor and reputation, does rather fear the evil tongue of such
a woman, then the sword of his enemy. For an honest man to strive, and contend
with a woman of such quality, is eue^ as much as if he would take upon him to
wash an asses head. Therefore he may not seem to make account of those
injuries done him, or evil words she has spoken of him. For women naturally
desire to enjoy the person they love, without let or interruption of any, and
to pursue to the death, those they hate. I would wish therefore the favored of
Princes, and such as have office and dignity in the court that they beware they
incur not into such like errors: For it is not fitting that men of honor,
and such as are great about the Prince, should seem to have more liberty in
vice then any other, neither for any respect ought the beloved of the Prince to
dare to keep company, much less to have friendship with any such common and
defamed women, since the least evil that can come to them, they cannot be
avoided.

But at the least he must charge his conscience, trouble his friends, waste
his goods, consume his person, and lose his good fame, ioining withal these
also, his concubine to be his mortal enemy: For there is no woman living that
has any measure in loving, nor end in hating. Oh how warily ought all men to
live, and specially we that are in the Court of Princes for many women (under
the color of their authority and office) go ofttimes to seek them in their
Chambers, not only as humble suitors, to solicit their causes, but also
liberally to offer them their persons, and so by color to conclude their
practices and devises: So that the decision and conclusion of process which they
feign to solicit, shall not go with him that demands there goods of them,
but rather with him that desires but their persons to spoil them of their
honor.

Now the Princes officers must seek to be pure, and clean from al these
practices of these common strumpets, much more from those that are suitors to
them, and have matters before them. For they should highly offend God, and
commit great treason to the king, if they should send those Women from them
that sued unto them rather dishonored and defamed, then honestly dispatched of
their business.

And therefore he binds himself to a marvelous inconvenience, that falls
in love with a woman suter: for even from that instant he has received of her
the sweet delights of love, even at the present he binds himself to dispatch
her quickly, and to end all her suites, and not without great grief I speak
these words.

There are many women that come to the Court of Princes, to make unreasonable
and dishonest suits, which in the end, notwithstanding obtain their desire:
And not for any right or reason they have to it: save only they have obtained
it through the favor and credit they have won of the favored Courtier, or
of one of his beloved: So as we see it happen many times, that the unjust
furnication, made her suit just and reasonable. I should lie and do my self
wrong me thinks, if I should pass over with silence a thing that happened in
the Emperors Court touching this matter: in the which I went one day to one of
the princes chief officers, and best beloved of him, to solicit a matter of
importance which an hosts of mine should have before him.

And so this favored Courtier, and great Officer after he had heard of men
the whole discourse of the matter, for full resolution of the same, he asked
me, if she were young and fair, and I answered him that she was reasonable
fair, and of good favor.

Well then (says he) bid her come to me, and I will do the best I can to
dispatch her matter with speed, for I will assure you of this, that there
never came fair woman to my hands, but she had her business quickly
dispatched at my hands.

I have known also many women in the Court so dishonest, that not contented to
follow their own matters, would also deal with others affairs, and gain in
feliciting their causes, so that they with their fine words and frank offer
of their persons obtained that, which many times to men of honor, and great
authority was denied.

Therefore these great Officers and favored of Princes ought to have great
respect, not only in the conversation they have with these Women: but also in
the honest order they ought to observe in hearing their causes. And that to be
done in such sort, that whatsoever they say unto them may be secret, provided
also the place where they speak with them, be open for other Suitors in like
case.

CHAP. XVIII. That the Nobles and Beloved of Princes, exceed not in
superfluous fare, and that they be not too sumptuous in their meats. A
notable Chapter for those that use too much delicacy and superfluity.
THe greatest care and regard that Nature laid upon her self was that men
could not live without sustinance: so that so long as we see a man eat (yea
if it were a thousand years) we might be bold to say, that he is
certainly alive. And he has not alone laid this burden upon men, but on
brute beasts also: For we see by experience, that some feeds on the grass
in the fields some lives in the air, eating flies, others upon the worms in
carring, others with that they find under the water: And finally, each beast
lives of other and afterward the worms feed of us all. And not only
reasonable men and brute beasts live by eating, but the trees are nourished
thereby; and we see it thus, that they in stead of meat, receive into them
for nutriture the heat of the Sun, the temperature of the air, the moisture
of the earth, any dew of heaven: so that the sustenance for men is called
meat, and that of plants and trees increase. This being true therefore that
we have spoken, we must needs confess, that to live we must eat: and yet
withal, we must understand that the sin of gluttony consists not in that
that we eat for necessity, but only in that that is eaten with a disordinate
appetite and desire. And sure now a days men use not to eat to content
nature, but to please their licorous and dainty mouths.

He that gives him self over to the desire of the throat, does not only
offend his stomach, and distemper his body, but hurts also his conscience:
for all gluttons and drunkards are the children, or the brothers of sin.

And I speak but little to say, that the mouth and sin are c^sin Germans
together: for by their effects and operations me thinks them so knit and
combined together, as the Father and the Son: Since burning Leacherie
acknowledges none other for her mother, but only the infatiable and gurmand
throat. And the diversity of meats is but a continual and importunate
awaking of dishonest thoughts. Do we not read of S. Hierome, that albeit he
remained in the wilderness, burned of the Sun his face dried up, and
wrinkled, bare footed, and also bare headed, clothed with sackcloth, his body
scourged with bitter stripes, watching in the night, and fasting and hungering
in the day, continually exercising his pen and his heart in contemplation, and
yet for all this grievous penance, him self confessed, that in his sleep, he
dreamed and thought he was among the Curtezans of Rome, and S. Paul the
Apostle, who was a man of rare and exquisite knowledge, and deserved to see the
very secrets of Paradise, never here to fore seen, traveling in his vocation
more then any other of the Apostles, did not he get his living with The
painful travel and industry of Saint Paul.
his own hands: and also went a foot preaching through all the world,
bringing infinite barbarous people to the faith of Christ, being beaten in the
day time by others, for that he was a Christian, and in the night time he
beat himself for that he was a sinner, punishing the flesh, to make it subject
to the spirit. And yet nevertheless he layth of himself, that he could not
defend himself from dishonest thoughts which did ever let him to preach and
pray with a quiet mind: Saint Austen recites of himself in his book De
consessionibus, that all the while he inhabited in the deserts, he eat
little, wrote much, prayed often, and sharply chastised his body, with
continual fasts and grievous disciplines: But yet perceiving that
notwithstanding all this, his dishonest thoughts suppressed his holy desires,
he began to cry with a loud voice thorough the deserts, and rocky hills,
saying. O Lord my God, thou commaundest me to be chaste, but this frail and
accursed flesh can never keep it. And therefore I humbly beseech thee first to
indue me with thy grace, to do that thou will have me, and then command me
what shall please thee: otherwise I shall never do it.

If therefore these glorious Saints with their continual fasts and
contemplations, and extreme punishing of their bodies, could not defend
themselves from the burning motion of the flesh, how shall we believe that a
company of drunkards and gluttons, can do it, which never linne bibbing and
eating. We may be assured that the less we pamper and feed our bodies with
delicacy and idleness, the morewe shall have them obedient and subject to our
wills: For though we see the fire never so great and flaming, yet it quickly
wastes, and is brought to ashes, if we leave for to put more wood unto it.

Excess is not only unlawful for the body, but it is also an occasion of a
thousand diseases both to the body and soul: For to say the truth, we have
seen more rich men die through excess, then poor men of necessity.

And in mine opinion, me thinks the sin of Gluttony need not to be
otherwise punished by divine justice, seeing that of it self it brings
pennaunce enough. And to prove this true: Let us but require these gluttons to
tell us upon their Oaths, how they find themselves in temper being full
paunched? and they will confess unto us, that they are worse at ease then if
they had fasted.

That their mouth is dry, their body heavy, and yll-disposed, that their
head aketh, their stomach is cold, and that Eyes are sleepie, and their
bellyes full, but that yet they desire to drink still. And therefore Dyogenes
Cinicus, deryding the Rhodians, said these words:

Oh you drunken and gluttonous Rhodians: Tell me I beseech you, What occasion
mooues you to go to the Church, to pray to the Gods, to give you health, when
at al times keeping sober diet, you may keep it with you? And moreover he
said unto them also: and if you will be ruled by my counsel, I will tell ye,
you need not go to the Churches, to beseech the gods to grant you health,
but only to pray unto them, to pardon you your sins and iniquities you daily
commit. Also Socrates the Philosopher was wont to say to his disciples, of the
university of Athens:

Remember Oh you Athenians, that in the well-gouerned policies, men live not
to eat, to glut the body: but A worthy speech of Socrates the philosopher.
do only eat to live, and sustain the body.

O grave saying of the good philosopher! and I would to GOD that every good
Christian would carry this lesson in mind. For, if we would but let Nature
alone, and give her liberty, and disposition, of her self, she is so honest,
and of such temperance, that she will not leave to eat that that shall suffice
her, neither will also trouble us with that that is superfluous.

Yet an other foul offense brings this vice of Gluttony, and that is, That
many put themselves in service to wait on others: not so much for the Ordinary
fare that is commonly used in their house, as for the desire they have to fill
their bellies with dainty and superfluous meats. And in especial, when they
know they make any marriages or feasts for their Friends, then give double
attendance, not contented alone with that themselves have eaten, but further in
remembrance of the worthy feast, commits to the custody of his trusty Cater
(his great Hose) perhaps a two or three days store of those rare and dainty
dyshes, which I am ashamed to write, and much more ought they to be ashamed to
do it. For that man that professes to be a man, ought to enforce himself
never to engage his liberty for that, his sensual appetite inciteth him to:
but only for that reason binds him to.

Aristippus the Philosopher washing lettice one day with his own hands for
his supper, by chance Plautus passing by that way, and seeing him said, If thou
would have served king Dionisius, we should not have seen thee have eaten
Lettises, as thou do now. Aristippus answered him again. O Plautus if thou
were content to eat of these Lettises that I eat, thou should not serve so
great a Tyrant as thou do.

The excess of meats is greater in these days, both in quantity, and in
dressing of them, then in times past, For in that golden age, which the
philosophers never cease to bewail, men had none other houses but natural
caves in the ground, and apparrelled only with the leaves of trees, the bare
ground for their shoes, their hands serving them in the stead of Cups to
drink in: they drank Water for Wine, eat roots for bread, and fruits for
flesh: and finally, for their bed they made the earth, and for their covering,
the sky, being lodged always at the sign of the Star.

When the divine Plato returned out of Cicill into Greece, he said one day in
his College: I do advertise you (my Disciples, that I am returned A worthy
saying of the divine Plato.
out of Cicil maruellously troubled, and this is by reason of a Monster I saw
there. And being asked, what monster it was, he told them it was Dionisius the
tyrant, who is not contented with one meal a day, but I saw him suppe many
times in the night.

O divine Plato, if thou were alive as thou art dead, and present with us in
this our pestilent age, as thou werte then in that golden: how many should
thou see, that do not only dine and sup well, but before dinner break their
fast with delicate meats and wines, and banquet after dinner and supper also
before they go to bed. So we may say, though Plato saw then but one Tyrant
suppe, he might see now every body both dine and suppe, and scant one that
contenteth him with one meal a day, in which the brute beasts are more
moderate, then reasonable men. Since we see that they eat but so much as
satisfies them: and are not contented to eat enough yea till they be full,
but more then nature will bear. And brute beasts have not also such diversity
of meats, as men have, neither servants to wait on them, beds to lie in, wine
to drink houses to put their heads in, money to spend, nor Physicians to
purge them as men have. And yet for all these commodities, we see men the most
part of their time sick.

And by these things recited, we may perceive, that there is nothing preserves
so much the health of man as labor, and nothing consumes sooner then rest.

And therefore Plato in his time once spoke a notable sentence, and worthy to
be had in mind, and that is this, That in that City where there are Another
sentence of Plato.
many Physicians, it must needs follow of necessity, that the Inahbitants
there of, are vicious, and riotous persons. And truly we have good cause to
carry this saying away: since we see that Physicians commonly enter not into
poor men's houses, that travel and exercise their body daily: but contrarily
into the rich and wealthy men's houses, which live continually idely, and at
ease.

I remember I knew once a Gentleman (a kinsman of mine, and my very friend)
which having taken physic, I came to see how he did, supposing he had been
sick, and demanding of him the cause of his purgation: he told me, he
took it not for any sickness he had, but only to make him have a better
appetite against he went to the feast, which should be two or three days
after.

And within six days after I returned again to see him, and I found him in
his bed very sick, not for that he had fasted too much, but that he had
inglutted him self with the variety of meats he did eat at the feast.

So it happened, that when he purged himself once only to have better
stomach to eat, he needed afterward a dozen Purgations for to discharge his
laden stomach of that great surfeit he had taken at the feast, with extreme
eating: And for the four hours he was at the Table where this Feast was, he
was lodged afterward in his Chamber, for two months to pay usury for that
he had taken, and yet it was the great grace and mercy of GOD he escaped
with Life: For if that it be ill to sin, It is far worse to seek and
procure occasions to sin.

And therefore by consequent, the sin of Gluttony is not only dangerous for
the conscience, hurtful to the health of the body, and a displeasing of God:
but it is also a worm that eats, and in fine consumes wholly the goods and
faculties of him that uses it. Besides that, these gurmands receive not so
much pleasure in the eating of these dainty morsels, as they do afterward
grief and displeasure to heat the great accounts of their stewards, of their
excessive expenses. It is a sweet delight to be fed daily with dainty
dishes, but a sour sauce to those delicate mouths, to put his hand so often to
the purse. Which I speak not without cause, since that as we feel great
pleasure and felicity in those meats that enter into our stomachs: so do we
afterward think that they pluck out of our heart the money that pays for
these knackes. I remember I saw written in an Inn in Catalogia these words:

You that host here, must say when you sit down to your meat: Salve regina,
Yea and when you are eating, vitae dulcedo: yea and when you reckon with the
host: Ad te suspiramus: yea and when you come to pay him, Gementes, and
flentes,

Now if I would go about to describe by parcels the order and manner of our
feasts and banquets, newly invented by our own Nation, there would rather
appear matter to you, to lament and bewail, then to write. And it had been
better by way of speech to have invented diverse fashio^s of tables, forms and
stools, to sit on, then such diversity of meats to set upon the Tables, as
we do use now a days. And therefore by good reason did Licurgus king of
Lacedemonia, ordain and command that no stranger (...).
coming out of a strange Country into his, should be so hardy to bring in any
new customs, upon pain that if it were known, he should be strait banished
out of the Country, and if he did use and practice it, he should be put to
death. I will tell you no lie, I saw once served in at a feast 42. sorts and
kinds of meats in several dishes. In an other feast of diverse sorts of the
fish called Tuny. And in an other feast being flesh day. I saw diverse fishes
broyled with larde. And at an other feast where I saw no other meat but
Troutes, and Lamperies of diverse kinds of dressing. And at an other feast where
I saw only vi. persons agree together to drink each of them three pottles of
wine a piece, with this condition further, that they should be 6. hours at
the table, and he that drank not out his part, should pay for the whole feast.

I saw also an other feast, where they prepared three several Tables for the
bidden guests, the one boorde served after the Spanish manner, the other after
the Italian, and the third served after the fashion of Flanders: And to every
table there was served 22. sorts of meats. I saw also at an other feast such
kinds of meats eaten, as are wont to be seen, but not eaten, as a horse
roasted, a cat in gely, little lysers with hot broth, frogs fried, and diverse
other sorts of meats which I saw them eat, but I never knew what they were till
they were eaten. And for Gods sake what is he that shall read our writings,
and see that is commonly eaten in feasts now a days, that it will not in a
manner break his heart, and water his plants.

The only Spices that have been brought out of Calicut, and the manner of
furnishing of our boordes, brought out of France, has destroyed our Nation
utterly. For in the old time they had no other kinds of Spices in Spain but
Saffron, Comin, Garlic and Onions, and when one friend invited an other, they
had but a piece of beef, and a piece of veale, and no more: and it was a rare
and dainty matter to add to a Hen: Oh mishaps of worldly creatures, you
embrace not now the time that was: for now if he be an Officer, or popular
person of any like condition, and that he inuit his friend or neighbor, he
will not for shame set before him less then vi. or vij. several dishes,
though he sell his cloak for it, or fare the worse one whole week after, for
that one supper or dinner.

Good Lord, it is a wonder to see what stir there is in that man's house that
makes a dinner or supper. Two or three days before, you shall see such resort
of persons, such hurly burly, such flying this way, such sending that way, some
occupied in telling the Cooks how many sorts of meats they will have, other
send out to provide a Cater to buy their meat, and to hier servants to wait
on them, and other poor folks to look to the dressing up of the house,
brawling and fighting with their servants, commanding their maids to look to
the Butterie, to rub the tables and stools, and to see all things set in
their order, as fit as may be, and to taste this kind of Wine, and that
kind of wine: so that I would to God they would (for the health of their
souls) but employ half this care and pains they take in preparing one
dinner, to make clean their consciences and to confess themselves unto
Almighty God.

I would feign know, after all these great feasts, what there remains more,
then as I suppose, the Master of the house is troubled, the Stewards and Caters
wearied, the poor cooks broyled in the fire, the house all foul, and yet
that is worst of al, sometimes the master of the feast comes short of a piece
of plate that is stolen.

So that he cannot choose but be sorry for the great charges he has been
at, besides the loss of his plate and vessel stolen, and the rest of his
implements of house marred, and in a manner spoiled. And peradventure also the
invited not satisfied, nor contented, but rather will laugh him to scorn for
his cost, and murmur at him behind his back.

Marcus Tullius Cicero was once bidden to supper of a covetous Roman, a
Citizen borne, whose supper agreede with his avarice: So the next day it
chanced this covetous Citizen to meet with Cicero, and he asked him how he
did with his Supper: very well, said Cicero, for it was a good Supper, that it
shall serve me yet for all this day. Meaning to let him understand by these
words, that his Supper was so miserable and he lest with such an appetite, as
he should dine the next day with a better stomach at home.

The Author continues his purpose
IT is now more then time we do bring you aparant proofs The Author
continues his speech concerning the abuse of feasts.
(as well by Scriptures, as profane Authors) that there was never made feast
nor banquet, but the Devil was ever lightly a guest, by whose presence always
happens some mischief. The first banquet that ever was made in the World,
was that the Devil made to Adam and Eve, with the fruit of terrestrial
Paradise: after which followed a disobeying of Gods commandment, the loss
that Adam had of his innocence, and a sudden shame and perpetual reproach to
our mother Eve: Man's nature presently brought to all sin and vice. So that
we may well say, they eat the fruit, that set our teeth an edge.

Did not Rebecca likewise make a feast to her husband Isaac, in which Esau lost
his heritage, and Jacob succeeded in the same blessing Isaacke (through fraud)
whom he took for Esau, and all through the counsel of his mother Rebecca,
she having her dedesire and purpose as she wished. Absolon, did not he make
an other to all his brethren, after which followed the death of Aman one of his
brothers and by one of the other brethren their sister Thamar was defamed, and
their father King David very sore grieved, and afflicted, and all the realm of
Israel slaundered? king Assuerus made an other of so great and foolish expense,
that he kept open house for a hundred and fourscore days: and it followed
that Queen Vasti was deprived of her crown, and the fair Hester invested in
her room: Many Fearful examples of those that have made riotous feasts.
Noble men of the City of Hull were murdered and hewn in pieces, by means
whereof the Hebrews came into great favor and credit, and Aman, the chief in
authority and favor about the Prince, deprived of all his lands, and shamefully
executed upon the Gallows, and Mardocheus placed in his room, and greatly
sublimed and exalted.

Also the 14. children of the holy man Job (which were 7. sons, and so many
daughters) being all feasted at their eldest brothers house, before they rese
from the board, were they not all slain?

Also Baltezar Son of King Nabuchodonozer made a banquet to all the
Gentlewomen and his Concubines within the City, so sumptuous and rich, that
that only vessel he was served withal, and the cups they drank in, were
robbed out of the Temple of Jerusalem by his Father: and this followed after
his great banquet. The self same night the king with all his Concubines dyed
suddenly, and his Realm taken from him, and put into the hands of his enemies.

It had been better for all these I have recited, that they had eaten alone at
home, then to have dyed so suddenly accompanied.

Now let all these gourmands and licorous mouthed people mark what I shall say
to them, and carry it well in mind, and that is this: that the sin of Gluttony
is nothing else but a displeasure, great peril, and a marvelous expense. I say
it is a displeasure: for the great care they have continually to seek out
diversity of fine and curious meats: great peril, because they plunge their
bodies into many diseases, and in unmerciful charge, for the curiosity and
number of dishes So that for a little pleasure and delight we take in the sweet
taste of those dainety meats, but a satisfaction unto the mind for a short
time: we afterward have infinite griefs and troubles, with a sower sauce,
to our no little pain.

And therefore Aristotle mockeing the Epicurians said, That they upon a time
went all into the Temple together, beseeching the Gods that they would give
them necks as long as the Cranes and Herens, that the pleasures and taste of
the meats should be more long, before that it came into the stomach, to take
the greater delight of their meat, complaining of Nature for that she made
their necks so short: affirming that the only pleasure of meats consisted in
the swallowing of it down, which they said was too soon. If that we saw a
man even upon a sudden throw all his goods into the Sea or river, would we not
imagine he were mad or a very fool?

Yes undoubtedly. Even such a one is he that prodigally spends all his goods
in feasting and banqueting.

And that this is true: do we not see manifestly that all these meats that
are served in at Noblemens boords to day, and to morrow conueyghed into the
privy, from the Eaters by their page or servant?

Surely man's Stomach is nothing else but a gutte or Tripe, forced with meat,
bread, and wine: a Pauement filled with wine Lees, and a vessel of
stincking-oyle, a receypt of corrrupt air, a sincke of a Kitchen, and a secret
place, whereinto we cast all our goods and faculty, as into the river.

And therefore Esaias said, that all these noble cities of Sodom and Gomorrha,
by this only curse did incur into such execrable sins, for which
afterward they were destroyed. And this was even through excess of feeding,
eating, and drinking, and too much idleness: and it is no marvel. For it is
an infallible thing, that where idleness and gluttony reigns, there must
needs come some ill end unto that man.

The Greeks, the Romans, the Egiptians, and the Scythes, although they were
derected of many other sins and vices, yet were they always sober and temperat
in eating and drinking.

Iustine that wrote of Trogus Pompeyus recites, that among the Scythes (which
were the rudest and most barbarous that came into Asia) used to reprove those
that let go wind, and to chastise and punish those that vomited: saying, that
breaking wind, and vomiting, came only of too much eating and drinking.

Plutarch in his Apothegmes said, that there was a philosopher in Athens
called Hyppomachus: that was so great an enemy to gluttony, that he used in
his College such and so great an abstinence, that his Disciples by that were
known amongst all the other Philosophers. And not for no other thing, but to
see them buy their cates and provision to live withal: for they never bought
meats to fat them, and keep them lusty, but only to sustain nature, and
that but little.

The Romans made diverse laws in the old time to expel out of their Cities
drunkards and Gluttons, whereof Wholesome laws of the Romans against gluttony.
we will recite some unto you, to the end that those that shall read our
present writings, shall both know and see what great care our Forefathers
took to abolish this horrible vice of Gluttony.

First, there was a Law in Rome, called Fabian Law, so called, because Fabian
the Consul made it, in which it was prohibited, that no man should be so
hardy in the greatest Feast he made, to spend above a hundred Sexterces, which
might be in value a hundred pieces of 6. pence, Salets, and all other kinds of
fruit, not comprised within the same.

And immediately after that, came out another law called Messinia, which the
Consul Messinius made. By which they were also inhibited in all feasts to
drink no strange wines, which only were permitted to be given to those that
were diseased. After which followed also another law Licinia made by the Consul
Licinius, forbidding in all feasts all kinds of Sawces, because they incite
appetite, and are cause of great expense. An other law Emilia, of Emilius the
Consul also, commanding the Romans should be served in their banquets but only
with five sorts of diversities of meats, because in them there should be
sufficient for honest re^ection, and no superfluity to fill the belly: And then
was there the Law Ancia made by Ancius the Consul, charging all the Romans
for to endeavor to learn all kind of sciences, except cookery. For, according
to their saying: In that House where was a Cook, those of that house became
poor quickly: their bodies diseased, their minds vicious, and al-together
given to gluttony.

After this law there came forth another called Iulia, of Julius Caesar,
comcommaunding al Romans, that none should be so hardy to shut their gates
when they were at dinner: and it was A Law made by Julius Caesar.
to this end, that the Censours of the City might have easy access into
their houses at mealtime, to see if their Ordinary were correspondent to their
ability.

And there was also another Law made afterward, called Aristimia, of
Aristmius the Consul, by which it was enacted, that it should be lawful for
every man to inuire his friends to dinner to him at noon, as they liked,
provided that they supped not together that night.

And this was established thus, to cut off the great charges they were at with
their suppers. For the Romans exceeded in superfluity of dainty and fine
meats, and moreover they sat too long guzling and eating at their suppers

Of all these Laws heretofore recited, were authors Aulus Gelius: and
Macrobius. And for this was Caius Gracchus well reputed of, by the Romans, who
notwithstanding he had bin Consul in diverse Provinces, (and that many times)
and he was a man of great gravity and authority in Rome, his wife was his
only cook: and traveling, his hostess of his house where he lay dressed his
meat.

Marcus Mantius in times past, made a book of diverse ways how to dress meat,
and an other of the tastes, sawces, and diverse manners of serving of them in at
the bankets, and a third book, how to cover the table, set the stools in order,
order the cupbord: and also how servants should wait and give their attendance
at the Table: which three books were no sooner imprinted, and published, but
presently and publicly they were burned by the Senate of Rome, and if his
author had not quickly voyded Rome, and fled into Asia, he had accompanied his
books in the fire.

The ancient writers never ceased to reprove enough Lentulus, Caesar, Scylla,
Scaeuola, and Aemilius: For, a banquet they made in a garden of Rome, where they
eat no other meats, but Blacke-byrdes, Torteyses, Mallardes, Nettles,
pigs-brains, and hares in sauce.

But if the Roman Writers wrote in these days, I do not believe they would
reprove so simple a banquet made by so noble and famous persons as they were:
For now a days they do so far exceed in variety of dishes at noble men's
boords, that neither they have appetite to eat, nor yet they can tell the name
of the dishes.

But now returning to our purpose, I say the intent why we have laid before
you these forepassed examples, was only to this end, to admonish the favored
of Princes, to look into themselves, that they avoid this filthy sin of
Gluttony. Being a foul blot in a Courtier, to be counted a greedy gut, and
carmarant at his meat, and being one, whose manners and behauior every man
marketh: for sure it is more fitting for them to be moderate and sober in
eating and drinking then others, and good reason why: For as they are more
Noble then others, so have they many that sue unto them, and they have also the
waightiest matters of government, passing under their charge: by reason whereof
if they surcharge themselus with excess, they are then very unapt to dispatch
any matters: for much eating causes sleep, and much drinking depriueth the^
of their judgment and senses both.

Is it not to be wondered at, yea, and to be reproved also, to see a
Magistrate or Counselor sit in his chair, to hear poor men's causes and
suites: and the suitor opening his cause unto him, he sits nodding with his
head in his bosom, ready to sleep?

Even so do I say likewise, that it is a great reproach to the beloved of the
Prince, and great damage to the commonwealth, that it should be spoken amongst
Courtiers and suitors, that to day he was of this opinion, and to morrow he is
of another. So that the Courtyer or suitor should have hope to dispatch that to
morrow, he could not do to day.

King Philip, Father of Alexander the great, although he was a Prince noble and
fortunate, yet was he noted and King Philip noted of drunkenness
rebuked for drinking of wine: whereof followed, that after he had given
judgment upon a time, against a poor widow-woman: she answered straight, she
appealed.

The Noblemen that were present, hearing what was said by the King: asked
her, to whom she would appeal, since the King in person gave sentence of
her, and no other? And this was her answer she made them. I appeal to King
Philip which is now drunk: that when he is sober, he return to give sentence.

And as the Hystoriographers say, that writes this history: This poor woman
was not deceived, in her appellation at all: For after K. Philip had reposed
and slept a little, he revoked and repealed the Sentence that he had before
given against her.

And therefore concerning this matter, I say, that that how wild or tame
soever a Beast be, yet he still continues a beast in his kind, only a man
except, who very often through too much excess of meat and drink, strayeth so
far from reason, forgetting himself, that neither he himself, nor any other
knows well, whether he be then a man or a Beast.

Those that are the favored of princes, must be very circumspect, that they
be not too sumptuous, and prodigal, in their Feasts and Banquets, for they
have many eyes attendant on them. And some will say, That they make not those
great feasts of themselves, but by the gifts and presents of others.

I wish them in this case, that they should not hope to excuse themselves by
saying, That they only feast their kinsfolks and familiar friends. For the
envy that commonly one bears against the power and authority of a man, is so
great and extreme, that it spares not friends, remembers not kinsfolk
neither makes account of the benefits received: but rather as soon as the
bidden guests are departed from his house that bad them, they go talking among
themselves, and murmuring amongst others, saying many times that it is more
worth, that is lost by the vain and lavish expenses of the favored Courtier,
then that that is commonly served to the Princes own boorde.

Also I counsel the beloved of Princes that they take heed whom they trust,
and whom they inuit unto their Tables: For many times if they be but four
that are bidden, one of them goes sure to eat and banquet, and the other three
to fleere and mock, and to mark all that is brought in, and the manner of the
service. And the worst is yet, that he shall many times bring such to eat with
him, that would more willingly eat his flesh, then his meat.

These reputed Courtiers must be well advised, that though they be too delicate
and superfluous in their meat yet at least that they bridle their tongs; For
they may be assured, that as their guests they bad go full paunched from them,
so carry they away with them all the superfluous and vain words they heard at
the table.

Besides that, that what so ever the Courtyer said at the board, reporting it
otherwhere, they will not say that he spoke it of himself, but that the King
himself told it him.

And yet is there a far greater danger and peril then this we have spoken
of, and that is: That they will not simply tell that they heard of the beloved
Courtyer, but will add unto it of their own heads, what they think best, and
what was his meaning, in speaking it.

So that we may say, that there are not so many Comments upon the Bible, (as
they make Glosses upon the same reports, by their rash judgments and fond
interpretations) which they did descant upon one only word spoken unawares
perhaps, by some at the Table of this favored Courtyer.

It is a general custom amongst all estates and conditions of people: that
where the^e are sumptuous Tables, and abundance of dyshes, there the invited
sit long at their meat, and are liberal to speak evil. Which sure such as
are in favor with the Prince, neither ought to do, nor suffer it to be done
at his board. For the good and honorable Feast, ought only to be served, with
good and dainty meats: but in no wise marred with the defaming of his
neighbor.

Oh how many Feasts and Bankets are made in Princes Courts, where without al
comparison there are more detractions used of their neighbors, then there are
diuersityes of dyshes to eat.

A pernicious thing doubtless, and and not to be suffered nor abidden: For no
man hurts the reputation of another with his tongue, but with the selfsame
he condemns his own conscience: and therefore let men be advised of their
speech, and what they How careful a man ought to be to bridle his tongue.
speak of others.

For it is always an easy matter to detract and hinder the good fame and
reputation of a man: but very hard afterward to satisfy the party.

Therefore I counsel, and admonish those Courtyers, that they do not often
feast others: but also that they do not accept to go to others Tables where
they are bidden. For, they may be assured, that they are beloved of few, and
hated of all: and besides that, it might so happen, that others should be at
the charge of the feast, and that they should lose their lives.

Also let not the favored Courtier trust those too much that come ordinarily
to his Table, and that do rebid him again to theirs, yea though they seem
even to be wholly his to dispose, and possible, as it were his right hand, and
that they be those who^ he happily to have done much for, in dispatching their
affairs: for lightly in such like feasts, treasons, and poisonings are not
practiced with the master of the Feast, but only with him that waits at the
Table to give drink or else by the Cooks that dresseth the meat.

Also let not the Courtier trust too much those whom he has been in Company
with all at diverse feasts, (where he never had hurt) much less knew any
little occasion to suspect ill of them, touching any treason meant toward him:
For so at a time when he suspecteth least, he may be in most danger, and
find himself deceived. And therefore by my council, he shall not easily be
entreated to every man's boorde, unless he be first well assured of the
company that are bidden as also of the Servants that wait: For the holes and
spaces of the French riddles (with which they dust their corn) sometimes is
even stopped with the very grains of the same corn: and lets the clear
passage of all the rest

One of the greatest troubles (or to term it better) one of the greatest
dangers, I see the favored Courtier in, is this: that all the Courtiers and
in a manner all the Citizens, desire to see them out of favor, or dead by some
means. For every man is of this mind, that with the change of things, by his
fall or death he hops he shall rise to some better state, or happily to
catch some part of his offices or living.

An other mischief and inconvenience yet happens to this favored Courtier,
by haunting other Tables, and that is, that many times it chances, unseemly,
and dishonest words are let fall at the Table, and perhapps quarrel arise upon
it, which though he be present, yet he can neither remedy, nor appease it.

And because these things were done and spoken in the presence of the esteemed
of the Prince, he that spoke them has credit, and those that heard it,
descryed it: Yet there is an other disorder that comes by these feasts that
is, that he which makes the feast and bids guestes, does it not for that
they are of his acquaintance, his kinsfolks, or his faithful friends, nor for
that he is bound and beholding to them, but only to obtain his desire in his
suites that he has in hand: for they are few that seek to pleasure men, but
in hope to be greatly recompensed. Therefore those that are in favor and
authority about the prince: and that accept others bidding, sure one of these
two things must happen to them: Either that he must dispatch his business
that inuiteth him: yea although it be unreasonable, and so unjust, and
damnable, that obtaining it, both he and the favored Courtier go to the
Devil together for company, for the wrong and injury they have done to
another: or on the other side refusing to do it, the Bidder is stricken dead,
and repents his cost bestowed on him.

Above all things I chiefly admonish the Courtiers and Officers of Princes, not
to sell, change, nor engage their liberties as they do, the same day they
begin to follow such feasts, or to receive gifts or presents, or to link
themselves in straight friendship with any or to deal parcially in any
cause: For by these foresaid occasions, they shall often bind themselves to do
that that shall not be fit for them, besides the loss of their liberty they
had before, to do that was most honest and commendable.

CHAP. XIX. That the favored of Princes ought not to be dishonest of their
tongues, nor envious of their words.
ANaxagoras the Philosopher disputing one day of the cause why Nature had
placed the members of man's body in such order as they are, and of the property
and complexion of every one of them, and to what end they had been so orderly
placed by Nature, each member in his place, falling in the end to treat of the
tongue, said thus of it: You must understand Anaxagoras his opinion concerning
the tongue.
my good Disciples, that not without art and great mystery, Nature gave us two
feet, two hands, two ears, and two eyes, and yet for all this but one tongue,
whereby she showed us, that in our going, feeling, smelling, hearing, and
seeing: we may be as long as we will: but in speaking we should be as sparing
and scant, as could be: Alleging further, That Nature suffered us to go
open, and barefaced: the Eyes, the ears, the hands, the feet, and other
parts of the body bare also, excepting the Tongue, which she has enuironned
with jaws, and empaled with Teeth, and also shut up with lips: which she did
to give us to understand, that there is nothing in this present life that has
more need of Guarde and defense, then has this our unbridled Tongue.

And therefore said Pythachus the philosopher, that a man's Tongue is made like
the iron point of a Lance, but yet that it was more dangerous then that: For
the point of the lance can but hurt the flesh, but the Tongue pierces the
heart.

And surely it was a true saying of this philosopher. For I know not that man
how virtuous or pacient so ever he be, but thinks it less hurt, the bloody
sword should pierce his flesh, then that he should be touched in honor, with
the venomous point of the Serpentine-Tongue. For, how cruel soever the wound
be, Time does heal it, and makes it well again: but defame or infamy,
neither late nor never can be amended.

We see men refuse to go by water for fear of drowning: not to come too near
the fire for fear of burning, nor to go to the wars, for fear of killing:
to eat no ill meats, for being sick: to climb up on high, for fear of
falling: to go in the dark, for fear of stumbling: to avoid the ill air
and rain, for fear of rewmes: and yet I see very few or none, that can beware
of detractors and ill tongues. And that this is true I tell you, I do not
think that in any thing a man is in such peril and danger, as when he lives
accompanied with men dishonest in their doings, and vile, and naught in their
tongues.

I have also read touching this matter, that Aformius the philosopher being
asked what he meant to spend the most part of his time amongst the desert
mountains, and in hazard, every hour to be devoured of wild beasts? Answered
thus. Wild beasts have no other weapons to hurt me, but their horns and
nails, and their Teeth to devour me, but men never cease to hurt and offend
me, with all their whole members.

And that this is true, behold I pray you, how they look at me with their
Eyes, spurn me with their feet, torment me with their hands, hate me with
their hearts, and defame me with their tongues. So that we have great reason to
say: That a man lives with more security amongst wild beasts, then amongst
malignant and envious people.

Plutarch in his book De exilio says That the Lidians had a Law, that as they
sent the condemned murderers to row in the Galleyes, so they confined those
that were Detractors, and evil tongued men into a secret place, (far off
from all company) the space Plutarch recites a Law used among the Lidians.
of half a year. In so much that many times these lewd mates chose rather to
rewe in the Galley three years then to be exempt from company, and speaking
with any but six months.

Much like unto this Law did Tiberius the Emperor make another, and condemned
a great talker and railer of his tongue, and commanded straightly that he
should never speak word the space of a whole year. And as the historic says,
he remained dumb, and never spoke during the whole term, but yet that he
did (with his dumbness) more hurt with nods and signs with his fingers, then
many other would have done with their ill tongues.

By these two examples we may see, that since these naughty tongues are not to
be repressed by silence, in secret, nor to entreat them as friends nor by
doing them good, nor by sending them to Galleyes: nor to make them hold their
peace, and to be as dumb men: By mine advise I would have them banished (by
general counsel) out of all Colleges counsels, chapters, towns and
Commonwealthes: For we see daily by experience, that let an apple have never
so little a bruise, that bruise is enough to rotte him quickly, if he be not
eaten in time.

Demosthenes the Philosopher was of great authority for his person, grave in
manners, and condition, and very sententious, and profound in his words: but
with these he was so obstinate, and wilful, and such a talker in all his
matters, that all Greece quaked for fear of him.

Whereupon all the Athenians one day assembled in their hall, or common house,
and there they appointed him a great stipend of the goods of the Common wealth,
telling him that they gave him this, not that he should read, but because he
should hold his peace. Also this great and renowned Cicero that was so valiant
and politic in martial affairs, so great a friend to the Common weal of
Rome and moreover a Prince of Eloquence, for the Latin tongue, though he was
cruelly put to death by Mark Antony, it was not for any fact committed against
him, neither for any wrong or injury he had done him, save only for that he
enuyed against him, and spoke evil of him.

Also the Noble and famous Poet Salust, and famous Orator of Rome, was not
hated of strangers, and not beloved of his own neighbors, for no other cause,
but for that he never took pen in hand to write, but he ever wrote against
the one, and never opened his mouth to speak, but he always spoke evil of
the other.

Plutarch touching this matter recites in his books De Republica, that
amongst them of Lidia, in their public weal, it was holden an inviolable What
punishment by a Law of the Lidians, was due to him that would defame his
neighbor.
Law, that they should not put a murderer to death for killing of any, but that
they should only execute, and put him to tortur, that would defame his
neighbor, or in any one Word seem to touch him in honor and estimation.

So that those barbarous Nations thought it more execrable to defame a man,
then to kill and murder him: And therefore I say, he that burns my house,
beats my person, and robs me of my goods, must needs do me great damage:
but he that takes upon him to touch my honor and reputation with infamy, I
will say, he offends me much, and that so greatly, as he may well stand in
fear of his life: For there is not so little an offense done to a man of
stout courage, but he carries it ever after imprinted in his heart, till he
have revenged the villainy done him: even so in Princes Courts, there rise more
quarrels, and debates through evil tongues and dishonest reports, then there
does for any play or shrewde turns that are done.

I know not what reason they have to strike off his hand that first draws
sword, and favors and leaves him unpunished, that draws blood with his il
tongue.

O what a happy good turn were it for the Common weal, if (as they have in
all Towns and well governed policies, penal laws, prohibiting for to wear
or carry weapon) they had like laws also to punnish detractiue, and wicked
tongues: Surely, there can not be so great a blotte or vice in a Noble man,
Knight or Gentleman of honest behavior and countenance, as to be counted and
reputed a tatler of his tongue, and therewithal a detractor of others. But let
not such deceive themselves, thinking that for their countenance or estates
sake they be privileged above others, at their wills and pleasure to enlarge
their tongues on whom they list in such manner, but that their inferiors far,
will as liberally speak of them, yea, and as much to their reproach, as they
before had done of them: repenting as much of their honesty and credit for
their calling (being in equivalent in estate or degree to them) as they do of
their dignity and reputation.

At that time when I was a Courtier, and lived in Princes Court, there dyed out
of the Court a worthy knight, who at his noble funerals was commended of us al,
to be a good and devout Christian, and chiefly above all his noble and
heroical virtues, he was only lauded and renowned, for that they never heard
him speak ill of any man.

So one of the company that was present, hearing this great praise of him,
took upon him to say this of him: If he never spoke ill of any, then did he
never know what pleasur those have that speak ill of their enemies. Which
words when we heard though we passed them over with silence, yet was there
none but was greatly offended at them, and good cause why: For to say truly,
the first degree of malignity is, for a man to take a felicity in speaking ill
of his neighbor.

King Darius being at dinner one day, there were put forth of the Waighters
and Standers by, certain Arguments of the Acts and doings of Alexander the
Great: in which lispute, one Mignus a Captain of the King, and greatly in
favor with him, was very earnest against Alexander, and went too far in
speech of him. But Darius perceiving him thus passioned, said to him: O
Mignus, A speech of King Darius.
hold thy tongue, for I do not bring thee into the wars with me, that thou
should infame Alexander (and touch his honor with thy tongue, but that thou
should with thy sword overcome him.

By these examples we may gather, how much we ought to hate detraction and
ill speaking, since we see that the very enemies themselves cannot abide to
hear their enemies evil spoken off in their presence: and this is always
observed of the honorable, grave, and wise men that are of noble minds: For
sure each noble heart disdaineth to be revenged of his enemy with his tongue,
for his injuries done him: if he cannot be revenged on him with his sword.

It is fitting for all in general to be modest and honest in their speech, but
much more it is due for him that embraces the favor and credit of his
Prince: For it is his profession to do good, to help every man, and to speak
ill of no man.

They have such Sentinels of spies upon them continually (which are officers in
Court and about the Prince) to mark what they speak and do, that treading
once awry (how little soever it be) it is straight blown into the Princes
ears, and they perhaps accused of that which they never thought delighting, and
taking great pleasure to tell openly what they heard them say.

Such therefore as are daily Courtiers, attending upon the What behavior
belongs to a Courtier.
Prince, and in favor with him, must (if they mean to continue that favor
and credit) be gentle, and courteous in their Words, and bountiful to those
that stand in need of them.

Also the esteemed Courtyer must beware he do not speak ill of no man, but
also that he be not too great a talker. For commonly these great talkers
besides that they are not esteemed, be also reputed of small judgment and of
simple counsel.

Pythyas', that was the great Gouerner, and Duke of the Athentan nation, was a
Noble prince, beloved and feared, hardy, and valiant, and yet in the end as
says Plutarch, the abundance of words, obscured the glory of his heroical
deeds.

Although often times these great talkers, and men too full of words be of Noble
byrth' or worship, wealthy in possessions, and otherwise of authority and
estimation: yet nevertheless, all that time they spend in speaking too much,
others that hear them, occupy the same in deryding and scorning of them.

I beseech you consider, what greater reproach could a Courtyer have, then to
be counted a babbler, a prater of his tongue, and a liar? For when he thinks
every man is attentive, and listening to him, it is quite contrary: for even
at that instant do they laugh him to scorn: and yet this is nothing to the
shame they do unto him afterward.

For those that talk to him, whilst he is thus babbling, pots at him with
their mouths, behind his back, nods with their heads, holds down their
Eyes, and soothes him in all that he says, and all this not to praise or
commend him, but to be merry afterward at the matter, when they are together.
And it is a sport to note, and hear of one of these great Talkers, if any man
talk of war, of the liberal sciences, of hunting, or of husbandry, he
will straight leap into the matter although he be utterly ignorant in the thing
proponed, taking upon him to reason of the matter, as if he were very
skillful, or master of that faculty. And to make the hearers believe, that that
is true he says, he brings in an example: saying that he has seen it,
read it, or heard it, and all perhaps a stark Lie, that he neither saw it,
read it, nor heard it of any: but only devised of his own head, on a sudden,
under the color of Truth, to forge and make a false Lie.

Acaticus the Philosopher, being one day at a Feast, where he neither spoke
nor offered once to speak: being asked after Dinner, what was the occasion of
his silence, answered them thus: It is better for a man to know his A wise
saying of Acaticus the Philosopher
time to speak, then it is to know to speak. For to speak well, is given us
by Nature: but to choose fit time to speak, proceeds of wisdom.

Epimenides the painter, after he had dwelt long time in Asia, returned to
Rhodes, from whence he first departed, and because none of the Rhodians ever
heard him speak any thing, either of that he had seen, or done in Asia,
they marvelled very much, and earnestly prayed him to discourse unto them some
part of that he had seen, and suffered in Asia. To whom he made this answer.

Two years I sulked the Seas, abiding the perils of the water, and ten other
years I was resident in Asia, to learn the perfection of a paynters art: six
other years I studied in Greece, to accustom my self to be silent, and now
you would I should feed you, with tales and news.

O Rhodians, come to me no more with any such motion: for you should come to
my house to buy pictures, and not to hear news. Albeit in so many years, and
in such far and strange Countries it could not be but Epimenides had seen
many things worthy to be recounted, and also very pleasant for to hear: yet
he would never tell them, nor show the^: and sure herein he did like a good
philosopher, and answered like a wise and grave person: For in telling of
strange things, and of diverse countries, there are few that will believe them,
and many that will stand in doubt whether they be true or not.

And therefore touching this matter also, Pythagoras the Philosopher was one
day asked upon what occasion he made his Scholars use so great silence in his
College, that in two years after they were entered, they might not speak. He
answered thus: In other Philosophers Schools they teach their Disciples to
speak, but in mine there is taught nothing but to hold their peace. For in
the whole World there is no better nor higher A speech of Pythagoras
philosophy then to know to bridle the tongue.

It is a marvelous thing to see a man that with time his beard and hairs of
his head become all white, his face withered, his ears deaf, his legs swollen
his breath stink, his spleen stopte, and his body faint and feeble with age,
and all the parts thereof consumed save only the heart and tongue, which we
never see wax old in manner, how aged or impotent soever he be, but rather
daily become green: and that is worst of all is, that what evil the wretched
heart thinks in that crooked and miserable age, that does that accursed tongue
with all celerity utter.

There is a Company of Courtiers in the Court that presume to be eloquent,
and well spoken, and of Courtly entertainment, which when they will talk of
some pleasant matter, they must first tell you a lie, and surely these kind of
Courtiers we may better call them detractors of others, then civil
entertainers.

Accursed be he that to the prejudice of his neighbor makes profession to
be a Courtly entertainener, and you shall hardly see none of these recited
Courtiers jest of any but they have in secret Spunne the thread to weaue a
great cloth of malice. And yet we do these men great honor and reverence,
not for any good will we bear them, but for that we are afraid of their ill
tongues, and although to dissemble other while, it is a grave and wise man's
part, yet for all that we may not judge ill of them, since we see the best
man's honor and credit commonly to be no greater nor less: then a malignant
person shall seem to use his tongue to speak of him. I remember there was in
the Court in my time a noble man, noble of birth and person both, whom I
reproved diverse times (as his familiar friend) of his prodigal living and ill
speaking: And he made me this answer.

Truly sir, those that report that I speak ill of them, it is themselves that
do it of me: and if I follow them therein, it is for nothing else, but to be a
witness for them, if any seek to impugn their saying: but sure of my self I
never uttered, or devised word, that might be to the prejudice of any. O what
evil causes he, that speaks ill of another, he only offends not that
begins, but he that assisteth him, and much more he that hears him, and
after publishes it but above all, he that tells it abroad, and adds more
then he heard.

The Favored of Princes must also think, that though they are prohibited to
speak much, yet it is most The Courtyer ought to be a true Secretary.
fit and decent for them to be true and faithful Secretaries: For there is
no thing that the Prince priseth more, then the secret breast of his favored
Courtier. And therefore I say not without cause that they ought to be secret,
but most secret: For the esteemed Courtier must have a better consideration of
his princes secrets committed unto him, then of the benefits received of him.

Sure it is no small, but a great and most necessary virtue in a man to be
close and of few words, and so secret in deed, that he make no more
countenance of that was told him privily, then if he had never heard it spoken
of.

I know an other kind of people so proane to speak ill, that they cannot
keep secret their own faults, much less others faults, publishing them in
every corner.

Cecilius Metellus being asked one day of a Centurion, what he meant to do
the next day following? answered thus.

Think not Centurion that those things I am determined to do, my hands shall
so lightly discover: for I am of this mind, if I knew that my shyrt had any
knowledge of that I will do tomorrow, I would put it off, and throw it
straight into the fire, and see it burned before my face.

It is not alike trust, to put money into one man's hands of trust, and to
commit secrets to the breast of another: and this to be true we see it
plainly, that the prince delivers his goods and treasure to the custody of
many, but his secrets he commits only to one.

The favored of Princes ought to be so secret, that whatsoever they see the
Prince do or say (be it in the presence of diverse, and that they are told of
it by many:) Yet they ought not to be acknowne of it. For, indeed the Prince
speaks many things commonly for his pleasure, which being reported again of
the Favored Courtyer, will be thought true, and most certain.

Therefore speaking generally of this matter, I say, that surely Friends are
greatly bound to keep the secrets of their friends: For that day I discover
my intent to any, the selfsame I make him lord of my liberty. Therefore let
that man think he has won a marvelous treasure, that has a secret
friend. For without doubt it is no such matter of importance, to keep treasure
safely locked up in a chest, as it is to commit and trust secrets unto the
heart of another.

Plutarche writes that the Athenians having wars with King Philip of
Macedonie, because there came certain leters of K: Philips to their hands
(intercepted by their scowtes) directed and sent unto his wife Olimpia: which
they no sooner understood, but they presently returned again safely sealed,
and untouched of them, as they came first unto them, saying: That since by their
law they were bound to be secret, they would not reveal the secrets of others,
notwithstanding they were their mortal enemies, as K: Philip was to them: and
therefore they would neither see them, nor read them openly.

Diodorus Siculus says also, that among the Egyptians it was a criminal act
for any man to bewray the secrets of another: which was proved true by the
example of a Priest, that in the Temple of the Goddess Isis had defloured a
virgin, and they both trusting to the fidelity of another Priest, making
their love known unto him: even as they were in Venus sweet delights, he not
regarding any longer their secrets, in ipso facto exclaimed and cried out, and
thereupon convict and apprehended by the Justice, these poor Lovers were
miserably executed, and this spightful and unfortunate Priest condignely
banished.

And this banished Priest complaining of the unjust sentence, saying, that
which he revealed was in favor of the Religion, and for the behoose of the
Common wealth: the Judge answered him thus: If thou had known their
offense of thy self, without their notice given thee, thou had had reason
to have complained of our sentence, but since they trusted thee with their
doings, and thou gave them thy word and promise to be secret, if thou had
called to mind the bond thou werte bound to them in, and that thy self did
freely without their compulsion submit thy self unto, thou would not once
dared to have published the fact as thou have done.

Plutarch in his book de exilio says, that a man of Athens once demanded an
Egyptian (Disciple of a Philosopher) what he had under his cloak, answered
him thus: Truly thou have studied little, and borne away less, although thou
art an Athenian borne, since thou see that I carry secretly that thou
demaundest, because thou nor none other should know it, and yet thou ask it
of my self, what it is that I carry.

Anasillus that was a Captain of the Athenians, was taken of the
Lacedaemonians, and put to the torture, because he should tell that he knew:
and what the King Agesilaus his Lord and Master did, to whom he gave this
answer. You Lacedaemonians have liberty to dismember me, and to hew me in
pieces: but so have not I to reveal my Lord and Masters secrets: A worthy
answer of Anasillus.
For in Athens we use rather to dye, then to bewray the secrets of our friend.

King Lisimachus entreated the Philosopher Philipides very earnestly, that he
would come and dwell with him: but he made them this answer: I would be very
glad to be in your company, knowing you to be a favorer of Philosophy: and
if you will go to the wars, I will follow you: and if you trust me with
your goods, I will keep them carefully and faithfully, if you have children, I
will teach them with all my heart: if you will use my counsel in your affairs,
I will give you the best I can: And if you will also give me the charge of
your common wealth, I will govern it with my best discretion.

Only one thing I will request you that you will never command me: that is,
not to make me pertaker of your secrets. For it might happen that what you had
told me in secret, your self unawares at a time might tell it openly, and yet
not think of it: and being afterward told you by some other, you would
presently enter into suspect that it came to knowledge by me. This Philosopher
would first indent with the Prince (before he would come to his service) that
he should never hear any of these things the knowledge whereof brings many
a man to their end, or at the least to some great mischief: only to show us
the eminent peril and danger the Secretary of a prince stands in. For our
heart is such a friend of news, that every hour it feels a thousand
temptations to utter that to others, that was delivered to us of secret.

In this our age we do not use for to keep secrets, so well as in old time
the Grecians were wont, since we see by experience, that if one friend have to
day told his friend a thing in secret, tomorrow, yea perhaps the self same
night before, it was told among the neighbors.

There are also some kind of men so desirous to hear news, that for to know
it, they will swear a thousand oaths never to reveal it again to any. But
so soon as they know it, they are like unto the bloud-hounds that follow the
Dear, now here, now there smelling with their noses, till they have found the
hurt Dear, then they open and baye for their Master.

Therefore I counsel and exhortal wise and discreet men, that they do not
accompany with those whom they know are not secret: for the hurt that comes
by them, consists not only to tell that they know, see, and hear: but with
this they tell that they have imagined of their own wicked, and malicious
heads. It cannot be otherwise, but being men, we are also subject to the
frailty of a man: As for example;

To fall into the sin of the Flesh, and in that to forget the sin of
gluttony, and to have small consideration of that of sloth, to be assured of
that of Avarice, or with that to be overcome with passion and rage, or to be
puffed up in the sin of Pride. And if perhaps by misfortune, any one chance
into such men's company, that has but part, or all these conditions, and such
one as do discover and disclose both his own secrets and others too, what
other can there be hoped of, then a fire enflamed in his good fame and
reputation, and a contagtous plague and pestilence in his house?

For that that I have heard, seen, and read, yea and also proved: I say and
affirm, that there is no bread so ill spent, as that that is given to the
Servant which open and reveal their Masters secrets.

And sure it may be said, that such are not Servant that serve them, but
Traitors that betray them, and fell their Masters liberty. And it is of such
importance, for the Favored of Princes, to keep secret, and not to reveal
any part of the Princes secrets, that every man must think, that when the
Prince tells them any thing in secret, he tells it not alone to them, but
rather he confesses it unto them.

Princes being men (as indeed they are) and much busied, with the cares of the
Commonwealth, it cannot be, but when they are withdrawn a part into their
privy chamber, they will both play, talk, sleyt, sigh, laugh, be angry,
threaten, and make much again of some before others.

All which things though they do before their servants in secret, it is not
their pleasure, neither will they like it should be told abroad amongst their
Subjects.

And sure they have great reason: for men of gravity and authority, do not
lose their reputation for doing of No servant so hurfull as he that reuealeth
his masters secrets.
things grave, and of good example: but they are justly noted, when publicly
they will show any lightness or folly, how lightly soever it be. Not only
those that be in authority and favor about the Prince, but such other officers
of the Court and Servants of household of the prince also, ought not to tell or
reveal any thing they see their Prince do: For they may be well assured, that
the prince will be more offended and displeased to have that he does in his
privy Chamber told abroad by those of the privy Chamber, or other whom it
pleases him to make familiar with him, then he would be, if his tresurers and
receivers should rob him of his treasure. It was told to Denis the Sir acusan
on a time that Plato the Philosopher was at the chamber door to speak with
him, and he presently sent Bias of his privy Chamber (that he loved well) to
him to know what he would with the King: The sentence of Denis upon Byas, a
Courtyre.
and Plato a^ked Bias what Denis did: and he answered that he lay stark
naked upon a Table, which when Denis understood, he was so offended with Bias,
that he commanded forthwith he should be beheaded, saying first these words
unto him. I will that like a traitor thou be beheaded, sithence thou have
traitorously betrayed me, presuming to disclose the secrets of my Chamber.
For I sent thee not to Plato to tell him what I did, but for to know what he
would of me. Now Princes familiars and Beloved of them, as they must be very
circumspect and heedefull that they tell no man the Princes secrets: so they
must be much careful that they tell it not chiefly to women, yea though they
were their own wives: For as women are very good and profitable, to look to
Courtiers ought to keep their secrets from women.
things of household, and safely for to lock up their husbands goods: So are
they on the other side very dangerous for man to commit any secrets to them:
For notwithstanding a woman know, that in reueling the secrets of her husband,
she puts her life in peril, the honor of her husband, the loss of her
children, the reputation of her house and kindred, and peradventure the peace
and tranquillity of the Common weal: yet had she rather dye, then she should
not utter that she knows.

And many times for no other respect, but to make these women believe that
hears her, that she only commands her husband, and all besides in her
house. Well, I will enlarge my self no further of this matter, for if I would
but give my pen leave to write that I know, I should find lime and sand
enough to build a Tower as high as Babylon.

But to end my purpose, I will speak this one word, and that is, That I
counsel and exhort, and with all my heart request Princes Familiars or
Servants, that they commit not their Princes secrets to any, how great a
friend, or near kinsman soever he be to them: For they may be assured, that
since they refuse to keep secret that the Prince commands them, that much
less their friend will keep it secret for any request they make to him. If
thou cannot keep the secret, that to open it, imports the loss of thy
favor and credit, and happily thy life also: how can thou think an other
will do it, that in telling it, wins both honor and credit.

CHAP. XX. A commendation of Truth, which professed Courtiers ought to embrace,
and in no respect to be found defective in the contrary, telling one thing for
an other.
EPimenides the Philosopher being requested of the Rhodians to tell them, what
the virtue was they caled verity, he answered them thus: Verity my friends, is
a thing which the Gods above al other profess, and her virtue is such, that it
warmeth the heavens, lights the earth, maintains justice, and governs the
Commonwealth, and suffers no evil thing in her, making plain and clear all
doubtful and hidden things.

The Corinthians asked the like question also of Chilo the Philosopher what
verity was; who answered, that it was a perdurable pillar, never diminishing,
nor decreasing: a buckler or shield impassable, a fair time that is never
troubled, an army that never perishes, a flower that never withers, a Sea
that never fears fortune and a sure haven where never was ship wrack.

Anaxarchus the Philosopher, was also demanded of the Lacedaemonians what
verity was, who answered that it was a health without sickness, a life
without end, a iuleppe and sirrop that heals all, a Sun that never
darkneth, a Moon without Eclipse, an herb that never dries, a gate that is
never shut, and a way that never wearieth man.

The like was asked of Eschines the philosopher touching verity, by the
Rhodians: And he said, that it was a virtue, without which all force was
weakened, Justice corrupted, humility fained and dissembled, patience
insupportable, chastity vain, liberty lost, and pity superflous.

The like was demanded of Pharmacus the philosopher by the Romans. And his
answer was, that verity was a true Center, wherein all things reposed, a
card to sail by, to direct the pilote and mariners, a wisdom to heal and
recure every man, and a present remedy for all evils: a height, in the top
whereof every man rests, and a bright light, to enlighten the whole world.
And surely this makes me think that these Phylosopehrs were great Friends
and Lovers of verity, since that they did so much enrich and sublime the same,
with so many rare and excellent titles.

But now omitting these Philosophers, who have truly spoken that they knew: let
us come speak of him that above all the World has exalted verity: which was
the divine WORD: and that was JESUS CHRIST, the only begotten Son of GOD:
and true glass of Eternity: who being asked the selfsame thing of Pylate,
said not to him, I am wisdom, neither justice, nor chastity, nor patience,
humanity, not charity: But only said unto him, I am verity. To let us
understand, that every creature might be partaker of that verity. But our
Lord Jesus Christ was not partaker of that verity, but the sole and only
possessor of the same, he being the very Truth it self.

Oh of how many is this virtue desired? and of how few (yea, most few)
observed. For, in effect it is nothing else but a mark, whereat all good men
shoot with their Eyes, and all ill and wicked persons loose their sight.

The Emperor Augustus in the Triumph he made of Mark Anthony, and his love
Cleopatra, amongst others brought to Rome an Egyptian Priest, of 60. years of
age, and the Senate being informed of a surety, that days of his life he never
told lie, they agreede not only to restore him to liberty, but to make him
high Priest of their Temple, and to erect a Statue of him, among the noble and
princely persons of Rome.

Spartianus writes, that in the time of Clandian Emperor of Rome, there
deceased a Citizen of Rome called Pamphylus reported never to have told a true
tale.
Pamphilus, whose doings after his death examined, it was manifestly proved,
that he never spoke one true Word all his life time, but always lied in that
he said.

Which related unto the Emperor, he commanded his body should not be buried,
his goods should be confiscate, and his house raized to the foundation, and his
wife and children for ever banished Rome, and all her Territories, to the end
there should remain no memory to the Commonwealth, of so pesteferous and
venomous a beast.

At that time when these 2 things thus happened, the Romans and Egyptians
were mortal enemies, and therefore by these examples we may see, of what
force and power this virtue of verity is, since the Romans made a statue to
their enemy, only for that he was a true and just man: and deprived of
Sepulture their native child, and a Roman borne, for that he was a liar.

A true man may go in any place where he lists, freely without
interruption, accompanied with all men, not fearing to be accused of any, and
may with safety reprove the vicious, and ill persons: And finally, to conclude,
he may without the fear of any speak in the face of the world, and show his
face among the best.

If a man will choose a friend, he need not be inquisitiue if he be wise,
just, chaste, careful, courageous, or noble, but only if he be true of his
word. And if that be so, it follows that all virtues and honesty must
abound in him.

Helius Spartianus recites of the life of Traian the Emperor that being one
night at Supper, and accompanied with noble men at his boorde: they argued of
the fidelity of friends, and infidelity of enemies, whom Traian answered.
That he never had friend in his life but he was good, true, honest, and
faithful; whereupon his Lords besought him, that it would please him to tell
them the occasion of his good hap in this, And he answered thus:

The cause why I have ever been so fortunate herein was this, I never would
choose to my friend a liar and A worthy speech of the Emperor (...) in
concerning liars.
covetous man: For in him that reigns avarice, and lying, there can never
dwell perfect friendship.

Those that are honest, and like so to be reputed, must endeavor them selves to
speak well always, and ever to say, that that is true: and if they will not
do this for conscience sake, yet let them do it for to avoid the shame that
follows them.

For there can be no greater mockery or despite done to a man, then openly
to make him know he has lied.

We see the child when he perceyueth he has told a lie, he blusheth
straight, and is ashamed: much more ought men grown in years, whose face is
covered with hayres, not only blush, but shame to tell a lie.

Many times I think what a great grief the Merchant suffers every hour
not to be counted a Liar, when he utters his ware, and sure he does it but
because he would not lose his credit.

And lo here why they swear commonly by the faith of a Merchant to be more
assured, when to the contrary we see many other, that in appearance seem to be
honest and grave men, that use not the manner, but rather they will stick no
mere to tell you a lie, then to lose a wheat grain:

But here I speak nor, neither do mean to touch those that are indeed
virtuous and good men: but I speak of those that think themselves honest and
yet be not, God knows. And therefore we may be assertained, that a merchant
esteems more his goods and merchandise, then a liar does his honor,
otherwise honesty.

There is nothing that preiudiceth truth so much, as a tatling tongue that
never lies: being in a manner impossible, that amongst many words, some lie
he not interlaced. All things consist not in other more or less, save only in
the use that men have of it: for if a man do use to eat little, he always
goes from the Table: if we use to sleep little, we also leave our bed.
And if we accustom our selus also to lie, we shall have it such a continual
use, as though we would, we shall never leave it after: For there are diverse
sorts of men, that as they accustom themselves to eat and drink often times in
a day, so do they use to lie every hour.

But I ask what is the greatest and most perfect thing in this life, that a
man whilst he lives may enjoy. I dare boldly say, that it is neither
nobility, great parentage, nor favor, neither the great estate, health, nor
riches: but rather that it is the sole honor, which tatlers and liars may
never enjoy, because they are never credited nor believed in their words: What
fame, credit, honor, reputation, or good can he have, out of whose mouth
there comes nothing but lies?

A liar deserves credit of no man, neither that any man should deal with him
in any thing, much less to commit any matter of trust into his hands, no nor
love him, nor accept of him, but rather as a detractor, and defamer of men's
good name, we How hateful and odious a Liar ought to be esteemed among men.
should banish him our company.

Hanibal that was the mighty Prince of the Carthagenians, so valiant in warlike
prowess, so hardy to follow it, and therewithal so fortunate to overcome his
enemies, was yet notwithstanding, blamed of Titus Liuius, and reputed for a
malignant and perjured person: For he never gave that he promised to his
friends, neither ever kept any covenant or agreement made with his enemies.
Such was not Gneus Pompeius (son to Pompey the great) with whom Octauian, and
Mark Antony (both his mortal enemies) being at supper with him on the sea,
Menodorus the Captain of his Army sent him word, if it were his pleasure, he
would so lively have hoist up the sails of the ship, that he would soon have
perished them, or sunked the ship they were in. To which message Pompey gave
this answer.

Thou shall tell Menodorus my Captain, that if I were Menodorus as he is,
that never knew what truth meant, I would have followed his advise, and have
done that he sends to me for: but if he were Pompeius as I am, which keeps
my word and promises with all men, such a thought and treason would never have
occupied his head.

Words sure worthy of so noble a Prince, son of so great and worthy a Father.

Herodotus writes also, that when the Egyptians would make any new amity
betwixt themselves, or be in league, and confederate themselves with
strangers, they used to bind their thombs hard to the thombes of those with
whom they would join in friendship, and then with an instrument pricked every
one of their thumbes that the blood spurted out, which they sucked the one the
other, with their tongue: inferring thereby, that they would rather sheadde
their whole blood, then in one jot to falsify and break that friendship
promised between them.

Is it not a goodly thing to hear him that swears by the Mass, of mine
honesty, so God ketch me, by my good sooth, by cock and pie, and other like
nice oaths, only under simplicity thereof to make you believe a lie he will
tell you: which in deed we should least then believe, when he is most ruff in
his oaths.

For it is most certain, the more a liar enforces his words with abundance
of Oaths, the less is he to be We ought not to believe one that swears
much.
believed. For that is a plain demonstration, that it is a prepensed Lie, he
would make us believe for a truth. It is a sport to see a true man and a Liar
in Argument together: for the true man enforces his words none otherwise but
thus: Truly friend, it is even thus as I tell thee, thou may if thou will
believe me.

And the other to defend and maintain his Lie, will invoke for witness all
the devils of Hell, etc. So that for defense of the Truth, it suffices to
stand fast on his feet: but for the defense of a Lie he must run through the
whole world.

If I were a King or prince to throw the beloved out of favor, to put my men
out of service, to deprive men of their office and dignity, or to disgrade a
knight of his order of knighthood, or to give no more faith nor credit to one
then an other. I would desire no better occasion or testimony, then once to
take him with a Lie. And I would think it less ill, that the fathers should
rather pardon a great fault in their children, that friend in his friend, and
the master in his servant, then to bear with him in one lie. For by Time the
wings of sin is cut: But to Lie is of such a condition, the elder a man waxes,
the more force and power it has of him.

It is not enough for a man to be free of this vice, but he must also fly and
sequester himself from the fellowship of those which are possessed with that
foul and inueterate Error, For, it is commonly seen, when a man would bring
out a sudden Lie, to give it the more credit, he will avouch his friend for a
witness, saying: he knows it, and was present with me.

Now those that hear this famous Lie, and know the very truth in deed of the
matter as it was, condemns his friend he avouches (although he be innocent
of the matter) for that he is brought in for testimony, as they do this
notorious, and shameless Liar.

I should lie also for company, if I should deny to tell you, that being in
the Court upon a time in a good presence, a friend of mine stuck not to forge
a Lie amongst others: and said that he had sailed in a ship, made all of the
canes of Synamon, and he avouched me for a witness: affirming that I was
likewise with him in his company in the ship: and I to save his honor (he
being my very friend) being ashamed he should incur the name of a Liar, was
compelled seriously to confirm his tale with him, whereof I repented me
afterward with all my heart. For thereby I was in secret noted of the
hearers, to be as great a liar as he.

Also another time, when I went to preach at the Court (being diseased of the
gout) I walked up and down with a staff of reed to stay me withal, the
selfsame person I told you of before, told amongst the Prelates that were in
the Chapel where I preached, that he had given me a Reed or cave to walk
withal, that from one knob to another, it would hold three great pots of wine.

Lo, now by my example you may gather, what shame and deshonestie an honest
virtuous man sustaineth, to be a friend and companion of one so shameless and
horrible a Liar.

For to be plain, I was brought to this pass, by means of this friend of
mine, that I could not tell what I should do, but when I heard him begin to
speak, to fly from him, and leave him, because I would not be reputed of like
reputation with him: how beit in the end I was forced to use this policy: that
what he had openly avouched me a witness in, secretly again I would excuse my
self and deny it.

But now returning to our matter again, I say, That these Courtiers and
Familiars of Princes, ought to exile and banish from them this abominable crime
of lying: For if a mean gentleman or simple Plebeyan happen sometimes to tell
one thing for another, It is but taken of the Hearers straight for a simple lie.

But being spoken by one of the favored of the Court, or other Gentleman of
reputation, it is thought a kind of treason: For like as betwixt God and the
sinner, our Savior Jesus Christ, is our only mean and Mediator, being
called upon by the Priest, even so betwixt the king and his Subjects, that are
suitors to his Priests ought not to distemble, nor be double in their words
Majesty: those that are in favor with the prince, are mediators for them: Now
therefore if these Priests be double in their words and dissemblers in that
they speak, how shall the sins of the one be pardoned, and the business of
the other dispatched:

Oh woeful and unhappy sinner, that puts his sins into the hands of a
naughty and wicked Priest, and likewise unfortunate and miserable is the poor
suitor that comitteth his affairs to the trust and dispatch of a lying and
dissembling Officer.

There are many officers in princes Courts, that tell the poor suitors still
they will dispatch them, but when it comes to the push, to follow the
matter, all his fair words are then but wind, and indeed they make an art
of it, to speak all men fair, to promise much, and to perform nothing,
weening with their sweet flattering words to win the hearts and good wills
of all, little regarding the great expense and loss of time of the poor suter:
much less also respecting their own honor, honesties, and credit. Sure it
were less dishonor for them, to be counted rough, and churlish, then to be
bruted for Liars, and breakers of their promise.

The officer of the Princes palace, that is a dissembler, and a Liar in his
words, and doings, he may for a time maintain his suites, and go through
with his matters: but in the end, his trecheries perceived, himself, his
fautor, and all his dealings lie in the dust, and are utterly overthrown.

Oh how many have I seen rise in Court of nothing to great matters, and
offices, and this not through their painful service, but altogether by means
of their deceit and flatteries they used: not exalted also for their merits,
but only by a subtle means and policy they had, to draw water to their
Mill: nor for any good conscience they had, but only for their great diligence
used in their practices. And all this not without the prejudice of others, but
rather to the great hurt and utter undoing and ruin of their Neighbor: and
not for any bounty they had to give liberally, but a greedy and covetous a
desire to get: not for any needful business, but to have those that are
superfluous: and not for to relieve the poor and needy, but only to satisfy
their insatiable apetites: and in fine, their account cast, we have seen
after their death their goods confiscated, their servants dispersed, and gone
away, and their Children utterly undone.

So that in brief, there was no more memory of them in this world, and GOD
grant also that in the other life their souls were not for euerdamned.

Courtyers may easily with their favor and credit attain unto great
possessions, as the Judges may also in robbing, the counselors in pleading,
and maintaining naughty causes, the captains in powling the Prince of the
Souldyers wages, the Merchaunts in their false weights and measures, and their
Brokers, in telling lies out of all measure. But in the end of their journey and
pilgrimage, they may be assured that the souls of the Fathers shall not only
be damned in hell, but the goods shall be taken from their Children. And also
that that is truly and justly gotten by the honest industry and travel of the
man, with a good zeal and holy intent, and to a good and just end: it is
written that it shall be of long continuance, and by the good permission of
GOD, and prayers of the people, it shall also prosper and increase.

For the true gotten goods, achieved by the sweat and labor of man, GOD does
always prosper and augment. And therefore continuing our matter, I say that
the princes officers ought to determine with themselves, to be upright in all
their actions and doings, and above all, true and just of their words: which so
performing, they shall be sure to be beloved of all, not alone of them that
pass under their Lee, but even also of those whom they have denied favor. And
also they need not to beafraid to speak boldly in all places where they come,
besides that they shall be reverenced of all men. Where to the contrary, if he
be a liar, a babbler, and dissembler, there are few that will fear them, much
less love them, and least of all do them reverence, or honor. And although
we cannot deny, but that these officers of the Court, and other men of
authority be waited upon, visited, accompanied, reverenced, and honored of
diverse sorts of men: yet it were a folly for us to believe, that their
train and attendaunts do them all that honor and reverence, for any desire
they have to do them any service: but only they use all that curtesy and
capping, to get themselus and their suites quickly dispatched. And this to be
true, we see it daily by experience.

For, when these suitors have at chiued their suite and desire, they do not
only leave off, and give over to accompany him, and to attend upon him: but
moreover, they get them home, without either thanking of him, or once taking
their leave of him.

If all those that have Function, or Office of estate or dignity, (having
charge of the dispatch of great and weighty matters, being also Liars and
dissemblers in their doings) knew the ill reports that go of them, and how
they condemn their corrupt and naughtic consciences: me thinks it impossible
(if they be not altogether graceless) but they must needs either change
condition and estate, or else quite give up their rooms and offices. For they
are in every man's mouth called Bablers, liers, dissemblers, traitors,
perjurers, miserable, auaricious, and vicious. And yet a worser thing then all
this, and that is: whilst they live, a thousand complain of them: and after
they are dead and buried, they take up their bones out of the grave, to hang
them up upon a gibbet. For thus says the old proverb: Such life, such end.
So as we may say, that to these officers above recited, rests nothing but
only these goodly titles. And hereunto we may add also, that Officers of like
conditions to them, need not to have any to accuse them, neither yet to punish
them. For a time will come one day, that they will plunge themselves so deep
into a Sea of troubles, that it cannot be chosen but they must needs at last
drown, and utterly perish, or at the least be driven into the haven of their
greatest Enemies: so that they shall carry the burden of their own wickedness,
and be condignely chastised with their own folly.

Therefore I pray all those that shall read these writings of mine, for to
observe them in their heart, and imprint them well in mind: being a matter of
such Morality and wisdom, that it can hardly be understood of any, but of
such as first have had some proof thereof.

Helius Sparthianus writes, that there was sometimes a Senator in Rome called
Lucius Torquatus, who was a tyrant, a dissembler, a great liar, and very
seditious, devising only to set discord between the Emperor Tytus and the
people: who being many times complained upon unto Titus he answered them
thus: I pray you good people let no man seek to reprove him, persuade him,
threaten, nor punish him: For he is so wicked and perverse in all things, that
I trust in the Gods one day his own naughty and crooked condition, shall make
revenge and satisfaction of all the mischiefs he hoth done me: which was a
wonderful thing in this noble prince, that for an injury of such great
importance as that was, he would have no other revenge of him, but refer all
to that he hoped to see by his own ill nature. And sure the matter well
considered, he had good reason to do it.

For a wicked person is of this condition, that after he has once begun to do
evil, he never cease to do worse, (if he be not reclaimed by some honest
man, until such time as unawares not looking to himself) he utterly falls to
ruineand perdition. So that we may aptly compare an ill man, to a ca^dle, which
after it is once light, it never leaves burning, till it have made an end of
it self. In great and weighty matters sometimes, such as have the dispatching
of the^, are wont to speak one word for another, and also to make some fainte
promises to their suitors, not in respect to lie to them, nor deceive them: but
to prolong them longer in suit, to increase their gain the more. Which I must
say, they ought not to do, much less once to think it. When the Favored
Courtyer or Officer of the prince is moved in any matter by the suter, let him
consider well if it be any thing that may displease the Prince, be it never
so little: For they must take great heed that they tell not Princes nor their
Servants any thing that they know may be displeasant to their ears: but only
that that shall be both pleasant to the ear, profitable to the purse, and
therwithal, that it be true and necessary to be told and looked to. For there
is no greater destruction to the Commonweal, then to bring false reports unto
the K: of his affairs.

It is one of the greatest kinds of treason that can be, for a Prince to
disclose the secrets of his heart to his Favored Courtyer, and for him again
to tell the Prince nothing but Lies and tales.

How great a friend soever the Prince be to his Favored Courtyer, yet the
beloved courtyer ought not to presume to advance himself to tell, or make his
Prince believe one thing for an other. For the matter afterward discovered,
and the truth known, it shall not be enough for him in his excuse, to tell the
Prince that he made him believe so, only to satisfy his friend. For the King
may justly tell him, that it is but an excuse, and that he meant no other but
to deceive him. For princes ears and conditions are so delicate, that I am
bold to admonish the^ that are his familiars, and beloved of him, that they
endeavor themselves always to speak (with all humble duty and reverence)
that that is true, yea though in secret it pleases the Prince to be merry with
them.

This is ever true, he that is a friend of verity, is also of justice: and he
that is a friend of justice, is also of the common weal: and he that is a
friend of the common weal, is ever endued with a good conscience: and he that
has a good conscience, consequently is of a good life, he that is of a good
life, is also of a good fame, and beloved of all. Albeit we cannot deny, but
that his enemies will ever speak evil of him: yet we may say also, that they
can never hurt nor condemn him, but rather he should be counted a fool of
all men, that will go about or seek to be his enemy, who is honest in his
doings, true in his words, modest in his behauior, beloved, and well thought
of of all. Therefore he puts himself into a great peril, that dare make
himself a companion, and fellow in doings with a wise and virtuous man: For he
must think, that acco^panying with such a man, he accompanies not his person
alone, but also the virtues that reign in him: and if he do repugne and
gainesay reasonable things, he shall straight show himself to come of a
wicked race, and to be plunged and rooted in all malice.

Now to the end we may leave nothing behind, that may serve to advise and
counsel this our favored courtier. I say also, that there are many other in
favor with the Prince, that often times do procure the Prince to give offices of
dignity, and realtie of the Realm, sometimes to their kinsfolks, otherwhiles
to their friends, and afterward to their servants also, which perhaps are so
unmeet and unworthy for them, that neither their merits shall deserve to have
them, nor their knowledge and experience also fit, for so weighty an
administration: And they do not procure these offices for them, for that they
are wise and capable: but only to advance them above others, and because they
are very troublesome and importunate. I am sorry to write it, and much more to
see it, that offices are not given now for the benefit of the Commonwealth,
but to recompense those of whom the favored Courtier has received pleasure,
or else to satisfy the importunacie of his servants of his own house.

But by process of time it might happen (by means of their skillesse rule)
that the king would take from them altogether their offices, or remove them
from one place to another, although they were never well settled in a town, and
commodiously: And being the Princes pleasure to do this, the wise and beloved
Courtier must take heed, he do not contrary the king, much less take upon
him to defend the ill government of those officers, hoping thereby to come to
greatter honor: For it were less hurt for him, the officer lost his estate
and office, then he his credit and reputation. Therefore those in favor and
authority ought to content themselus with the Prince, the servants with their
masters, and the parents and kinsfols with the Princes officers, for that they
procured them these offices at the Kings hands, with the ill wills of many:
without that they further prease, and importune them, to suborne their faults:
for after that the doings of these worthy officers be once discovered to be
naught and corrupted, it is impossible by any means to make them good before
the prince, with whom all the means the parents and kinsfolks of such persons
can make, cannot stead them to bring them to their first honor by their own
folly lost.

And now to end this our present volume of the favored Courtier, I do assure
all the beloved Courtiers, that if God shall find purity in their souls, the
Common weal justice in their own house, and the king troth in their mouths,
and fidelity in their hearts, the good and honest men grace in their favor,
and that the ill and wicked boast themselves no more of their authority and
office, and that the poor shall praise them for their good works and the King
also find them faithful servants: I will at this present with mine own hand
give them such faith and assurance, that they shall need never to fear that
God will forsake them, nor that men can hurt them, and that they shall never
be detected of any infamy, ouerthrown by any misfortune, neither put out of
favor and credit with their prince at any time.

HERE FOLLOWS CERTAIN OTHER LETTERS, WRITTEN BY Marcus Aurelius. Selected
out of the Spanish Copy, not written in the French Tongue.
CHAP. I. Of the huge Monster seen in Scicilie in the time of Marcus Aurelius,
and of the Letters he wrote with blood upon a gate.
IN the year of the foundation of Rome 720. and xlii, of the age of Marcus
Aurelius, and two years before he took possession of the empire, the twenty
day of August, about the going down of the Sun, in the Realm of Scicill, in
the City of Palermo (a port of the sea) there chanced a thing perilous to
them, that saw it then, and no less dreadful to those which shall hear it
now. Whiles they of Palermo were celebrating a great feast with much joy, that
they had vanquished the Navy of the Numedians, the Pirates dividing their
booty, were prevented by the Magistrates of the City, who commanded the whole
spoil to be laid up till the wars were finished: for such was the Law of
the Isle: And truly it was a just law: for oftentimes the only let why the
peace is not made between Princes, is because there wants riches to satisfy
the damage done in wars.

When all the people were returned home unto their houses to Supper (for it was
in the Summer) there appeared an huge Monster in the City in this form. He
seemed to be of the length of three cubits, his head was balde, so that his
skul did appear He had no ears, save only two holes in the neck, whereby
men judged that he heard: he had two writhen horns like a Goat, his right
arm was longer then his left, his hands were much like the feet of horses,
without throat, his shoulders and his head were both of one height, his
shoulders shone as does the scales of fishes, his breast was all rough of
hair. his Face in all things, was much like unto a man, save that he had but
one Eye, which was in the midst of his forehead.

In his Nose there was but one nosethrill. From the middle downwards, there was
nothing seen, because it was all covered: he sat on a charyot with four
wheels, which was drawn with four beasts: That is, two Lions before, and two
Bears behind. No man can tell of what wood the Chariot was made. In fashion
it differed nothing from those which other men do accustomably use.

Within this Chariot stood a great Chauldron with ears, wherein the Monster
was, wherefore it could not be seen but from the middle upward, It wandered a
great space in the City, from one gate to another, casting out sparks of
fire.

The fear and terror hereof was so great throughout all the City, that some
Women with child were with great danger delivered, and others being weak
and fainte hearted, fell down dead.

And all the people, both men and women, great and small ran to the Temples
of Jupiter, Mars, and Februa, with doleful clamours and cries, making their
importunate prayers.

At the same time, all these Rouers were lodged in the Governors Palace of
the City, whose name was Solyno, borne at Capua, where also the riches was
kept.

After the Monster had been in all patts of the City (or in the most part
thereof) it came to the palace where the Pirates were, and cut one of the
Lions ears off, and with the blood thereof wrote these Letters upon the
palace gate, which was shut. R. A. S. P. I. P.

These Letters were of diverse men diversely interpreted: so that the
interpretations were more then the letters. And in the end a woman-prophetesse
greatly esteemed for her science (unto whom God had given this secret
knowledge) opened the true meaning of these Letters, saying: R. signifies
Reddite, A aliena, S, sivultis, P. propria, I. in Pace, P. possidere. Which
altogether is to say: Render unto others that which is theirs, if you in quiet
will possess your own. Truly the pirates were wonderfully afraid of this
sudden commandment, and he Woman was highly commended for her exposition.

This being done, the Monster went the same night out of the City, unto a high
hill called Iamicia, and there stood for the space of 3 days in the sight of
the City, the Lions with terrible voices roaring, the Bears with no less
fearful cries raging, and finally, the monster most dreadful flames casting.
During all this time there was neither bride seen in the air, nor beast in
the fields. And the people offered such great sacrifices unto their Gods, that
they brake the veins of their hands and feet, and offered the blood thereof to
see if they could appease their wrathes.

These three days being passed, there appeared in the Element a marvelous
dark cloud, which seemed to darken the whole earth, and therewith it began
to thunder and lighten so terrible, that sundry houses fell to the ground, and
infinite men ended their lives.

And last of all there came such a flame of fire from the Monster, that it
burned both the Palace where the Rouers were: and all other things that were
therein, so that all was consumed with fire: yea the very stones themselves.
The tempest was so great, that there fell above two thousand houses, and there
dyed more then ten thousand persons. In this place where this Monster was on
the top of the Hill the Emperor edified a sumptuous temple to the God
Jupiter in perpetual memory of the same. Whereof afterward Alexander
Emperor, having war with the people of the Isle, made a strong Castle.

CHAP. II. Of that which chanced unto Antigonus a Citizen of Rome, in the time
of Marcus Aurelius.
AT the same time when this woeful chance happened in the Isle, there dwelled
a Roman in the same City called Antigonus, a man of a noble blood, and well
stricken in age, who with his wife and daughter were banished two years
before from Rome.

The cause of this banishment was this: There was an old laudable custom in
Rome instituted by Quintus Cincinnatus the Dictator, that two of the most
ancient Senators should go with the Censour newly created in the month of
December, to visit al Rome, and to examine severally every Roman, declaring
unto him the 12. Tables, and also the particular Decrees of the Senate,
demanding of of them, if they knew any man that had not observed these laws:
and if they did, they should inform the Senate thereof. And so every man
should receive condign punishment according to his offense. But they never
punished before they warned, for they used the one year to admonish them of
their faults, and the next year if they did not amend to punish them, or else
to banish them: These were the words of the Law in the fifth Table, and third
Chapter.

The sacred Senate does ordain the happy people do consent, and the ancient
Colonies do allow, that if men as men in one year do trespass, that men as
men for that year do wink at them: but if they as evil men do not amend,
that then the good as good men do punish them.

Moreover, the Law said, the first faults are dissembled withal, because they
are committed through weak ignorance: but the second shall be punished,
because they proceed of negligence and malice.

This inquiry was made in the month of December, because in the month of
January following the Officers of Rome were elected.

And it was reason the good from the evil should be known, to the intent
they might know who merited to have them, and who deserved to go without them.

The chief cause why this Antigonus his Wife and his Daughter were banished
was this:

It was ordained by the eleventh Emperor of Rome Augustus, that no man should
be so hardy as to piss near the doors of any temple. And Caligula the fourth
Emperor commanded, that no woman should give or iell any Letters of
Witchcraftes to hang about the peoples necks, to deliver them from the Fever
quartaine.

And Cato the Censour made a Law, that neither man nor maid should talk
together at the Conduites, where they used to fetch water, nor at the river
where they washed their cloths, nor at the bakhouse where they baked their
Bread: because all the wanton youth of Rome ordinarily haunted one of these two
places.

It chanced when the Censors and Consulles visited the ward of mount Celio,
Antigonus who dwelled thereby, was accused to have pissed against the walls of
the temple of Mars: and his Wife likewise was complained of, for selling of
writings to cure the Feauers: and his daughter was noted for one that commonly
haunted the conduits, rivers, and bake-houses, to talk with young men: the
which in those days was a great shame to maidens of Rome.

The Censours therefore, seeing the evil president which they found in the
house of Antigonus at that time registered also before, and that he had been
gently thereof admonished: banished him unto the Isle of Scicilie, for as long
time as it should please the Senate. And like as in sumptuous and goodly
Buildings, one stone falls not without shaking of another, so it chances
likewise to men. For commonly one mischaunce comes not alone, but that
another immediately follows.

I speak it for this purpose, for that Antigonus was not only deprived of his
Honor, goods, and country, but also by an Earthquake, his house fell down
to the ground, and slew his dearly beloved daughter.

Whilst both these mischaunces happened, I mean the Monster of Scicily, and of
the banishment of Antigonus from Rome, Mark the Emperor was in the wars
against the Argonantes: where he received a letter from Antigonus of his
banishment: whereof the Emperor was marvelous sorry, as it appears by the
answer which he sent to comfort him.

CHAP. III. How Marcus Aurelius sought the wealth of his people, and how his
people loved him.
THe second year that Mark was elected Emperor the xlv. of his age, when he
returned from the conquest of the Germans, and the Argonants, from whence he
brought great riches and treasures to the Roman Empire, he to rest himself,
and to appoint his men lay at Salon, until such time as the Romans had
prepared all things convenient for such a glorious triumph: There was one
thing done which never was seen in Rome: for the same day of his triumph, his
son Comodus by the assent of the whole people of Rome was chosen Emperor
after the death of his Father.

He was not chosen at the request of his Father, for he was against it: saying
that the Empire ought not to be given for the merits of those which are
dead, but he should be chosen for his own good works being alive.

This Emperor said oftentimes that then Rome should be undone, when the
Election shall be taken from the Senate, and when the Emperor shall enherite
the Empire by patrimony.

Now to come to our matter, the Emperor being at Salon, traveled much to
bring his men into Rome in good order: and Rome was more careful for to receive
him triumphantly, and as it appertained to such a great conquest.

He was meruellously wel-beloued of all the Empire, and he always studied the
wealth of his People, and they were always most faithful in his services. So
that sundry times there was a question moved in the Senate: which of these two
things was better, beloved: Either the Emperor of his people, or the people of
their Emperor.

So that one day they appointed two Judges in this case: The one was the
Ambassador of the Parthes, and the other was the Ambassador of the Rhodes,
and the information was given on both parts in writing.

The Emperor alleged the great profit he had done to the Commonwealth, and
the many evils which he had delivered it from.

On the other part the Senators declared the good deeds they had done, in his
absence, and the great love they bare him always in his presence.

So likewise the Emperor another day moved an other question to the Senate,
affirming that it was more glory for him to have such subjects, then for them
to have such an Emperor.

The Senate denied it, affirming that the comfort was greater which they had
of him, then that which he could have of them. And in this wise the Emperor
gave the glory to his people, and the people gave the glory to their Emperor.

Thus merrily this matter was reasoned of again.

It was a pleasant thing to hear the reasons wherewith each party proved his
purpose. For the good Emperor attributed the whole Land, for a perpetual
memory unto the people, because of the great obedience, diligent service, and
faithful love, which he had found in them. And on the other part the
Fortunate people, gave the glory unto the Emperor, for his clemency, and
mercifulness, for his vprighteous governing, for his honesty of living, and
for his stout courage in conqueting.

It was a thing worthy of noting, to behold, how the people gave the honor to
their Emperor, and how the Emperor attributed the praise to his people.

These matters were delivered in trust to the strange Ambassadors, to the end
that all people might learn to obey their Princes, and also Princes learn to
love their people: only to this end, that by such worthy examples (as it is
reason) the better sort should be encouraged, and the evil discomforted.

Thus the Noble Emperor prepared all things in readiness, with his Captain
and Captives, for his Entering, and the people of Rome made as great preparation
for to receive him.

It was a marvelous thing for to see what people came forth of Rome to meet
him, and what infinite number were at Salon to behold him. They that were at
Salon had their eyes there and their hearts at Rome, and they that were at Rome
had their hearts at Salon in such sort, that their hearts dazeled with that
they saw, and their hearts also rejoiced for that they hoped to see.

For there is no greater torment to the heart, then when it is deferred from
that which it greatly desired.

CHAP. IIII. How at the intercession of many which the Empress had sent, The
Emperor granted his daughter Lucilla license to sport her self at the feasts.
YOu shall understand that the Romans used always in the month of January to
permit that their Emperors should triumph. And it cha^ced that at that time
when they prepared for the triumph, Faustine the Empress caused diverse noble
Barrons to demand license of the Emperor, that her daughter might come from
her mistress, where she was taught, to the feasts. Her name was Lucilla, who
was elder then the prince Comodus her brother.

She had a goodly iesture, she was well made in the body, and dearly beloved
of her mother, whom she resembled not only in beauty, but also in living.
Though the request seemed to be reasonable, and those that made it his
Counselors and great about him, and though him whom they asked was the father,
and she that demanded it was the mother, and she for whom this request was
made was the daughter: yet the Emperor would not grant it, but half against
his will.

Faustine when she had obtained license was exceeding glad, and so soon as
she might possible, she brought her daughter home unto the Palace: And when
the day of the great Feast and solemn triumph came, the young Damsel
perceiving her self at large without any Governor, trusting in the Innocence
of her self, esteemed not the malice of any other man: but rejoiced with those
that rejoiced, talked with them that talked, beheld the^ that beheld her, and
she thought because she meant evil to no man, that no man willed evil to
her.

In those days it was as great an offense for a maid of Rome, to laugh in the
company of men: as it was for a woman of Grecia to be taken in adultery with a
Priest. So greatly was the honesty at that time of the Roman Matrones
regarded, and the lightness of the maidens was so detested, that they gave more
sharper punishment for one offense done openly, then for two which were
committed in secret. Amongst all other things, from these seven the Roman
Matrones did maruellously refrain, that is to say, from talking much at
feasts, from greedy eating among strangers: From drinking wine whiles they
were whole: from talking in secret with any man: from lifting up their eyes in
the Temples: from gazing much out at the windows, and from wandering abroad
without their husbands: for the woman that was apprehended in any of these
things, was always after counted as one defamed.

There are many things suffered in persons of mean estate, which cannot be
endured in those of higher degree: For Ladies of high renown cannot keep the
reputation of their estates, unless they are marvelous circumspect in all
their doings.

All things that degenerate from their kind, deserve blame, but the dishonest
woman meriteth infamy. If Ladies will be counted Ladies indeed let them know
how much they excel others in riches, so much less license have they then
other to go gadding in the streets: For of a surety the abundance of their
riches, and the liberty of the persons, should not be a spur to provoke them
to gad abroad, but rather a bridle to keep them within.

All this is spoken for this cause that Lucilla, as a maid tender and young,
and Faustine her mother, as one not very old, sometimes on foot and sometimes
riding: sometimes openly, and now and then secrerly: sometimes with company,
and at other times alone: sometimes by day, and often times by night: used to
foot the streets of Rome, to view the fields of Vulcane, to sport them by the
river of Tyber: to gather the fruits in the Orchardes of Saturn, to suppe at
the conduites of Nero, and such other vagaries they used, The which things
though their age did desire, and their idleness allure them unto: yet the
gravity which Ladies ought to have should withdraw them from it.

I will speak one thing, to the end that other Ladies and Gentlewomen may
take warning thereby: which is, that I cannot tell which was greater, either
the small discretion which moved Faustine and Lucilla to wander in such sort
about the streets, or the audacity that evil men took thereby to talk of
their persons, and doubt of their honesties.

The keeping of women in their houses, is like unto a bridle to hold still
evil men's tongues. The woman that is a strayer abroad, puts her good name
in much danger. Of truth it were better for a woman never to be borne, then to
live with an evil name. Among all the families of the Ancient Romans, that of
the Cornelians was counted most fortunate, for among the men there was never
any found a coward, nor among the women any that was defamed.

The Historiographers say, that there was one woman of that lineage only, for
being light in her behavior, was by the hands of her own parents executed,
and put to death. Surely, it was well done of the Romans, to the intent that
the lightness of one woman alone, should not defame the whole family. Where as
is nobleness and honesty: there the matters that touch the honor, ought not
to tarry whiles they be remedied by justice: but from that man or woman which
among all has lost his good name, from the number of the living he ought also
to be taken. It is not sufficient for one to himself to be good: but it is
requisite that he give no occasion to others to judge him to be evil.

All the losses of temporal goods that chance unto men in this life, ought not
to be compared with a little blemish of a man's good name. The man that
hazardeth for a trifle his good name in this world, shall at a bu^dred shootes
scarsly shoot one right. And contrariwise, that man that has lost his
honesty, and that esteems not the reputation of his person, truly from him we
shall never see any good thing proceed.

Now the Emperor like unto a wise shippe-master, fearing after the great
calmes some tempestuous storm: seeing the lightness of his Daughter, and
vanity of the Mother (I mean in the time of this great mirth and gladness)
feared least any infamy should ensue unto these two Ladies.

And for a surety he doubted not without a cause: for it is an infallible rule
of envious Fortune for to give us in many years a little prosperity, to the
intent that afterward suddenly and at unawares she may bring us into some
great adversity.

By experience daily we see, that the Sea is seldom times calm: but
immediately there follows some perilous Tempest. The extreme heat of the
day does prognosticate, that terrible thunder is the Euentide. I mean, when
Fortune does flatter us with her golden pills: it is a token that she
intends to catch us in her snares.

The Mylner before the bank broken repayreth the dammes. The husband man
before it raineth, thacketh his house, fearing the snow and rain that is to
come.

So likewise the sage man ought to consider that during this life he has
prosperity but by leave and adversity, as by patrimony.

Marcus Aurelius among all other men was he that knew how to enjoy prosperity,
and also to prevail of adversity. Though fortune gave him much prosperity,
yet he never trusted therein, nor for any troubles that ever he received in
this life, he was at any time abashed.

CHAP. V. Of the sharp words which Marcus Aurelius spoke to his wife, and to
his daughter.
WHen the triumphs before named were finished, this good Emperor then being
willing to unburden his heart, and to advise Faustine, and to teach the young
damsel his daughter, and to the end, that no man should hear it, he called
them a part, and said unto them these words.

I am not content Faustine with that thy daughter did, nor yet with that which
thou have done, being her mother.

The daughters if they will be counted for good Children, must learn to obey
their fathers: and the mothers if they will be counted good mothers, must learn
to bring up their daughters well.

When the mother is honest, and the daughter shamefast, the father is excused
in giving counsel.

It is great shame to the Father being a man, that the Mother (being a woman)
should chastife his son. And this is a great reproach to the mother, that the
daughter should be chastised by the hands of any man.

There was a Law enacted amongst the Rhodians, that neither the Fathers should
have to do with the daughters, nor the mothers with the Sons, but the men
used to bring up the men, and the women the women. And in such wise, that they
abiding all in one house, it seems unto the fathers, that they had no
daughters, and unto the mothers that they had no sons.

Oh Rome, Rome, I bewail thee not to see thy streets vnpaued, nor to see thy
houses so decayed, nor to see thy battlements so fallen down, nor thy timber
hewed down, not for the diminishing of the inhabitants: for all this Time
brings, and Time takes away, but I weep for thee again, to see thee
unpeopled of good-fathers and unprovided in the nourishing of their children.

Rome began to decay, when the discipline of Sons and Daughters was
enlarged, and that their bridle was set at liberty. For there is now such
boldness in Boys, and so little shamefastnes in Gyrles, with dishonestie of the
Mothers: that whereas one Father sufficed for xx. Sons, and one Mother for
xx. daughters: now xx. fathers dare scarcely undertake to bring up well one
Son, and xxx. Mothers one daughter.

I say this to you Faustine, you remember not how you are a Mother: For, you
give more liberty to your Daughter then ought to be suffered And now Lucilla,
remember not how you are a daughter: for you show to have more liberty then
requires for a young Maiden.

The greatest gift that the Gods have given to the Matrones of Rome is, because
that they are women, they keep themselves close and secret, and because they
are Romans they are shamefast. The day when the women want the fear of the
Gods secretly, and shame of men openly believe me they shall either fail the
world, or the world them.

The common wealth requires it of great necessity, that the women which
therein inhabit should be as honest, as the Captains valiant: for the
Captains going to war defend them, and the women which abide at home
conserve them. As now four years passed you saw this great pestilence, and I
demanded then to have account of the people, and I found that of a C. and xl.
M. honest women lxxx. M. dyed, and of x. M. dishonest women, in a manner they
escaped all: I cannot tell for which I should weep, either for the lack that
we have of the good and virtuous Women in our common wealth, or else for the
great hurt and damages that these evil and wicked women do to the youth of
Rome.

The fire that burns in Mount Ethna, does not so much endamage those that
dwell in Scicill, as one evil woman does within the walls of Rome.

A fierce beast and a perilous enemy to the Common wealth is an evil woman,
for she is of power to commit all evils, and nothing apt to do any good. O
how many realms and Kingdoms read we of, which by the evil behauiours of
one woman have been lost, and to resist against them, there has been need
both of wisdom, perils, money, and force of many men.

The vices in a woman is as a green Reed, that boweth every way: but the
lightness and dishonesty is as a dry Kyxe that breaks, in such wise that the
more evil they utter, the more unlikely is the amendment thereof.

Behold Faustine, there is no creature that more desires honor, and worse
keeps it, then a Woman, and that this is true, we see by Justice, by
Orations, by writing, and other Trauells, man gets fame and renowm: but
without it be by flattering, and fair speaking, this hour by ancient
writers we can read of few women or none, which either by writing, reading,
working with Needle, spinning, or by weauing, have gotten them any great
renown.

But even I say of one, so I say of another, certainly of diverse we read, by
keeping themselves closed in their houses, being well occupied in their
business, temperate and modest in their words, faithful to their Husbands,
well-ordered in their persons, peaceable with their Neighbors, and finally for
being honest amongst their own Family, and shamefast amongst strangers, they
have obtained great renown in their life time, and left perpetual memory of
them after their death.

I will tell you an ancient history as profitable to restrain your vices, as
it did then augment virtues, which is this: The Realm of the Lacedaemonians
says Plato: was a long time as dissolute through the unthriftiness of the
women-kinde, as infamed by the vices of the men: So that of all Nations they
were both called and esteemed barbarous, what time Greece of the Philosophers,
was called The Mother of Philosophers.

Lycurgus, a most wise Philosopher in knowledge, and a right just king
concerning his gouerna^ce, partly with his doctrine very profitable, and partly
with his life most pure, ordained Laws in the said Realm, whereby he expelled
all vices, and planted all virtues. I cannot tell which of these two were most
happyest, the King having so obedient people, or else the Realm to have so
worthy a King?

Amongst other Laws for women, he enacted one worthy of high commendations:
the which commanded that the Father which dyed, should give nothing to his
daughter: and an other, that neither living nor dying, he should give any
Money to marry her withal: to the intent that none should take her for her
goods, but only for her virtues: and not for her beauty, but for her good
qualities: whereas now some are forsaken, because they be poor, so then they
abode unmarried, because they were vicious.

Oh Time worthy to be desired: when maidens hoped not to be married with
their Fathers goods, but by the virtuous works of their own persons: this was
the time called The golden World: when neither the daughter feared to be
disinerited by the father in his life, nor the Father to dye sorrowful, for
leaving her without dowry at his death.

Oh Rome, treble accursed be he that first brought Gold into thy house, and
cursed be he that first began to hoord up treasures. Who has made Rome to be
so rich of Treasures, and so poor of virtues? who has caused noblemen to
marry the Plebeyans, and to leave the daughters of Senators unmarried? what
has made that the rich man's Daughter is demanded unwilling, and the daughter
of a poor man none will desire: What has caused that One marryeth a Fool,
with 500. marks, rather then a wise woman with ten thousand virtues: then I
will not say that in this case the flesh vanquished the flesh: but I say that
vanity is overcome of malice. For, a covetous person will now-adayes rather
take a wife that is rich and foul, then one that is poor and fair?

Oh unhappy woman that brings forth children, and more unhappy be the
daughters that are born, the which to take in marriage no man desires: neither
for the blood of their predecessors, nor the favor of their friends, nor the
worthiness of their persons, nor the purity of their lives.

Oh wicked world, where the daughter of a Good Man without money shall have no
marriage: but it was not wont to be so. For, in the old time when they treated
of Marriages: first they spoke of the persons, and afterward of the goods: not
as they do at this present in this unhappy time. For now they speak first of
the goods, and last of all of the persons.

In the said Golden-world, first they spoke of the virtues, that the person was
endued with, and when they were married, as it were in sport, they would
speak of the Goods.

When Camillus triumphed over the Gauls, he had then but one son, and he was
such a one that his deserts merited great praise: and for the renowm of his
Father, diverse Kings desired to have him to their sons, and diverse Senators
desired to have him to their sons in law. This young man, being of the age of
thirty years, and the Father at 60. was importunately styrred by his natural
friends, and desires of strange kings, for to marie him: but always the old
Camille withstood the counsel of his friends, and the importunity of the
strangers.

When it was demanded, why he determined not upon some Marriage for his son:
since thereby should ensue the quiet life of the man, and the joy and comfort
of himself, in his age: He answered them thus,

I will not marry my Son, because some offer me rich daughters, some noble
of lynage, some young, and some fair. But there is none has said to me, I
give you my virtuous daughter.

Certainly Gamille merited triumph, for that he did, and deserved eternal
memory for that he said.

I spoke to you Faustine, all these words, because I see you lead your
daughter to Theaters and plays, and bring her into the capitol you put her to
the keeping of the Sword players: you suffer her to see the Tumblers, and yet
do not remember that she is young, and you not too aged, you go into the
streets without license, and sport you by the rivers: I find no villainy
therein, nor think that your daughter is evil but I say it, because you give
occasion that she should not be good.

Beware, beware Faustine, never trust to the race of flesh of young people: nor
have no confidence in old folks, for there is no better way then to fly the
occasion of all things.

For this intent the virgins vestals are closed up between the walls, to
eschew the occasions of open places, not to be more light and foolish, but to
be more sad and virtuous, flying occasions. The young shall not say, I am
young and virtuous: nor the old shall not say, I am old and broken: for of
necessity the dry flax will burn in the fire, and the green flagge smoke in
the flame.

I say, though a man be a Diamond set among men, yet of necessity he ought to
be quick, and to melte as wax in the heat among Women. We cannot deny that
though the Wood be taken from the fire, and the imbers quenched: yet
nevertheless the stones oftentimes remain hot.

In likewise the flesh, though it be chastised with hot and dry diseases,
consumed by many years with travel, yet concupiscence abides still in the
bones.

What need is it to blaze the virtues, and deny our Naturalities? certainly
there is not so old a horse, but if he see a Mare will neigh once or twice:
there is no man so young nor old but let him see fair young Damsels, either
he will give a sigh, or a wish,

In all voluntary things I deny not but that one may be virtuous: but in
natural things I confess every man to be weak. when you take the wood from
the fire, it leaves burning: when Summer comes, the cold winter cease,
when the sea is calm, the waves leave their vehement motions: when the Sun
is set, it lightneth not the World. I will say then, and not before, the flesh
will cease to trouble us, when it is laid in the grave: of the flesh we are
borne, in the flesh we live, and in the flesh we shall dye: and thereby it
follows, that our good life shall sooner end, then our fleshly desires
forsake us: oftentime some wholesome flesh corrupts in an evil Vessel, and
good wine sometimes sauoureth of the foist. I say, though that the Works of
our life be virtuous, yet shall we feel the stench of the weak flesh,

I spoke this, Faustine, since that age cannot resist those hot apetites, how
can the tender members of youth resist them? unless you that are the Mother
go the right way, how should the Daughter that follows you find it? The
Roman Matrones, if that they will bring up their Daughters well, ought for
to keep and observe these Rules, when they do see that they would wander
abroad, that they break their legs, and if that they should be gazing,
then put out their eyes: and if they will listen, stop their ears: if they
will give or take, cut off their hands: if they dare speak, sow up their
mouths: if they will pretend any lightness, bury them quick: death ought to
be given to an evil Daughter, in stead of a dowry: for gifts, give her
worms, and for her house, a grave.

Take heed Faustine if you will have much joy of your daughter, take from her
all the occasions whereby she shall be evil. To underset a house, behooves
diverse proppes: and if the principalls be taken away, it will fall down: I say
you women are so frail, that with keepers, with great pain they can keep
themselves: and for a small occasion they will lose altogether.

Oh how many evil has there bin, not for that they would be so, but because
they followed such occasions, the which they ought to have eschewed.

It is at my pleasure to enter into this battle but yet it is not in my power
to attain the victory, it is for me to enter into the Sea, yet it lies not
in my hands to escape the peril: it is in the hands of a woman to enter into
the occasion, and after that she is therein, it is not in her power to escape
from evil, nor to deliver her from tongues.

Peradventure Faustine, thou will say unto me, none can speak to your
daughter Lucilla, unless thou hear it, nor see her but thou see him, nor
convey her, but thou know where: nor make any appointment, without thy
consent: and yet thou know, that those which will her evil, seek with
their tongues to dishonor her: and those that with their hearts love her,
speak only in their hearts.

We love in young blood, in the spring time, and flourishing youth is a
poison, that forthwith spreads into every vain, it is an herb that enters
into the entrails, a swouning that incontinently mortifieth all the members
and a pestilence that slaieth the hearts: and finally, it makes an end of all
virtues. I know not what I say: but I feel that which I would say, for I would
never blaze love with my tongue, except I were sore wounded therewith in my
heart.

Ovid says in his book of the art of love, Love is I wot not what, it it
comes I know not from whence, who sent it I wot not, it engenders I know not
how: it is satisfied I know not wherewith: it is self, and I know not how, often
it slays, I know not wherefore: and finally, without breaking the flesh
outwardly, love takes root, and molesteth the heart inwardly. I know not what
Ovid means hereby, but I know when he said these words, he was as far
banished from himself, as I am at this time from my self.

O Faustine, they that love together, utter the secrets of their hearts by
diverse ways, and in sleeping they reason and speak by signs, they understand
each other. The many words outwardly declare small love inwardly, and the
seruent inward love keeps silence outward. The entrails within embraced with
love, cause the tongue outward to be mute: he that passes his life in love,
ought to keep his mouth close. And to the intent that you shall not think,
that I speak Fables: I will prove this by ancient histeries, we find
anciently, that in the year cclxx. after the foundation of Rome, Etrasco a
young Roman that was dumb, and Verona a fair Lady of the Latins which was
dumb also: These two saw each other on the mount Celio at the Feasts, and
there fell in love together, and their hearts were as sore fixed and entangled
in Love, as their tongnes were tied from speech.

It was a marvelous thing to see then, and fearful to note now that this
young Lady came from Salon to Rome: and he went from Rome to Salon, sundry
times by the space of 30. years, without the knowledge of any person, and
never spoke together. It chanced at the last, that the husband of the Lady
Verona dyed, and the wife of Etrasco also, and then they discovered their love,
and treated a marriage between them.

And these two dumb persons had issue a son of whom descended the noble
lynage of our Scipions, which were more famous in the seats of Arms, then
their Father and mother were troubled for want of words.

Then Faustine mark this thing, it had little auayled to have cut out the
tongues of the two dumb persons to have remedied their love, and not to have
cut our their hearts.

And I shall tell you of Masinissa, a worthy knight of Numidie, and Sophonissa
a famous Lady of Carthage, all only by one sight as they saw each other on a
Ladder, he declares his desire unto her, and she knowing his lust, breaking
the ores of fear, and lifting up the anchors of shame, raised incontinent the
sails of their hearts, and with the ships of their persons they joined each
to other, here we may see how the first sight of their eyes, the knowledge of
their persons, the consent of their hearts, the copulation of their bodies, the
decay of their estates, and the loss of their names, in one day, in one hour,
in one moment, and in one step of a Ladder, were lost: What will you that I
say more to this purpose? Do you not know what Helen the Greek and Paris the
Trojan of two strange Nations, and of far Countries, with the one only
sight in a Temple their wills were so knitte together, that he took her as
his Captive, and she abode his prisoner.

In Paris appeared but small sorce, and in Helene but small resistance: so that
in a manner those two young persons, the one procuring to vainquish, and the
other in suffering to be vanquished: Paris was the causer of his Fathers
destruction, and both of their own deaths, loss and damage to both their
Realms, and slander to all the world. All this love grew of one only sight.

When great King Alexander would have given Battle to the Amazones, the queen
(captain of them) no less fair then strong and virtuous, came to a
Riuers-side: and the space of an hour each of them beheld the other, with
their eyes, without uttering of any word.

And when they returned to their Tents, their fiercenes was turned into sweet
amorous words. When Pyrrus the faithful defender of the Tharrentines, and
renowned king of the Epyrotes was in Italy, he came into Naples, and had not
been there but one day, but he was enamoured of a fair lady named Gemelicia,
of a high lineage and greatly esteemed for her beauty, and the very same day
she was gotten with child, and shamed throughout all Italy, and cast out of
the city: and after that she was delivered of child, she was slain by one
of her own brethren.

Also queen Cleopatra in the Province of Bythinia, in the wood Sechin, made a
goodly banquet to Marcus Anthonius her Lover, and though she was not very
honest of her self, yet had she with her chaste women. And thus the Banquet
endured a great part of the night.

Now the wood being thick, young damzels were not so wily to hide the^, but
the yo^g men Romans found them: so that of 60. daughters of the Senators 55.
were gotten with child among the thick bushes, which thing made a great
slander in the people, and augmented the infamy of Marcus Anthonius.

Thus as I have showed of a small number, I could say of many other. All men
are not men, nor all women are not women. I speak it, because I would it
should be said, let it touch them that it touches, and let them that come
understand me. There are some ships which are so light that they will sail with
a little wind. And there be other some milles that will grind with a little
water. I say there be some women so brickle, that as a glass with a philip
will break, and will slip with a little mire.

Tell me Faustine, have you suffered your daughter to speak but with her
uncles, and keep company but with her cousins? I say in this case, that the
mother is in as much blame, as the daughter in peril.

Do you not know, that the hot fire does not forbear the wood, be it wet or
dry: but in like manner it consumes the hard stones.

Do you not know that the extreme hunger causes beasts to devour with their
own teeth the thing that was bredde in their entrals? Do you not know, that
the gods made a Law over all things, except over Lovers, because they may not
abide it: and doubtless much more then I have said.

And diverse times me thinks I should fall down, because I dare not weep
with mine eyes, yet I feel it inwardly in my heart. I would feign commune with
thee in diverse things: Come I pray thee to Briette, to the intent that we may
speak together: And since it has pleased the Gods to take my child from me
that I loved so well, I would counsel with thee that art my loving friend. But
few days passed, there came thither an Ambassador from the Rhodes, to whom I
gave the most part of my horses: and from the farthest part of Spain, there
were brought me eight: of the which I send thee four. I would they were such
as might please thee: The Gods be thy safeguard, and send me and my wise some
comfort.

Marcus Aurelius right sorrowful has written this with his own hand.

CHAP. VI. A Letter sent by Marcus Aurelius Emperor to Catullus Censorius, of
the news which were at that time in Rome.
MArcus the new Censor, to thee Catullus now aged, sends salutations. There
are ten days past, that in the temple of God Ianus I received thy Letter: and
I take the same God to witness, that I had rather have seen thy person: Thou
desiredst that my letters may belong but the shortness of time makes me to
answer thee more briefly, then I would. Thou willest me to give thee
knowledge of the news here. Thereto I answer, that it were better to
demand, if there were any thing remaining here in Rome, or Italy, that is old:
For now by our evil destinies, all that is good and old, is ended: and new
things which be evil, now begin: The Emperor, the Consul, the Tribune,
the Senators, the Ediles, the Flamines, the Pretours and Centurions, all things
be new save the virtues which be old.

We pass the time in making new officers, in devising new counsels, and in
raising new Subsidies. In such wise that there has been now more novelties
within these 4. years, then in times passed in 400. years: we now assemble
together 300. to counsel in the Capitol, and there we brag and boast,
swear and promise that we will exalt the virtuous, and subdue the vicious,
favor the right, and not wink at the wrong, punish the evil, and reward the
good, repair old, and edify new, pluck vices up by the roots, and to plant
virtues, to amend the old, and follow the good, reprove tyrants, and assist
the poor: and when that we are gone from thence, they that speak best words
are often taken with the worst deeds.

O wicked Rome, that now a days has such Senators, which in saying we will
do, we will do, pass their I for and so every man seeking his own profit
forgets the weal public: Oftentimes I am in the Senate to behold others
as they regard me: and I do marvel much to hear the eloquence of their
words, the zeal of justice, and the justification of their persons: and after
that I come thence, I am ashamed to see their secret extortio^s, their damnable
thoughts, and their evil works.

And yet there is another thing of more marvel, and not to be suffered, that
such persons as are most defamed and use most wicked vices, with their most
damnable intentions make their auowes to do most extreme justice. It is an
infallible rule, and of humane malice most used: that he that is most hardy
for to commit greatest crimes, is most cruel to give sentence against an
other for the same offense.

We think that we behold our own faults, as through small nets, which
cause things to seem the less: but we behold the faults of others in the
water, that causes them to seem greater.

Oh how many have I seen condemned by the Senate, for one small fault, done in
all their life: and yet they themselves commit the same every hour.

I have read in the time of King Alexander the great, there was a renowned
Pyrate on the Sea, called Dyonides, the which robbed and spoiled all the
shipping that he could get: and by commandment of this good King Alex: there
was an army sent forth to take him. And when he was taken and presented to K.
Alexander, the King sai^e unto him, Show me Dyonides, why do thou so spoil
on the Sea, that no ship can sail out of the East into the west for thee? The
pyrate answered, and said: if I spoil the Sea, why do thou Alexander rob
both the Sea and Land also? O Alexander, because I fight with one ship in the
Sea, I am called a thief: and because thou robbest with two hundredth ships on
the Sea, and troublest all the world with 200000. men, thou art called an
Emperor.

I swear unto thee Alexander, if Fortune were as favorable to me, and the
Gods as extreme against thee: they would give me thine Empire, and give thee
my little ship: and then peradventure I should be a better king then thou
art, and thou become a worse Thief then I am.

These were high words, and well received of Alexander: and of truth to see if
his words were correspondent to his promises, he made him of a pyrate a great
captain of an Army, and he was more virtuous on Land, then he was cruel on
the Seas. I promise thee Catullus, Alexander did right well therein, and
Dyonides was to be praised greatly for that he had said. Now-adayes in
Italy they that rob openly are called Lords, and they that rob privily,
are commonly called thieves. In the Annals of Liuius I have read, that in the
second troublous war punicke, between the Romans and the Carthagenians,
there came an Ambassador Lusitaine sent from Spain, and to treat of accord
of peace.

When he came to Rome, he proved before the Senate, that since he entered into
Italy, he had bin ten times robbed of his goods: and whiles he was at Rome, he
had seen one of them that robbed him, hang vpanother that had defended him.

He seeing so evil a deed, and how the thief was saved without justice: as a
desperate man took a cole, and wrote upon the gybet as follows. O gybet,
thou art planted among thieves, nourished among thieves, squared of thieves,
wrought of thieves, and hanged full of Innocents, with innocents.

The original of these words are in the history of Liuius, where the whole
Decade was written with black ink, and these words with read vermelion.

I cannot tell what other news I should send thee, but that every thing is so
new and so tender, and it joined with so evil sement, that I fear me, all
will fall suddenly to the ground. I tell thee that some are suddenly risen
within Rome unto honor, whose fall I dare rather assure then life: For all
buildinges hastily made, cannot be sure. The longer a tree is kept in his
kind, the longer it will be ere it be old.

The trees whose fruit we eat in Summer, do warm us in Winter: Oh how many
have we seen, whereof we have marvelled of their rising, and been abashed at
their falls. They have grown as a whole piece, and suddenly wasted as a
skumme. Their felicity has been but a short moment, and their infortune as a
long life.

Finally, they have made a mill, and laid on the stones of increase, and
after a little grinding, left it unoccupied all the year after, Thou know
well, my friend Catullus, that we have seen Cincius Fuluius in one year made
Consul, and his children Tribunes, his wife a Matrone for young maidens: and
besides that, made keeper of the Capitol: and after that not in one year, but
the same day we saw Cincius beheaded in the place, his children drowned in
Tiber, his Wife banished from Rome, his house razed down to the ground, and all
his goods confiscated to the common Treasury.

This rigorous example we have not read in any book, to take a copy of it,
but we have seen it with our eyes, to keep it in our minds. As the Nations
of people are variable, so are the conditions of men diverse. And me thinks
this is true, seeing that some love, some hate, and that some seek, some
eschew: and that some set little by, other make much store. In such wise, that
all cannot be content with one thing, nor some with all things cannot be
satisfied. Let every man choose as him list, and embrace the world when he
will, I had rather mount a soft pace to the falling, and if I cannot come
thereto, I will abide by the way, rather then with the sweat to mount hastily,
and then to tumble down headlong.

In this case since men's hearts understand it: we need not to write further
with pens. And of this matter, mark not the little that I do say, but the
great deal that I will say. And since I have begun, and that thou art in
strange lands, I will write thee all the news from hence.

This year the 25. day of May, there came an Ambassador out of Asia, saying
he was of the Isle of Cetin, a Baron right proper of body, ruddy of aspect,
and hardy of courage: He considered being at Rome, though the Summers days
were long, yet Winter would draw on, and then would it be dangerous sailing
into this isle, and saw that his business was not dispatched: On a day being at
the gate of the Senate, seeing all the Senators enter into the Capitol,
without any armor upon them, he as a man of good spirit, and zelator of his
Country, in the presence of us all said these words:

O Fathers Conscript: O happy people, I am come from a strange country to
Rome; only to see Rome: and I have found Rome without Rome. The walls
wherewith it is enclosed has not brought me hither, but the fame of them that
govern it: I am not come to see the Treasury: wherein is the treasure of all
Realms: but I am come to see the sacred Senate, out of the which issues
counsel for all men: I came not to see it, because ye vanquish other: but
because I thought you more virtuous then all other. I dare well say one thing,
except the gods make me blind and trouble my understanding, ye be not
Romans of Rome, nor this is not Rome of the Romans your predecessors. We
have heard in our Isle, that diverse realms have been won by the valiantnes
of one, and conserved by the wisdom of all the Senate: and at this hour you
are more likely to lose, then to win as your Fathers did. Al their exercise
was in goodness, and ye that are their children pass all your time in
Ceremonies: I say this ye Romans, because you have almost killed me with
laughing at you, to see how you do all as much your diligence to leave your
armor without the gate of the Senate, as your predecessors did take to them to
defend the Empire.

What profit is it to you to leave off these Armours which hurt the bodies,
and to put on them those which kill all the World? What profits it to the
careful Suitor, that the Senator enters unarmed into the Senate without sword
or dagger, and his heart enters into the Senate armed with malice. O Romans, I
will that you know that in our Isle we esteem you not as armed Captains, but
as malicious Senators. You fear us not with sharp golden swords and daggers,
but with hard hearts, and venomous tongues: If ye should in the Senate put on
harness, and therewith take away our lives it were but a small loss, seeing
that you sustain not the Innocents, nor dispatch not the business of suitors:
I cannot suffer it, I cannot tell in what state ye stand here at Rome: for in
our Isle we take armor from fools whether your Armours are taken away as from
fools or mad folks, I know not: if it be done for ambitiousnesse, it comes
not of Romans but of Tirants: that wranglers and irefull folk should be
judges over the peaceable; and the ambitious over the meek, and the malicious
over the simple? if it be done because you are fools, it is not in the Laws
of the gods, that three hundred fools should govern three hundred thousand
wise men.

It is a long season that I have tarried for mine answer and license, and by
your delays I am now further off, then I was the first day.

We bring oil, honey saffron, wood, and timber, salt, silver: and sold out
of our Isle into Rome, and ye will that we go else where for to seek
justice. Ye will have one Law to gather your rents, and another to determine
your justice: ye will that we pay our tributes in one day, and ye will not
discharge one of our errands in a whole year.

I require you Romans, determine your selves to take away our lives, and so we
shall end: or else hear our complaints, to the intent that we may serve you.
For in another manner it may be, that ye know by hearing with your ears, which
peradventure ye would not see with your eyes. And if ye think my words be
out of measure, so that ye will remedy my country, I set not by my life. And
thus I make an end.

Verily friend Catullus, these be the words that he spoke unto the Senate,
which I gate in writing. I say of truth that the hardiness which the Romans
were wont to have in other Countries, the same (as now) strangers have in Rome.

There were that said that this Ambassador should be punished, but GOD
forbid: that for saying truth in my presence, he should have been corrected.
It is enough, and too much too, to suffer these evils, though we slay not, and
persecute those that advertise and warn us of them.

The Sheep are not in surery of the wolf, but if the Shephearde have his
dog with him. I mean, dogs ought not to leave barking, for to awaken the
Shepherds.

There is no GOD commands, nor Law counsels, nor Commonwealth suffers,
that they which are committed to chastise Liars, should hang them that say
troth. And since the Senators show themselves men in their living, and
sometimes more humane then others that be Slaves, who else should deliver
them, from chasticement.

Oh Rome, and no Rome, having nothing but the name of Rome: Where is now become
the nobleness of thy Triumphs, the glory of thy children, the rectitude of
thy justice, and the honor of thy temples? For as now they chastise him more
that murmureth against one only Senator, then they do them that blaspheme all
the Gods at once. For it grieueth me more to see a Senator or Censor to be
worst of all other: then it displeases me that it should be said, that he
is the best of all other.

For a truth I say to thee my friend Catullus, that now we need not to seek to
the Gods in the Temples, for the Senators are made gods in our hands

There is a difference between them that be immortal, and they that be
mortal. For the Gods never do thing that is evil, and the Senators do never
any thing well. The Gods never Lie, and they never say truth. The Gods pardon
often, and they nouer forgive: the Gods are content to be honored five times
in the year, and the Senators would be honored ten times a day.

What will thou that I say more? but whatsoever the Gods do, they ought to be
praised: and the Senators in all their works deserve to be reproved. Finally,
I conclude that the Gods are constant in every thing, and err and fail in
nothing: and the Senators assure nothing, but err in all things. Only in one
thing the Senators are not of reason to be chasticed, and that is: when they
intend not to amend their faults, they will not suffer the Orators to waste
their time to show them the truth.

Be it as may be, I am of that opinion, that what man or woman withdraws
their Ears from hearing the truth, impossibls it is for them to apply their
hearts to love any virtues: be it Censour that judges, or Senator that
ordains, or Emperor that commands, or Consul that executes, or Orator
that preaches.

No mortal man, take he never so good heed to his works, nor reason so well
in his desires, but that he deserves some chastisement, for some cause, or
counsel in his doings. And since I have written unto thee thus of others. I
will somewhat speak of my self, because of the words of thy letter. I have
gathered that thou desire to know of my person.

Know thou for certain, that in the Kalends of January, I was made Censor in
the Senate, the which office I desired not, nor I have deserved it.

The opinion of all wise men is, that no man without he lack wit, or
surmounteth in folly, will gladly take on him the burden and charges of other
men. A greater cause it is for a shamefast man to take on him an office to
please every man: for he must show acountenance outward, contrary to that he
thinks inward. Thou will say, that the good are ordained for to take the
charge of offices. O unhappy Rome, that has willed to take me in such wise,
as to be the best in it. Grievous pestilence ought to come for them that be
good, since I am escaped as good among the evil, I have accepted this office,
not for that I had need thereof, but to fulfill the commandment of Antoninus
my Grandfather. Have no marvel of any thing that I do, but of that I leave to
be done: For every man that is wedded to Faustine, there is no villainy but he
shall do it,

I swear to thee, that since the day we were wedded, me seems that I have no
wit. I leave wedding for this time, and return to speak of offices: Surely, a
peaceable man ought to be in offices, though it be painful: for as the
offices are assured among them that be virtuous, so perillously goes the
virtuous folk among Offices: And for the truth hereof reckon what they win,
and then thou shall see what they lose. Say that is good, if thou know it,
and hear the evil, if thou desire to know it.

He that will take the charge for to govern other, seeks thought and
trouble for himself, envy for his neighbors, spurs for his enemies,
poverty for his riches, a waking for thieves, peril for his body, end of his
days, and torment for his great renown.

Finally, he seeks a way to reject his friends, and a repeal to recover his
enemies. O unhappy man is he, that takes on him the charge of children of
many mothers, for he shall be always charged with thoughts, how he should
content them all: full of sighs, because one has to give him: fear that one
should take from him, weeping if he lose, and fear that they infame him, He
that knows this, without long tarrying ought to set a bridle in his head. But
I say of one as I say of another: For I will swear, and thou will not deny it,
that we may find some now a days that had rather be in the park to fight
against the bulls, then be in surety upon the Scaffold,

Ostentimes I have heard say: Go we to the Theaters to run at the Bulls: Go
we to chase the Hearts and wild Bores: and when they come thither they run
away, not the beasts from them, but they from the beasts, In such wise as they
went running, they return again flying. I say, these ambitious persons
procure for to govern, and are governed: they command, and are commanded,
they rule and are ruled: And finally, thinking to have diverse under their
hands, these wretches put themselves under every man's foot. For the remedy of
all these perils, my thoughts are comforted with one thing, and that is,
without procuring or offering my self, he Senate of their own Will has
commanded me. In the eight Table of our ancient laws by these Words. We
command that in our sacred Senate, Charge of justice be never given to him
that willingly offers him self to it, but to such as by great deliberation
are chosen. This is certainly a just Law: for men be now not so virtuous, not
so loving to the Common wealth, that they will forget their own quietness and
rest, doing damage to themselves, to procure another man's profit.

There is none so foolish that will leave his wife, children, and his own
sweet Country, to gee into strange Countries: but if he see himself among
strange people, thinking under the color of justice to seek for his own
vtility. I say not this without weeping, that the Princes with their small
study and thought, and the Judges with their covetousness, have undermined and
shaken down the high walls of the policy of Rome.

O my friend Catullus, what will thou that I shall say, but that our credence
so diminishes, our covetousness so largely stretches, our hardiness so
boldneth, our shamefastness so shameless, that we provide for Judges to go
and rob our neighbors, as Captains against our enemies: I let thee to know,
where as Rome was beloved for chastising the evil, now it is as much hated for
spoiling the good. I do remember that I read in the time of Dennis Siracusan,
that rules all Scicill, there came an Ambassador from Rhodes to Rome, being
of a good age, well learned, and valiant in arms, and right curious to note
all things.

He came to Rome to see the Majesty of the sacred Senate, the height of the
high Capitol, environed with the Colliset: the multitude of Senators, the
wisdom of the Counselors, the glory of triumphs, the correction of the
evil, the peace of the inhabitants, the diversity of Nations, the abundance
of the mantenance, the order of the offices: And finally, seeing that Rome was
Rome, he was demanded how he thought thereby? He answered, and said; O
Rome, at this present world thou art full of virtuous and wise men, hereafter
thou shall be furnished with fools.

Lo what high and very high words were these: Rome was seven hundred years
without any house of fools, and now it has been three hundred years without
any wise or virtuous man. Look what I say, it is no mockery, but of truth, if
the pitiful Gods now a days did raise our predecessors from death to life,
either they would not know us for their children, or else they would attach us
for fools.

These be things used in Rome, but thou sendest no word of that is used in
Agripine. I will write nothing unto thee to put thee to pain: write to me some
thing to rejoice me, if thy wi^e Dimisila chanced well of the flote that came
out of Cetin with salt, oil, and honey, I have well provided for her: Will thou know that Flodius our uncle was cast down by the rage of his horse, and
is deceased. Laercia and Colliodorus are friends together by occasion of a
marriage. I do send thee a Gunne, I do pray to the gods to send thee joy
thereof.

My wife Faustine saluteth thee. Recommend me to Iamiro thy son: The Gods
have thee in keeping, and and sinister fortune be from me.

Marcus thy friend, to thee Catullus his own.

CHAP. VII. Marcus Aurelius writes to the amorous Ladies of Rome.
MArk Orator, reading in Rhodes the art of humanity, to you amorous Ladies of
Rome, wishes health to your persons, and amendme^t of your desired lives. It
was written to me that at the Feast of the mother Berecinthia, all you being
present together, made a play of me, in which you laid my life for an
example, and slaundred my Renown. It is told me that Auilina composed it,
Lucia Fuluia wrote it, and thou Toringua did sing it, and you altogether into
the Theater did present it.

You brought me forth painted in sundry forms, with a book in my hand turned
contrary, as a fained Philosopher, with a long tongue, as a bold speaker
without measure: with a horn in my head as a common Cuckolde, with a nettle in
my hand, as a trembling lover, with a banner fallen down as a coward Captain:
with my beard half shaven, as a feminate man, with a cloth before my eyes as a
condemned fool: and yet not content with this, another day ye brought me
forth portracted with another new devise: Ye made a figure of mine, with
feet of straw, the legs of amber, the knees of wood, the thighs of brass,
the belly of horn, the arms of pitch, the hands of mace, the head of iron:
the ears of an Ass, the eyes of a Serpent, the hears of roots ^agged, the
teeth of a catte, the tongue of a Scorpion, and the forehead of lead in which
was written in two lines these letters, M. N. S. N. I. S. V. S. which in my
opinion signifies thus: This picture has not so many metals as his life has
changes.

This done, ye went to the river and tied it with the head downwarde a whole
day, and if it had not been, for the good Lady Messelyne, I think it had
been tied there till now.

And now ye amorous Ladies, have written me a Letter by Fuluius Fabritius,
which grieved me nothing but as an amorous man from the hands of Ladies I
accept it as a mockery.

And to the end I should have no leisure to think thereon, ye sent to demand
a question of me, that is, if I have found in my books, of what, for what,
from whence, when, for whom, and how women were first made.

Because my condition is for to take mockes for mockes, and since you do desire
it, I will show it unto you. Your friends and mine have written to me, but
especially your Ambassador Fuluius has instantly required me so to do. I am
agrieued with nothing, and will hold my peace, saving to your letter only I
will make answer.

And since there has been none to ask the question, I protest to none but to
you, amorous Ladies of Rome, I send my answer. And if an honest Lady will
take the demand of you, it is a token that she does envy the office that ye
be of. For of a truth, that Lady which shows her self annoyed with your
pain openly, from henceforth I condemn her that she has some fault in
secret: They that be on the Stage, fear not the roaring of the Bull: they
that be in the Dungeon fear not the shot of the Canon.

I will say the woman of good life, fears no man's slanderous tongue, The
good Matrons may keep me for their perpetual servant, and the evil for
their chief enemy. I answer.

It is expedient you know of what the first women were made. I say that
according to the diversities of Nations that are in the world, I find diverse
opinions in this case.

The Egyptians say, that when the tiuer Nilus brake, and ouerranne the earth,
there abode certain pieces of earth which cleaued together, and the Sun
coming to them, created many wild beasts, amongst whom, was found the first
woman. Note Ladies, it was necessary, that the floude Nilus should break out:
so that the first woman might be made of earth.

All creatures are nourished, and bred in the entrails of their mothers:
except the Woman which was bredd without a mother. And it seems most true,
that without mothers you were borne: for without rule ye live, and with order
ye die.

Truly he that takes upon him a great thing, and has many cares in his
mind, much to muse upon, needs much counsel, needs long experience, and
ought to choose amongst many women, that thinks to rule the only wife by
reason.

Be the beasts never so wild, at length the Lion is ruled by his keeper, the
Bull is enclosed in his Park, the Horse ruled by the bridell, the little hook
catches the fish, the Ox contented to yield to the yoke: only a woman is
a beast, which will never be tamed, she never loses her boldness of
commanding, nor by any bridle will be commanded, The Gods have made men as
men, and beasts as beasts, and man's understanding very high, and his strength
of great force: yet there is nothing, be it of never so great strength and
power that can escape a woman, either with slight or might.

But I say unto you amourous Ladies, there is neither spur can make you go,
reine that can hold you back, bridle that can refrain you, neither
fish-hooke, nor Net that can take you: and to conclude, there is no Law can
subdue you, nor shame restrain you, nor fear abash you, nor chasticement can
amend you.

O to what great peril and danger puts be himself unto, that thinks to
rule and correct you: For if you take an opinion, the whole world cannot
remove: who warns you of any thing, ye never believe him. If they give you
good counsel, you take it not: if one threaten you, you straight complain. If
one pray you, then are you proud: if they rejoice not in you, then are you
spiteful: If one do forbear you, then are you bold, if one chastise you,
straight you become serpents.

Finally, a Woman will never forget an injury, not be thankful for a
benefit received. Now a days the most simplest of all Women will swear that
they do know less then they do: But I do swear, which of them that knows
least, knows more evil then all men: and of a truth the wisest man shall
fail in their wisdom.

Will ye know my Ladies, how little you understand, and how much you be
ignorant? that is in matters of great importance ye determine rashly, as if you
had studied on it a thousand years: if any resist your counsel, you hold him
for a mortal enemy: Hardy is that woman that dare give counsel to a a man,
and he more bold that takes it of a woman: but I return and say, that he
is a fool which takes it, and he is a fool that asks it, but he is most
fool that fulfilleth it.

My opinion is, that he which will not stu^ble amongst such hard stones, nor
prick himself amongst such thorns; nor sting him with so many Nettles: let
him harken what I say, and do as he shall see, speak well, and work evil. In
promising, avow much: but in performing, accomplish little. Finally allow your
words, and condemn your counsels.

If we could demand of famous men which are dead, how they liked in their
life time the counsels of Women? I am sure they would not rise again to
believe them, nor to be revived to hear them.

How was that famous King Philip with Olympia, Paris with Helene, Alexander
with Rosana, Aeneas with Dido, Hercules with Deyanira, Hannibal with Tamira,
Antonie with Cleopatra, Julius with Domitian, Nero with Agrippina? And if you
will believe what they suffered with them, ask of me unhappy man what I
suffer amongst you?

Oh ye Women, when I remember that I was borne of you, I loathe my mylife: and
thinking how I live with you, I wish and desire my death. For there is no such
death or torment, as to have to do with you: and on the contrary, no such
life, as to fly away from you.

It is a common saying among Women, that men be very unthankful, because we
were bred in your entrails: We order you as servants. Ye say for that ye
brought us forth with peril, and nourished us with travel, it is reason that
we should always employ us to serve you. I have bethoght me diverse times with
my self, from whence the desires that man has unto Women comes?

There are no Eyes, but ought to weep, no heart but should break, nor spirit
but ought to wail, to see a wise man lost by a foolish woman.

The foolish Lover passes the day time to content his eye, and the darknight
he spends in tormenting of himself with fond thoughts: one day in hearing
tidings another day in doing services.

Sometimes in liking the darkness, and sometimes in loathing of the light,
being in company, and solitary lives: And finally, the poor Lover may that he
will not, and would that he may not.

Moreover, the counsel of his friends avails him nothing, nor the infamy of
his enemies, not the loss of goods, and the adventure of honor, the loosing
of his life, nor the seeking of his death, neither coming near, nor flying
far, nor seeing with his eyes, nor hearing with his ears, nor tasting with
his mouth, nor feeling with his hand: and to conclude, to get victory, he is
always at strife and war with himself. Then I would ye lovers knew, from
whence your Love does come, it is thus:

The entrails whereof we are bredde be Flesh, the breasts that we sucked are
flesh, the arms wherein we be fastued be of flesh, the thoughts which we
think be fleshly, the works which we do are fleshly, the men with whom we
live are of flesh, and the wonder for whom we dye are flesh.

By which occasion comes, the reuerting of our flesh to flesh, many free
hearted are entangled with these snares of Love.

It seems well (my Ladies) that ye were engendered in puddles, as before is
mentioned of the Egyptians: the puddles have no clear waters to drink, nor
fruit to be eaten, nor Fish to be taken, nor yet ship to sail in.

My meaning is, that in your lives ye be filthy, and your persons without shame
in adversity, weak and feeble in prosperity, full of deceit and guile, false
in your words, and deceitful in your doings, in hating without measure, in
love extreme, in gifts covetous, in taking unshamefast: and finally, I say
ye are the ground of fear, in whom the Wise men find peril, and the simple
men suffer injury.

In you, the wise men hold their renown slaundered, and the simple men their
life in penury. Let us omit the opinion of the Egyptians, and come to the
Greeks, which say, that in the deserts of Arabia, the Sun shines hotest:
and at the beginning there was found one Woman, with one bird called the
Phoenix, which bird was created on the Water, and the woman engendered by the
great heat of the Sun, and of the powder of trees in this wise.

There was a tree sore eaten with worms, and upon a time a blast of Lightning
set it on fire, and burnt it: so as among the ashes of that rotten tree, the
first woman was made and found.

Although I be a Roman Philosopher, yet can I not disallow the opinion of the
Greek Philosopher. Of a truth 'ye amorous Dames, you have your tongues of the
nature of fire, and your conditions like the powder of a rotten tree.

According to the diversity of Beasts, so Nature has in diverse parts of the
body placed their strength: as the Eagle in her byll: the Unicorn in the
horn, the Serpent in the tail: the Bull in the head, the Bear in his paws,
the horse in the breast, the dog in the teeth, the Bore in the tuske: the Doves
in the wings, and the women in their tongues. For of a truth, the flight of
their love is not so high, as the fantasy of your foolishness is vain: the
catte scratcheth not so sore with her nails, as ye do scratch the foolish
men with your importunities.

The dog hurts him not so much that he runs after, as ye do the
sorrowful Lover that serves you: the life of him is not in so much danger that
catches the Bull by the horns as is the fame of him that falls into your
hands.

To conclude, the Serpent has not so much poison in his tail, as ye have in
your tongues. I accept the Roman Ladies apart, for there are many very noble,
whose lives are not touched with complaint, nor good fames had in suspect. Of
such, neither my Letter speaks ought, nor my pen writes: but of those
women I speak that be such, as all the venomous beasts in the world have not
so much poison in their bodies, as one of those have in their tongues. And since
the Gods have commanded, and our fate does permit, that the life of men cannot
pass without women: I advise the youth, and beseech the aged: I wake the wise,
and instruct the simple, to shun women of evil name, more then the common
pestilence. Reading the ancient Laws of Plato, I find written this. We
command that all women openly defamed, be openly banished the City, to the
intent that others seeing the sin punished, may abhor the same, for fear
to fall in the like pain. The same Law said further, We command that they
pardon a woman for all her faults she commits boldly, in case ye see
amendment likewise in her: but we will that no fault be pardoned, committed
by the tongue, For actual sin done, is the frailety of nature, the tongue
only of malice. O divine Plato, Master, and measure of all knowledge and
science, and prince of all philosophers: when thou in the golden world made
such Laws: In which time there was such scarcity of those women which were
evil, and so great plenty of them that were good: In this case what should
we do now in Rome, where there be so many evil openly, and none good in
secret?

Women ought naturally to be shamefast in their face, temperate in their
words, wise of wit, sober in their going, honest in their conversation,
pitiful in their correction, wary in their living, avoiding companies,
faithful in their promises, constant in their love.

Finally, she that will be counted honest, let her not trust to the wisdom
of the Worldly-pretended-wise: nor commit her Fame unto the wanton youth: Let
every wise woman take heed what he is that promises her ought. For after the
flames of Venus be set on fire, and Cupid shot his arrows, the Rich offers
all that he has, and the poor all that he may. The wise man will ever be
her friend, and the simple-man, for ever her servant.

The wise man will lose his life for her, and the simple will accept his death
for her. The old men say, they will be friends to their friends: and the young
men will say, he will be enemy to their enemies. The aged promising to pay her
debts, the other to revenge her jniuries. Finally, the one because to hide
their poverty, and the other to publish their beauty, lead these fools
losing their lives, and bringing their fame to end. I will leave to speak of
the good Women, for I mind not to charge them with ought.

I ask you amorous Ladies, if Plato was amongst you, when ye made a play of my
life, and drew my picture about Rome? No surely, for that I see in your act
now: I do suspect that to be true, which has been said of others, for there
are few in Rome that execute the pains of Platoes Law.

One thing ye cannot deny: if I were the worst of all men, at the last ye see
the end of my transgressing: but this you cannot deny, that she which is least
evil of all you, the naughtines of her life, I could not sufficiently set out
in my life.

It is great peril to wise women to be neighboured with fools, it is great
peril to the shamefast to be with the shameless: it is great peril to the
chaste to be with the adulterers: great peril it is for the honorable to be
with the defamed: For there is no slaundered woman but thinks every one
defamed, or at the least is desirous to have them so, procures to have them
slaundered, or says they be infamed. And in the end to hide their infamy,
they slander all the good.

It is long since I knew you amorous Ladies, and you me. If I speak, I
speak: if you know, I know. If ye hold your peace, I am still: if ye
speak openly, I will not talk in secret.

Thou know well Auilina, thou did compass the jest of me, that
Eumedes sold Calves de^rer in the Butchery, then thou did innocent
Virgins in thy house.

And thou Toringa know well, that before me thou could not recount all
thy Lovers on thy fingers, but did desire to have a bushel of peason.

Thou know well Lyuia Fuluia, when thou were (thou know with whom) at
Bretus, we made agreement with thy husband, thou tookest him aside and sayedst:
Unless I may lie out of my house one Night in a week, thou shall not lie
quietly in thy house: Thou know well Rotoria, that in thy youth thou werte
two years on the Sea, and did compound with the pirate, that no woman
should serve the 100. soldiers, but thou alone in a gally.

Thou know right well Enna Curtia that when the Censor came to take thee, he
found v. men's apparel, the which thou warest in the night season and but one
woman's attire, wherewith thou were clothed in the dayetime.

Thou know well Pesilana Fabricia, that Alluines, Metelles, and thou being
married, demanded openly what thou had gotten in his house with thy
friends in secret: Thou know well Camilla, not being content with thy own
Country folk, thou had such resort and haunt of strangers to thee, that
thou can speak all languages.

I will mark them that have marked me, hurt them that have hurted me,
persecute them that have persecuted me, defame them that have slaundered me,
all other my pen pardons, for that they pardoned me in their play. Because
my letter begun with that ye did to my person: therefore I will end it, with
that it knows of your good names.

And thus I conclude, that a man may escape from all dangers in shunning them:
but from women, there is no way but to fly from them.

Thus I end, and beseech the gods that I may see of you that which you would
see of me: and since ye be lovers, I counsel you, as you have sent me the
play in a mockery, even so receive my answer.

Mark now the Rhodian, to the amorous Ladies of Rome.

CHAP. VIII. Of a Letter sent by Marcus Aurelius to his love Boemia, for that
she desired to go with him to the wars.
MArcus the Roman Praetor, being in the wars of Dacia, sends health to his
loving Boemia, remaining in the pleasures of Rome. Escaping from a cruel
battle, thy few lines I read and understood thy large information. I let thee
know thou have astonished me more, then mine enemies have feared me, and taking
thy letter in my hands, the herb of malice entered into my heart. When I temper
my body with the delights, I think my heart free from the venom of thy
amors: since I of my will, and thou for want of power has given us to be free
of our pleasures. I think as well to make a divorce of our sorrows: But ye
be such, yea such I say, as are the banishments of love, and the treasure of
griefs.

The love of you all ought to be digested with pills, but the passion of one
of you will not be oppressed, with all the rubarbe in Alexandria, Ye show
your selves cruel to pardon an enemy, and ever lightly you change your
friends. I have curiously made search, whilst delight governed my youth: yet
could I never see in a woman steadfastness, nor reason in their love, nor end
in their hate. The present wantonness quarrelleth with my youth passed,
because thou see not in me the ancient good will toward thee, nor the
present service.

And certainly hearing thy accusation, and not my justification: thou might
pay me as justly with death, as I pay thee with forgetfulness: The which
forgetfulness ought to be as strange in him that serves, as ingratitude in
the Lady that is served: think thou that I have forgotten the law of Venus?
when I commanded that the curious Lovers should exercise their strength in
chiualry, and occupy their hearts in love? and more it wills a man to wear
his clothes cleanly, their feet right, their bodies constant, their voice soft
and humble, demure and modest of cheer: they ought to have eyes open, always
looking up to the Windows, and their hearts ready to fly into the air: For a
truth, my friend Boemia, he is a gross lover that has his will in captivity,
and his judgment free. The judgment is of no value, where the will is in
thraldom. This I say, that thou may know, though my age has left the
exercise: yet my understanding has not forgot the art: Thou complaynest
because I give my self unto much quiet, and that I have forgotten thee. I will
not deny the truth, the day of my forgetting makes thee privy of my thoughts.

And reason the Ouerseer declares that it is not requisite for my gravity to
permit I should love: nor in thy age to suffer to be beloved. The world does
dissemble many things in youth: which in age meriteth grievous corrections. The
wanton toys of youth proceed of ignorance, but the villainies done in age grow
of malice.

When I walked in the nights, I ietted the streets, I sang ballades, I gazed
to the Windows: I played on the Gitiornes: I scaled the walls: I wakened the
youth.

Think thou that I win what I did in my youth? but sithence I see my self
bereaved of all my wonted wanton toys, and polished with so many white hayres,
cladde with so many sorrows: either I think now I was not then, or else I
dream now, not knowing the way I stray in, nor seeing that stony way ready to
stumble in.

Unwittingly I have fallen into the stayres, not foreseeing the Whirlepoole:
guidelesse I entered, in the rashness of my youth I lost me: for the which I
ask pardon. And now that I am out of the briars, thou would have me further
in, then ever I was.

Now that I cannot take the purgations, thou offerest to me the sirropes. I
have awaked all night, and now thou give me a fresh alarm. By our ancient
friendship I pray thee, and by the Gods I conjure thee, that sithence my
heart is rebel to thy will, that thy doubtful will do suffer, and let alone
my will out of doubt. And because thou should not think any ingratitude in
my white hayres, as I may in thy young wanton person. I will that we account
that we have gotten, and that we hope to get. Tell me what comes of these
vain pleasures? the time evil spent, the fame in way of perdition, the goods
consumed, the credit lost, the gods offended, the virtuous slaundered: from
whence we get the names of bruit beasts, and surnames of shame: Such be ye
and others.

Thou writest in thy Letter, how thou would willingly leave Rome, and come
to see me in the Wars of Dacia.

Considering thy folly, I laugh, but knowing thy boldness I believe thee. And
when I think on this I turn to my bosom, and peruse thy seal: doubting
whether the Letter were thine or not. The veins of my heart do change, my
color does turn, imagining that either shame has utterly forsaken thee, or
else gravity has wholly abandoned me: for such lightness should not be
believed, but of the like persons.

Thou know well he that does evil, deserves punishment sooner then he that
does infamy. I would ask thee whether thou will go? thou sufferedst to be cut
as a sower grape, and now thou would be sold for good wine? thou came in
with Cheries and yet would remain as quinces. We have eaten thee in
blossoms, and thou will be like the fruit? the nuttes be pleasant, but the
shelles be hard. By dung thou were made ripe in thy youth, and thou think
to be in still. Thou art naught else but rotten. And if thou be rotten, thou
art to be abhorred. Thou art not content with forty years which thou have
whereof 25. thou did pass in taste, like to sweet wine that is sold, or
like the Melons that be ripe and mellow.

Art not thou that Boemia which lacks two teeth before? are not thine eyes
sunken into thy head? thy hayres whiter, the flesh wrinckled, and thy hand
perished with the gowt, and one rib marred with childbearing? Whether do
thou desire to go? put thy self then in a barrel, and cast it into the
River, so shall thou become pure and white.

We have eaten the fresh fish, and now thou would bring hither the stinking
salt fish. O Boemia, Boemia, in this case I see no trust in youth, nor hope in
age: For under this thy hored age there is hid the pangues of frail youth.
Thou complainest that thou have nothing: it is an old quarrel of the ancient
amorous Ladies in Rome, that taking all things, they say they have left them
nothing. The cause thereofis, where you do lack credit, there you would have
it accomplished with money.

Believe me loving friend, the foolish estate of unlawful gaming, both gives
an unsure estate, and also an evil fame to the person. I know not how thou art
so wastfull, for if I pulled off my rings with the one hand, thou pickedst my
purse with the other: greater wars had thou then with my Coffers, then I
have now with my enemies.

I never had jewel, but thou demaundedst it of me, and thou never askedst me
thing that I denied thee I find and bewail now in my age the high parts of my
youth. Of travel and poverty thou complainest, I am he that has great need
of the medicine for this opilation, and playsters for the son, and cold
water for such a burning fever.

Do thou not well remember, how I did banish my necessity into the land of
forgetfulness, and placed thy good will for the request of my service? in the
winter I went naked, and in the summer loaded with clothes. In the mire I went
on foot, and rode in the fair way. When I was sad I laughed, when I was glad I
wept. Being afraid I drew out my strength, and out of strength cowardnes. The
night with sighs, and days in wayling I consumed.

When thou had need of any thing, I robbed my father for it. Tell me
Boemia, with whom did thou sulfill thine open follyes, but with the
misorders that I did in secret? Think you what I think of the amorous Ladies
in Rome: that ye be mothes in old garments, a pastime for light persons, a
treasure of fools, and the sepulchers of vices. This that seems to me is,
that in thy youth every man gave to thee, for that thou should give to every
one? now thou give thy self to every man, because every one should give them
to thee. Thou tellest me that thou have two sons and lackest help for them.

Give thanks to the gods for the mercy they showed thee. To xv. Children of
Fabritius my neighbor, they gave but one Father: and to thine only two
sons, they have given fifteen Fathers. Wherefore divide them to their
Fathers, and every one shall be well provided for. Lucia thy daughter indeed,
and mine by suspect, remember that I have done more in marrying of her, then
thou did in bringing her forth: For in the getting of her, thou calledst
many: but to marry her, I did it alone. Very little I write thee, in respect
of that I would write.

Butrio Cornely has spoken much to me on thy behalf, and he shall say as
much to thee on my part. It is long ago sithence I knew thy impatience: I know
well thou will send me another more malicious.

I pray thee, since I write to thee in secret, discover me not openly: and
when thou read this, remember what occasion thou have given me to write thus.

Although we be fallen out, yet I will send thee money. I send thee a gown,
and the Gods be with thee Boemia, and send me from this war with peace.

Mark Pretour in Daeia, to Boemia his Lover, and ancient friend in Rome.

CHAP. IX. The answer of Boemia, to the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, wherein is
expressed the great malice, and little patience of an evil woman.
BOemia thy ancient Lover, to thee Mark of Mount Celio her natural enemy,
desires vengeance of thy person, and evil fortune during thy life I have
received thy letter, and thereby perceive thy spiteful intents, and thy cruel
malices. Such naughty persons as thou art, have this privilege, that since one
does suffer your villainies in secret, you will hurt them openly: but thou shall
not do so with me Mark, Although I am not treasuresse of thy good: yet at the
least I am of thy naughtiness: All that I cannot revenge with my person, I
will not spare to do it with my tongue. And though we women for weakness
sake, are easily overcome in person, yet know thou that our hearts are
invincible.

Thou say, escaping from a battle, thou receyuedst my Letter, whereof thou
wast sore aghast. It is a common thing to them that be slothful to speak of
love, for fools to treat of books, and for Cowards to blaze of Arms: I say
it because the answer of a Letter was not needful, to rehearse to a woman
whether it was before the battle, or after. I think well thou have escaped
it, for thou were not the first that fought, nor the last that fled. I never
saw thee go to the iwarre in thy youth, that ever I was fearful of thy life:
for knowing thy cowardlinesse, I never took care for thy absence, I always
judged thy person safe. Then tell me Mark, what do thou now in thy age? I
think thou carriest thy lance, not to serve thy turn in thy war, but to
lean on, when the gout takes thee. The head-peece, I judge thou have not to
defend thee from the strokes of swords, but to drink withal in tauernes.

I never saw thee strike any man with thy sword, but I have seen thee kill a
thousand women with thy tongue. O malicious Mark, if thou were as valiant as
thou art spiteful, thou should be no less feared among the barbarous
nations then thou art abhorred (with good reason) amongst the Romans. Tell me
what thou list, but thou can not deny? but both thou have been, and art a
slack lover, a cowardly knight, an unknown friend auaricious, infamed, an
enemy to all men, and friend to none.

Moreover, we knew thee a light young man, condemn thee now for an old
doting fool. Thou say that taking my letter into thy hands, forthwith thy
heart received the herb of malice.

I believe thee well unsworn: for any thing touching malice, does straight
find harbor in thy breast: the beasts corrupted do take poyso^, which the
sound, and of good complexion refufeth, Of one thing I am sure, thou shall not
dye of poison: For seldom times one poison hurts another: but it drives out
the other. O malicious Mark, if all they in Rome knew thee, as well as the
unhappy Boemia does: they should see how much the words that thou speak,
differ from the intention of thy heart. And as by the books thou make, thou
meritest the name of a Philosopher, even so, for the illness thou inuentest,
thou do deserve the name of a Tirant. Thou say, thou never saw
constancy in a Woman's love, nor end in her hate. I joy not a little, that other
Ladies in Rome as well as I, do know thy small wisdom.

Behold Mark, I will not mock thee: for thou art such a one as never deserved
that one should begin to love, nor end to hate. Will thou have stability in
love, and thou unthankful of thy service, will thou serve in mockery, and be
beloved faithfully? will thou enjoy the person without spending any of thy
goods? will thou have no complaints on thee, and thou ceasest not thy malice?:
Thou know the il of women: I will that thou know, that we be not so
foolish as ye suppose us to be: nor thou so wise, as thou praysest thy self
to be.

Hitherto we have seen more men follow the desire of women, then women have
liked to follow men. I have seen a thousand times, yea and thou thy self,
that one man has not so mighty a heart as to overcome three wise women, and
one woman holds her self strong enough to subdue three hundred light persons.
Thou say thou art ashamed of my lightness, to see me forsake Rome, and
come to thee into the wars.

Great is the love of the Country and many leave much goods which they have in
strange lands, to live poorly in their own: but greater is thy love, since I
would leave Rome with the delights therein, and come to seek thee in strange
lands among the rude soldiers.

O malicious Mark, O strange friend, if I leave Rome, it were to go seek my
heart, which is with thee in the wars. And certainly oftentimes when I think
of thy absence, I fall into a swound, as one that had no heart: but I never
find remedy. I think our love is not like to these beasts, which have their
minds only upon sensual pleasures, without the conioyning of the loving
hearts.

I swear to thee by the goddess Vesta, and the mother Berecinthia, that thou
owe more to me for the love I have borne to thee in one day, then for the
service I have done to thee in 22. years*

Behold, unhappy Mark, how much and dearly I loved thee. In thy presence I
always beheld thee, and absent I always thought of thee: sleeping I dreamed
on thee, I have wept for thy sorrows, and laughed at thy pleasures: and
finally, all my wealth I wished thee, and all thy misfortunes I took as mine.

I assure thee of one thing, that I feel not so much the persecution thou have
done me, as I do the wailing forgetfulness thou show unto me. It is a
great grief to a covetous man to lose his goods, but without comparison it is
a greater torment for the Lover to see his evil bestowed, It is a hurt that is
always sore, and a pain always painful, a sorrow always sorrowful, and
it is a death that never ends.

Oh if men knew how dearly and faithfully women do love, when they are bent
to love: and with what malicious heart they hate, being set to hate: I swear
unto you, ye would never company with them in love: or if ye did love them,
ye would never leave, for fear of their hate. And as there is never great
hate, but where there was first much love: even so, thou shall never be
greatly hated, for that thou were never truly beloved of the ladies.

The sorrowful Boemia has loved thee xxii. years of her life: and now she
hates thee till after her death. Thou say I may be eaten for vertiuyce:
and yet would be sold for wine.

I know I have erred, as one both young and light: and when I found me to
stray out of the way, I was too far gone, and my mishap could no other way,
nor remedy.

It is a great loss of all losses when there is no remedy. I have offended as
a weak and frail woman, but thou as a man strong. I erred by simple
ignorance, but thou of a purposed and wilful malice. I sinned not, knowing
that I did amiss: but thou know what thou did.

I gave ear and credit unto thy words as a faithful Knight, and thou
betrayedst me with a thousand Lies, and protestations, as a common liar.

Tell me, did not thou seek occasion to come into my mother Getuliaes
house, to entice me her daughter Boemia, to thy mind?

Did thou not promise my Father, to teach me to read in one year: and
readdest me Ouide, of the art of Love? Did not thou swear to marry me,
and after withdrewe thy hand as a false Adulterer? Did thou not know that
thou never foundest in my person any villainy, nor in thy mouth any truth?

At the least thou can not deny, but thou have offended the Gods, thou art
defamed amongst men, odious to the Romans, a slaunderer of the good folks,
an Example to the ill, and finally a Traitor to my Father, a breaker of thy
faith to my mother, and to me the vnhapy Boemia, an unkind lover.

Oh malicious Mark, have thou not cut me in leaves, offering to my father to
keep his vines safe? Evil may the chicken trust the Kyte, or the Lambs the
wolf, or the Doves the Faulcon, but thou art worse, to bring up the
daughters of good men.

Oh cursed Mark, a hurtful keeper of vines has the matrone of Rome found
thee, in keeping their Daughters. I swear, that there was neither grape or
cluster, but it was either eaten, or gathered by thee. Thou did cut me
green, for the which I promise thee, it has set thy teeth on edge. Thou say
I was riped by power of heat and straw.

It grieueth me not so much that thou say it, as that thou give me
occasion to say unto thee, thy shame is so shameless, and thy evil so
malicious, that I cannot make answer to thy purpose, unless I rub thee on
the quick.

I ask thee when thou marryedst Faustine, whether thou foundest them green or
ripe? thou know well, and so do I also, that others gaged the vessel and
thou drankest the Lees: others had the meat, and thou the husks: others did
eat them being green, and with the refuge set thy teeth on edge.

Oh cursed Mark: behold how great thy evils are, and how the gods have
justly punished thee: that being young could not deserve to be beloved ^f thy
Zouers: nor yet now in thy Age, thy wife keep her faith to thee. For me to be
revenged of thy person, I need no more but to see thee married to Faustine.

By the Mother Berecynthia, I promise thee, that if thy small wisdom might
attain to know at the full, what they say of thee, and her in Rome: thou
would weep both day and night, for the life of Faustine, and not leave the
woeful Boemia.

Oh Mark, little care is taken for thee, and how far is our understanding
uncoupled from thy thoughts? For through thy great Learning, thy house in the
day time is a school of philosophers, and the wantonness of thy wife Faustine
in the night, makes it a receyte of Ruffians.

It is a just judgment of the gods, since that thy malice only suffices to
poison many that be good, the euilnes only of one woman, shall be enogh to
spoil and take away thy good renowm,

One difference there is between thee and me, and thy Faustine, which is: that
my facts are in suspect, and yours done in deed: mine be secret, but yours
known openly. I have but stumbled, but ye have fallen. For one only fault I
deserve punishment: but you deserve pardon for none. My dishonor dyed with my
fact, and is buried with my amendment: but your infamy is borne with your
desires, nourished with your malices, and still with your works. Finally, your
infamy shall never dye, for you lived never well.

Oh Mark malicious, with all that thou know: do thou not know that to
dye well, does cover an evil fame, and to make an end of an evil life, does
begin a good fame?

Thou ceasest not to say evil only of suspect, which thy false judgments
gives: and yet would thou we should conceal that we see with our eyes?
Of one thing I am sure, that neither of thee, nor of Faustine, there are, or
have been any false witnesses. For there are so many true evils, that there
needs no Lies to be invented.

Thou say it is an old custom, with the amorous Ladies in Rome, though
they take it of many, yet they are the poorest of all, because we want credit,
we are honored for silver: It is most certain, that of holly we look for
pricks, of acornes husks, of netles stinging, and of thy mouth malices. I have
seriously noted: I never heard thee say well of any, nor I never knew any that
would thee good.

What greater punishment can I desire for thy wickednenes, nor more vengeance
for my injuries, then to see all the amorons Ladies of Rome discontented with
thy self, and joy to think on thy death, cursed is the man whose life many do
bewail, and in whose death every one does rejoice. It is the property of such
unthankful wretches as thou art to forgette the great good done to them, and
to repent the little they give.

How much the noble hearts do rejoice in giving to other: so much they are
ashamed to take service unrewarded. For, in giving they are lords, and in
taking they become slaves.

I ask what it is thou have given me, or what thou have received of me? I
have adventured my good Fame, and given thee possession of my person: I have
made thee lord of me and mine: I banished me from my country, I have put in
peril my life. In recompense of this, thou do detect me of misery. Thou
never gave me ought with thy heart, nor I took it with good will, nor it
ever did me profit.

As all things recover a name, not for the works we openly see, but for the
secret intention with which we work: Even, so thou unhappy man desire me,
not to enjoy my person, but rather to have my money.

We ought not to call thee a clear Lover, but rather a Thief, and a wily
person. I had a little Ring of thine, I mind to throw it into the river: and a
gown thou gave me, which I have burnt. And if I thought my body were
increased with that Bread I did eat of thine: I would cut my flesh being
whole, and let out my blood without fear.

Oh malicious Mark; thy obscured malice will not suffer thee to understand my
clear letter. For I sent not unto thee to ask money, to relieve my poverty
and solitarines: but only to acknowledge and satisfy my willing heart. Such
vain and covetous men as thou, are contented with gifts, but the hearts
incarnate in love, are not satisfied with a little money.

For Zoue is rewarded always with love. The man that loves not as a man of
reason, but like a brute beast, and the woman that loves not where she is
beloved, but only for the gain of her body: Such ought not to be credited
in words, nor their personages to be honored.

For the love of her, ends when their goods fails, and his love when her
beauty decays. If the beauty of my face did procure thy love, and thy
riches only allured my good will: it is right that we should not be called
wise Lovers, but rather foolish persons.

O cursed Mark, I never loved thee for thy goods, although thou likedst me for
that I was fair. Thou sayedst the Gods used great pity on me, to give me few
children, and them many Fathers, The greatest fault in women is shameless,
and the greatest villainy in men is to be evil sayers.

Diverse things ought to be borne in the weakness of women, which in the
wisdom of men are not permitted. I say this, for that I never saw in thee
temperance, to cloak thine own maliciousnes, nor wisdom to shadow the
debilitie of others. Then I loved with my heart, and now I abhor thee with all
my heart.

Thou say my Children have many Fathers: but I swear unto thee, that the
children of Faustine shall not be fatherles although thou dye. And if the Gods
as thou say have been pitiful to my Children, no less art thou unto
strange children. For Faustine keeps thee but to excuse her faults, and to
be tutor to her Children.

Oh cursed Mark, thou need not to take thought, for thy children have no
need to be married. For one thing we are bound to thee, that is: the example
of thy patience: for since thou suffer Faustine in so many open infamyes,
it is no great need we suffer any secrets in thee.

For this present I say no more, I end my Letter, desiring shortly to see the
end of thy life.

CHAP. X. Marcus Aurelius writes to the Lady Macrine the Roman, of whom,
(beholding her at a window) he became enamored. Which declares what force the
beauty of a fair woman has in weak man.
Mark, the very desirous, to the Lady Macrine greatly desired. I know not
well whither by evil chance, or by hap of my good adventure: not long ago I
saw thee at a window, where thou had thy arms as close, is I mine Eyes
displayed, that cursed be they for ever: for, in beholding thy Face, forthwith
my heart abode with thee as prisoner. The beginning of thy knowledge, is the
end of my reason, and falling in: shunning one evil, come infinite trauells
unto men.

I say it for this, if I had not bin idle, I had not gone out of my house: and
not gone out of my house? I had not passed by the street. And not going
through the street, I had not not seen thee at the window: and not seeing thee
at the window, I had not desired thy person, and not desiring thy person, I had
not put thy fame in so great peril, nor my life in doubt: nor we had given no
occasion to Rome to speak of us. For of truth Lady Macrine, in this case I
condemn my self: For very willingly I did behold thee. I did not salute thee,
though thou desiredst to be seen. Since thou were set up as a white, it is no
marell though I shot at thee with the arrows of mine eyes, at the butte of
thy beauty, with thy rolling Eyes, with thy brows bent, well colored Face,
incarnate Teeth, ruddie lips, courled hair, hands set with Rings, clothed
with a thousand manner of colors, having purses full of sweet savors: the
Bracelettes, and Eare-rings, full of pearls and precious-stones.

Tell me what this means? The most that I can think of this is: since you
show us your bodies openly, ye would we should know your desires in secret.
And if it be so, as I believe it is: it seems to me Lady Macrine, thou
ought to love him that likes thee, to enform him that seeks thee: to
answer him that calls thee: to feel him that feels thee: and to
understand him that understands thee: And since thou understand me, I do
understand thee, and understand that thou know not.

I do well remember as I went by the street solitarily, to see two thieves put
to death, mine eyes glauncing saw thee at a window: on whom depends all my
desires.

More justice thou do to me, then I to the Thieves: For I being at
justice, thou have iusticed the justice, and none dare pain thee. The gallows
is not so cruel to them which never knew but doing evil: as thou art to me,
which never thought other but only to serve thee.

They suffer but one death, and thou make me suffer a thousand: They in one
day and one hour end their lives, and I each minute do feel the pangs of
death. They dyed guyltie, but I innocently. They died openly, and I in secret.

What will thou that I say more unto thee? They wept for that they dyed, and I
weep daily tears of blood from my heart, for that I live. This is the
difference, their torments spreads abroad through all their body, and I
keep mine together, in my heart.

O cruel Macrine, I know not what justice this is, that they kill men for
robbing and stealing from many? and suffer women to live, which steal men's
hearts?

If they take the lives from them that pick purses: why then do they suffer
Ladies, which rob our entrails? By thy Noblenes I pray thee, and by the
Goddess Venus I Conjure thee, either satisfy my desire, or restore me to my
heart, which thou have robbed from me.

I would thou should know Lady Macrine, the clear intention of my heart,
rather then this Letter written with my hand. If my hap were so good, as thy
Love would permit me to speak with thee, I would hope by sight and speech to
win that, which I am in suspect by my Letter to loose.

The reason whereof is, because thou shall read my rude reasons in this
letter, and if thou saw me, thou should see the bitter tears which I
would offer to thee, in this my unhappy life.

Oh that my mouth could publish my cruel pains, as my heart feels them. I
swear unto thee Lady Macrine, that my woeful plaintes would stir up thy
small care, and as thy beauty has made thee thine own, so the true knowledge
of thy griefs, should make thee mine. I desire thou would regard the
beginning: and therewith note the end.

For of truth, the same day that thou imprisonedst my heart at the window, in
the dungeon of my desires, I had no less weakness to overcome, then thou
had strength to enforce me: and greater was thy power to take me from my
self, then my reason was to put me from thee.

Now lady Macrine, I do not ask other mercy of thee, but that we may
declare our minds together. But in this case, what will thou I say unto thee?
but that thou have so much power over me, and I so little of my liberty: that
though I would not, my heart must needs be thine: and that being thine, thou will show thy self to be mine. And since it may not be, but that my life must
be condemned in thy service: be thou as sure of my Faith, as I am doubtful
of thy goodwill. For, I shall have a greater honor to be lost for thy sake,
then to win any other Treasure. I have no more to say unto thee now, but that
thou have respect to my perdition: and to draw life out of my death, and turn
my tears to joy.

And because I hold my Faith, and will never despair in thy hope, I send thee
x. little rings of gold, with x. rings of Alexandria: and by the immortal Gods
I conjure thee, that when thou put them on thy fingers, thou receyuest my
Love into thy heart.

Marcus thy Lover, wrote this with his own hand.

CHAP. XI. Of an other Letter, which the Emperor sent to the Lady Macrine:
wherein he expresses the Fiery-flames, which soonest consume the
gentle-hearts.
Mark thy neighbor at Rome, to thee Macrine his sweet enemy; I call thee
Sweet for it is just, I dye for thee: and enemy, because thou ceassest not to
kill me. I cannot tell how it is, but since the feast of Ianus hitherto I have
written three letters unto thee, in the answer whereof I would have been
contented to have received but two from thee. If I would serve thee, thou will
not be served: If I speak to thee, thou will not answer me If I behold thee,
thou will not look at me: if I call thee thou will not answer me: if I visit
thee, thou will not see me: if I write unto thee, thou will make no answer: And
the worst of all is, if others do show thee of my griefs, thou take it as a
mockery.

Oh that I had so much knowledge where to complain to thee, as thou have power
to ease my plaint: then my wisdom should be no less praised amongst the wise,
then thy beauty among the fools. I beseech thee heartily not to have respect
to the rudenes of my reasons, but regard the faith of my tears, which I offer
to thee, as a witness of my will.

I know not what profit may come by my harm: nor what gain of my loss thou
may hope to have, nor what surety of my peril thou may attain: nor what
pleasure of my pain thou may have?

I had answer by my messenger, that without reading my Letters, with thine
own hands thou did rent them in pieces: it ought to suffice to think how
many persons are tormented. If it had pleased you Lady Macrine, to have read
these few lines, you should have perceived, how I am inwardly tormented.

Ye women be very extreme: and for the misaduenture of one man, a woman will
complain of all men in general. So ye all show cruelty for one particular
cause: openly ye pardon all men's lives, and secretly ye procure death to all.
I account it nothing Lady Macrine, that thou have done, but I lament that
which thou causest thy Neighbor Valerius to say to me.

One thing I would thou should remember, and not forget, That is: Since my
liberty is so small, and thy power so great, that being wholly mine, am
turned to be thine: the more injury thou do to me, the more thou hurtest thy
self, since by thee I dye, as thou by me do live. In this perverse opinion
abide not, so may thou hazard the life of us both. Thou burist thy good name,
and destroyest my health, in the end thou must come to the same Physic Pardon
me Lady Macrine, if I say ought that may offend thee. I know ye women desire
one thing greatly: that is, to have souerainty of us, and yet not seem so much
as by thought to wish the same. Thou had the fame of a gentle nature,
though indeed thou were not so: yet thou had the fame thereof, and an
ancient good name ought not to be lost with a new unkindness. Thou know how
contrary ingratitude is to virtue, in a virtuous house. Thou can not be
called virtuous, but if thou be courteous. There is no greater ingratitude, the^
not to love again.

Though I visit thee, and thou not me, it is nothing: though I remember thee,
and thou forgettest me, it is nothing: though I weep, and thou laugh, it is
nothing: though I crave of thee and thou deny me, it is nothing: though thou
owe me, and pay me not, it is nothing: But if I love thee, and thou not
me, this is a great thing: which the eyes can neither dissemble, nor the heart
suffer.

All the vices in mortal men are to be pardoned, because they offend
naturally, save only this discurtesy in women, and ungentleness in men, which
are counted of malice.

Diverse services by me done to thee, and all the good wills I have heretofore
borne to thee, thou only Lady Macrine, with one thing reward me. I pray thee
be not slack to help me, for I was not so to offer me into peril, If thou
say that Patroclus thy husband has that property in thee, at the least yet
receive me upon proof, and I will pretend a possession of thee: and in this
wise the vainglory in being thine, shall hide the hurt being mine: thou make
me marvel not a little, that for so small a reward, thou will suffer so
great an importunity. For certainly we grant many things to an importunate man,
which we deny to a temperate man. If thou lady Macrine, hopest to ouercom me,
behold I yield me as vanquished. If thou will loose me, I hold me lost: if
thou will kill me, I hold me dead.

For by the gestures which I make before thy gates, and the secret sighs,
which I fetch in my house, thou may know how greatly I mind to rest, but thy
brave assaults are rather buildings to nourish death, then to comfort the life.
If thou will I escape this danger, deny me not remedy. For it shall be a
greater dishonor for to slay me, then shame to save me. It is no just thing
for so small a gain, to lose so faithful a friend. I wot not how to make
thee my debtor, nor how to make thee pay me: and the worst of all is, I know
not what to say, nor how to determine For, I was not borne to mine own wealth,
but to be faithful in thy services. And since thou know whom thou have
trusted with thy messages, the same I do trust with this open letter, and my
answer it secret. I do send to thee a jewel of pearl, and a piece of gold: I
pray the Gods make thee receive them, as willingly as I do freely send them.

Mark Orator, to the inexorable Macrine.

CHAP. XII. Of a Letter which the Emperor Marcus Aurelius sent unto the lady
Lyuia, wherein he reproves that Love is natural, and that the most part of
the Philosophers and wise men have been by Love overcome.
Mark full of sorrow, to thee careless Lyuia. If thy little care did lodge in
me, and my sorrows were harbored in thee, thou should then see how little
the quarrel is, that I make unto thee in respect to the torments I suffer.

If the flames did issue out, as the Fire does burn me within, the heavens
should perish with smoke, and the earth should make imbers. If thou do well
remember the first time I saw thee in the Temple of the virgin Vestals, thou
being there, did always pray to the Gods for thy self, and I upon my
knees prayed to thee for me. Thou know and so do I, that thou did
offer oil and honnie to the Gods, but I did offer unto thee tears and sighs.

It is just thou give more unto him that offered his heart, then to him which
draws money out of his purse I have determined to write unto thee this Letter,
whereby thou may perceive how thou art served with the arrows of mine Eyes,
which were shot at the white of thy service.

Oh unhappy that I am, I fear least this present calm does threaten me with
a tempest to come. I will say that discurtesie in thee, causes doubtful hope
in me. Behold my misaduenture, I had lost a letter, and turning to the Temple
to seek it, I found the letter, which was of some importance: and had almost
lost my self, which is the greatest thing.

Considering my small reward, I see mine eyes (the Ladders of my hopes) set on
so high a wall, that no less certain is my fell then my clyming was
doubtful. Thou bending down thy harness of thy high deserts, and putting me
to the point of continual service, suffer me to enjoy the fruit, and give
unto whom thou will the leaves.

By the immortal Gods I swear unto thee, that I marvel not a little: For, I
thought that in the Temple of the Virgin-Vestals no temptations could have
comen unto any man: But contrary now by true experience I find, that that
woman is easylier overcome, which is most watched, then the other that has
honest liberty.

All bodily diseases be first had, ere they be known, and known ere they
seen, and seen ere they be felt: and felt ere they be tasted: And so in all
things except this dart of Love: whom they first feel the stroke thereof,
before they know the way how it comes. The lightning comes not so sudden,
but it is known before by the thunder. The wall falls not suddenly, but
first some stones fall down.

The cold comes not so fast, but some small shiuering is seen before: only
Love is not felt, until he has had power in the entrails.

Let them know that are ignorant, and thou lady Lyuia, if thou will know, Love
sleeps when we waken, and waketh when we sleep: laugheth when we weep, and
weepeth when we laugh.

It assures in taking, and takes in in assuring: it speaks when we be
still, and is still when we speak. And finally, it has such a condition,
that to give us our desire, it causes us to live in pain. I swear unto the,
when my will became thy servant, and thy beauty made thee my Mistress, when I
was at the Temple, and there found thee, neither thou in thy prayers did
mind me, nor (I unhappy man) did think on thee.

Oh unhappy heart of mine, that being whole, thou art divided: being in health
thou art hurt, being alive thou art killed: being mine thou art stolen: and the
worste of all is, that thou not helping to my life, consentest that death
should assault me.

Considering many times Lady Liuia with my self, my thoughts to be high, and
my Fortunes base, I would have separated my self from thee: but upon better
hope, knowing my trauells to be well employed in thy service, I say though I
might, I would not now wish to be separated from thee.

I will not deny one thing, that is: The cursed Love takes away the taste of
all things, and in those things only it gives us pleasure, which are greatly
against our profit. This is the proof of him that loves heartily, that one
frown of her that he loves, does more grieve him, then all the delights of
the rest of his life can please.

I deem Lady Lyuia, thou art abashed to see me openly as a Philosopher, and
to know me secretly as a lover. I beseech thee heartily discover me not. For if
the Gods grant me long life, I am now a young fool, yet in age, I will be
wise.

The Gods know what I desire, and the force which does enforce me thereunto.
And as the flesh is weak, and the heart tender, the occasions many, the
virtues few, the world deceitful, the people malicious. So I pass this
springtime with flowers, in hope that in harvest I shall have some fruit.

Think thou lady Lyuia, that philosophers (be they never so wise) are are
not touched with the sharp darts of Love? and that under their course
clothes, there is not soft flesh and white? Certainly amongst hard bones is
nourished soft flesh: and within the pricking husks grow the Chess-nut.

I say that under the simple attire, is the faithful love. I do not deny but
our frail nature does withstand our virtues. Nor I deny not but that the
wanton desires are repressed with virtuous minds. Nor I deny not, but that
the rashness of youth are restrained with the reins of reason.

I deny not but many times wisdom does withstand that which the flesh
procures: and yet I confess that he which is not amorous, is a Fool.

And do thou not know, that although we be wise, we leave not therefore to
be men? do not thou know, all that ever we learn in our life, suffices
not to govern the Flesh one hour? Do not thou know, that to wise men in
this case has fallen many errors? Do not thou know, that there has bin
and are many masters of virtues: and much more there are and has bin
followers of vices.

Then, why do thou make such a wonder only of me? I will nor say it
without a truth, that I never had my judgment so good and perfect, as when
Cupid blewe wind on me, with his wings.

There was never man until my time accounted wise, but first he was entangled
with Cupids snares. Gratian was in love with Tamira. Solon Salaminus the giver
of the laws, was enamoured with one Gretian. Pittachus Mytelenus left his own
wife, and was in love with a Bondwoman that he brought from the wars.

Cleobolus when he was foure-score years elde, and had read Phylosophie
sixtie-fiue years, climbing up a Ladder, to scale his Neighbors wall, fell,
and of the bruise dyed.

Periander Prince of Achaya, and chief philosopher of Greece, at the instance
of his lovers, slew his own wife. Anacharsis a Philosopher, a Scythian by his
Father, and a Greek by the mothers side, loved so dearly a woman of Thebes,
that he taught her all that he knew: in so much that he being sick on his
bed, she read for him in the schools.

Epimenides of Creete, that slept 15. years without waking. Although he was a
great worshipper of the Gods, yet he was banished Athens 10. years for the
loving of Women.

Architus Tarentinus, the master of Plato, and scholar of Pythagoras, occupied
his mind more to invent new kinds of Love, then to employ his studies to
virtue and Learning.

Gorgias Leontinus, borne in Scicile, had mo concubines in his house, then
books in his study. All these were wise men, and we knew them wise, yet at
the end they were overcome with flesh. Therefore blame me not alone, for as I
have told thee of these few, so could I of a whole armey.

For of truth he ought to have many things, that will be accounted a curious
Lover. He must have his eyes displayed on her that he loves, his
understanding much altered in that he thinks, his tongue troubled in that it
should speak: so that in seeing he is blind, in thinking dismayed, in speaking
troubled.

O Lady Lyuia, the loving in mockery, passes by mockery: but where true love
is, there is grief and no mockery: there true love spitteth his poison, and
cruel Cupid fixes his Arrows up to the feathers.

The Eyes weep, the heart sigheth, the Flesh trembles, the sinews do
shrink, the understanding is gross, reason falls to the earth: Finally, the
heavy Lover abiding in himself, holds nothing of himself.

All this I say, because if I want knowledge to make me a Lover; yet am I sure
that the works fail not in me to effect thy service. And though by mishap I
saw thee, yet by good chance I knew thee. I ask nothing of thee, but that
thou love me faithfully, since I love thee unfeignedly. And if thou hear that
I am sick from my heart, I desire thee to do me some good. Since it is in thee
only to help me, it is reason thou only do seek for remedy.

I was greatly comforted when Fulius Carlotus desired me in thy behalf, to do
a pleasure, which I did incontinent all that thou desiredst, to the intent that
thou another day should do franckly that I desire thee. And behold fair
Lady Lyuia, the woman that is served with services, it is great reason within
a while she be sued unto by prayer. And though my strength cannot open the
gates of the purpose, or not agreeing to thy demand yet all my labors slack
not to uphold thy renown. I pray thee discover not the one, nor beguile me
with the other: For thou see in granting is remedy, and in hoping is
comfort: but promise is deceiuable, and delaying is perilous, and the
entertayning binds.

I see well that the hearty demand requires a long answer: but I would not
thou should do so. But as I love thee, so love me: as I desire of thee, so
grant thou me.

I will say once again, I am all thine, and nothing mine own. And note Lady
Lyuia, that it is as much honor to thee, as profitable for me, that thou
change these thy desires, and put in order thy disordered will. For, thou
see it is much better to heal shortly, then too-late, with failing thy
purpose?

All Women observe an evil opinion, that is: ye never receive council,
although it be given you in never so weighty a case. And if it be not so,
then because thou art esteemed beautiful, be likewise honored for taking of
good council. In this sort, though my loss be much, and thy patience little,
yet shall they account me wise in giving counsel, and the most happy to
follow it.

One thing I will say unto thee, and pardon me therein. Women be much defamed
in that they will take no counsel, and such as do assure their renown so
much on the judgment of others, as they condemn well doing before.

I think good if it so like thee, and would if thou will, that thou should
do in all (...) I have counseled thee.

I will say no more Lady Lyuia, but that I do present unto thee, all my
unfortunate troubles, my sighs as a desperate man: my service, as thy servant,
my troubled griefs, my words of Phylosophie, and my tears as a Lover: I send
thee here a gyrstle of Gold, on condition that thou always six thine Eyes on
that, and thy heart on me.

I pray the Gods give me to thee, and thee to me.

Mark the open Philosopher, wrote this in great (...).

FINIS.

