DEATHS DELIVERANCE, AND ELIAHES FIERY CHARET, OR The Holy man's Triumph after
Death.

Delivered in two Sermons preached at PLYMOVTH, the one the 16. the other the
19. of August: the former at the Funeral of Thomas Sherwill, an Eminent and
pious Magistrate of that place. 1631.

By ALEXANDER GROSS now Pastor of Bridford.

PSALM. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of
that man is peace.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for Francis Eaglesfield, and are to be sold
at the Mary-gold in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL JOHN WADDON Mayor of Plimmouth, and the residue of
that famous Corporation, the blessed increase of all Grace on earth, and the
fullness of all Glory in Heaven.
Right Worshipful, and much respected,
IT is an Axiom among the Logicians: Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum
recipientis: and sutably, we are taught by daily experience, that the welfare
and issue of our actions is much dependant upon other men's interpretations:
sometimes groundless surmises, causeless jealousies of men's intentions, ends,
and purposes, do put an evil construction upon a very good and holy
undertaking, and turn the sweetest flower into a loathsome, and unsavory
weed: thus David's 2 Samuel 10.3.4.5.
servants sent by him in kindness, to visit and comfort Hanun after the death of
his father, were upon a groundless jealousy entertained as spies, and not as
friends, sent away not with thanks, but with disgrace; having their garments
cut off to the buttockes, and their beards shaved off to the half. Sometimes
the low estate and condition of the Agent, does much obscure and darken the
glory of the work; thus Solomon tells us, Eccle. 9.15.
there was a little City, and few men in it; and there came a great King
against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it; now there
was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the City,
yet no man remembered that same poor man: the jewel is despised because the
Casket is not rich and gilded; and thence it was that they looked on our
Savior, as on a Esaias 53.2.
dry tree, as on one that had no beauty for which they should desire him;
called into Mat. 13.54, 55, 56, 57.
question his learning, took offense at him, because as man, he had (as they
conceived) a poor original; sometimes a prejudicate conceit, a forestalled
opinion; this makes men with John. 1.46.
Nathaniel to question whether any good can come out Nazareth. Sometimes want
of Complement, and humane varnishings, to set forth the work; the cloth is
not regarded, because the lace wants: Thus Paul's preaching seemed 1 Cor. 1.
foolish to the Grecians, because it wanted the enticing words of man's
wisdom. Holy intentions, good and profitable undertakings, have many clouds
to darken them, many tongues of a vicious and different temper to gloss upon
them: But for mine own part (the integrity of mine intentions warranting to
mine own heart this enterprise) I am resolved with S. Paul, to take it a small
thing to be judged of 1 Cor. 4.3.
man's judgment. If I may do any good, give any light, minister any comfort,
though but to one poor soul, by my weak and despised endeavors, I fear
not, I regard not a thousand censures. It is not the importunity of others,
the commemoration of past kindnesses, expectation of, or invention unto future
favors, but the love I bear to the parties deceased, my desire to have their
memorial preserved, continued; the refreshing of your memories with the
blessing ye enjoyed by their life, and the loss ye sustain by their death;
the quickening of you to an holy conversation, the preparing of you for your own
dissolution, are the moving causes of the publication of these two Sermons.

It is not earthly honor, worldly fullness, fleshly pleasures, vanishing
greatness, transitory abundance, that is the richest jewel, the brightest
Sun, the sweetest music, the most honorable Crown; all these are sand
sinking, exhalations vanishing, thorns pricking, Eagles flying away, Prove. 23.5
things which are not. These are often given for a snare, as Saul's 1 Samuel 18 21.
daughter to David; These like Judge. 16.19.
Dalilah betray us, after they have sung sweetly to us, cut off our locks,
spoil us of what should make us happy, and involve us in an irrecoverable
misery: like Judge. 4.20, 21.
Iael, after they have fed us, clothed us, and in our imagination secured us,
drive the nail of destruction into our temples: like Absaloms feast for 2 Samuel
13.28.
Amnon, they do but prepare us for destruction. To a soul savingly
enlightened, unfainedly humbled, truly sanctified, thoroughly affected with the
taste of Gods goodness, blessedly enriched with spiritual and heavenly
graces, beautified and adorned with the precious pearl surpassing all earthly
merchandise: what these things are let Gregory speak; Greg. in 1 Reg. cap. 20.
quid divitiae pereuntes, and transitoriae facultates, nisi stercora, aeterna
diligentibus? what are perishing riches, and transitory abilities, but dung to
them that love eternity? And thus Paul accounted all to be but Phil. 3.8.
dung and dross in comparison of the knowledge of Christ Jesus. It is not
greatness, but goodness; not worldly riches, but heavenly graces; not the
highest top of earthly felicities, but true holiness, is the way leading to
the Crown, and joy of never failing continuance. Though (as one says) the
pursuit of purity is deemed the height of folly; yet you shall find this
infallibly, constantly, unchangeably true; That true godliness, the religious
exercise of holy duties, heavenly walking with God, is a pillar of the greatest
strength to support, a star of the brightest light to direct, a jewel of the
richest price to enrich, a flower of the most orient and shining beauty to
adorn, and a shield of the most tried metal to defend any Kingdom, town,
family, people or particular person.

Many be the instruments and means which God of his goodness has ordained,
prepared, sanctified, for the begetting, breeding, nourishing, establishing,
and perfecting of this godliness, this religion in the hearts of his people:
among the many, these two, the Ministry of the Gospel, meditation upon our
uncertain, yet speedy dissolutio^, are not the least effectual, preualent, and
powerful, to make us speedy, careful, and circumspect runners in this race,
and to forward us in this holy and blessed work. Therefore as the Mat. 24.24.
Eagles gather themselves to the Carcass, as the Mica. 4.1, 2.
waters flow to the Ocean, as the Ioh. 5.4.5.
lame men came to Bethesda, as the Queen of the South came from far to hear
the wisdom of Solomon; so come ye, attend, wait upon, reverence, receive,
embrace and love the holy and faithful Ministry of the Word. Here is the
sweetest music that ever ear heard, the delicat'st Feast that ever palate
tasted, the most comfortable tidings that ever man brought, the most glorious
light that ever eye did see: here is a garden which has a flower for every
sanctified nostrill; an Artillerie-house, wherein are weapons for every
soldier fighting Gods battle; an Apothecaries shop that has a healing
medicine for every wounded soul; here is a Counselor for every circumcised
ear, a guide for every traveller, a comforter for every sorrowful and
dejected spirit. This is the isntrumental staff and stay of Gods children;
the Crown and glory of the Lords people. But as our Savior took occasion,
from the quality of the persons receiving the Gospel, to say, Mat. 11.5, 6.
the poor receive the Gospel, and blessed is he that is not offended in me;
So may I take occasion from the condition of the persons preaching, and from
their manner of teaching to say, Esaias 11.6. Psalm. 8.2 2 Cor. 10.1^.
mortal men, weak men, men of low estate and condition, men whose bodily
presence is weak, and speech contemptible, preach the Gospel, and that in a
plain manner without ostentation: and blessed is he that is not offended,
because this Treasure is brought in a wooden Vessel, because men preach not
themselves, but Christ; that so the excellency of the power may appear to be
of God, and not of men. It is with us indeed, as we are carnal, as it was
with Antiochus, Livi: lib. 37. Plut. in Comp. Scipio. and Annib.
and his people, in another case. History makes mention, how Antiochus prepared
against the Romans an Army very great and huge, of men of many Nations, but
white livered Soldiers, not so strong with armor, as glistering with gold and
silver: Antiochus himself was amazed at the sight of it, and thought it
invincible; and so did the simple fools of his Country: but the Romans
contemned it, and Annibal jested at it. So natural men being to wage war
against their spiritual adversaries, will 2 Timothy 4.3.
heap up many teachers, and if their Sermons glister with the gold and silver,
or rather with the gilded brass, and copper of humane eloquence, supercilious
speeches, curious and quaint conceits and devices, though there be little or
no spiritual power in it; yet they stand amazed at it think that the battle is
won, that the day and crown is theirs: when it is too apparent that Satan,
and sin, like Annibal and his Romans, do scorn, and are no more moved, no
more affrighted with it, then with the admiration used by the Acts 19.15.
sons of Sheva, where Satan prevailed, and they ran away wounded; for as
Satan said to them: Paul I know, and Jesus I know, but what are ye? So in this
case the evil spirit will, at least may say: them that preach Christ sincerely,
faithfully, powerfully, I know; but what are the feeble sayings of Heathenish
Philosophers, or the rythmes and fictions of fond Poets, who sanctified these
as a means to conquer sin and Satan? Two things have I found, (which J
propose to the view and censure of all the Lords people) the one by internal
sense and feeling, the other by external observation: the first is this; The
more or less the Minister of God has of the Spirit in his preaching, so much
the more or less powerful is his Sermon, either for conviction, conversion,
or consolation: The second is this, That holy, humble, and faithful Pastors,
though for humane Eloquence like Cicero, for their abilities in Philosophy like
Aristotle, for their versifying faculty like Ovid; yet in Gods Sanctuary have
they laid aside these weapons, and studied to preach God and Christ Jesus, not
out of Homer, Virgil, Cicero, Aristotle, but of out the Sacred Scriptures, with
all 1 Cor. 14.18, 19.
possible plainness, fit for men's capacities. And for mine own part, I think
Gods Ministers should use humane helps, as Abraham did his Genesis 22.5.
Ass and his Servant; they may go with them to the foot of the Hill, and
there stay, but not ascend into the Sanctuary, where they preach Christ Jesus,
and offer their spiritual sacrifice, except in some Act. 17.28. Tit. 1.12.
extraordinary cases. For thus S. Augustine: In doctrina sacrae Scripturae
authoritatem debet Episcopus praeferre, non saecularium literaru^ peritiam
ostentare; non enim Episcopi est officium Grammaticam exponere, nec lauds
Iovis personet os pontificis: that is, the Minister must prefer the authority
of sacred Scripture in his teaching, and not show forth his skill in secular or
humane learning; it is not the duty of a Minister to expound Grammar, or sound
forth the praises of Jupiter: this have I made hold to tell you, that you may
not stick in cortice, in the naked world of a Sermon, like men that behold
only the outside of the house; but open the door, go in, and see what good
cheer the Spirit of God does make there for your souls; Origin in Levit. Hom.
39.
for as Origin says, Spiritus divinis verbis convalescit, nutrimenta spiritus
sunt divina lectio, orationes assiduae, sermo doctrinae; his alitur cibis, his
convalescit, his actor efficitur: It is not an humane but a divine word which
nourishes, and makes the soul holily operative: it is Gods word which does
enlighten the understanding, awaken the conscience, purify the affection,
reconcile to God, work peace in the heart, and fill the inward man with all
goodness: think of these things, and of many poor souls that amongst you
come within the walls of the Lords house, and there stand and see, but hear
not, that you may accordingly provide for your own, and their everlasting good.

And as the holy, and soule-refreshing Ministry of the Gospel, so also the
serious meditation of our own slippery standing, fleeting condition, is a spur
very forcible to quicken us in the way of righteousness: were that of the
Prophet to Ezekiah, 2 King. 20.
thou may not live but die, ever sounding in our ears, and fresh in our
memories, it would cause us to set both house and soul in order, it would
cause us with the Merchant to buy while the Mart lasts, with the Traveller to
walk while the light shines, with the Mariner to row while the tide serves.
And that the word of God may now be pleasant and profitable, your death at the
last comfortable and gainful; let the presence, power, and increase of these
four ensuing graces, like four precious jewels adorn you. 1. Humility,
which is in Gods eye a 1 Pet. 3.3.
Pearl of great price, a fruit, an evidence of the Prove. 11.2.
wisdom which is from above, the first Mat. 11.29.
lesson learned in the School of Christ Jesus, and that which makes us
capeable Iam. 4.6.
of all graces. 2. Sincerity, let your inward disposition, your outward
conversation, be like our Saviors Coat without seame; it is your Psalm 32.1, 2.
blessedness, your praise before God and all good men now, and will be your
joy and your 2 Cor. 1.12.
glory at the last, to be true Israelites, right Nathaniels, in whom is no
guile. 3. Unity, a holy concord, a sweet agreement in every good way betwixt
your selves: this is a fruit of the highest Ioh. 1. Iam. 3.17.
wisdom, like a Psalm. 13 3.1.2.
precious ointment in Gods nostrils, a singular sweetning of your mutual
conversation, commerce, and communication, a great strengthening, and a
powerful prevention of much evil. 4. Constancy in all the ways of God,
having begun in the spirit, end not in the flesh, be not weary of well doing;
having put your hand to Gods plow, look not back, but come forth as the Psalm.
19.5.
Sun, like a Bridegroom out of his Chamber, adorned with all spiritual
splendour and brightness; and rejoice ye like a mighty man to run the race
of Gods Commandments: Isa. 40.31.
mount up like the Eagle, walk on, and faint not; so shall you at the last
embrace death as a friend, rest in your grave, as on a Bed of Down, have your
souls carried in a fiery Chariot into Heaven, be entertained with most sweet
embracements by the LORD JESUS, and have with JEHOVAH blessed for ever, the
full fruition of endless joys in his most glorious Kingdom: This He
unfainedly desires, who ever rests.

Yours in all holy services, Alexander Gross.

DEATHS DELIVERANCE.
Isai. 57.1, 2. The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart; and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away
from the evil to come.

He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in
his uprightness.


THe heaviest afflictions are sweet mercies to Gods Servants; their greatest
loss does prove their chiefest gain; as the red Sea to Israel, proved a Exodus
14.28, 29.
grave to their enemies, a passage to them from their Egyptian bondage: as
Sampson had Judge. 14.14.
honey in the Lion, sweet out of the sour, meat out of the eater; so the
Lords people have light out of darkness, joy out of heaviness, peace out of
trouble, life out of death; the wounding arrow, the piercing sword, that sticks
in their sides, does prove a launcing knife; the deadliest poison a sweet
purgation; the most mortal enemy does the labor of a kind and loving friend;
as Pharaohs burdens, fury, violence, and high hand, drove Israel from working
in an iron furnace, from living under a miserable and slavish bondage: so
enemies, afflictions, sorrows, troubles, sickness, violent diseases, and
death it self, turn to the singular good of all that love the Lord; for if
they perish, if they dye, if they lay down their life; oh! it is for their
advantage, though others, it may be, do not consider it; for thus the Prophet
here has it:

The righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are
taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken from the evil to
come.

This Text is to a good man, like the Travelers Inn, bed, and place of
repose, after his long and wearisome journey; like the Mariners haven after
many violent and stormy Tempests; like the Ex. 9.20
houses wherein the Egyptian Cattle were preserved from the grievous hail, one
day threatened, and the next day inflicted; for so the Prophet says.

The righteous is taken from the evil to come: he shall enter into peace, they
shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness.

In the words we may consider;

1. Quis. Of whom the Prophet here speaks, of the righteous and merciful man.

2. Quid. What he says of him, he perishes, is taken away, the latter word
does well explain the former.

3. Quare. Wherefore, he is taken away from the evil to come.

4. Quomodo. How, in what manner, he is taken away in peace, he lays down
his life in the fear of God, rests in his grave, as on a bed, till the
morning of the Resurrection.

5. Qualiter. How the surviving men are affected with it, they lay it not to
heart, they consider it not.

These be the streams flowing from this fountain, because time will not give
us leave with Gideons many thousands to bow down upon our knees, and drink a
full draught of these waters, we shall be constrained with his 300. soldiers
to Judge. 7.6.
lap a little, and so away.

To begin therefore with the two first of these jointly; Quis and Quid, who
perishes, who is taken away, The righteous: Gods people are righteous Jo.
13.10.
inchoative, as the morning, the dawning of the day is light, but has
darkness mingled with it: as Lazarus came forth of his grave, he was risen,
but his Jo. 11.44
grave-cloth bound him. So Gods people are risen to a new conversation out of
the grave of sin, but their corruptions are yet in some degree remaining in
them, a great hindrance to their holy walking. 2. They are righteous Mat. 5.6.
Psa. 119.5.
affective, they desire it, hunger and thirst after it. 3. They are righteous
Is. 32.15.
effective, righteousness is their work, their fruit, their walk. 4. They
are righteous 1 Cor. 5.21. Romans 4.6.
imputative, and so they be perfectly righteous, not a part, but the whole
righteousness of Christ is imputed to them. They are as Genesis 27.15.
Jacob in Esaus their elder brothers garment, and so they win the blessing from
God, as Jacob obtained the blessing at the hands of his Father Isaak.

The righteous man here is most properly the man which does holy and righteous
works; that walks constantly, and conscionably in the way of righteousness;
whose exercise is with Act. 24.16.
Paul, to keep a conscience void of offense toward God, and toward man; this
man perishes, is smitten with the arrow of temporal death, falls in this
war, etc.

Merciful men, or men of kindness, or godliness, as the word also
signifies, men easily Luke 6.36.
moved to grieve at the miseries of others, and to succor them: men merciful,
even as God is merciful; for in mercy there is the affection of pity, and the
effect of help and succor: the men thus righteous, thus merciful, thus
qualified, are taken away by death, whence observe,

That such as be most holy and gracious, are subject to a bodily dissolution,
as well as others. The sith cutteth the beautiful, and sweet smelling flower,
as soon as the fearne; the Axe heweth down the good tree, as well as the
barren, being once laid to the root of it: so is death impartial; as the
Deluge Genesis 7.19.
over-flowed the meadows, orchards, gardens, as well as the wilderness, the
most fruitful, as well as the more barren parts of the earth: so death spares
none. God has Heb. 9.27.
appointed it, the sentence is irrecoverable, and how Eccles. 2.16.
dies the wiseman? says Solomon, as the fool. What is become of all the
Saints that lived before us? Have they not all drunk of this cup? Have they not
all run this race? Hear what the wise man says, Eccle. 8.8.
There is no man (whether rich or poor, high or low, young or old, holy or
unholy) that has power over the spirit, to retain the spirit, neither has he
power in the day of death; and there is no discharge in that war, neither
shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it. The proof of this is as
needless, as to prove the going down of the Sun from our Horizon, which
every eye may daily behold and see: neither is it strange, for

There is some sin, some corruption in the best, there is that seed Ruth.
1.16.
Ruth followed Naomi, as Ionathans Armor-bearer said to him, 1 Samuel 14.7.
turn thee, behold I am with thee, according to thy heart: so may death say to
sin, for which way soever that turns, or goes before it, death does without
fail ensue and follow Romans 5.12.
after it. This is the Romans 6.23.
wages belonging to it, the payment never fails: as Solomon says of other
buildings, Eccl. 10.18.
by much slothfulness the building decays, and through idleness of the
hands the house droppeth through: So may I say of these our earthly
Tabernacles, through our corruptions these weak buildings of our bodies do
decay, and through the sin which is within us, this house droppeth through,
till at length it falls to the ground, comes to the grave; sin is the
mother, and death the daughter, Lam. 3.42, 43.
Lam. 3.42, 43.

1 Pet. 2.11.
Pilgrims, this is not their Heb. 11.9, 14.
Country, now they are 1 Cor. 9.24.
Travelers, and tend every day to their journies end and as Israel could not
come to Canaan, but through the 1 Cor. 10.1.
Red Sea, no more can Gods people attain their journies end, but by death;
when the prison walls are beaten down, then they who are kept in fetters
there, may go forth, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2.
We know (says the Apostle) that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the Heavens.

This makes them also in some sort Lord and Master has drunk of this cup,
trodden this path before us, and the Mat. 10.24.
Disciple must not look to be above his Master: but, as in other things, so
in this we must be made like him, to this we are To. 8.29.
ordained, we must first be like him in his sufferings, and then we shall be
like him in his reigning. 2 Timothy 2.11.
It is a faithful saying, if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him,
if we suffer we shall also reign with him: Therefore as Gideon said unto his
Soldiers, Judge. 7.17.
Look on me, as ye see me do, so do ye: so must we look on our Gideon,
our Christ, our Captain, and do as we have seen him do before us.

This works the utter destruction Sampson by his Judge. 16.30.
death destroyed the Philistines his enemies, so the righteous by their death
destroy their corruptions; sin is like a subtle Fox, that cannot be taken
till his holds be destroyed; like ivy in the wall, which cannot be totally
taken away, till the stones be pulled asunder: Israel could not be freed from
the Exo. 14. Morte peccati praecisionem homo lucratur, ne malum immortale
esset, ita poena ipsi in misericordiam cessit. Nazian. Orat. 38.
Egyptians, till they came to the red sea; no more can Gods people of their
sins, till they come to the grave: by death do the righteous gain the
cutting off of sin; and death which was a punishment, is turned to a mercy to
all that walk uprightly.

But Christ has dyed for them, and their sin is forgiven, Gods Justice is
fully satisfied, how then can God be just in bringing death on them?

Joh. 3.16.
given of God to us; given, not instantly to confer upon us an actual
freedom from all evils, but in due time, after we have been exercised with
variety of trials. God does not only give Christ, but also apply him unto us,
and when there is a full application of Christ to believers, then there shall
be a complete Ephesians. 1.14.
redemption from all evils: and thus though Christ have paid the ransom, yet
God does us no wrong, in suffering us to be exercised with many troubles,
because there is not yet a full application of this ransom; and because God
gave him in such a way and manner to bring his chosen to salvation, as seemed
best to his own wisdom. God promised Canaan to Israel, but yet he led them
through the red sea before he brought them thither, and in so doing, did them
no wrong.

Death to the people of God is not Moses Exodus 4.3, 4.
serpent, it may at first sight make the people of God afraid, as that did him;
but as Moses afterward took the Serpent in his hand, and it did him no harm,
so is death to the righteous. like a Serpent without a sting, like a Soldier
overcome, and his weapons taken from him, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57.
O death (says Saint Paul) where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory?
the sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be
unto God, which gives us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord.

David cut off 1 Samuel 17 50, 51.
Goliahs head with his own sword, so will God destroy sin by death, which is
held as a sword in sins hand.

red sea to Israel, the destruction of the enemies of their salvation, an end
of all miseries, a passage to everlasting life: so that Gods people have
freedom from the evil, but not from the necessity of dying; and herein is the
wonderful power, wisdom, and goodness of God very clearly seen, even in
changing the nature of death, and making it to his people so useful, which in
it self is so hurtful.

the righteous exempted? must they taste of this cup? It is then in vain for
the wicked, unrighteous, unmercifull, to dream of escapall: As the Apostle
said in another case, 1 Pet. 4.17.
if judgment begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of them which
obey not the Gospel of God, and as our Savior also said in another case, Luke
23.31.
if they do thus to the green tree, what will they do to the dry? So in this
case, if death seize upon, and spare not Gods family, the household of faith,
the holy and righteous, Isa. 61.3.
trees of righteousness, Trees of Gods own planting, as the Prophet calls
them, where then be the hopes of the profane man's deliverance: If holiness,
if being in Christ, in covenant with God, preserve not the righteous, the
merciful man from death; Oh think not then, O profane man, that riches,
honor, worldly abilities will preserve thy life, these be shields of no
strength to defend us from the darts of death, foundations of sand, unable to
bear us up* like that whereon the foolish man built his house, Mat. 7.27.
Mat. 7. Whereon when the Winds blew, and the waves beat, it fell, and great
was the fall thereof: such will be the end of all that build upon the sand of
earthly powers, whose very strength is weakness. It was neither the strength,
nor height of the tree, nor fairness of the leaves, nor abundance of the
fruit, nor extent of the shadow, could preserve it from the sentence of the
Dan. 4.12, 13, 14.
woe, the which Nebuchadnezar beheld coming down from Heaven in his vision:
so death (when it once comes, when the God of Heaven sends it) will shake off
the leaves, break down the branches, take away the beauty of the fairest, the
might of the strongest, not regard the wealth of the richest, but new down the
Tree, and cast the body into the grave. Ps. 82.6.
I have said (says the Lord of them that be most rich, most potent, most
mighty on earth) ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most High,
but ye shall dye like men, and perish like one of the Princes. As the fire
burns both the shrub and Cedar; so death spares neither poor nor rich. The
Lords wrath will seize upon all the wicked alike, as the Is. 5.24.
the fire devoureth the stubble, and the flame consumes the chafe, so their
root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust, because
they have cast away the Law of the Lord of Hoasts: and woeful, miserable and
wretched will their death be. For

It shall end all their joys, then Job 18.5, 6.
Candle will be put out, as the Dan. 5.5.
hand writing in the wall marred Belshazzars feast, so will death mar the
wicked man's mirth.

It will rob him of all his pomp, as Dan. 4.30.
Nebuchadnezar was turned from his glorious Palace, to eat grass like an Ox;
so will death turn the profane man out of all his dignities, bring his Isa.
14.11.
pomp to the grave, and make him a Mat. 25.41.
companion with the Devil and his angels.

It will leave him as an abomination upon the earth, his memory shall Prove.
10.7.
rot, when he dies, so the man that is in Psalm. 49.23.
honor, and knows not, is ignorant of God, destitute of his fear, void of
his grace, shall be like the beast which perishes.

Luke 16.24.
quenching; to that Jude v. 7.
fire which is everlasting, it shall cast them into that Rev. 21.8.
lake, from whence there is no out-going. To this slaughterhouse must thou
come, O riotous, O covetous, O unclean and carnal man, and though thou do
escape a little while; yet it will not be long: thou may cheer Eccles. 11.9.
thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes, but for all these things, God at length will bring
thee to judgment. Gellius says of Sejanus horse, no man ever sped well that
was owner of him: Such a horse is sin, no man ever speeds well at last, but
takes a fall that rides this horse, and is carried headlong to destruction;
overwhelmed with everlasting torments, before he is aware of it, over-taken as
a woman by her 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.
travail, it will come as a thief in the night season. As Absaloms, servants
fell on Amnon and murdered him, when his heart was 2 Samuel 13.28.
merry with wine: so when the hearts of men are merry with the pleasures of
sin, when they be satiated and glutted with worldly and fleshly delights,
then sorrow, shame, death, everlasting woes, the servants of sin shall fall
upon them, as Absaloms servants upon Amnon. The pleasures of sin are but for
a Heb. 11.25.
season, they be but a Ps. 39.5.
spanne long, as the afflictions of the righteous be but for a Romans 8.18.
moment, so the Job 20.5.
pleasures and triumph of the wicked: and one hours torment in Hell, will
swallow up the pleasures of a thousand years on earth.

Are the righteous subject to a the Saints and holy servants of God learn, not
to set their hearts on things here below, but to be as 1 Pet. 2.11.
strangers upon the earth; to live as Tenants at will, in a continual
preparedness to depart. The Lord pressed the Prophet to this, by presenting
before him the changes which he would work; Behold (says the Lord) Jer.
45.4, 5.
that which I have built, I will break down, and that which J have planted, I
will pluck up, even this whole land: and seek thou great things for thy
self? seek them not: to this the Apostle persuades the people of God, by the
consideration of their new conditions: Col. 3.1, 2.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek the things which are above: To this he
urges the Hebrews, by setting the inconstancy of their outward estate before
them, We have no Heb 13.12, 13.
continuing City here, but seek one to come; therefore let us go forth
without the Camp, bearing our reproach, let us forsake the Earth, deny our
selves, be willing to be dissolved, that we may enjoy our desired home. And
this was of old the exhortation of the Prophet, Mica. 2.10.
Arise you and depart, for this is not your rest: And therefore as our Savior
said unto the Disciples concerning Judas, Mat. 26.46.
rise, let us be going, behold he is at hand that does betray me: So let me
say to you of death, arise, let us go hence, let us take our hearts from
things here below, for death which will take our life from us is at hand: And
as Matthew Mat. 9.9.
arose from the receipt of custom, and followed Christ: So let us arise every
man from his sin, from his profane way, from his evil custom, and become
sincere, humble, diligent, and constant followers of the Lord Jesus; and as the
Virgins at the cry of the Bridegroomes coming, arose Prove. 6.10, 11.
and trimmed their lamps: So we (Beloved) hearing now the cry of the coming
of death, O let us break off our sleep, cast away our security, prepare our
lamps, get the oil of saving grace into our souls: Let us not like the
sluggard cry, yet Prove. 6.10, 11.
a little more sleep, a little more slumber, a little more folding of the hands
upon the bed of sin, lest, as poverty came on him as an armed man, so death
come on us as an armed man, and take us unprepared, and then we be undone for
ever. O therefore seek not peace, seek not fullness, seek not felicity here;
as the Angel said of our Savior, Luk 24.5, 6.
he is risen, he is not here, why seek ye the living among the dead: so may I
say of these things, why seek ye them here below, they are not here, they are
above, our God, our Christ, our Heaven, our home it is above, and there, O
there let our hearts for ever be.

Are the righteous subject to a bodily dissolution? Are the merciful men taken
away? Then comfort your selves all ye that fear the Lord; there is a Physician
coming will heal all your diseases; a Deliverer at hand which will open all
prisons; a Conqueror which will overcome all enemies: Therefore let me charge
you in this case, as Moses charged Israel at the waters of the Red Sea, Exodus
14.13.
Exodus 14.13. Fear, not, stand still, wait a while, the day of death will
come, and when that day comes, the enemies which you see, the miseries and
troubles which you undergo, you shall see them, feel them, undergo them no
more for ever. It was Plutarchs comfort given to his Soldiers, entering into a
dangerous and bloody battle, that they should suppe (...), in a place
invisible; the word signifies, in heaven, in a place of peace and rest no
doubt hemeant. So let us encourage our selves, whatsoever be our miseries,
troubles, disasters, in the days of our life, yet in the Sunne-set, in the
evening of our age, when death comes, we shall sup with the Lamb of God
Christ Jesus, and there will be great joy indeed: for that is the Rev. 19.7, 8,
9.
marriage feast of the Lamb and our souls, Be therefore patient; Heb. 10.37.
He that shall come; will come, and will not tarry. The Lord will remove us
when it shall be most for his glory and our good: the righteous shall die, the
merciful men shall be taken away from the evil to come. And thus are we come
to the third thing.

Quare: why the righteous die; why merciful men are taken away; there is evil
to come. The Lord sees there be many miseries, many plagues, and great
troubles, as wars, famines, pestilences, strange and fearful alterations
coming; and to the end holy, righteous, and good men may not see these evils,
feel these miseries, God does take them away. Whence two things present
themselves to our consideration, 1. That death is a sweet mercy, a great
kindness to Gods holy servants. 2. That the death, and taking away of holy
persons, is a fearful prediction of ensuing evils. First, a word or two of
the former of these.

That death is a sweet mercy, a great kindness to Gods holy servants. It is
Salomons Aphorism, Eccle. 7 1
the day of a man's death, is better then the day of a man's birth: It is our
Saviors proposition, Reve. 14.13.
blessed are they that die in the Lord: It is Saint Paul's conclusion, Phil 1.23
to depart and to be with Christ is far better. For

arising from the flesh, from Satan, from the world: as the Husbandman at the
harvest removes the tares from the wheat; as Abraham turned scoffing and
persecuting Genesis 21.14.
Ismael out of the house from Isaac, so God at the day of a good man's death,
takes away, turns out whatsoever might annoy him.

By death they are delivered from all ensusing miseries: thus before the Lord
Jeroboam, he took away his young son, because in 1 King. 14 10, 11, 12, 13.
him was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel, therefore the
Lord would take him away, he should not see the evil ensuing.

By death they are brought to the fruition Reve. 1.4, 5.
all tears are wiped away, and in Gods Psalm 16.11.
presence there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for
evermore.

This, it. 4. Moderation in our sorrow for them that be departed, mourning for
our own loss, but rejoicing in their gain: but to pass by this, let us come
to the second point.

The death and taking away of holy persons, is a fearful prediction of
ensuing evils. When Noah was entered into the Arc, then the Genesis 7.12 13.
Deluge came. When Lot was gone out of Sodom, then Genesis 19.24.
fire and brimstone fell upon it and burned it. When the Lord had determined
the destruction of Ieroboams house, (as you heard before) first he took away
his child, in whom there was some good thing found. Thus when the Lord intended
to bring evil upon 2 Kings. 22.16, 17, 18, 19, 20.
Jerusalem, and upon the people, he would first gather good Josiah the King,
(whose heart was tender, and humbled himself at the hearing of the Law) to his
Fathers, and into his grave with peace, and then the evil should come. When 2
Chro. 24.18, 24
Iehoiada was dead, Ioash left the House of the Lord God of his Fathers; then
the Syrians came with a small Company, and God delivered a very great Host
into their hands, and they executed judgment against Ioash. The truth of this
is moreover manifest, by five benefits arising to the place where good men are.

Their presence does draw the love God to the place where they are; they are
dear to God as the Zach. 2.5, 8
apple of his eye, and he will be a wall of fire about the place where they
be: and many times does God spare the wicked, as the Husbandman spares the
Mar. 13.30.
tares, for the wheat growing with them. Thus the Family was spared for Noah's
sake; and God would have spared Sodom and Gomorrah, if there had been Genesis
18.32
ten righteous there: the Lord gave Acts. 27.24
Paul all them that failed with him, they were delivered from the storm for
his sake. And surely, as Paul said to the Verse. 31.
Centurion and the Soldiers, of the Shipmen; except these abide in the ship
ye cannot be saved: so may I say to you of the holy, righteous, and faithful
servants of God, unless these abide amongst us we cannot be in safety, we
shall certainly be exposed to many miseries: for as the Prophet said to
Iehoram, were it not for good 2 Kin. 3.13
Iehosaphat I would not look toward thee; so certainly were it not for the
presence of the holy, the merciful, the righteous, the Lord would not look
toward us, at least with any favorable and shining countenance.

Gods blessing does attend the place where they are for their sakes, as the
house of 2 Samuel 11.6
Obed-Edom was blessed for the presence of the Arc; so does God prosper the
Kingdom, Town, Family, where the righteous are for their sakes: thus Laban
Genesis 30.30
prospered through the presence and service of Jacob; and God blessed Genesis
29.3, 23
Potipheas house for Joseph's sake.

God to be graciously present in the place where they are; if the Father have a
child in a Town, or Family, he will often visit that place, he will not be
strange, but loving and kind to the people dwelling there. So God, where his
Children are, there will he be graciously present, those places will he visit
and there will show much kindness, and bestow many favors; for where two or
three be gathered together in his Mat. 18.20
Name, in his fear, according to his word, to invocate and worship him, there
will he be: for it is among the Rev. 1.13.
Candlesticks in the Church, among the believers, where the light of the truth
shines, where duties of godliness are exercised, that Christ walked, and
showed himself graciously present.

They are a safeguard to the place and Origin says, one holy man praying, can
do more then innumerable sinners can do with fighting. Thus Moses Exodus 17 11.
prevailed more by his prayers, then Joshua with all his Soldiers against the
Amalekites: and when the Emperor Marcus Aurelius was like to lose his Army
through want of water, the Christians in his Army prevaled with God, and
obtained rain. As they procure many favors, so they also prevent many evils,
which would otherwise fall upon the place where they live: Psalm. 106 23.
He would (says the Psalmist) destroy them, had not Moses his servant stood
before him in the breach to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them.
So that as Nabals servants said of David and his men, 1 Samuel: 25.15, 16
The men were very good unto us, and we were not hurt, neither missed we any
thing as long as we were conversant with them: when we were in the field,
they were a wall unto us both by night and by day: so may every Kingdom,
Town, and Family say of the holy and righteous servants of God, They have
been very good unto us, and we have had no hurt while we have been
conversant with them; they have been a wall unto us, both by night and by day.

Husbands are won by the conversation of the wives, while they behold their
chaste conversatio^ coupled with fear; 1 Pet. 3.1, 2.
won to approve of, and attend upon that word of God, which teaches their
wives to live so chastely, to walk so circumspectly, and to order themselves
every way so holily, so meekely, so blamelesly, so that men that are strangers
to the power of a godly life, are strongly wrought upon, and very much affected
with, and won by the religious and gracious conversation of the Lords
faithful people. Even Saul will 1 Samuel 10.10
prophecy, when he is among the Prophets: the coldest stone will grow hot and
full of burning being among the sticks in the fire: and Justin Martyr
confessed he was first turned to Christ by Christian Religion, through the
admiration he had to behold the innocent and godly life of a Christian, hearing
them pray for their good and preservation, who to the utmost endeavored and
wrought their ruin: thus forcible, thus effectual, thus prevalent is the
example of a godly conversation. Now by the death of Gods people there is a
removal of these privileges, and so the place of their former abode is
exposed to many miseries: for when the godly are removed, when the righteous
are taken away,

Ephesians. 2.12.
the Covenant, without God and Christ in the world.

Lord would bring confusion upon Jerusalem for her sin, what does he? He
takes from Jerusalem and Isa. 3.1, 2, 3
Judah the stay and staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of
water, the mighty man, and the man of war, the Judge, and the Prophet, and
the Prudent man, and the Ancient, the Captain of fifty, and the Honorable man,
and the Counselor, and the cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator, and I
will give Children to be their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them.

Then there is none to stand up in the Lord from them, but as Soldiers rush in
at the breaches made in the walls, when none are standing there to keep them
out; so will all manner of plagues and miseries rush in upon the people, when
the righteous, who should stand in the gap, are taken away from them: therefore
when the Prophets saw vanity, and a lying divination, when they forsook the
word of the Lord, and flattered the people in their sin, then the Lord said,
O Israel thy Prophets are like Ezekiel. 13.4, 5.
foxes in the De sarts, ye have not gone up into the gaps, neither made up the
hedge, for the house of Israel to stand in the battle, in the day of the Lord.
And again in another place the Lord by the same Prophet says, Ezekiel. 22 30, 31
I sought for a man among them that should make up the hedge, and stand in the
gap before me for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none:
therefore have I powered out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them
all with the fire of my wrath, their own way have I recompensed upon their
heads.

Gods holy and righteous people; whose delight is not in then that Psalm. 16.3
excel in virtue, as Christ's is; whose eyes are not upon the Psa. 101.6.
faithful in the Land, as David's was, but rather wish and labor their
removal. Many there be, to whom the presence of the righteous is like the 1 Samuel 6 1, 5.
Arc to the Philistines; as that was a burden to their Land, and their God,
and therefore they sent it away; so are the people of God a burden, a trouble
to many profane persons, a cross, a contradiction to their doings, and
therefore desire, and labor their absence: and what do they hereby, but in
the strength of their impiety, and multitude of their folly, involve themselves
in remediles and irrecoverable miseries. The Sodomites took offense at Lots
presence, but what became of them when Lot was gone? Did not the Genesis 19.24.
fire and brimstone instantly consume them? The presence of Moses was irksome
to Pharaoh, he was charged no more to look him in the Exodus 10.2, 8.
face, but what ensued? what was the issue of it? were not all the Exodus 11 5.
first borne in Egypt thereupon destroyed. Pharaohs servants conceived Israel
to be a Ezod 10 7.
snare, to be instruments of much evil, endeavored their removal; but when
Israel was gone, what became of them? Did not the Exodus 14
Red Sea swallow them the very day of Isreal's out-going. Thus you see how
usually it fares with profane persons upon the removal of the righteous: and
is it not strange that notwithstanding all this they should still distaste
their presence, still wish and work their absence? Do they not hereby
plainly declare, and publicly proclaim, 1. That there is no 1 Ioh. 5.1
love of God in their souls, for how can a man love the father, and hate the
presence of the child? 2. That they have no union with Christ; do the living
members in a body natural, hate and wish each others removal? was it ever
heard (says the Apostle) that a man did Ephesians. 5 29
hate his own flesh; 3. That there is no saving grace, no presence, no powers
of the spirit in such; does not every thing agree with, and rejoice in its
like? Do not waters agree and flow together in one Channel? And had these men
the spirit of holiness in them, could they grieve at the presence of Gods
people? Surely it is impossible; for the Spirit of God is a Spirit of Phil.
2.1, 2
fellowship, love, peace, joy, making men of one accord, and of one mind; and
when the righteous are gone, when the merciful men are taken away, who shall
stand in the gap then? Shall the profane, shall the worker of iniquity? What
can he do; In what account are his prayers? The blind man could see and say
this; God hears not Ioh. 9 31.
sinners; their prayers are an Prove. 28.9
abomination in his presence, as Solomon does assure us.

This must therefore teach us deeply O Beloved, let us not, I beseech you, be
like them of whom the Propht here speaks, that did not consider, that did not
lay to heart the taking away of the righteous from ensuing evils. Let us not be
like Ephraim, whose strength was devoured by Hos. 7.9
strangers, and he knew it not, that had gray hairs here and there, and much
weakness coming upon him, and yet he knew it not: O let us not be unsensible
of the declining and decay of our strength and stay, and of the miseries which
are coming on us; let us not be like a man in a Lethargy, that has no feeling
of the cutting off, and taking away of a member from him: but rather as David
upon the fall of Abner refused to eat till the Sun was gone down, saying to
his servants, 2 Samuel 3.35, 38, 39.
know ye not that there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel,
and I am this day weak, and these men the sons of Zerviah be too hard for
me: may not we say the like in this behalf; is not the Church of God weak,
are not the enemies thereof too strong? Was not the man now fallen amongst us a
Ruler, an eminent man in this place? And is there not in this regard great
cause of mourning? Doubtless there is. For whenever a good man does fall; 1.
The Church of God on earth does lose one member. 2. The place where they lived
does lose one Pillar, and so, like a house whose pillars fail, is much
weakened. 3. Hereby we loose his presence, which was a whetstone to set Pro.
27.17.
edge upon us, whose face was, as Jacob said of Esaus, as the Genesis 33.10.
face of God unto us. 4. Hereby we lose his prayers, which were as buckets to
bring much water out of the wells of Salvation to us. 5. We lose his
instructions and counsels, which were as a shining Lamp, as a comfortable
Guide to us in the way. 6 We lose his comforts, which were wont to be as the
Apothecaries ointments, as the sweet flowers of the Garden to our nostrils, as
the Dove with her Olive Genesis 8.11
branch to Noah; as the Wagons which Joseph sent to old Jacob, the reviving of
ours, as they were the Genesis 45.27, 28.
reviving of his heart. 7. We lose his help and assistance, which was wont
like a strong arm to make our heavy burden light, as a fountain of living
water to refresh us, as a firm and sure anchor to stay us: and therefore as
Israel Deu. 34.8.
wept 30. days for Moses, so have you great cause of sorrow and lamentation
now for the taking away of this Moses, this servant of the Lord here before us:
and also at other times whenever the righteous do thus perish, are thus
taken away from the evils ensuing.

And now to say no more, here you see a shining star in your Horizon set, a
maine Pillar of your house fallen, a choice flower of your Garden taken away, a
man eminent for his endowments, well known, and sufficiently tried for his
abilities: a man of whom; 1. For his Religion, for his uprightness toward God
I think I may say of him, as the Lord himself of Job, Job 1.1.
He was a perfect and upright man, one that feared God, and eschewed evil, a
man that held fast his Job. 2.3.
integrity, though there wanted not occasions and means to move and shake him;
as Satan moved God against Job without cause to destroy him; a man he was like
the tree growing within the Courts of the Lords house, Psalm. 92.12.
bearing much fruit in his old age. 2. For his public Government, he was like
them prescribed by Iethro Exo. 12.21
to Moses, an able man, a man fearing God, a man of truth, and hating
covetousness: a man in whom there was a sweet and powerful concurrence of all
requisite virtues for his calling and office and accordingly he proved a
careful Watchman over this Town and people: he did not like the evil
servant hide his Mat. 25.30
talent in a napkin; but his care, study, labor, travel was (I am persuaded)
for the public, common, and true good of this place and people. 3. He was in
his domesticke Government like Genesis 18.19
Abraham, a man commanding, and teaching his children and household after him
to walk in the ways of the Lord; a man like David walking in the midst of
his Psalm. 101.3.
house with a perfect heart. 4. He was toward Gods people kind, loving, and
amiable, showing that his Psalm. 16.3.
delight was in them that excel in virtue. 5. He was in his conference and
communication, wise, grave, holy, full of heavenly discourse, Pro. 1^.7
his lips did disperse knowledge. I speak these things not to disparage any
living, but to encourage such as knew him, to a careful imitation of what was
found praiseworthy in him. The richer his endowments, the greater your loss;
the more should be your grief, the greater your care to labor the
reparation, and to stop the breach which God has made by his fall: and
whatsoever you have lost in him, labor to repair and increase in your selves.
1. By growing in all grace, by being filled with all goodness, drawing nearer
to God, in all things make his counsel your Psalm. 73.24.
guide now, that he may receive you to his glory at the last. 2. By being
diligent, faithful, careful, conscionable in the employment you have received,
that so when you shall be as he is now, you may hear that sweet and
comfortable saying of our Savior, Mat. 25.23.
Well done thou good and faithful servant, thou have been Ruler over few
things, I will make thee Ruler over many things; enter thou into the joy of thy
LORD.

FINIS.
ELIAHS FIERY CHARIOT OR THE HOLY MAN'S TRIVMPH after Death.

A SERMON PREACHED at Plymouth the nineteenth of August 1631. At the Funeral
of the late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, MATTHIAS NICOLS
Bachelour in Divinity, and late Preacher to the Town of Plymouth.

By A. G.

1 Samuel 25.1. And SAMVEL dyed, and all the Israelites were gathered together,
and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah.

Printed at LONDON, 1640.

ELIAHS FIERY CHARET OR, The holy man's Triumph after DEATH.
2 Kings 2.11.12. Behold there appeared a Charet of fire, and horses of fire,
and parted them both asunder, and Eliah went up by a whirlwind into Heaven.

And Elisha saw it, and he cried, my Father, my Father, the Charet of Israel,
and the horsemen thereof.

And he saw him no more: and he took hold of his own clothes, and rent them
in two pieces.


THE sorrows of Gods people are often like the waves of the Sea, one rolling
upon the back of another; like stones in a building, when one is fallen,
another tumbles after: We multiply our transgressions, and God does multiply
our miseries; we are sometimes like men cast into a deep and dead slumber, and
God must strike not once but twice before we will awaken: our hearts are often
very senseless, stony, stupid; and therefore as Moses stroke the rock Number.
20.11.
twice, that waters might come forth, so does God often strike us, sometimes in
the feet, in our Inferiors; sometimes in the sides, in them that are most
dear unto us; sometimes in the arms, in them that be our chief Assistants;
sometimes in the head, in them that are our Governors sometimes in the face,
in the eye the tenderest part, in our Pastor: and all this the Lord does to
draw from us the tears of true repentance.

I have been to you of this place of late a Messenger, like 2 Samuel 18
Cushi to David, bringing nothing but sad and sorrowful tidings of the fall of
your friends and acquaintance; like the Messengers coming to Job one after
another, with Job. 1.
tidings of taking away the sheep, oxen asses, the death and slaughter of his
servants, sons, and daughters. It was but on Tuesday last I brought you heavy
tidings of the death of a pious and eminent Magistrate, and now am come again
with the like sad and doleful message, of the death and departure of your
holy, faithful, and painful, Pastor: Of whom whiles they lived, I may say as
David did of Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.22.
from the blood of the slain, and the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan
turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty: so these, The sword
of the one in the Magistracy, and the Bow of the other in the Ministry
prospered and prevailed mightily: of that sweet communion which was between
them, of the unparalled integrity of their conversations, agility, industry,
un-weariedns in their callings, I may speak again in the language of David
touching Saul and Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.23.
They were lovely and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not
divided; they were swifter the^ Eagles, they were stronger the^ Lions. And as
to you who lately enjoyed the benefit, the comfort of their presence, labors,
abilities, I may say once again with David there, Ver. 24. Ye daughters of
Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet with other delights, who put
on ornaments of gold upon your apparel; how are the mighty fallen in the midst
of battle? So in this case; O Town, O People, O Congregation, weep over these
men, who lately sought your welfare, studied your good, were instruments of
your peace, of your honor, of your enrichment: whose endeavors, whose desires,
whose labors were to adorn you with the choicest ornaments, and to fill you
with the sweetest delights. O how are these mighty men fallen in the midst of
this Battle! And touching him whose corpse lies now before us, we may all say
as David of Jonathan, Verse 26. We are distressed for thee, O holy, and godly
Pastor, O zealous and and painful Minister, very pleasant have thou been to
us, thy love to us was wonderful, passing the love of Women; O how is this
mighty man fallen! and the weapons of his war perished! And as Elisha in the
Text upon the sight of Eliahs translation, so may we beholding the dissolution
of this our Eliah, cry out, my Father, my Father, the Charet of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof.

The words declare and set before us Eliahs translation, ascension into Heaven,
signifying (in all probability) the Ascension of our Savior: for as Elisha
waited to see the translation of Eliah, so the Disciples waited, and beheld the
Acts 1.10, 11.
Ascension of Christ. It shadowed also our Resurrection. Enoch was translated
before the Law, Eliah under the Law, Christ under the Gospel; to show that the
Believers of alages, before the Law, under the Law, under the Gospel, shall in
the appointed time ascend into heaven: and it likewise is a divine, evident and
assured testimony, that all Gods holy people after the passage of this earthly
pilgrimage, shall enjoy life everlasting in the Kingdom of Heaven.

In the words some things require a little explication; By the Charets of fire,
and Horses of fire, is meant the Angels of God likened to Charets and Horses.
1. For their strength. 2. For their valor. 3. For their fighting for the
Church of God, and against the enemies thereof. 4. For their readiness, speed,
and quickness in the execution of Gods counsels. 5. For their order,
submission, and subjection unto God, they are not like horses in an open field
running whither they list; but like horses in a Charet, going when whither, and
which way the Lord will have them. They are said to be Horses of fire, and
Charets of fire, to show that they are zealous, fervent, earnest, and full of
life and power, as the burning fire, in the execution of their office. Thus by
the Prophet Zachary they are likened to Zach. 6.1, 2.
horses and Charets coming out between the mountains, to show that they come
forth with resolution, courage, preparednes in a speedy manner to execute Gods
Will and Counsel, which is firm like the Mountains: and by the Apostle they
are styled a Heb. 1.7.
flaming fire, and by the Prophet Isajah they are called Isa. 6.6.
Seraphin, ab urendo; to show their fervor in the way and work wherein the
Lord does set them: and for this also they are resembled to the wind, because
as the wind is a strong and speedy messenger, so are the Angels of the Lord:
and herein we may clearly see, that the more strong, courageous, speedy,
obedient and fervent we are in our callings, the more do we resemble the holy
Angels.

The words thus explained, fall asunder into two general parts.

1. Eliahs Translation. Behold there appeared a Charet of fire, and horses, of
fire, and parted them asunder, and Eliah went up by a whirle wind into Heaven.
2. Elisha's Lamentation. And Elisha saw it, and he cried: my Father, my Father,
the Charets of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: And he saw him no more: and
he took hold of his own cloths, and rent them in two pieces.
In the first of these, Eliahs Translation, we may consider; 1. Motus: he went
up. 2. Terminus a quo, from whence he went up, from the Earth. 3. Terminus ad
quem, to what place he went, into Heaven. 4. Instrumenta motus, a Charet of
fire, Horses of fire, and a whirle wind.


In the second; Elisha's Lamentation. There is, 1. Motivum: an Inducement to
this lamentation: and this is threefold: the 1. external, he saw it; the 2.
internal, his affection: my Father, my Father: the 3. mixed, or experimental,
drawn from the defense ministered to Israel by Eliah, whereof Elisha was very
sensible, and therefore called him, the Horsemen and Charet of Israel. 2. Here
is Gradus, the degree of his grief, nor a little, but much, he cried. 3.
Incrementum doloris, the increase of his sorrow, that he should see him no
more. 4. Signum, the sign of his grief and sorrow, he took hold of his own
Cloths, and rent them in two pieces.


Thus you see the words are like a Tree of many branches, each bearing his
particular fruit, of some of which we will take a more slender, of others a
fuller taste: and first to begin with the first thing noted in Eliahs
Translation.

The terminus a quo, from whence he ascended, from the earth: when Eliah, and
Elisha were walking together, the Charet of fire, and Horses of fire parted
them asunder, and Eliah went up to heaven, he was carried up from the earth:
thereby showing,

That the earth is not the abiding place of Gods people; Heb. 13.14.
We have no continuing City here (says the Apostle) but seek one to come: 1.
This is an enemies country, Satan is styled the 2 Cor. 4.4.
God of this world: here we are John 15.19.
hated, and therefore as Jacob, when he beheld that Laban's countenance was not
toward him Genesis 31.2
as before, that he had ten times changed his wages, took his wives, children,
ca^, and returned to his own Country; so we beholding how the world does
frown upon us, how it does exercise us with many changes, we should willingly
forsake it, and gladly go to our heavenly home. 2. Our Christ, our Jesus is
Luke 24.6
risen, ascended, he is not here, and therefore as the Be rests not till he
return to his Hive, as the Genesis 8.9.
Dove found no resting place till she came again unto the Arc, no more should
we till we return to our God, and our Jesus, and have the full fruition of
their blessed presence in the heavens. 3. Our portion is not in this life, the
men of the world have their Ps. 17.14.
portion here, our 1 Pet. 1.4.
Inheritance is reserved for us in the heavens: O therefore let us not labor
for the bread which does Ioh. 6.27.
perish; let us not lay up for our selves treasure upon Mat. 6.19 20.
earth, where the rust and the moath corrupt, and where thieves break thorough
and steal, but let us lay up for our selves treasure in heaven. For this is
the terminus ad quem; the place whereunto we must move, as Eliah here did.

It is not long since Eliah ran 1 Kin. 18.45, 46.
on foot, and Ahab rode in his Charet; but now Eliah he has a Charet, a
Charet of fire, and Horses of fire, a bright, a glorious, and shining Charet, a
company of blessed Angels to carry him into the holy and highest heavens. Let
Ahab ride now, Eliah shall ride at the last. Gods people shall have their
Charets one day as well as others. And here note:

That the future estate of Gods servants shall be very glorious, though for the
present it be contemptible, and ignominious in external appearance: the
greatest honor of Gods servants is reserved till after their departure out of
this earthly pilgrimage. Now indeed like Eliah, they walk on foot, but (...)
last they shall be like Eliah in his fiery Charet; how they be like Joseph in
prison, then they shall be like Joseph ruling in the sec^ place in the
Kingdom; for (...) they shall be next to God and Christ in the Kingdom of
Heaven. (...) Solomon had seen of old, Eccl. 10 7
servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth: so now,
men that are slaves to their own lusts, bondmen to Satan; servants, yea
drudges to the world, these are on horseback, exalted, preferred, endowed
with earthly riches, worldly honors, but they who are Kings and Priests to
God, these walk like servants on foot, these are in a low and despised estate
for the most part; but there is a day coming wherein the Lord will dispell all
the clouds of ignominy now covering them, and cause a glorious Sun to shine
upon them: they shall then have a very glorious dwelling, 2 Cor. 5.1
a dwelling in the heavens, a dwelling made without hands, a City whose Heb.
11.10.
builder and maker is God, a dwelling so rich, so beautiful, so sumptuous,
that in comparison hereof, the Dan. 4.30
Palace whereof Nebuchadnezzar so boasted, is but a base Cottage. Then they
shall have a Luke 25.43.
Paradise, in respect whereof the most delightful places, the pleasantest
garden upon earth, are but a barren wilderness: then they shall have treasure,
in resp^ whereof the choicest jewels are (...) dung and dross, such a tree to
gather fruit from, as in regard thereof, the chief Vines are but brambles, and
thorns, and briars, such a wellspring to drink of, as in comparison thereof,
the sweetest Wine is but slimy water, as it is very fully expressed by our Rev.
22.1, 2.
Savior, Rev. 22.1, 2. for then as Cyprian says, Nihil deerit, nihil oberit,
omne desiderium eorum Christus praesens implebit, non senescent, non tabescent,
non putrescent amplius, perpetua san^, foelix aeteruitat beatitudinis illis
sufficientiam confirmabunt^e then nothing shall be wanting, there shall be
nothing which shall hurt: the blessed face and presence of Jesus Christ shall
fully satisfy all their desires, etc. For

Then there shall be deliverance from all sin, then there shall be gardens
without Ephesians. 5.26
without either spot or wrinkle, as 2 Samuel 14 25.
Absolon was said to be without bodily blemish, from the crown of the head to
the sole of his feet; so shall Gods people at last be without all blemish both
in their souls, and also in their bodies; now they are as the Moon bright and
glorious, yet as the Moon, so they have their spots, and are subject to
spiritual waxings, and wanings, but at last they shall be as the Sun, wholly,
unchangeably pure, glorious, in an estate more excellent then the estate of
Adam in his innocence: in him there was a posse cadere, a possibility to fall,
but Gods people shall be confirmed as the Angels of God, so that they shall be
free from a possibility to be drawn to sin.

Then there shall be a discharge from all weaknesses, maladies, distempers,
disorders of nature, evils and inconveniences whatsoever; then there shall be a
cessation from all Rev. 21.4.
labor, a removal of all sorrows, the Rev. 21.4.
first things shall pass away, the miseries, troubles, and changes attending
this life shall be gone, like a Land flood that passes by, like a cloud driven
away by the wind, they shall be wasted away in death, done away in the grave,
as the 2 King. 5.14.
Leprosy of Naaman in Jordan: they shall have an absolute and blessed freedom
from all evils both inward and outward, of the body and of the soul, for they
Rev. 7.16 17.
shall hunger no more, neither shall thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them nor any heat, for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of water, and God
shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.

1 Samuel 17
Philistin before Israel: now as Israel had the Jude 2.2.
Canaanites, so have we them that be thorns in our sides, and pricks in our
eyes, now we are 2 Cor. 12 7.
buffeted by Satan, now we are troubled with the prick in the flesh: but then
Romans 16 20.
Satan shall be trodden under our feet, then our enemies shall be made our
Math. 22 44.
footstool, then we shall have a perpetual triumph, we shall not fear an
enemy, nor loose a friend.

Then they shall have the fruition of Savior at large describes it, Revel. 21
17, 18, 19.
Revel. 21. to show that nothing is so precious, so bright, so glorious, so
rich, so dear to us, as can sufficiently set out the transcendent and
unconceiveable excellency of that heavenly City: then also shall we have the
sweet communion of the Saints; were the dwelling never so glorious, should a
man be constrained to dwell alone, it would prove a great abatement of his
contentment, delight, and comfort: therefore for the filling up of the joy of
his servants, God has provided for them not only glorious mansions, but also
the comfortable communion of his Saints and Angels: they shall Mat 8.11 Heb.
12.22 23.
sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, they shall come to an innumerable
company of Angels, to the general Assembly, and Church of the first borne,
etc. And which is most of all, more then all the rest, they shall have the
blessed vision of God: a glorious house, the company of the children, there is
little; without the presence of the Master of the house, the Father of the
Family: so heaven, so the communion of the Saints, were little; should we not
also behold the face of God; for as the fruition of the husbands presence, the
sense of the husbands love does more solace, satisfy, rejoice, and delight the
wife, then the stateliness of the dwelling, the presence of all her
companions: so the fruition of Gods face and favor, the Lord filling the soul
with his celestial brightness and glory, we seeing him face to face, and he
becoming all in all unto us, this is much more then all the rest; and herein
stands the perfection, the consummatition of our happiness, therefore our
Savior says, Rev. 22, 3, 4.
there shall be no more curse, but the Throne of God, and of the Lamb shall
be in it, and his servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face.

But if the future estate of Gods servants be so honorable,

The people of God desire long life; Psalm. 39.13.
peace with God more fully before they finish this earthly pilgrimage. 2.
Sometimes they may also glorify God with their bodies, which by death are
Psalm. 6.4, 5.
disabled to do God any service. 3. Sometimes that they may among men Psalm.
30.10. Psalm. 84.10 11, 12.
celebrate and praise God for his blessings and favors bestowed upon them,
that they may be an encouragement to Gods people, anornament to Gods truth, a
terror to the adversaries of it here upon earth. 4. Sometimes that they may
perfect some good Work which they have begun, do good to others in their
places and callings: thus Phil. 1.23.
Paul, though he knew it was better for him to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, yet he was willing to live longer, because it was good for them that
he should continue with them: so that though the people of God sometimes for
such causes do desire continuance here, yet it no way denies this truth, that
their future estate in the Heavens is very glorious. And if so be, their future
estate be so glorious, so pleasant, so comfortable, as we have clearly seen
it is, Then first,

Crown is 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
laid up for hereafter; here like Israel we have but a little taste, a few Number.
13.13.
Grapes in the way, the full Vintage is reserved till at last; here we are like
Sampson, the Honey we have is in the Judge. 14.14.
belly of a Lion, but hereafter we shall have sweet without sour, light
without darkness, rivers of joy without a tempest: therefore as the servant
patiently endures the heat of the day, in expectation of his wages in the
evening; the Soldier the dangerous and deadly wounds of the battle, in
expectation of a Crown; the husbandman the heat of the Summer, the cold of
the Winter, comforting himself with the coming of a full and liberal
harvest: let us do the like in this case, here is a wages, a crown, a
harvest, which will abundantly answer all losses, labors, hardness,
reproaches, and whatsoever does for the present annoy us. As our Savior said
in another case, a John 16.21.
Woman when she is in travel has sorrow, because her hour is come, but as
soon as she is delivered of the child, she remembers no more the anguish,
for joy that a man is borne into the World: so in this case the people of God
are now often in great anguish, like a woman in travel but when this life is
ended, when our regeneration and new birth shall be fully accomplished, we
shall meet with that which will swallow up all our former grief and trouble,
and make it as if it had never been: and as Salomons mother said in that case,
Pro. 31.6 7.
Prove. 31. give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to those
that be of a heavy heart; let him drink and forget his poverty, and remember
his misery no more: so here is a cup of consolations, here is sweet wine, here
is a more pure river, whereof when we once come to drink our full draught, we
shall forget our poverty, we shall remember our misery no more: therefore let
us according to the charge of the Psalmist, Ps. 37.5, 6.
commit our way to God, trust in him, and the Lord shall bring it to pass, he
shall bring forth our righteousness as the light, and our judgment as the
noone day: and in all our troubles, trials, and against all adversary powers,
let us say as the Prophet Micah Mica. 7.8 9.
does, rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall, I shall rise; when I
sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me: I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
cause, and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness. And reckon also with the Romans 8.18.
Apostle, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us: and evermore to remember
that of S. Paul to the Corinthians, that 2 Cor. 4.17, 18.
our light afflictions which are but for a moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory: while we look not at the things which
are, but at the things which are not seen, for the things which are seen are
temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal: think I beseech you
of these things and let patience have her Jam. 1.4.
perfect work in all trials, troubles, changes, where with the Lord shall be
pleased to exercise you.

This must teach the children of Isa 64.4.
inconceiveable: O therefore be not like Gideons many thousands which Judge.
7.5, 6, 7.
fainted, which bowed down upon their knees, and drunk of the waters, and so
were discarded as unfit for the battle: be not afraid of any loss, of any
trouble, of any inconvenience, having given your names to God; O bow not down
again to the World, be no more as servants to your lusts, or drudges to the
earth: I beseech you say not with the sluggard, Prove. 26.13.
there is a Lion in the way, a Lion in the street, fear not the Lion of
opposition, of reproach, of earthly loss, or transitory trouble, but go on in
the way of God, be faithful in the Covenant of the Lord, be courageous in the
service of our God: and then as the spirit of the Lord came Judge. 14.5, 6, 8.
mightily upon Sampson, so mightily, that he rent the Lion in pieces which
roared against him, and found at length a Honey comb in the belly of him: so
shall the Lord enable you to vanquish all oppositions, and draw very sweet
comforts from your present disquietments. Let not the proverb take hold of
you, 2 Pet. 2.22.
the Dog is returned again to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the
mire; be not like 1 Timothy 1.19.20.
Hymeneus and Philetus; like unskilful and cowardly mariners, that fly back
or make shipwreck with every tempest: do not with 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas forsake Paul, leave the Ministry, become a stranger to the word, and
forsake God, and go back again to this present World: be not like the
disciples, which followed Christ for the John 6.66.
loaves, but afterward went back, and came no more to him: but like Gideons
300. Soldiers, go ye on without fainting, without bowing down to the World:
resolve in this, as Hester did in that case, Hester 4.16.
Hester 4. If I perish, I perish, whatsoever you loose, whatsoever you endure,
here is an ample recompense: be you faithful, be you upright, be ye constant
as Eliah was, and you shall at last have a fiery Charet as Eliah had. Walk
with God without wavering, as Genesis 6.9.
Noah did, as he ceased not from building the Arc, whatsoever discouragement
was ministered, no more do you cease to ad grace to grace, as the builders do
stone to stone, till you attain perfection: and then as Noah had his Arc, was
preserved in it when others perished, so shall you have safety, peace, joy,
comfort, and everlasting triumph, when others shall perish in the deluge of
Gods judgments. Be constant as 1 Samuel 17 33.34.
David was, and then as he overcame the Bear, the Lion, the great Goliath, and
enjoyed the Crown at length, so shall we the Crown of glory at the last, if
we Rev. 2.10
be faithful unto the death: therefore with Moses seeing him that is Heb.
11.26, 27.
invisible, and having an eye to the recompense, let us choose rather to endure
affliction with the children of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a
season: and knowing that we have an Heb. 10.34.
abiding substance in Heaven, let us with the primitive Christians take the
spoiling of our goods joyfully. This is the property of true grace, this is
peculiar to the man that is truly pious, Prove. 4.18.
to shine more and more like the light unto the perfect day: the Trees of Gods
planting be known from all other trees, by bearing Ps. 92.13.
much fruit in their old age: this is that which has the promise, who shall
reap but he that Gal. 6.9.
faints not? And who shall be saved, but he that 1 Mat. 13.13.
continues to the end? That corn alone which holds out unto the harvest, is
gathered into the garner.

so pleasant, so eminent, so transcendently glorious? Then this must cause the
children of God to entertain death with all cheerfulness; how terrible so
ever in it self, though it be as the Philosopher says, (...), of all
fearefuls the most fearful; or as Job styles it, the Job. 18.14
King of terror: though looked upon in it self, it be to the people of God, as
once the face of Esau, a terror to Jacob, yet looking upon the glory, dignity,
and fullness of all bliss which does attend it, it should be to the people of
God, as the face of Esau was at last to Jacob, even as the Genesis 33.10, 11.
face of God: in the thought of this we should rejoice, as the hireling in his
thoughts of the Evening; as the traveller in the thoughts of his bed: as the
warrior in the thought of the day of his triumph. For I may say to you of
death, as Hugh Laverock said to his fellow Martyr John a Price of the Lord of
London: Be of good comfort my brother, for my Lord of London is our good
Physician, he will cure thee of all thy blindness, and me of my lamen^sse this
day: so beloved, all ye that truly fear God, all that put away all
filthiness of the flesh, and perfect holiness before him in fear, be of good
comfort. Death will be your very good Physician, it will cure all your
diseases, end all your miseries, set you free from all troubles. And therefore
as the people came readily to John 5.4 5.
Bethesda to be healed of their infirmities; as we come cheerfully to the
Physician; so should we to the grave; for what is death to the people of God?
what is it to them to die? but as the Inhabitants leaving of an old and ruinous
house, the Musicians laying down of a Lute whose strings are broken, the
Carpenters putting aside of a worn Instrument, unfit for any longer service,
or employment; what is Death to Gods children, but as a guest making have out
of his Inn to his long, his lovely, and desired home; as the putting off of a
worn, rotten, and ragged suite of apparel, to put on rich, and comely raiment;
for while we live, we are like Zach. 3.3, 4, 5.
Josua the high Priest, clothed with filthy garments, but when we die, then we
are like Joshua with a fair Mitre upon his head, and comely raiment about his
back. And therefore we should earnestly desire to be 2 Cor. 5.8.
absent from the body, that we might be present with the Lord. For the day of
Death to the body is (as one says) the birthday of eternity to the soul:
Seneca who saw the immortality of the soul, the future felicity of it, but as
through a Cloud, by ifs, and ands, yet professes, that when he thought but a
little of it, and had some pleasant dreams thereof, he loathed himself, and
all his trifling greatness: Socrates also sweetened his cup of poison, with his
discourse of the souls Immortality, to the amazement of the beholders: how
much more should christian, and sanctified souls be ravished, affected, and
enflamed with the meditation of it! O how should this cause us to thirst after
death, as 2 Samuel 23, 15, 16.
David after the waters in the wells of Bethlem, and to break thorough all
difficulties, to attain that immortal, and ever-blessed estate which to the
people of God attends this life, as David's Worthies brake thorough the host
of the Philistines, to fetch them, waters; and as Laurence Saunders kissed the
stake, and said wilcome be the cross of Christ, well-come be everlasting life:
my Savior began to me in a bitter cup, and shall I not pledge him? so should
we entertain death, as a very well-come guest, as a very dear friend, our
souls should say within us, welcome be death, welcome be everlasting life,
my Savior is gone before me, and shall I not go after him? As the Lion
desires to go out of the grate, the Eagle out of the cage, and the prisoner
out of the prisonhouse, so should we with Paul desire to be Phil. 3.23.
dissolved, and to be with Christ.



1 Freedom
1. This is the day of their Freedom, who is not comforted to see his friend
come forth of prison, to see him set free from all persecution and trouble?
After Eliah went up in his fiery Charet, Iezabel could no more make him fly,
she had no more power to molest and persecute him.

2 Honor.
2. This is the day of their Honor, now with Eliah they ride in their fiery
Charet into heaven; now as Solomon said of the Eccles. 4.12.
poor wise child, may I say of all that are 2 Ti^ ^.12.
wise unto salvation though poor, though afflicted, during their abode on
earth, yet now they shall come out of prison, out of a troublesome, and low
estate, to 2 Timothy 2.11, 12.
reign with Christ in his kingdom. And I may well say to all that sorrow for
their religious deceased friends, as William Hunter said to his Mother, when
he was to suffer Martyrdom: For a momentany pain, I shall have a crown of
life, and may you not be glad of that? So they for a slender, troublesome,
contemptible condition, have a full, a peaceable, a glorious estate in heaven,
and have in that respect great cause of rejoicing.

3. This is the day of their Joy, 3 Joy.
now they are Hos. 2.19 2 Cor. 11.1, 2, 3.
betrothed, but then the Marriage between Rev. 19.7.
Christ and their souls shall be consummate; as the Marshals wife of France
said to her husband at the stake, Be of good cheer, your wedding was but a
shadow, an earnest of the blessed marriage, which the Lamb will now
consummate. This then is the Marriage day of the godly, and who will not
rejoice, at least a little with his friend on his Marriage day?

4. Recompense.
4. This is the day of their Recompense, now their Rev. 14.13.
works follow them; now is their harvest; though heretofore they have Ps.
126.5, 6.
sown in tears, yet now they reap in joy.

5. God gave our godly friends to us but for a season, we are tenants at will,
the Lord may put us out at his pleasure of all our possessions, and therefore
we should learn with Job to submit our wills to Gods will, and say, Job. 1.21.
the Lord gave, and the Lord takes, blessed be the name of the Lord.

6. We shall shortly 2 Samuel 12 23.
go to them, they cannot return to us, it is but a little while, and we shall
for ever have 1 These. 4:13.14.17.
their fellowship in the Heavens.

7. God will be instead of all, God will be to the widow, to the woman that
has no husband, instead of a husband, to the fatherles child instead of a
father, etc. As Elka^a said to Hannah grieving at the barrennes of her womb,
because she had no children; 1 Samuel 1.8.
Why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am
not I to thee better then ten sons? So may I say in this behalf, to every
woman, every child, every parent, every friend, why weep ye? why eat ye not?
why are your hearts grieved? Is not God to you in stead of ten husbands, ten
children, ten friends? surely in God is all fullness; and as the Sun is instead
of all Candles, so should the Lord be to us instead of all others, and
infinitely more then all helpers, guides, stays, friends, and comforters: Let
then the thought of their advantage, who are gone the way of all flesh before
us, and the meditation of Gods constant, and never failing goodness, mitigate
the sorrow, and sadness which does usually attend our loss in this behalf;
let their gain assuage the grief of our loss, and also quicken us to a
careful preparation, that whenever the day of our dissolution shall come, we
may also have a fiery Charet with Eliah to carry us into the heavens.

Thus are we come to the last thing noted in Eliahs translation, and ascension:
the instrumenta motus, the Angels of the Lord: whence observe;

That the holy Angels carry the souls of the righteous at the day of their
death into the heavens: they now Psa. 34.7
encampe about them, they now Heb. 1.13
minister for their good, and at last will carry their souls to heaven, as
they carried Luke 16 22.
Lazarus into Abraham's bosom.

The ground of this their attendance upon the righteous, flows from the
Communion, and conjunction of Gods faithful people with the Lord Jesus; a
woman joined in wedlock with the Prince, is honored, reverenced, attended,
not only by the common subjects, but also by the greatest Nobles in that
Princes Court; so the Spouse of Christ, true believers, being married to
Christ, are served, attended, waited on, not only by the common creatures, but
also by the glorious Angels: O the dignity whereunto man through Christ Jesus
is advanced! O that the Name of God might be magnified by us, according to the
honor he has bestowed upon us!

Thus from Eliahs Ascension: let us descend unto, and look upon Elishas
Lamentation: wherein you may remember was presented to us a threefold motive.
The first external: he saw Eliah ascending, and thereupon cried. Wherein you
may see; That the sight of dying or departing is very forcible to move the
affections of the surviving; Note.
Lam. 3.51
mine eye affects my heart, was the saying of the Church in her Lamentations:
but this I must now pass by.

The second motive was his internal affection: My Father, my Father: Note.
Where also learn; That Gods holy Ministers are spiritual Fathers: and
therefore they must be to Gods people, as fathers to the children; and must be
loved, reverenced, honored by the people; as children love, reverence, honor
them that be fathers over them.

The third motive was next; Note.
drawn from the experience, Elisha had of the safety, and defense ministered to
Israel, by the presence of Eliah among them, therefore calling him the Horsemen
of Israel, and the Charets thereof; because as the horsemen and charets are the
strength of the people, and the instruments of their defense: so may we hereby
learn; That Gods faithful Ministers are a singular stay and defense to the
people where God has set them: but because time will not give leave to speak
of these particulars, I will from the degree, increase, and sign of Elishas
sorrow, and from his affection, crying, renting his cloths, mourning as for a
father, propose unto you this observation.

That the death and departure of Gods faithful Ministers ought to be deeply
and affectionately bewailed by Gods holy servants; as 2 Samuel 3.22.
David lamented, and all the people wept over Abner when he was slain, being a
great man in Israel, a man that went forth to gather all Israel unto David, so
have we great cause to mourn for, and bewail the death of the spiritual
Captains and Leaders, which are sent forth to gather the people unto God, and
to 2 Cor. 5.18.19.
reconcile them, and bring them into Covenant with the Lord: thus Elisha here
bewailed the translation of Eliah; and King Ioash afterward in the same words
lamenteth 2 Kings 13, 14.
Elisha. Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness whereof he died, and
Ioash King of Israel came down unto him, and wept over his face, and said; O my
father, my father, the Charets of Israel, and Horsemen thereof. And this is a
part of the Churches lamentation, Lam. 1.19 20.
My Priests and mine Elders gave up the ghost in the Cty, behold O Lord, for I
am in distress: and this was a principal part of the peoples complaint, a
great aggravation of their affliction, Psa. 74.9
We (say they) see not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is
there any among us that knows how long: and when Paul departed from the
people of God at Ephesus, this was their great grief, that they should see him
no more, for at his departure from them it is recorded, Acts 20.37, 38.
that he kneeled down, and prayed with them all, and they all wept sore, and
fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him, sorrowing most of all for the words which
he spoke, that they should see his face no more: and that the people of God
should thus deeply, thus affectionately bewail the death and departure of
Gods Ministers, there is great cause: for

Then they are without a Guide, as Isreal's fall, the Prophet in vision, saw the
people scattered like sheep without a 1 King. 22 17.
shepherd, and as men having no master: So when the faithful Minister of God,
the spiritual Pastor is taken away, then are the people scattered abroad, as
Mat. 9 36
sheep having no shepherd; then they are as travelers without a guide: then
they are as the Syrians, 2 Kings 6 18, 19.
that had their eyes put out, and went they knew not whither, into their
enemies City, when they thought they had been traveling to their own
Country; so people, when the faithful Ministers of the Gospel are taken from
them, they be as men without eyes, they think they are in a good, when they
are in a very evil estate; in the way to life, when they be in the very gates
of death; for the Ministers are the eyes of the people, therefore called Isa.
30.10
Seers; and as Moses said to Hobab, Numbers.
Leave us not I pray thee, for as much as we are to encamp in the wilderness,
and thou may be instead of eyes to us; so may the people say to the Minister
of God, Leave us not we beseech thee, for as much as we are to travel through
the Wilderness of this World, and thou may be to us instead of eyes: in
stead of eyes to teach us to discern the things which differ, to foresee evils
to come, to show us the mysteries of salvation, to guide us into the ways of
peace; and therefore as it would grieve a man to have his eyes put out, so it
should much grieve us to have the Ministers of God, our spiritual eyes, taken
from us.

Then they are without spiritual food, as children that have lost their
Father, their Mother, their nurse, are often without bodily food; for the
Ministers of God are their spiritual 1 Cor. 4.16.
Fathers, the 1 These. 2.7.
Nurses which must draw forth the breasts of spiritual consolations to nourish
them, the shepherds which must Jer. 3.15. Joh. 21.16.17.
feed them with knowledge and understanding, the Mat. 13.52.
stewards which must bring forth old and new out of their treasury, which must
open and apply both the Law and the Gospel to their conscience: 1 Cor. 4.1.
faithful stewards, 2 Timothy 2.15.
dividing the word aright, giving every one his portion, and that in due
season. Without these there is a spiritual famine, a famine not of bread and
water, but which is far worse, a Amos 8.11.
famine of hearing the word of the Lord. Without these the people at the best
are but like the sheep brought by Labans daughters to the well, but could not
drink, till Jacob rolled away the Genesis 29 8 10.
stone; for what else does an un-teaching Minister, but gather the people to
the well, call them to the word, to hear the Scriptures; but are unable to
roll away the stone, to give the Neh. 8.8
sense as Ezra did, to divide the word, and give them waters out of the wells
of life: and therefore as it would much trouble us to be in a bodily, so
should it much more disquiet us to be under a spiritual famine.

Sion, these have the charge given to minister consolation to the people; Isa.
40.1, 2.
comfort ye, comfort ye my people, (says our God) speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, etc. These are the sons of Act. 4.36
Consolation, these are the Doves which bring the Olive branch of peace to the
soul in the deluge of trouble: their voice through Gods blessing does appease
the troubled conscience, as the Mat. 8.25 26.
voice of our Savior appeased the stormy tempest: these under God are the
Physicians which heal our wounded souls, when all the World cannot cure us,
nor minister any peace or comfort to us, as our Savior cured the Mark. 5.39.
woman of her bloody issue, after that she had spent all that she had upon the
Physicians, and yet was not healed: for these are the men to whom God has
given the Isa. 5.40.
tongue of the learned, to minister a word in due season; when these therefore
are gone, the Instruments of our comfort are gone, our star is set, we are
left in darkness, and are as the Church when she had no Comforter. Lament.
1.9. Lam. 1.19.


Then they are without the means Satan; when the Parents are gone, strangers
use to make a pray of the children; so when the Ministers of God are taken
away, when the spiritual Parents are removed, then sin, Satan, and the world
easily make a pray of the people; for the faithful Ministry of the Gospel is
the thunder by which the devil must be cast down to the ground like Luke 10.18.
lightning: this is the warlike weapon which is mighty thorough God to cast
down the strong 2 Cor. 10 4.5.
holds of sin; as the walls of Jos. 6.20.
Ierico were thrown down by the sounding of the Rams horns, so the walls
of sin, the strong holds of Satan are overturned by sounding forth the
trumpet of the Gospel. Before Philip came to Samaria, Satan had the possession
there, but when he came and preached the Gospel, then the Acts 8.8 9.
unclean spirits went out of many that were possessed with them; thus is the
Ministry of the word an instrument of victory to Gods people over the enemies
of their salvation: but when the Ministry fails, then Satan's Kingdom is
erected, then his throne flourishes; when the gardener is taken away, then the
garden becomes a wilderness; when the shepherd is gone, the flock is
scatered, the wild beast makes a pray of it; as the Psalmist says in another
case, Psalm. 104 20, 21.
the Lord makes darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth, and the Lions roar after their prey; so here when
the Lord takes away the light of the Gospel, brings darkness, a spiritual
night upon us, then sin, and satan the 1 Pet. 5.8
roaring Lion creep forth, then they make a prey of the souls of men, then
they fill them full of all uncleanness, then the faithful City becomes an
harlot, a den of darkness, a lodge of all uncleanness: behold this in the
Churches, once eminent, and famous for their knowledge, faith, and holiness,
but now very sinkes of sin, and all abominations.

Then they are without their defense, Horsemen and Charets of Israel, because
they are the strength and safeguard of the place where they are: where the word
of God is purely and sincerely taught, there God is after a peculiar manner
present, showing his power in the defense of the place and people: to the
Minister of God has made a very gracious promise, Ier. 1.18, 19.
Behold (says the Lord to Jeremy) I have made thee this day a defenced City,
and an iron Pillar, and brazen wall against the whole Land, against the Kings
of Judah, against the Princes thereof, against the Priests thereof, and against
the people of the Land: And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not
prevail against thee, for I am with thee to deliver thee. And the Lord is not
only a defense to the Ministers themselves, but also to the place and people
where they are; thus when the Syrians compassed the City Dothan where Elisha
was, then were the mountains full of Charets and Horses, the Angels of the
Lord like an Army standing in the defense of Elisha, 2 Kings 6 16, 17.
so that the Syrians could hurt neither Elisha nor the place where he was: thus
also when the 2 Chro. 11.13, 14, 16, 17.
Priests, the Levites, and such of the Tribes of Israel, as set their hearts to
seek the Lord God of Israel, came to Jerusalem, then they strengthened the
Kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam strong, even so many years as he walked
in the ways of David and Solomon. It is not so much the number of the people,
the great abundance of riches, and other munition and furniture, as holy and
faithful Ministers, pious and religious people, that are the strength, stay,
and instruments of safety to a Kingdom, place or people: therefore when
Iehosaphat sent forth them that taught in Judah, and had the book of the Law
of the Lord with them, and went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, and
taught the people; then it is said, 2 Chro. 17.9.
the fear of the Lord fell upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were round
about Judah, so that they made no war against Iehosaphat: yea they did not
only forbear to annoy and hurt him, but then also the Philistines brought
Iehosaphat presents, and tribute silver, and the Arabians brought him flocks,
seven thousand and seven hundred Rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred
He-goats: behold here the blessed safety, the great defense ministered to the
place and people, where the Lord gives faithful and teaching Ministers to
instruct them: see and consider in this, the singular good attendant upon, and
derived unto the places which the Lord endowes with sanctified and able
Pastors; they by their labors convert many to true holiness, fill the souls
of many with much goodness, make them very fruitful in the good works of all
righteousness, bring them to be Gods dear favorites; they by their prayers
also previle with God for the removal of much evil hanging over, and for the
procuring of much good to the place and people where the Lord does set them:
and thus they are instrumentally a singular defense unto them, but these being
removed, the people become like a City having neither wall nor watchman.

God the crown and glory of the people, which enjoy them: therefore Moses tells
Israel, that there was no Nation so Deuteronomy. 4.6
great as they, because there was no Nation had God so nigh unto them, that had
such statutes as they, and this was their wisdom and understanding to keep
them: and therefore also when the Ark, which was to Israel a testimony of Gods
presence, as the Ordinances of God are now to us, when this Arc I say was
taken from them, the wife of Phineas refused to be comforted, saying, the 1 Samuel 4.21, 22.
glory was departed from Israel: for as the stars be the glory and ornament of
the heavens, so are the Ministers of God the Rev. 1.19
stars in the right hand of Christ, the ornaments and glory of the Church: a
great privilege, a rare favor are Gods ordinances where he does vouchsafe
them: Psalm. 147 19, 20.
He shows his word (says the Psalmist) unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel: he has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his
judgments, they have not known them.

Then they are in great danger of Apostasy, when Moses was but a few days
Exodus 32 1, 2.
golden calfe to go before them: when Iehoaida dyed, 2 Chr. 24.2, 17, 18.
Iehoash soon turned aside from the way of God to Idols, the soldiers will
soon go back, if their Leader be once gone; the ship will quickly miscarry,
make shipwreck, if there be no Pilot in it.

2 Chro, 15.2, 3.
without God. The taking away then of the faithful Ministers being no less
then a depriving of the people of their guides, food, comforters, means of
spiritual freedom, instruments of defense, this robbing them of their glory,
exposing them to the danger of Apostasy, and making them like men without God
in the World, we cannot but confess that the death and departure of Gods
faithful. Ministers ought to be deeply and affectionately bewailed by Gods
holy servants.

Israel of old, weary of our heavenly Manna, as they of Number. 11.56.
theirs, and as they fell a lusting after the onions, and flesh pots of Egypt'
so do many of us after the old Egyptian doctrine, though the Gospel was never
taught amongst us, opened to us with such clearenesse, power, evidence, and
demonstration of the spirit as now, yet because it has been long continued,
many begin to loath it, to grow very weary of it, to take, at least, no
pleasure in it. It was Seneca his observation of old, Sol spectatorem non
habet, nisi cum deficit, nemo observat Lunam, nisi laborantem, adeo natural
est magis nova quam magna mirari; the Sun has no beholder except eclipsed,
no man observes the Moon, unless when she is in travel; so natural it is
unto us to admire new things, rather then great things: The doctrine which is
styled Popish we reject, because it has an old name, but let the same doctrine
come under a new name, a doctrine as like the Popish, as one egg is like
another, as the Sun that shines now, is like that which shined many years
ago; or rather if ye will, as the bramble which grows now, is like the
bramble which grew a hundred years since; though a man might say to the
teachers and embracers of it; as the Prophet to Jeroboams wife disguising her
self, 1 King. 14.
come in, come in, thou wife of Jeroboam, why fainest thou thy self to be
another then thou art? So we in this case, for as she was the same woman, only
her apparel and gesture was changed, so let this be the same doctrine with
that which we call Popish, yet because under a new name, a little disguised,
somewhat arrayed in another apparel, it will be by some highly esteemed,
strongly embraced, the fall of truth and faithful Ministers of God not at all
bewailed: and what do men by this declare, but that 1. They were never of Ioh.
18.37 Ioh. 2.19.
the truth. 2. That they never unfainedly 1 These. 2.10
loved the truth. 3. That they never 1 Pet. 2.2, 3
felt the saving power nor heavenly comforts of it, if they had tasted the
sweetness of it, been acquainted with the joy and peace which this ministers,
had they seen the beauties, the glory and excellency of God in it, then as
Peter beholding the glorious transfiguration of our Savior, said, Mat. 17.4.
It is good being here, let us build three Tabernacles, etc. so would they say,
it is good being under the Gospel, it is pleasant, it is comfortable being
here, let us build our Tabernacle here, O let us dwell under this forever.

This must therefore move us to bewail Israel was gathered together, and 1 Samuel 25.1
lamented the death of their Samuel: so have you great cause to lament the
death of your Samuel, the departure of your faithful Pastor: As Jonah was much
grieved at the Jonah 4.6, 7, 8.
withering of the Gourd, which was a shadow over his head, a comfortable
protection and refreshment to him, so have you great occasion to be grieved
much at his withering, at his dissolution, who was a shadow, an instrument of
much, of sweet refreshment (whiles he lived) to your souls. And as Hagar sat
down and Genesis 21.16.
wept because her bottle was empty, so have you great cause now to sit down
and weep, because the well which was wont to send forth waters of consolation,
is now dried up: for now you may behold how your Eliah, like him of old, though
not in body, yet in soul is gone in his Fiery Charet into Heaven; he who
shined like the Sun to you of this place for some years, is now gone down
from your Horizon, whom your eyes shall see no more till the morning of the
Resurrection: the Mat. 13.22.
Tree whose fruit lately fed you, whose branches lately shadowed and refreshed
you, is now withered, dead and dry, no more fruit to be gathered from him: he
that was in some respect the Father, the Charets and Horsemen of this place, is
now like Eliah parted asunder from you; he that stood like Ge. 29.8, 10.
Jacob, to roll away the stone from the Well, to open and give you the sense of
the Scriptures, can now no more do that office for you: He that lately stood
like a Isa. 60.6.
Watchman upon your walls, to awaken you, to warn you, is now by death put to
silence, and can no more call upon you: he who of late like a good Steward
brought out of his storehouse old and new, brake the bread of life amongst
you, has now given account of his stewardship, and shall no more be steward
over you. God gave you a great blessing in him, the Lord grant there be no
curse attend his removal. Sure I am as the people said of David, 2 Samuel 18.3.
thou art worth ten thousand of us; so may we say of him, he was worth a great
number of them that do survive him: the greater was his worth, the more should
be your grief, yet as our Savior said to the daughters of Jerusalem, Luke
23.28.
Daughters of Jerusalem weep not for me, but weep for your selves and for your
children; so may I say to you, weep not for him that is now departed from you,
but weep for your selves and for your children, for the great loss you have
taken; as for the gain which he has gotten, the crown which he has won,
there is cause of rejoicing: for he you well know, was a man in whom there was
a rare confluence of all virtues, as of lines meeting in one Center, streams
running into one Ocean; there was indeed a singular compleatnesse in him, his
soul was a rich storehouse, a glorious garden, having jewels and flowers of
all sorts, a Tree laden with all kind of fruits: I may say of him as Horace in
another case, -- Micat inter omnes Iulium sydus, velut inter ignes Luna
minores: and as the people said of 1 Samuel 10.22.
Saul in regard of his endowments, He was the head and shoulders above many
others: For

1. The Lord enriched him with much knowledge, according to the prophecy he
was filled with this, as the Sea with Isa. 11.6
waters, his Lamp was full of this oil; he was as our Savior said of the
Baptist, a bright and shining John. 5.35.
light, the Lord gave him the tongue of the learned to minister a word in Isa.
50.4.
due season. 2. The Lord replenished him with such a rare dexterity, singular
wisdom, to discern, advise, and give counsel fit for every estate and
undertaking: of whom I may say in this behalf, as Pharaoh of Genesis 40.38, 39
Joseph, Can we find such a man as this was, a man in whom the spirit of God
was; surely there are few so discreet and wise as he was. 3. He was diligent
and laborious in his calling, a good Steward, ever breaking the bread of life
amongst you, a loving Nurse always drawing forth his breast unto you; he was
not a cloud without rain, a Well without water, he did not hide his talent in
a napkin; he did not put his light under a bushel; but as the Sun does often
visit the earth, so did he this place: as Paul said of the Macedonians in
regard of their contribution to the Saints, to 2 Cor. 8.3.
their power, and beyond their power they were willing: so this man in his
calling was willing to his power, and as some conjecture, beyond his power in
regard of his bodily infirmities. 4. He was not only diligent in his calling,
but also profitable in his teaching, it was not Ier. 23.28
chafe, but good wheat which he sowed amongst you, not the sand of humane
devices, but the firm and sure Rock of Gods Word, did he lay as a foundation
for you thereon to build; he sought not with humane eloquence, vain flashes,
idle quirks, fantastical conceits, and 1 Cor. 8.3.
enticing words of man's wisdom to please men, but his labor was to speak
and preach in the demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith
might not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God: and this indeed
is not the least part both of the wisdom and fidelity required of Gods
messengers to stoop to the capacity of the people, to present the counsel of
God plainly to their understanding. Bonorum ingeniorum est insignis indoles
(says Augustine) in verbis verum amare, non verba: quid enim prodest clavis
aurea si aperire quod volumus non potest, aut quid obest-lignea, si hoc potest,
quando nihil aliud quaerimus nisi ut pateat quod clausum est? This is a
singular property of wisdom, in words to love the truth, and not the words:
what does a golden key profit if it cannot open what we would have unshut; what
does a wooden key hurt or hinder, if it can open, when as we desire no more
but that which is shut may be opened, that which is hidden may be unfolded? he
is surely in Gods school the best scholar in Gods Church the most eminent and
worthy teacher, that does with most clearenesse, plainness, power, fullness
and evidence of the spirit open and apply Gods counsels to the consciences of
the hearers. 5. He was also in his discourse very holy, and profitable, a
seeds-man always sowing, a light always shining, very constant in doing good
by his communication. 6. He was in the order of his conversation very sincere
and upright, so far as ever I observed, and I am persuaded it was the joy and
2 Cor. 1.12.
rejoicing of his heart, that he had his conversation in sincerity and
uprightness, and not in fleshly wisdom. 7. He was very friendly to Gods
people, with them he delighted to converse, Gods image, true goodness in
them, was a lodestone very powerful to move and draw his affection. 8. He was
open-handed to such as needed, ready out of his fullness to power plentifully
into such vessels as he found empty. 9. By his conversation he gave a good
example, he did not build with one hand and pull down with the other, but his
doctrine and his conversation were at a sweet agreement, like Ruth and Naomi
they went hand in hand together. 10. He was not one in public, another in
private, but every where the same; as they said of Valerins Court, so may we
say of his house, it was a Church of God in regarded of the holy orders orderly
there observed, and religious duties there performed. Now therefore walk ye in
that light which he has caused to shine unto you, bring forth the fruit of
that seed which he has sown among you, and build up that sacred and saving
truth which he has proposed and set before you. And now lastly;

Gods faithful Ministers be so deeply to be bewailed, if our estate without
them be so wretched, so uncomfortable; then you must show your selves very
careful in repairing the loss which you have now sustained, do not ye say as
Galienus the Emperor when he had lost Egypt, cannot we be without the hemp
and flax of Egypt; and when he had also lost France, two great and mighty
Countries, cannot the Lord (said he) stand sine sagis trabeatis, without these
soldiers cassockes which France does send us. Beloved, I beseech you do not so
say of the departure of Gods Ministers, do not slight the loss of them, as if
it were but the loss of a little flax, hemp, or a few soldiers coats; but
look upon it I entreat you, and consider it, and be affected with it, as with
one of the greatest losses could ever be sustained, and accordingly declare and
show your wisdom, circumspection, care diligence, faithfulness, and
conscionablenesse for an able supply. And for your better direction in this
behalf, let it be your care.

1. To go to God, and by prayer and fasting seek his counsel and assistance,
as the people in the days of Ezra by Ezra 8.21.
prayer and fasting sought of God a way for them and their little ones; so do
you now by prayer and fasting seek of God an able and faithful Minister, to
guide both you and your little ones in the way that leads to peace and
everlasting happiness. As the people after the death of Jud. 1.1.
Joshua, went to God and asked him, who should go up for them to fight against
the Canaanites, so must you now after the death of your spiritual Leader, go
to God, and ask of him, who shall go up for you to fight for you in this
war against sin and Satan: this is not more holiness then is requisite,
for thus the Disciples sought to God by Act 1.24
prayer and fasting, to direct them in the choice of a successor in the room
of him that fell.

2. Seek not too much to please your selves, be not too indulgent to your own
affections, but let your special aim be at the glory of God, and the general
and saving good of the people of this place: let that man which in all
probability, and upon good evidence will be most zealous for Gods glory, and
do best service to the people of this place, be without any by or sinister
respect the man of your choice. This do, or else for any thing I know God may
require the blood of this people at your hands.

3. Be careful that the man whom you choose be a man after Gods own h heart,
a holy man, a man able to feed you with knowledge and understanding, a man
experienced in the work of Gods word upon his own soul: for as Christ was
made like unto us in allm things sin excepted, that he might have compassion on
us in all our estates and conditions; so it is requisite the Minister of God
should be made like the people in all things, I mean in being sensible of the
burden of sin, of the trouble of an afflicted conscience, of the buffetings
of Satan, of the work of Gods word and spirit upon his own heart: and then
shall he be fit to compassionate, comfort, teach the people, and know how to
minister a word in due season.

Lord to Samuel, 1 Sa. 16.7.
judge not after the outward appearance; and take this for a sure rule, that
God does not always do the greatest works by men of greatest earth-abilities:
the Lord over-turned the Midianitish host by a Jud. 7.23
barley cake, by Judge. 6.15.
Gedion whose family was poor in Manasseh and that was the liast in his
fathers house: the Lord caused the Exodus 17 6
waters to come forth out of the rock, by no other, no worthier instrument,
then the stroke of a rod. It was not in Saul's armor, but with a 1 Sa. 17.54.
sling and a stone that God enabled David to overthrow Goliath, and delever
Israel. They were Trumpets neither of gold nor silver, but Ios. 6.20
rams horns, contemptible things in the eyes of men, which God caused the
Priest to sound, and at whose sounding the walls of Jericho fell. And the
Psalmist tells us, that God has ordained strength out of the (...). 8.2.
mouths of babes, and sucklings: and the Apostle lays it down as a general
and constant rule, the 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 28, 29.
foolishness of God is vviser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger
then men: for ye see your calling brethren, how that not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble men are called, but God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wife: and God has chosen the
weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base
things of the world, and things which are despised has God chosen; yea and
things which are not, to bring to naught things which are: and he renders the
reason of the Lords so doing, that no flesh should glory in his presence:
Think on these things, and be not wise in your own eyes; this have I spoken
not as vnder-valuing abilities humane, but as advising that you fasten not your
eyes too much upon them, least they prove a sandy foundation. And as for him
that shall succeed your now deceased Pastor, my prayer is, that as the spirit
of Eliah was doubled upon Elisha, so the spirit of this man may be doubled on
him that shall in this place succeed him, that he may prove to you as a bright
and a shining star to lead you, as the star led the wise men to Christ
Jesus; and as the fiery pillar conducted Israel form Egypt to Canaan, so may he
lead you from the Egypt of sin, and bondage of Satan, to the heavenly Canaan,
that place of glory, rest, peace, and all fullness, which God has provided for
his children in the holy and higest heavens.

Laus Deo soli.
FINIS.

