CERTAIN LEARNED AND ELEGANT WORKS OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE FVLKE LORD BROOK,
Written in his Youth, and familiar Exercise with SIR PHILIP SIDNEY.

The several Names of which Works the following page does declare.

LONDON, Printed by E. P. for Henry Seyle, and are to be sold at his shop at
the sign of the Tigers head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1633.

THE NAMES OF THE SEVERAL BOOKS.
A Treaty of Humane Learning. An Inquisition upon Fame and Honor. A Treaty
of Wars. The Tragedy of Alaham. The Tragedy of Mustapha. Caelica,
containing CIX, Sonnets. A Letter to an Honorable Lady, etc. A Letter of
Travel.
A TREATY OF Humane Learning.
1.
THe Mind of Man is this worlds true dimension;
And Knowledge is the measure of the mind:
And as the mind, in her vaste comprehension.
Contains more worlds than all the world can find:
So Knowledge does it self far more extend,
Than all the minds of Men can comprehend.
2.
A climing Height it is without a head,
Depth without bottom, Way without an end,
A Circle with no line environed,
Not comprehended all it comprehends;
Worth infinite, yet satisfies no mind,
Till it that infinite of the Godhead find.
3.
This Knowledge is the same forbidden tree,
Which man lusts after to be made his Maker;
For Knowledge is of Powers eternity,
And perfect Glory, the true image-taker;
So as what does the infinite contain,
Must be as infinite as it again.
4.
No marvel then, if proud desires reflection,
By gazing on this Sun, do make us blind,
Nor if our Lust, our Centaure-like Affection,
In stead of Nature, fadome clouds, and wind,
So adding to original defection,
As no man knows his own unknowing mind:
And our Egyptian darkness grows so gross,
As we may easily in it, feel our loss.
5.
For our defects in Nature who sees not?
We enter first things present not conceiving,
Not knowing future, what is past forgot:
All other Creatures instant power receiving,
To help themselves; Man only brings sense
To feel, and wail his native impotence.
6.
Which Sense, Man's first instructor, while it shows,
To free him from deceit, deceiues him most;
And from this false root that mistaking grows,
Which truth in humane knowledges has lost:
So that by judging Sense herein perfection,
Man must deny his Natures imperfection.
7.
Which to be false, even Sense it self does prove,
Since every Beast in it does us exceed;
Besides, these senses which we thus approve,
In us as many diverse likings breed,
As there be different tempers in Complexions,
Degrees in healths, or Ages imperfections.
8.
Again, Change from without no less deceives,
Than do our own debilities within:
For th'obiect, which in gross our flesh conceives,
After a sort, yet when light does begin
These to retaile, and subdiuide, or sleeves
Into more minutes; then grows Sense so thin,
As none can so refine the sense of man,
That two, or three agree in any can.
9
Yet these racked up by Wit excessiuely,
Make fancy think she such gradations finds
Of heat, cold, colors such variety,
Of smells, and tafts, of tunes such diverse kinds,
As that brave Scythian never could descry,
Who found more sweetness in his horses naying,
Than all the Phrygian, Dorian, Lydian playing.
10.
Knowledges next organ is Imagination;
A glass, wherein the object of our Sense
Ought to respect true height, or declination,
For understandings cleares intelligence:
But this power also has her variation,
Fixed in some, in some with difference;
In all, so shadowed with selfe-application
As makes her pictures still too foul, or fair;
Not like the life in lineament, or air.
11.
This power besides, always cannot receive
What sense reports, but what the affections please
" To admi^^; and as those Princes that do leave
" Their State in trust to men corrupt with ease,
" False in their faith, or but to faction friend,
" The truth of things can scarcely comprehend.
12.
So must th'Imagination from the sense
Be misinformed, while out affections cast
False shapes, and forms on their intelligence,
And to keep out true intromissions thence,
Abstracts the imagination or distasts,
With images preoccupately placed.
13.
Hence our desires, fears, hopes, love, hate, and sorrow,
In fancy make us hear, feel, see impressions,
Such as out of our sense they do not borrow;
And are the efficient cause, the true progression
Of sleeping visions, idle phantasmes waking,
Life, dreams; and knowledge, apparitions making.
14.
Again, our Memory, Register of Sense,
And mould of Arts, as Mother of Induction,
Corrupted with disguised intelligence,
Can yield no Images for man's instruction:
But as from stained wombes, abortiue birth
Of strange opinions, to confound the earth.
15.
The last chief oracle of what man knows
Is Understanding; which though it contain
Some ruinous notions, which our Nature shows,
Of general truths; yet have they such a stain
From our corruption, as all light they lose;
Save to convince of ignorance, and sin,
Which where they reign let no perfection in.
16.
Hence weak, and few those dazzled notions be,
Which our frail Understanding does retain;
So as man's bankrupt Nature is not free,
By any Arts to raise it self again;
Or to those notions which do in us live
Confused, a well-fram'd Art-like state to give.
17.
Nor in a right line can her eyes ascend,
To view the things that immateriall are;
" For as the Sun does, while his beams descend,
" Lighten the earth, but shadow every star:
So Reason stooping to attend the Sense,
Darkens the spirits clear intelligence.
18.
Besides, these faculties of apprehension;
Admit they were, as in the souls creation,
All perfect here, (which blessed large dimension
As none denies, so but by imagination
Only, none knows) yet in that comprehension,
Even through those instruments whereby she works,
Debility, misprision, imperfection lurkes.
19.
As many, as there be within the brain
Distempers, frenzies, or indispositions;
Yea of our fallen estate the fatal stain
Is such, as in our Youth while compositions,
And spirits are strong, conception then is weak,
And faculties in years of understanding break.
20.
Again, we see the best Complexions vain,
And in the worst more nimble subtilty;
From whence Wit, a distemper of the brain,
The Schools conclude, and our capacity;
How much more sharp, the more it apprehends
Still to distract, and less truth comprehends.
21.
But all these natural Defects perchance
May be supplied by Sciences, and Arts;
Which we thirst after, study, admire, advance,
As if restore our fall, recure our smarts
They could, bring in perfection, burn our rods;
With Demades to make us like our Gods.
22.
Indeed to teach they confident pretend,
All general, uniform Axioms scientificall
Of truth, that want beginning, have no end,
Demonstratiue, infallible, only essential:
But if these Arts contain this mystery,
It proves them proper to the Deity:
23.
Who only is eternal, infinite, all-seeing,
Even to the abstract essences of Creatures;
Which pure transcendent Power can have no being
Within man's finite, frail, imperfect features:
For proof, What grounds so general, and known,
But are with many exceptions overthrown?
24.
So that where our Philosophers confess,
That we a knowledge universal have,
Our ignorance in particulars we express:
Of perfect demonstration, who it gave
One clear example? Or since time began,
What one true form found out by wit of Man?
25.
Who those characteristicall Ideas
Conceiues, which Science of the Godhead be?
But in their stead we raise, and mould Tropheas,
Forms of Opinion, Wit, and Vanity,
Which we call Arts; and fall in love with these,
" As did Pygmalion with his carved tree;
" For which men, all the life they here enjoy,
" Still fight, as for the Helens of their Troy.
26.
Hence do we out of words create us Arts;
Of which the People not withstanding be
Masters, and without rules do them impart:
Reason we make an Art; yet none agree
What this true Reason is; nor yet have powers,
To level others Reason unto ours.
27.
Nature we draw to Art, which then forsakes
To be herself, when she with Art combines;
Who in the secrets of her own womb makes
The Lodestone, Sea, the Souls of men, and winds;
" Strong instances to put all Arts to school,
" And prove the Science-monger but a fool.
28.
Nay we do bring the influence of Stars,
Yea God himself even under moulds of Arts;
Yet all our Arts cannot prevail so far,
As to confirm our eyes, resolve our hearts,
" Whether the heavens do stand still or move,
" Were framed by Chance, Antipathie, or Love?
29.
Then what is our high-prais'd Philosophy,
But books of Poesy, in Prose compiled?
Far more delightful than they fruitful be,
" Witty appearance, Guile that is beguiled;
Corrupting minds much rather than directing,
The allay of Duty, and our Prides erecting.
30.
For as among Physicians, what they call
Word-Magike, never helps the disease,
Which drugges, and diet ought to deal withal,
And by their real working give us ease:
So these Word-sellers have no power to cure
The Passions, which corrupted lives endure.
31.
Yet not ashamed these Verbalists still are,
From youth, till age, or study dim their eyes,
To engage the Grammar rules in civil war,
For some small sentence which they patronize;
As if our end lived not in reformation,
But Verbes, or Nounes true sense, or declination.
32.
Music instructs me which be lyrike Moodes;
Let her instruct me rather, how to show
No weeping voice for loss of Fortunes goods.
Geometry gives measure to the earth below;
Rather let her instruct me, how to measure
What is enough for need, what fit for pleasure.
33.
She teaches, how to lose naught in my bounds,
And I would learn with joy to lose them all:
This Artist shows which way to measure Rounds,
But I would know how first Man's mind did fall,
How great it was, how little now it is, (this?
And what that knowledge was which wrought us
34.
What thing a right line is, the learned know;
But how auailes that him, who in the right
Of life, and manners does desire to grow?
What then are all these humane Arts, and lights,
But Seas of errors? In whose depths who sound,
Of truth find only shadows, and no ground.
35.
Then if our Arts want power to make us better,
What fool will think they can us wiser make,
Life is the Wisdom, Art is but the letter,
Or shell, which often men for the kernel take;
In Moodes, and Figures moulding up deceit,
To make each Science rather hard, than great.
36.
And as in Grounds, which salt by nature yield,
No care can make return of other grain:
So who with Books their nature ouer-build,
Lose that in practice, which in Arts they gain;
That of our Schools it may be truly said,
Which former times to Athens did vpbraid;
37.
" That many came first Wise men to those Schools;
" Then grew Philosophers, or Wisdome-mongers;
" Next Rhetoricians, and at last grew fools.
Nay it great honor were to this Booke-hunger,
If our schools dreams could make their scholars see
What imperfections in our Natures be.
38.
But these vain Idols of humanity,
As they infect our wits, so do they stain,
Or bind our inclinations borne more free,
While the nice Alchymie of this proud vein
Makes some grow blind, by gazing on the sky,
Others, like whelps, in wrangling Elenchs die.
39.
And in the best, where Science multiplies,
Man multiplies with it his care of mind:
While in the worst, these swelling harmonies,
Like bellows, fill unquiet hearts with wind,
To blow the fame of malice, question, strife,
Both into public States and private life.
40.
Nor is it in the Schools alone where Arts
Transform themselves to Craft, Knowledge to Sophistry,
Truth into Rhetorike; since this womb imparts,
Through all the practice of Humanity,
Corrupt, sophistical, chymicall always,
Which snare the subject and the King betrays.
41.
Though there most dangerous, where wit serves might,
To shake divine foundations, and humane,
By painting vices, and by shadowing right,
Which tincture of Probabile profane,
Under false color giving truth such rates,
As Power may rule in chief through all Estates.
42.
For which respects, Learning has found distaste
In Governments, of great, and glorious fame;
In Lacedemon scorned, and disgraced,
As idle, vain, effeminate, and lame:
Engines that did vn-man the minds of men
From action, to seek glory in a den.
43.
Yea Rome it self, while there in her remained
That ancient, ingenuous austerity,
The Greek professors from her walls restrained,
And with the Turk they still exiled be:
We find in Gods Law curious Arts reprou'd,
Of Man's inventions no one School approved.
44.
Besides, by name this high Philosophy
Is in the Gospel termed a vain deceit;
And caution given, by way of prophecy
Against it, as if in the depth, and height
Of spirit, the Apostle clearly did foresee,
That in the end corrupt the Schoolmen would
Gods true Religion, in a heathen mould.
45.
And not alone make flesh a Deity,
But gods of all that fleshly sense brings forth:
Give mortal nature immortality,
Yet think all but time present nothing worth:
An Angel-pride, and in us much more vain,
Since what they could not, how should we attain?
46.
For if Man's wisdoms, laws, arts, legends, schools,
Be built upon the knowledge of the evil;
And if these Trophies be the only tools,
Which do maintain the kingdom of the Devil;
If all these Babels had the curse of tongues,
So as confusion still to them belongs:
47.
Then can these moulds never contain their Maket,
Nor those nice forms, and different beings show,
Which figure in his works truth, wisdom, nature,
The only object for the soul to know:
These Arts, moulds, works can but express the sin,
Whence by mansfollie, his fall did begin.
48.
Again, if all man's fleshly Organs rest,
Under that curse, as out of doubt they do;
If Sky, Sea, Earth, lie under it oppressed,
As tainted with that taste of errors too;
In this Mortality, this strange privation,
What knowledge stands but sense of declination?
49.
A Science never scientificall,
A Rhapsody of questions controuerted;
In which because men know no truth at all,
To every purpose it may be converted:
Judge then what grounds this can to other give,
That waued ever in it self must live?
50.
Besides, the soul of Man, Prince of this earth,
That lively image of Gods truth, and might,
If it have lost the bliss of heavenly birth,
And by transgression dim that piercing light,
Which from their inward natures, gave the name
To every creature, and described the same.
51.
If this be stained in Essence, as in Shrine,
Though all were pure, whence she collects, diuides
Good, ill; false, true; things humane, or divine;
Yet where the Judge is false, what truth abides?
False both the objects, Judge, and method be;
What be those Arts then of Humanity?
52.
But strange Chimera's borne of mortal sense,
Opinions curious moulds, wherein she casts
Elenches, begot by false intelligence,
Between our Reasons, and our Senses taste:
Binding man's mind with earths imposture-line,
For ever looking up to things divine.
53.
Whereby, even as the Truth in every heart
Refines our fleshly humor, and affection;
That they may easlier serve the better part,
Know, and obey the Wisdom to perfection:
These dreams embody, and engrosse the mind,
To make the nobler serve the baser kind.
54.
In lapse to God though thus the World remains,
Yet does she with divine eyes in Chaos'd light,
Strive, study, search through all her finite veins,
To be, and know (without God) infinite:
To which end Cloisters, Cells, Schools, she erects,
False moulds, that while they fashion, do infect.
55.
Whence all Man's fleshly idols being built,
As humane Wisdom, Science, Power, and Arts,
Upon the false foundation of his Guilt;
Confusedly do weaue within our hearts,
Their own advancement, state, and declination,
As things whose beings are but transmutation.
56.
Subject not only therein unto time,
And all obstructions of Misgouernment;
But in themselves, when they are most sublime,
Like fleshly visions, never permanent:
"Rising to fall, falling to rise again,
"And never can, where they are known remain.
57.
But if they escape the violence of War,
(That active instrument of Barbarism)
With their own niceness they traduced are,
And like opinion, crafty moulds of schism;
As founded upon flatteries of Sense,
Which must with truth keep least intelligence.
58.
But in dark successiue Ignorance
Some times lie shadowed, and although not dead,
Yet sleeping, till the turns of Change, or Chance
Do (in their restless chariots garnished
Among the cloudy Meteors made of earth)
Give them again, to scourge the world, new birth.
59.
Thus, till Man end, his Vanities go round,
In credit here, and there discredited;
Striving to bind, and never to be bound,
To govern God, and not be governed:
Which is the cause his life is thus confused,
In his corruption, by these Arts abused.
60.
Here see we then the Vainenesse, and Defect
Of Schools, Arts, and all else that man does know,
Yet shall we straight resolve, that by neglect
Of Science, Nature does the richer grow?
That Ignorance is the mother of Devotion,
Since Schools give them that teach this such promotion?
61.
No, no; amongst the worst let her come in,
As Nurse, and Mother unto every lust;
Since who commit injustice, often sin,
Because they know not what to each is just;
Intemperance does often our Natures win,
Because what is foul, indecent, we think best,
And by misprision so grow in the rest.
62.
Man must not therefore rashly Science scorn,
"But choose, and read with care; since Learning is
"A bunch of grapes sprung up among the thorns,
"Where, but by caution, none the harm can miss;
"Nor Arts true riches read to understand,
"But shall, to please his taste, offend his hand.
63.
For as the World by time still more declines,
Both from the truth, and wisdom of Creation:
So at the truth she more and more repines,
As making have to her last declination.
Therefore if not to care, yet to refine
Her stupidnesse, as well as ostentation,
Let us set straight that Industry again,
Which else as foolish proves, as it is vain.
64.
Yet here, before we can direct man's choice,
We must divide Gods Children from the rest;
Since these pure souls (who only know his voice)
Have no Art, but Obedience, for their test:
A mystery between God, and the man,
Asking, and giving far more than we can.
65.
Let us then respite these, and first behold
The World, with all her instruments, ways, ends;
What keeps proportion, what must be controlled,
Which be her enemies, and which her friends?
That so we best may counsel, or decree
The vanity can never wiser be.
66.
Wherein to guide Man's choice to such a mood,
As all the world may judge a work of merit;
I wish all curious Sciences let blood,
Superfluous purged from wantonness of spirit:
For though the World bebuilt upon excess,
Yet by confusion she must needs grow less.
67.
For Man being finite both in wit, time, might,
His days in vanity may be misspent;
Use therefore must stand higher than delight,
The active hate a fruitless instrument:
So must the World those busy idle fools,
That serve no other market than the Schools.
68.
Again the active, necessary Arts,
Ought to be brief in books, in practice long;
Short precepts may extend to many parts,
The practice must be large, or not be strong.
And as by artlesse Guides, States ever waine:
So do they where these vselesse dreamers reign.
69.
For if these two be in one balance weighed,
The artlesse Use bears down the vselesse Art;
With mad men, else how is the madd'st obeyed,
But by degrees of rage in active hearts?
While Contemplation does the world distract,
With vain Idea's, which it cannot act.
70.
And in this thinking undigested notion,
Transformes all beings into Atomi;
Dissolues, builds not; nor rests, nor gets by motion,
Heads being less than wombes of vanity:
Which Visions make all humane Arts thus tedious,
Intricate, vain, endless, as they prove to us.
71.
The World should therefore her instructions draw
Back unto life, and actions, whence they came;
That practice, which gave being, might give law,
To make them short, clear, fruitful unto man,
As God made all for use; even so must she,
By chance, and use, uphold her mystery.
72.
"Besides, where Learning, like a Caspian Sea,
"Has hitherto received all little brooks,
"Devoured their sweetness, borne their names away,
"And in her greenesse hid their crystal looks;
"Ler her turn Ocean now, and give back more
"To those clear Springs, than she received before.
73.
Let her that gathered rules Imperial,
Out of particular experiments,
And made mere contemplation of them all,
Apply them now to special intents;
That she, and mutual Action, may maintain
Themselves, by taking, what they give again.
74.
And where the progress was to find the cause,
First by effects out, now her regresse should
Form Art directly under Natures Laws;
And all effects so in their causes mould:
As frail Man lively, without School of smart,
Might see Successes coming in an Art.
75.
For Sciences from Nature should be drawn,
As Arts from practice, never out of Books;
Whose rules are only left with time in pawn,
To show how in them Use, and Nature looks:
Out of which light, they that Arts first began,
Pierced further, than succeeding ages can.
76.
Since how should Water rise above her fountain?
Or spirits rule-bound see beyond that light?
So as if Books be man's Parnassus mountain,
Within them no Arts can be infinite;
Nor any multiply himself to more,
But still grow less than he that went before.
77.
Again, Art should not, like a Curtizan,
Change habits, dressing graces every day;
But of her Terms one stable Counterpane
Still keep, to shun ambiguous allay;
That Youth in Definitions once received,
(As in Kings standards) might not be deceived.
78.
To which true end, in every Art there should
One, or two Authors be selected out,
To cast the learners in a constant mould;
Who if not falsely, yet else go about;
And as the Babes by many Nurses do,
Often change conditions, and complexions too.
79.
The like surueyes that spirit of Government,
Which moulds, and tempers all these serving Arts,
Should take, in choosing out fit instruments,
To judge men's inclinations, and their parts;
That Books, Arts, Natures, may well fitted be,
To hold up this Worlds curious mystery.
80.
First dealing with her chief commanding Art,
The outward Churches, which their Ensigns bear
So mixed with power, and craft in every part,
As any shape, but Truth, may enter there:
All whose hypocrisies, thus built on passion,
Can yet nor being give, nor constant fashion.
81.
For though the words she use, seem leuels true,
And strong, to show the crookedness of Error;
Yet in the inward man there is nothing new,
But masked evil, which still adds terror,
Helping the vanity to buy or sell,
And rests as seldom as it labors well.
82.
Besides their Schoolemens sleepy speculation,
"Dreaming to comprehend the Deity
"In humane reasons finite elevation;
While they make Sense seat of Eternity,
Must bury Faith, whose proper objects are
Gods mysteries, above our Reason far.
83.
Besides, these Nymphs of Nemesis still work
Nets of opinion, to entangle spirits:
Andlin the shadow of the Godhead lurk,
Building a Babel upon faithless merits;
Whence Form, and Matter never can agree,
To make one Church of Christianity.
85.
The Ancient Church which did succeed that light,
In which the Jews high Priesthood justly fell,
More faithfully endeavored to unite,
And thereby nearer came to doing well,
Never revealing curious mysteries,
Unless enforced by man's impieties.
86.
And when that Disobedience needs would deal
With hidden knowledge, to profane her Maker;
Or under questions contradiction steal,
Then wisely undertakes this undertaker
With powerful Councels, that made Error mute;
Not arguments, which still maintain dispute.
87.
So were it to be wished, each Kingdom would
Within her proper Soueraignity,
Seditions, Shismes, and strange Opinions mould
By Synods, to a settled unity;
Such, as though Error privately did harm,
Yet public Schisms might not so freely swarm.
88.
For though the World, and Man can never frame
These outward moulds, to cast Gods chosen in;
Nor give his Spirit where they give his Name;
That power being never granted to the sin:
Yet in the world those Orders prosper best,
Which from the word, in seeming, vary least.
89.
Since therefore she brooks not Divinity,
But Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Rites,
Traditions, Legends, and Hypocrisy;
Let her yet form those visions in the light,
To represent the Truth she does despise;
And, by that likeness, prosper in her lies.
89.
To which end let her raise the discipline,
And practice of Repentance, Piety, Love;
To image forth those Homages Divine,
Which even by shows, draw Honor from above;
Embracing Wisdom, though she hate the good,
Since Power thus vayl'd is hardly understood.
90.
Laws be her next chief Arts, and instruments,
Of which the only best derived be,
Out of those ten words in Gods Testaments,
Where Conscience is the base of policy;
But in the world a larger scope they take, (make.
And cure no more wounds, than perchance they
91.
They being there mere Children of disease,
Not formed at once by that all-seeing might,
But rather as Opinions markets please,
"Whose diverse spirits in times present light,
"Will yet teach Kings to order, and reduce
"Those abstract rules of Truth, to rules of Use.
92.
Therefore, as shadows of those Laws divine,
They must assist Church-censure, punish Error,
Since when, from Order, Nature would decline,
There is no other native cure but terror;
By Discipline, to keep the Doctrine free,
That Faith and Power still relatiues may be.
93.
Let this fair handmaid then the Church attend,
And to the wounds of Conscience add her pains,
That private hearts may unto public ends
Still governed be, by Orders easy raines;
And by effect, make manifest the cause
Of happy States to be religious Laws.
94.
Their second noble office is, to keep
Mankind upright in traffic of his own,
That fearelesse each may in his cottage sleep,
Secured that right shall not be overthrown;
Persons indifferent, real Arts in prise,
And in no other privilege made wise.
95.
Lastly, as linkes betwixt mankind, and Kings,
Laws safely must protect obedience,
Under those Sovereign, all-embracing wings,
Which from beneath expect a reverence:
That like the Ocean, with her little springs,
We for our sweet may feel the salt of Kings.
96.
Physic, with her fair friend Philosophy,
Come next in rank, as well as Reputation;
Whose proper subject is Mortality,
Which cannot reach that principal Creation,
Mixtures of Nature, curious mystery,
Of timelesse time, or bodies transmutation;
Nor comprehend the infinite degrees
Of qualities, and their strange operation;
"Whence both, upon the second causes grounded,
"Most justly by the first cause, be confounded.
97.
Therefore, let these which deck this house of clay,
And by excess of Man's corruption gain,
Know probability is all they may,
For to demonstrate they cannot attain:
Let labor, rest, and diet be their way
Man's native heat, and moisture to maintain,
As Healths true base, and in disease proceed,
"Rather by what they know, than what they read.
98.
Next after comes that Politic Philosophy,
Whose proper objects, form and matters are;
In which she often corrupts her mystery,
By grounding Orders offices too far
"On precepts of the heathen, humors of Kings,
"Customs of men, and times unconstant wings.
99.
Besides, what can be certain in those Arts,
Which cannot yield a general proposition,
To force their bodies out of native parts?
But like things of Mechanical condition,
Must borrow that wherewith they do conclude,
And so not perfect Nature, but delude.
100.
Redress of which cannot come from below;
But from that Orb, where power exalted reigns,
To order, judge, to govern, and bestow
Sense, strength, and nourishment, through all the veins,
That equal limbs each other may supply,
To serve the Trophies of Authority.
101.
Once in an age let Government then please
The course of these traditions, with their birth;
And bring them back unto their infant days,
To keep her own Soueraignity on earth;
Else viper-like, their parents they devour:
For all Powers children easily covet power.
102.
Now for these instrument all following Arts,
Which, in the traffic of Humanity,
Afford not matter, but limme out the parts,
And forms of speaking with authority:
"I say who too long in their cobwebs lurks,
"Does like him that buys tools, but never works.
103.
For whosoever marks the good, or evil,
As they stand fixed in the heart of Man:
The one of God, the other of the devil,
Feel, out of things, Men words still fashion can:
"So that from life since lively words proceed,
"What other Grammar do our natures need?
104.
Logike comes next, who with the Tyranny
Of subtle rules, distinctions, terms, and notions,
Confounds of real truth the harmony,
Distracts the judgment, multiplies commotion
In memory, man's wit, imagination,
To dim the clear light of his own creation.
105.
Hence strive the Schools, by first, and second kinds
Of substances, by essence, and existence;
That Trine, and yet Vnitednesse divine
To comprehend, and image to the sense;
As do the misled superstitious minds,
By this one rule, or Axiom taken thence;
Look where the Whole is, there the Parts must be,
Think they demonstrate Christ's vbiquity.
106.
The wise reformers therefore of this Art
Must cut off terms, distinctions, axioms, laws,
Such as depend either in whole, or part,
Upon this stained sense of words, or sawes:
Only admitting precepts of such kind,
As without words may be conceived in mind.
107.
Rhetorike, to this a sister, and a twinne,
Is grown a Siren in the forms of pleading,
"Captiuing reason, with the painted skin
"Of many words, with empty sounds misleading
"Us to false ends, by these false forms abuse, (use.
"Bring never forth that Truth, whose name they
108.
Besides, this Art, where scarcity of words
Forced her, at first, to Metaphorike wings,
Because no Language in the earth affords
Sufficient Characters to express all things;
"Yet since she plays the wanton with this need,
"And stains the Matrone with the Harlots weed.
109.
Whereas those words in every tongue are best,
Which do most properly express the thought;
"For as of pictures, which should manifest
"The life, we say not that is fineliest wrought,
"Which fairest simply shows, but fair and like:
So words must sparks be of those fires they strike.
110.
For the true Art of Eloquence indeed
Is not this craft of words, but forms of speech,
Such as from living wisdoms do proceed;
Whose ends are not to flatter, or beseech,
Insinuate, or persuade, but to declare
What things in Nature good, or evil are.
111.
Poesy and Music, Arts of Recreation,
Succeed, esteemed as idle men's profession;
Because their scope, being merely contentation,
Can move, but not remove, or make impression
Really, either to enrich the Wit,
Or, which is less, to mend our states by it.
112.
This makes the solid Judgments give them place,
"Only as pleasing sauce to dainty food;
Fine foyles for jewels, or enammels grace,
Cast upon things which in themselves are good:
Since, if the matter be in Nature vile,
How can it be made precious by a style?
113.
Yet in this Life, both these play noble parts;
The one, to outward Church-rites if applied,
Helps to move thoughts, while God may touch the hearts
With goodness, wherein he is magnified:
And if to Mars we dedicate this Art,
It raises passions which enlarge the mind,
And keeps down passions of the baser kind.
114.
The other twinne, if to describe, or praise
Goodness, or God she her I deas frame,
And like a Maker, her creations raise
On lines of truth, it beautifies the same;
And while it seems only but to please,
Teaches us order under pleasures name;
"Which in a glass, shows Nature how to fashion
"Her self again, by ballancing of passion.
115.
Let therefore humane Wisdom use both these,
As things not precious in their proper kind;
The one a harmony to move, and please;
"If studied for it self, disease of mind:
The next (like Nature) does Idea's raise,
Teaches, and makes; but has no power to bind:
Both, ornaments to life and other Arts,
Whiles they do serve, and not possess our hearts.
116.
The grace, and disgrace of this following train,
Arithmetike, Geometry, Astronomy,
Rests in the Artisans industry, or vein,
Not in the Whole, the Parts, or Symmetrie:
Which being only Number, Measure, Time;
All following Nature, help her to refine.
117.
And of these Arts it may be said again,
That since their Theoricke is infinite;
"Of infinite there can no Arts remain.
"Besides, they stand by courtesy, not right;
"Who must their principles as granted crave,
"Or else acknowledge they no being have.
118.
Their Theoricke then must not waine their use,
But, by a practice in material things,
Rather awake that dreaming vain abuse
Of Lines, without breadth; without feathers, wings:
So that their boundlesnesse may bounded be,
In Works, and Arts of our Humanity.
119.
But for the most part those Professors are,
So melted, and transported into these;
And with the Abstract swallowed up so far
As they lose traffic, comfort, use, and ease:
And are, like treasures which strange spirits guarded,
Neither to be enjoyed, nor yet discarded.
120.
Then must the reformation of them be,
By carrying on the vigor of them all,
Through each profession of Humanity,
Military, and mysteries Mechanical:
Whereby their abstract forms yet atomis'd,
May be embodied; and by doing pris'd.
121.
As for example; Buildings of all kinds;
Ships, Houses, Halls, for humane policy;
Camps, Bulwarks, Forts, all instruments of War;
Surueying, Navigations, Husbandry,
Traffic, Exchange, Accounts, and all such other,
"As, like good children, do advance their mother.
122.
For thus, these Arts pass, whence they came, to life,
Circle not round in selfe-imagination,
Begetting Lines upon an abstract wife,
As children borne for idle contemplation;
"But in the practice of man's wisdom give,
"Means, for the Worlds inhabitants to live.
123.
Lastly, the use of all unlawful Arts
Is maine abuse; whose acts, and contemplation,
Equally founded upon crased parts,
Are only to be cured by extirpation:
The rule being true, that What at first is ill,
Grow worse by use, or by refining will.
124.
"Now as the Bullion, which in all Estates,
"The standard bears of Soueraignity;
"Although allaid by characters, or rates
"Molded in wisdom, or necessity,
"Gets credit by the stamp, above his worth,
"To buy, or sell; bring home, or carry forth:
125.
Even so, in these corrupted moulds of Art,
Which while they do conform, reform us not;
If all the false infections they impart
Be shadowed thus, thus formally be wrought;
Though what works goodness, only makes men wise;
Yet Power thus masked may finely tyrannize.
126.
And let this serve to make all People see,
The vanity is crafty, but not wise;
Chance, or occasion her prosperity,
And but advantage in her head, no eyes:
Truth is no Counselor to assist the evil,
And in his own, who wiser than the devil?
127.
In which corrupt confusion let us leave
The vanity, with her Sophistications;
Deceived by that wherewith she would deceive,
Paying, and paid with vain imaginations;
Changing, corrupting, trading hope, and fear,
In stead of virtues, which she cannot bear.
128.
And so return to those pure, humble Creatures,
Who if they hauc a latitude in any,
Of all these vain, traducing, humane features,
Where, out of one root do proceed so many;
They must be sparing, few, and only such,
As help Obedience, stir not pride too much:
129.
For in the world, not of it, since they be:
Like Passengers, their ends must be to take
Only those blessings of Mortality,
Which he that made all, fashioned for their sake:
Not fixing love, hope, sorrow, care, or fear,
On mortal blossoms, which must dye to bear.
130.
With many linkes, an equal glorious chain
Of hopes eternal those pure people frame;
Yet but one form, and metal it contains,
Reason, and Passion, being there the same:
"Which wel-linck't chain they fix unto the sky,
"Not to draw heaven down, but earth up by.
131.
Their Arts, Laws, Wisdom, Acts, Ends, Honors being
All stamped and molded in the Eternal breast;
Beyond which truth, what can be worth their seeing,
That as false wisdoms all things else detest?
Whereby their works are rather great than many,
More than to know, and do, they have not any.
132.
For earth, and earthynesse it is alone,
Which enuies, strifes, hates, or is malecontent;
Which Meteors vanish must from this clear zone,
Where each thought is on his Creator bent;
And where both Kings and People should aspire,
To fix all other motions of desire.
133.
Hence have they latitudes, wherein they may
Study Sea, Sky, Air, Earth, as they enjoy them;
Contemplate the Creation, State, Decay
Of mortal things, in them that misimploy them:
"Preserve the body to obey the mind,
"Abhor the error, yet love Humane kind.
134.
Solomon knew Nature both in herbs, plants, beasts;
Used then for health, for honor, pleasure, gain;
"Yet, that abundance few Crowns well digest,
Let his example, and his book maintain:
Kings, who have trauail'd through the Vanity,
Can best describe us what her visions be.
135.
For we in such Kings (as clear Mirrors) see,
And read the heavenly glory of the good;
All other Arts, which borne of evil be,
By these are neither taught, nor understood,
Who, in the womb of Gods true Church their (mother
Learn they that know him well, must know no other.
Which God this People worship in their King
And through obedience travail to perfection;
Studying their wills under his will to bring,
Yield trust, and honor both, to his direction:
"And when they do from his example swerve,
"Bear witness to themselves they ill deserve.
137.
Since Goodness, Wisdom, Truth, then joined in one,
Show Kings, and People, what the glories be
Of mutual duties, to make up a Throne,
And weaue protection in humility:
Where else to rocks when men do fasten chains,
Their labors only draw themselves to pains.
138.
Now, if this wisdom only can be found,
By seeking God, even in the Faith he gives;
If earth, heaven, sea, stars, creatures be the bound,
Wherein revealed his power, and wisdom lives,
If true obedience be the way to this,
And only who grows better, wiser is:
139.
Then let not curious, silly Flesh conceive
It self more rich, or happy when it knows
These words of Art, which men (as shells) must cleave,
Before the life's true wisdom they disclose;
Nor when they know, to teach, they know not (what
But when their doings men may wonder at.
140.
For only that man understands indeed,
And well remembers, which he well can do,
The Laws live, only where the Law does breed
Obedience to the works it binds us to:
And as the life of Wisdom has expressed,
If this you know, then do it, and be blessed.
141.
Again, the use of Knowledge is not strife,
To contradict, and Critical become,
As well in books, as practice of our life;
Which yields dissoluing, not a building doom,
A cobwebs work, the thinnest fruit of wit,
Like Atomi, things real seem to it.
142.
But as to War the error, is one end,
So is her worthiest to maintain the right;
Not to make question, cavil or contend,
Dazell the earth with visions infinite;
But nurse the World with charitable food,
Which none can do that are not wise, and good.
143.
The chief Use then in man of that he knows,
Is his pains taking for the good of all,
Not fleshly weeping for our own made woes,
Not laughing from a Melancholy gall,
Not hating from a soul that ouerflowes
With bitterness, breathed out from inward thrall:
"But sweetly rather to ease, loose, or bind,
"As need requires, this frail fallen humane kind.
144.
Yet Some seek knowledge, merely to be known,
And idle Curiosity that is;
Some but to sell, not freely to bestow,
These gain and spend both time, and wealth amiss;
Embasing Arts, by basely deeming so,
Some to build others, which is Charity,
But these to build themselves, who wise men be.
144.
And to conclude, whether we would erect
Our selves, or others by this choice of Arts;
Our chief endeavor must be to effect
A sound foundation, not on sandy parts
Of light Opinion, Selfe^esse, Words of men,
But that sure rock of truth,; Gods Word, or Pen.
146.
Next that we do not ouerbuild our states,
In searching secrets of the Deity,
Obscurities of Nature, casualtie of Fates;
But measure first our own Humanity,
Then on our gifts impose an equal rate,
And so seek wisdom with sobriety:
"Not curious what our fellows ought to do,
"But what our own creation binds us to.
147.
Lastly, we must not to the world erect
Theaters, nor plant our Paradise in dust,
Nor build up Babels for the Devils elect;
Make temples of our hearts to God we must;
And then, as Godless wisdoms follies be,
So are his heights our true Philosophy.
148.
With which fair cautions, Man may well profess
To study God, whom he is borne to serve,
Nature, t'admire the greater in the less;
Time, but to learn; our selves we may observe,
To humble us: Others, to exercise
Our love and patience, wherein Duty lies.
149.
Lastly, the truth and good to love, and do them,
The error, only to destroy, and shun it,
Our hearts in general will lead us to them,
When gifts of Grace, and Faith have once begun it.
"For without these, the mind of man grows numbe,
"The body darkness, to the soul a tomb.
150.
Thus are true Learnings in the humble heart
A Spiritual work, raising Gods Image, rased
By our transgression; a well-framed art,
At which the world, and error stand amazed;
A Light divine, where man sees joy, and smart
Immortal, in this mortal body blazed;
A wisdom, which the Wisdom us assures
With hers even to the sight of God endures.
Hard Characters (I grant) to flesh and blood,
Which in the first perfection of creation
Freely resigned the state of being good,
To know the evil, where it found privation;
And lost her being, ere she understood
Depth of this fall, pain of Regeneration:
"By which she yet must raise herself again,
"Ere she can judge all other knowledge vain.
AN INQVISITION UPON FAME and HONOR.
1.
WHat are Men's lives, but labyrinths of error, Shops of deceit, and Seas of
misery?
Yet Death yields so small comfort, so much terror;
Gain, Honor, Pleasure, such illusions be;
As though against life, each man whet his wit,
Yet all Men's hearts, and sense, take part with it.
2.
Of which three baytes, yet Honor seems the chief,
"And is unto the world, like goodly weather,
"Which gives the spirits life, the thoughts relief,
"Delight, and travel, reconciles together:
So as the Learned, and Great, no more admire it,
Than even the silly Artisans aspire it.
3.
This made the four rare masters, which begun
Fair Artemysia's husbands dainty tomb,
When death took her, before their work was done,
And so bereft them of all hopes to come;
That they would yet their own work perfect make,
Even for their works, and their selfe-glories sake.
4.
Among the Worthies, Hercules is noted,
For Fame, to have neglected Gain, and Pleasure;
Cleombrotus to have been so devoted,
To pease his deeds, by her nice weights and measure,
As he that to his state, made his life thrall,
Yet to save both, would not let Honor fall.
5.
Which great desire, hatched up in these vast Spirits,
Lives as a relicke of Man's discreation;
When he affected to be Judge of merits;
Or echo, which gives all Sounds moderation:
"An image too sublime for Thrones to bear,
"Who all what they command not, ever fear.
6.
What was it then, made Aristotle raise
These imbound spirits to so high a rate?
Call them ingenious, civil, worthy praise?
The Answer's plain, that never any State
Could rise, or stand, without this thirst of Glory,
Of noble works, as well the mould as story.
7.
For else, what Governor would spend his days,
In envious travel, for the public good?
Who would in Books, search after dead men's ways?
Or in the War, what Soldier lose his blood?
"Lived not this Fame in clouds, kept as a crown;
"Both for the Sword, the Scepter, and the Gown.
8.
It therefore much concerns each public State,
To hoyse these costlesse sails up to the sky,
"For it is held a symptom of ill fate,
"When Crowns do let this thirst of Glory dye;
Which does enlarge States, by enlarging hearts,
And out of deeds teach Schools to fashion Arts.
9.
Thus see we, both the force, and use of Fame;
How States and Men have honor by her style,
As Echoes that enuiron orders frame,
Which disproportion waits to beguile.
Fame walls in Truth, and cherishes her end,
"Knows neither why, nor how, yet is her friend.
10.
For in the worlds corrupted traffic here,
Goodness puts only tincture on our gall,
The light of Truth, does but in clouds appear,
Hardly discerned, and not obeyed at all:
No man yields glory unto him that makes him,
For if he do, he sees the world forsakes him.
11.
Now in this twilight of Deliberation,
Where Man is dark, because he will not see:
Must he not trust to his selfe-constellation?
Or else grow confident, he cannot be?
Assuming this, he makes himself his end,
And what he understands, that takes to friend.
12.
In which strange odds, between the earth and sky,
Examine but the state of every heart;
Flesh feels and fears strong inequality;
"Horrors of sin, cannot be freed by art:
Humors are man's religion, Power his laws,
His Wit confusion, and his Will the cause.
13.
Nor is it thus, with Man himself alone,
His theaters and trophies, are not free,
I mean all States, all Governments, all Thrones
That have no basis, but his Policy;
"They all alike feel dissolution ready,
"Their own subsistence failing, and unsteady.
14.
Rebellion in the members to the head,
Advantage in the head, to keep them under,
The sweet consent of sympathy quite dead,
Selfenesse even apt to tear it self asunder:
"All Gouernemnts, like Man himself within,
"Being restless compositions of the sin.
15.
So as in this estate of Man's defection,
Confused amongst the good and ill, he goes;
Both gathers and distributeth infection,
Chooses and changes, builds and ouerthrows;
For Truth and Goodness, having left his heart.
He and his Idols, are but words of Art,
16.
Among which number, men must reckon Fame,
Wit, Superstition, Learning, Laws that bind,
Without our Maker, this worlds crased frame,
All which constrain, but not instruct the mind;
Govern the evils part, with her confusion,
Which have no throne or being, but delusion.
17.
Then to cast faith on Fame, or these foundations,
Or not to think, as all these nothing were,
So back to nothing, they shall have gradation,
Since Time must ruin all what she did bear,
Were not to know these drams of mortal seed,
"In curing one, still more diseases breed.
18.
And yet to part this worlds declining frame,
And let some pillars stand while others fall,
I mean make Virtues bodies unto Fame,
That be indeed hypocrisies of hell;
And smother Fame again with Virtues name,
Must needs exile all hope of doing well:
God being vnbeleeued, or unknown,
And humane Wisdom, with it self overthrown.
19.
For to be good the world finds it too hard,
And to be nothing to subsistence is
A fatal, and unnaturing award,
So as between perfection, and vnblisse,
Man, out of man, will make himself a frame,
Seeks outward help, and borrowes that of Fame.
20.
Yet does there rise from abstract contemplation,
A gilt or painted image, in the brain,
Of humane virtues, Fames disestimation,
Which, like an Art, our nature so restraines;
"As while the pride of action we suppress,
"Man grows no better, and yet States grow less.
21.
Hence they that by their words would Gods become,
With pride of thought, deprave the pride of deeds,
Upon the active cast a heavy doom,
And mar weak strengths, to multiply strong weeds:
"While they conclude Fames trumpers, voice, and pen,
"More fit for crafty States, than worthy Men.
22.
For Fame they still oppose even from those grounds,
That prove as truly all things else as vain,
They give their virtues only humane bounds,
And without God subvert to build again
Refined Ideas, more than flesh can bear,
All foul within, yet speak as God were there.
23.
Man's power to make himself good, they maintain,
Conclude that Fate is governed by the wise;
Affections they supplant, and not restrain,
Within our selves, they seat Felicities;
"With things as vain, they vanity beat down;
"And by selfe-ruine, seek a Sampsons crown:
24.
Glory's dispraise, being thus with glory tainted,
Does not as goodness, but as evils do
Shine, by informing others beauties painted,
Where bashful Truth vayles neighbors errors too;
All humane pride, is built on this foundation,
And Art on Art, by this seeks estimation.
25.
Without his God, Man thus must wander ever,
See moates in others, in himself no beams,
"Ill ruins good, and ill erecteth never,
"Like drowning torrents, not transporting streams:
The vanity from nothing has her being,
And makes that essence good, by disagreeing.
(...) 37.
Again, to take the true Anatomy
Of these, and search in life what sure foundation
For humane good, or greatnesses there be,
In all the swelling styles of Ostentation;
What hopes they promise, on what grounds they (build,
What pain they ask, and then what fruit they yield.
38.
We shall discern the root of this Ambition
To be conceit, that glory does contain
Some supernatural spark, or apparition,
More than the common humor can attain:
Since to be reuerenc'd, loved, obeyed, and known,
Man must effect, with powers above his own.
39.
Ah silly Creature, cursed Mortality!
What can thou know, that know not Man's estate
To be but Vice, gilt with hypocrisy;
"Which does the life it most resembles, hate?
And yet affects that clear vnshadow'd light,
Wherein her dark deformities show bright.
40.
So that for thee to pass the piercing eyes
Light tongues, and listening ears of curious Fame,
Were to use traffic to thy prejudice,
As with a trumpet publishing thy shame;
"Which all but fools, who know their own hearts (least,
"Rather seek to conceal, than manifest.
41.
Besides, to be well known finds out oppressors,
By which the World still honors thee the less;
For who be thoroughly known, are ever loosers,
If Fame belie not Man's unworthiness,
Where to the just, in thought, as well as deed;
What other trumpet, does the Conscience need?
42.
Yet in Man's youth, perchance, Fame multiplies
Courage, and active vnderstandingnesse,
Which cooles in Age, and in experience dies,
Like Fancies smoke Opinions wantonness:
Yet who knows, whether old age qualifies
This thirst of Fame, with vnderstandingnesse
With selfe-despaire, or disabilities?
Whether experience, which makes Fame seem less:
Be wit, or fear, from narrowness arising,
True nobleness as none of these despising?
43.
Nevertheless frail Man does still aspire
Unto this welbeleeuing reverence,
As helps, to raise his masked errors higher,
And so by great improuements in the sense,
Extend Mankind unto the bounds of praise,
Far above Order, Law, and Duties ways.
44.
Or if this reverence be not the fire,
Wherein Mankind affects to mould his state;
Then is it love, which they by Fame aspire,
An imposition of the highest rate
Set upon people, by their own desire,
Not making Powers, but Natures magistrate:
Whether in people, worth, or chance work this,
Is known to them, that know what Mankind is.
45.
"For true to whom are they, that are untrue
"To God and nothing seriously intend,
"But tumult, fury, fancy, hope of new?
"Never all pleased with Jove, if he descend;
"Unconstant, like confusion in a mind,
"Not knowing why it hates, nor why it is kind.
46.
To prove this by example, take Cmillaus
Scipio, Solon, Metellus, Aristides,
Themistocles Lycurgus, or Rutillius,
And by their change of humors toward these,
Let us conclude, All people are unjust,
And ill affections end in malice must.
47.
Besides, the essence of this glorious name,
"Is not in him that has, but him that gives it:
If people only then distribute Fame,
In them that understand it not, yet lives it:
"And what can their applause within us raise,
"Who are notconscious of that worth they praise.
48.
Nor is it by the Vulgar altogether,
That Fame thus grows a wonder of nine days;
The wise and learned, pluck away her feathers,
With envious humors, and opposing ways:
For they deprave each other, and descrie.
Those staves, and beards, these Augurs traffic by.
49.
Plato (it is true) great Homer does commend,
Yet from his Commonweal did him exile;
Nor is it words, that do with words contend,
Of deeds they vary, and demurre of style:
"How to please all, as no words yet could tell;
"So what one act did all yet censure well?
50.
For proof, what work more for the Public good,
Than that rare Library of dead men's treasure;
Collected by the Egyptian royal blood?
Which Seneca yet censures at his pleasure,
No elegance, nor princely industry,
But rather pomp, and studious luxury.
51.
Nay, his own epithete Studious, he corrected,
Inferring that for pride, not Studies use,
The luxury of Kings, had them collected:
So what in scorn of Critical abuse,
Was said of books, of Fame will prove the state,
That Readers censures are the Writers fate.
52.
Thus show our lives, what Fame and Honor be,
Considered in themselves, or them that gave them;
Now there remains a Curiosity,
To know even what they are, to those that have them:
"Namely inordinate to get or use,
"Difficult to keep, and desperate to lose.
53.
And for the first, if Fame a monster be,
As Virgil does describe her, then she must
Come from a monstrous birth and progenic:
And if she be the child of Peoples lust,
Then must she (without doubt) be basely borne,
"And, like her parents, never uniform.
54.
For what indeed more monstrous, or more base,
Than these Chimera's of distempered minds,
Borne of Opinion, not of Virtues race,
From whence it grows, that these Fame-hunting kinds,
"Prove like those Woers, which the Mistress sought,
"Yet basely fell, and with the Maids grew naught.
55.
They walk not simply good, or evil ways,
But feet of numbers.none of which return;
As Polypus with stones, so they with praise,
Change colors, and like Proteus their form,
"Following the Peoples lust, who like their cloths
"Still shift conceit of truth and goodness both.
56.
These honor none, but such as boast their pride,
And ready heads for all times humors be,
So as not eminent virtue is the tide
Which carries Fame, but swollen iniquity,
What shall we judge of Sylla and Marius then?
But Satyrs, Centaures, demi-beasts and men.
57.
Such as false glory sought by being head,
Of the Patrician, or Plebeian faction;
By which that mistress State was ruined,
Division ever bringing in contraction;
Among the learned, so Epicurus wan
His Fame, by making Pleasure God of man.
58.
Diogenes by mockes, Heraclitus by tears,
Democritus by smiles; and by such ladders climes
Each Sect and Heresy, to Honors spheres,
With new opinions, in misguided times,
Subuerting nature, grace, ciuillity,
By scandalous, satyricall scurrility.
59.
Thus Aretine of late got reputation,
By scourging Kings, as Lucian did of old,
By scorning Gods, with their due adoration;
And therefore to conclude, we may be bold,
That Peoples love, with evil acts is won,
And either lost, or kept, as it begun.
60.
What wind then blows poor Man into this sea,
But Pride of heart, and Singularity?
Which weary of true virtues humble way,
And not enduring Man's equality,
Seeks by Wit, or Sophistry to rise;
"And with good words, put off ill merchandise.
61.
Of which Ambitions, time observes three kinds:
Whereof the first, and least unnatural
Is, when frail man some good in himself finds;
But ouer-priz'd; defects, not peas'd at all:
"Like Bankrupts, who in auditing their States,
"Of debts, and of expense forget the rates.
62.
And of these Solons fools, who their own wants
Cannot discern, if there were not too many,
Our inward frailties easily would supplant
Outward ambitions, and not suffer any
To usurp these swelling styles of Domination,
Which are the Godheads true denomination.
63.
The second we may term political,
Which value men by place, and not by worth,
"Not wisely, thinking we be Counters all,
"Which but the sums of Government set forth:
"Wherein, even those that are the highest placed
"Not to their own, but others ends are graced.
64.
So that from Pharoahs Court to Iethros Cell,
If men with Moses could their hearts retire,
In Honor they should enuilesse excel,
And by an equal balance of desire,
Live free from clouds of humane hope, and fear,
"Whose troubled circles often strange Meteors bear.
65.
The last sort is, that popular vain pride;
Which neither stands upon worth nor place,
But to applause, and selfe-opinion tied,
Like Esops Iay, whom others feathers grace,
Himself as good, and glorious esteems,
As in the glass of Flattery, he seems.
66.
This makes him fond of Praise, that knows it lies;
The cruel tyrant thinks his grace renowned,
Even while the earth with guiltless blood he dies;
And his Magnificence, even then resound
When he does rauine all before his eyes:
Of which vain minds, it may be truly said,
Who love false praise, of false scorns are afraid.
67.
Besides as this Ambition has no bound;
So grow's it proud, and instantly unjust,
Enforcing short-breathed Fame aloud to sound,
By pardoning debts, and by defrauding trust;
Whence the Agrarian mandates had their grounds,
As all veiles else, that cover Sovereign lust:
For fire and People do in this agree,
They both good Servants, both ill Mastersbe.
68.
Thus we discern what courses they must hold,
That make this humor of applause their end:
They have no true, and so no constant mould;
Light Change, is both their enemy and friend,
Herostratus shall prove, Vice gouernes Fame,
Who built that Church, he burnt, has lost his name.
69.
Yet when this brittle Glory thus is gotten,
The keeping is as painful, more confuse,
Fame lives by doing, is with rest forgotten,
"She those that would enjoy her does refuse,
"Wooed (like a Lais) will be and observed;
"Ever ill kept, since never well deserved.
70.
And if true Fame with such great pain be won,
Won, and preserved, of false what can we hope?
Since Ill with greater cost than good is done:
Again, what has less Latitude or scope,
To keep, than that which every Change bereaues,
That times, Man's own heart, or the world receiu's?
71.
Lastly, this Fame hard gotten, worse to keep,
Is never lost, but with despair, and shame,
Which makes Man nature, once fallen from this steep,
Disdain their being should out-last their name:
Some in selfe-pitty, some in exile languish,
Others rebel, some kill themselves in anguish.
72.
Like Relatiues, thus stand the World and Fame,
Twins of one womb, that lose, or win together,
With Vulcan's nets, they catch each others shame,
Divide with God, and so are losers ever;
"Alone they are but Nothings, well disguised,
"And if compared, more worthily despised.
73.
But now I hear the voice of Power, and Art,
A fatal dissolution straight proclaim,
Closely to be inweau'd in every heart,
By undermining thus the World, and Fame;
"For wound Fame in the world, the world in it,
"They ask what is left to stir up humane Wit.
74.
Are God, Religion, Virtue, then but name;
Or need these heavenly beings earthly aid,
To govern under, as above this frame?
"Must good Men's deeds, with ill Men's words be paid?
"When we are dead, is merit dead with us?
"Shall breath determine God, and Virtue thus?
75.
Some Schools made Fame a Shadow, some a Debt,
To virtue some a Handmaid, none her end:
For like a God, she others strives to get,
Affects no honor, needs nor fame, nor friend:
" Moved, she moves man to adore her mouer,
"And only gives her self to those that love her.
76.
Hence did the Romans, Mountebankes of Fame,
Build Fame, and Virtue temples, so in one,
As thorough Virtue all men to it came,
Yet unto Virtue, men might pass alone;
Expressing Fame, a consequence, no cause,
A power that speaks, not knowing by what laws.
77.
But let true wisdom carry up our eyes,
To see how all true virtues figured be,
Angel-like, passing to and from the skies,
"By Isreal's ladder, whose two ends are free
"Of Heaven, and Earth; to carry up, and down,
"Those pure souls, which the Godhead means to crown.
78.
And if you ask them, whether their pure wings,
Be charrets, to bear up those fleshly prides
Of Crowne-rooft Miters, Church-unrooffing Kings,
Conquest and Fame, whose ebb, and flowing tides,
Bring froth dividing tytles, captived laws,
Of Man's distress, and ignorance the cause?
79.
These Virtues answer, they be powers divine;
Their heaven, faith; object, eternity:
Devised in earth, those ruins to refine,
Under whose weight, our Natures buried lie;
"Faith making Reason perfect, as before;
"It fell, for lack of faith, believing more.
80.
Abcees they are, which do vnteach again
That knowledge, which first taught us not to know.
The happy state, wherein we did remain,
When we for lack of evil, thought not so;
New making Paradise, where we began,
Not in a garden, but the heart of Man.
81.
And as to Serpents, which put off their skin,
Nature renewes, a natural complexion,
So when the goodness does uncase the sin,
Health so renewed, can never take infection:
The World inchants not, Hell has lost her might,
For what mist can eclipse the Infinite?
82.
Which pure reflections, what dim eye can see?
And after either World, or Fame admire?
Comparisons expels the vanity,
Immortal here, is object of desire,
"Nature abhorres this supernatural,
"And scorned of flesh, as God is, they be all.
83.
Yet has the goodness, this of Infinite,
That they who hate it, praise, who hurt it, fear,
Who strive to shadow, help to show her light,
Her roots, not Fame, but love, and wonder bear,
"God, that to pass, will have his Justice come,
"Makes sin the Thief, the Hangman, and the doom
84.
These woo not, but command the voice of Fame,
For live they, dye they, labor they, or rest,
Such glorious lights, are imag'd in their frame;
As Nature feels not, Art has not expressed:
All what the world admires comes from within;
A doom, whereby the sin, condemns the sin.
85.
Then make the sum of our Idea's this,
Who love the world, give latitude to Fame,
And this Man-pleasing, Gods displeasing is,
Who love their God, have glory by his name:
But fix on Truth, who can, that know it not?
Who fix on error, do but write to blot.
86.
"Who worship Fame, commit Idolatry,
"Make Men their God, Fortune and Time their worth,
"Form, but reform not, mere hypocrisy,
"By shadows, only shadows bringing forth, (springs,
"Which must, as blossoms, fade ere true fruit
"(Like voice, and echo) joined; yet diverse things.
A TREATY of WARS.
1.
PEace is the harvest of Man's rich creation,
Where Wit and Pain have scope to sow, and reap
The mind, by Arts, to work her elevation;
Care is sold dear, and Sloth is never cheap,
Beyond the intent of Nature it proves
The earth, and fruitful industry it loves.
2.
Under the ground concealements it discouers;
It does give form, and matter multiply;
Her acts beget on Nature like a lover,
But for increase, no seeds within her dye:
Exchange, the language is she speaks to all;
Yet least confusion feels of Babels fall.
3.
Seas yield their fish, and Wilderness their woods,
Fowls for her food, and feathers for her pleasure,
Beasts yield their labor, fleeces, flesh, and bloods,
The Elements become her servants, and her treasure;
To her alone, God made no Creature vain,
No power, but Need, is idle in her reign.
4.
When she has wrought on earth, she Man improues,
"A shop of Arts, a rich and endless mine,
Works by his labor, wit, his fear, and love,
And in refining him, all else refines;
"Nature yields but the matter, Man the form,
"Which makes the world a manifold return.
5.
His good, and ill, his need, and vanity,
Both, sets himself a-worke, and others too;
Trades, and exchangeth our humanity;
Her Marts are more than Laws, to make men do;
Nature brings nothing forth, that is not wrought,
And Art works nothing on her but is bought.
6.
If Peace be such, what must we think of War,
"But Horror from above, below Confusion,
Where the unhappy only happy are,
As making mischief ever her conclusion;
"Scourges of God, figures of hell to come,
"Of vanity, a vain, infamous tomb.
7.
Where neither Throne, nor Crown have reverence,
Sentence, nor Writ, nor Sergeant be in fashion;
All terror scorned, of guiltiness no sense;
A Discipline where of the rule is Passion:
"And as men's vices, beasts chief virtues are,
" So be the shames of Peace, the Pride of War.
8.
Here Northern bodies vanquish Southern wit,
Greek Sciences obey the Roman pride,
Order serves both to save, and kill with it,
Wisdom to rain only is applied:
Fame, Worth, Religion, all do but assure,
Vain Man, which way to give wounds, and endure.
9.
And when the reins of humane hope and fear,
Are thus laid on our necks, and order changed,
Pride will no more, the yoke of heaven bear,
Nor our desires, in any bounds be ranged;
The world must take new forms of wrong and right,
For War did never love things definite.
10.
Here Books are burnt, fair monuments of mind,
Here Ignorance does on all Arts tyrannise,
Virtue no other mould but Courage finds,
All other beings, in her being dies;
Wisdom of times grows infancy again,
Beasts rule in man, and men do beastly reign.
11.
Audit the end: how can Humanity
Preserved be in ruin of Mankind?
Both Fear, and Courage feel her cruelty,
"The good, and bad, like fatal ruin find:
"Her enemies do still provide her food,
"From those she ruins, she receives her good.
12.
Was not this Mars, then Mauors rightly named?
That in one instant, all thus overthrows?
Or can the Poets heavy doom be blamed,
Who censures, these Forge-masters of our woes,
"To have no kinsman, right, or habitation,
"But multiply themselves by desolation?
13.
Yet since the Earths first age, brought Giants forth,
Greatness for good, has so past every where,
As even this cloud, of Giant-making worth,
Proudly the style of Fame, and Honor bears;
"Kings are her creatures, so is virtue too,
"And beings take, from what the valiant do.
14.
Thus did vain Nimrod, (that Man-hunting beast)
Raise up the first God-scorning Monarchy:
And from the War, even so sprang up the rest,
That by advantage, change equality:
So as those Princes, still most famous are,
Which stain most earth, with humane blood in War.
15.
The ground which makes most States thus fond of War,
Is, that with arms all Empires do increase:
But mark what is next, with arms they ruined are:
For when Men feel the health, and bliss of peace,
They cannot rest, nor know they other Art,
But that wherein themselves, and others smart.
16.
Now when the policies of great Estates,
Do Mars profess, Religion then to war
It self must fashion, and endure such rates,
As to the ends of Conquest proper are;
"This made the Greeks, paint al their gods in arms,
"As friends, of man's selfe-hazard, to do harms.
17.
Such the Religion is of Mahomet,
His doctrine, only war, and hazard teaching,
His Discipline, not how to use, but get,
His Court, a camp, the Law of Sword his Preaching:
Virtues of peace, he holds effeminate,
And does, as vices, banish them his State:
18.
And though the Christians Gospel, with them be,
Esteemed the joyful embassy of peace,
Yet he that does pretend supremacy,
Upon their Church; lets not contention cease;
But with opinions stirs up Kings to War,
And names them Martyrs, that his furies are.
19.
And unto Arms, to multiply devotion,
Calls that Land holy, which by God is cursed;
Disturbes the Churches peace, stirs up commotion,
And as (with drinking Christian blood) a-thirst,
From desolation, strives to set that free,
Whose servitude stands fixed in Gods decree.
20.
Thus see we, how these ugly furious spirits,
Of War, are clothed, colored, and disguised,
With styles of Virtue, Honor, Zeal, and Merits,
Whose own complexion, well Anatomis'd,
A mixture is of Pride, Rage, Avarice,
Ambition, Lust, and every tragic vice.
21.
"Some love no Equals, some Superiors scorn,
One seeks more worlds, and he will Helene have,
This couets gold, with diverse faces borne,
These humors reign, and lead men to their grave:
"Whereby for bays, and little wages, we
"Ruin our selves, to raise up Tyranny.
22.
"And as when Winds among themselves do jar,
"Seas there are tossed, and wave with wave must fight:
So when powr's restless humors bring forth War,
There people bear the faults, and wounds of Might:
"The error, and diseases of the head
"Descending still, until the limbs be dead.
23.
Yet are not Peoples errors, ever free
From guilt of wounds they suffer by the War;
"Never did any Public misery
" Rise of it self; Gods plagues still grounded are
"On common stains of our Humanity:
"And to the flame, which ruineth Mankind,
"Man gives the matter, or at least gives wind.
24.
Nor are these people carried into blood
Only, and still with violent giddy passion.
But in our Nature, rightly understood,
Rebellion lives, still striving to disfashion
Order, Authority, Laws, any good,
That should restrain our liberty of pleasure,
Bound our designs, or give desire a measure.
25.
So that in Man the humor radical
Of Violence, is a swelling of desire;
To get that freedom, captived by his fall;
Which yet falls more by striving to clime higher:
"Men would be Tyrants, Tyrants would be Gods,
"Thus they become our scourges, we their rods.
26.
Now this conclusion, from these grounds we take,
That by our fall, we did Gods image leave,
Whose power and nature is to save and make,
And from the Devils image, we receive
"This spirit, which stirs Mankind with man to war
"Which Devils do not; wherein worse we are.
27.
For proof; this very spirit of the Devil,
Makes men more prompt, ingenious, earnest, free,
In all the works of ruin, with the evil;
Than they in saving with the goodness be;
"Critics upon all writers, there are many,
"Planters of truth, or knowledges not any.
28.
How much more precious is the Satyr pen,
Momus or Mimus, than the Lyricke vain,
Or Epicke image to the hearts of men?
And as in Learning, so in Life again,
"Of crafty Tyrants store, wise Kings scarce one,
"Law-breakers many, and Lawmakers none.
29.
Yea even in War, the perfect type of hell;
See we not much more politic celerity,
Diligence, courage, constancy excel,
Than in good Arts of peace or piety?
So work we with the Devil, he with us;
And makes his harvest by our ruin thus.
30.
Hence grew that Catapult in Sicil found,
This counterfeit of thunders fiery breath,
Still multiplying forces to confound;
Allaying courage, yet refining death:
Engines of ruin, found out by the Devil,
Who moves War, Fire, and Blood, all like him, evil.
31.
Yet let us not forget that Hell, and he,
Under the power of Heaven, both incline;
And if Physicians, in their art did see,
"In each disease there was some spark divine:
Much more let us the hand of God confess,
In all these sufferings of our guiltiness.
32.
Hence great diseases, in great bodies bred,
Of States, and Kingdoms, often are foretold,
By Earthquakes, Comets, Births disfigured,
By Visions, Signs, and Prophesies of old:
"Who the four Monarchs change more clearly (spoke,
"Than Daniel, long before they root did take.
33.
The Scripture then assuredly says true,
That War begins, from some offense divine:
That God makes nation nation to subdue,
Who led his flock, to that rich promised Mine;
Not for their goodness, but even for the sin,
The Canaanites and Amorites lived in.
34.
Nor by the Wars does God revenge alone,
He sometimes tries, and trauelleth the good,
Sometimes again, to have his honor known,
He makes corn grow, where Troy it self once stood:
Lets Fate pass from him, on the wheels of time,
And change to make the falling balance clime.
35.
For if one Kingdom should for ever flourish,
And there one family for ever reign;
If Peace for ever should one People nourish;
Nobility, Authority, Prosperity, and Gain,
As under Nature, keep one fixed state,
And not endure vicissitudes of Fate;
36.
God would in time seem partial unto some,
To others cruel, and to all unjust;
His power despised, and Man's own wit his doom,
Chance in his hands, change underneath his lust;
Superiors, still inferiors tyrannising;
Advantage, more advantages devising.
37.
Till at the length, enormities of vice,
Laws multiplicity, Prides luxuriousness,
Increase of people, leprous Avarice,
Arts sophistication, Traffic in excess,
Opinions freedom, full of prejudice,
Curious novelty; all fair weeds of Peace,
"Would ruin Nature, and Men monsters make,
"Weary the earth, and make her womb not take.
38.
Needful it therefore is, and clearly true,
That all great Empires, Cities, Seats of Power
Must rise and fall, wax old, and not renew,
Some by disease, that from without devour,
Others even by disorders in them bred,
Seen only, and discovered in the dead.
39.
Among which are included secret hates,
Reuolts, displeasure, discord, civil war;
All have their growing, and declining states,
Which with time, place, occasion bounded are:
"So as all Crowns now hope for that in vain,
"Which Rome (the Queen of Crowns) could not attain.
40.
This Change by War, enioyes her changing doom;
Irus grow's rich, and Craesus must wax poor,
One from a King shall Schoolmaster become,
And he made King, that wrought in Potters Oar;
They who commanded erst must now obey;
And Fame, even grow infamous in a day.
41.
That by vicissitude of these translations,
And change of place, corruption, and excess;
Craft ouerbuilding all degenerations;
Might be reduced to the first address
Of Natures Laws, and Truths simplicity;
These planting worth, and worth authority.
42.
All which best root, and spring in new foundations,
Of States, or Kingdoms; and again in age,
Or height of pride, and power feel declination,
Mortality is Changes proper stage:
States have degrees, as humane bodies have,
Springs, Summer, Autumn, Winter and the grave.
43.
God then sends War, commotion, tumult, strife,
"Like winds, and storms, to purge the air and earth;
Disperse corruption; give the World new life,
In the Vicissitude of creatures birth,
Which could not flourish, nor yield fruit again,
Without returns of heat, cold, drought and rain.
44.
But further now the eternal Wisdom shows,
That though God do preserve thus for a time,
This Equilibrium, wherein Nature goes,
By peasing humors, not to ouerclime,
Yet he both by the cure, and the disease,
Proves Dissolution; All at length must cease.
45.
For surely, if it had been Gods intent
To give Man here eternally possession,
Earth had been free from all misgouernment,
War, Malice, could then have had progression,
"Man (as at first) had bin man's nursing brother,
"And not, as since, One Wolf unto another.
46.
For only this Antipathy of mind
Has ever bin the bellows of Sedition;
Where each man kindling one, inflames Mankind,
Till on the public, they inflict perdition,
"And as Man unto Man, so State to State:
"Inspired is, with the venime of this hate.
47.
And what do all these mutinies include,
But dissolution first of Government?
Then a dispeopling of the earth by feud,
As if our Maker to destroy us meant?
For States are made of Men, and Men of dust,
The moulds are frail, disease consume them must.
48.
Now as the Wars prove man's mortality;
So do the oppositions here below,
Of Elements, the contrariety;
Of Constellations, which above do show,
Of qualities in flesh, will in the spirits;
Principles of discord, not of concord made,
All prove God meant not Man should here inherit,
A time-made World, which with time should not fade;
"But as Noes flood once drowned woods, hills, and plain,
"So should the fire of Christ waste all again.
49.
Thus see we both the causes and effects
Of War, and how these attributes to hap,
Councels of men, power, fame, which all affect,
Lie close reserved within the Almighties lap:
Where fashioned, ordered, and disposed they be,
To accomplish his infallible decree.
50.
And from these grounds concluding as we do,
Wars causes diverse; so by consequence,
Diverse we must conclude their natures too:
For War proceeding from the Omnipotence,
No doubt is holy, wise, and without error,
The sword of justice, and of sin the terror.
51.
But Wars of Men, if we examine these
By piercing rules, of that steep narrow way,
Which Christian souls must walk, that hope to raise
Their bodies from the earth another day:
"Their life is death, their war obedience,
"Of crowns, fame, wrongs, they have no other sense
52.
Then till to these God plainly has expressed,
By Prophets, Sawes, Wonder, and Angels sound,
That his Church-rebels he will have suppressed;
Or give his people other peoples ground;
"They must preserve his Temples, not shed blood,
"But where the mouer makes the motion good.
52.
Nay, even these Wars though built on Piety,
They lawless hold, unless by lawful might
They undertaken, and performed be;
"For Natures order, every creatures right,
"Has unto peace ordained, that Princes should,
"Of War the grounds, and execution mould.
53.
Besides, the manner must have charity,
First offering peace, which if disease distaste,
Yet wisdom guides the cure, not cruelty;
Art prunes the earth, confusion leaves it waste:
God would not have men spoil what they may eat
It feeds the War, and leaves a ground to treat.
54.
What warrant then for all our Wars of glory,
Where Power and Wit, do multiply their right,
By acts recorded, both in fame and story,
Are there not due prerogatives of Might?
Or shall we by their dreams examine these,
That lose the world, they know not what to please?
55.
Is not even Age due odds to every Father,
From whence, we Children owe them reverence?
If he that has, have latitude to gather,
"Must he not yield, that cannot make defense?
"Have Subjects Laws, to rectify oppression?
"And Princes wrongs no law but intercession?
56.
"Are there by Nature lords, and servants too?
"Was this world made indifferent to man?
"Do Power and Honor follow them that do?
"And yet are Kings restrained from what they can?
"Gave Nature other bounds of habitation,
"Than strength, or weakness unto every nation?
58.
Have we not both of Policy, and Might
Pregnant examples, even in Isreal's seed?
First, how the Younger got the Elders right,
At easy rates, by well-obseruing need;
Then of his heavenly blessing him bereaved,
Wherein the man, not God, that Eve deceived.
59.
Let us then thus conclude, that only they
Whose end in this World, is the World to come,
Whose hearts desire is, that their desires may
Measure themselves, by Truths eternal doom,
Can in the War find nothing that they prise,
Who in the world would not be great, or wise.
60.
With these I say, War, Conquest, Honor, Fame,
Stand (as the World) neglected, or forsaken;
"Like Errors cobwebs, in whose curious frame,
She only joys, and mournes; takes, and is taken:
"In which these dying, that to God live thus,
"Endure our conquests, would not conquer us.
61.
Where all States else that stand on Power, not Grace,
And gage desire by no such spiritual measure,
Make it their end to reign in every place;
To war for Honor, for Revenge and Pleasure;
"Thinking the strong should keep the weak in awe,
"And every Inequality give Law.
62.
These serve the World to rule her by her Arts,
Raise mortal trophies upon mortal passion;
Their wealth, strength, glory growing from those hearts,
Which to their ends, they ruin and disfashion;
"The more remote from God, the less remorse;
"Which still gives Honor power, Occasion force.
63.
These make the Sword their Judge of wrong, and right,
Their story Fame, their laws but Power and Wit;
Their endless mine, all vanities of Might,
Rewards and Pains the mystery of it,
And in this sphere, this wilderness of evils,
None prosper highly, but the perfect devils.
64.
The Turkish Empire, thus grew unto height,
Which, first in unity, past others far,
Their Church was mere collusion, and deceit,
Their Court a camp, their discipline a War;
With martial hopes, and fears, and shows divine,
To hazard only they did man refine.
65.
Upon the Christians hereby they prevailed,
For they divided stood, in Schism and Sect,
Among themselves (assailing or assailed)
Their undertakings mixed with neglect:
"Their Doctrine Peace, yet their Ambition War,
"For to their own true Church they strangers are.
66.
God and the World they worship still together,
Draw not their laws to him, but his to theirs,
Untrue to both, so prosperous in neither,
Amid their own desires still raising fears:
"Unwise, as all distracted Powers be.
"Strangers to God, fools in humanity.
67.
Too good for great things, and too great for good;
Their Princes serve their Priest, yet that Priest is
Grown King, even by the arts of flesh and blood;
Blind Superstition having built up this,
"As knowing no more than it self can do,
"Which shop (for words) sels God and Empire too
68.
Thus wave we Christians still betwixt two aires;
Nor leave the world for God, nor God for it;
While these Turks climing up united stairs,
Above the Superstitions double wit;
Leave us as to the Jewish bondage heirs,
A Saboth rest for selfe-confusion fit:
Since States will then leave war, when men begin
For Gods sake to abhor this world of sin.
FINIS.
ALAHAM
THE SPEAKERS NAMES.
The old King. Alahams second Son. Caine Bassha. Priest. Nuntius. Zophi the
eldest Son. Hala Alahams wife. Mahomet Bassha. Caelica the old Kings
daughter. Nutrix.
PROLOGVS.
The speech of a Ghost, one of the old Kings of Ormus.

HOV Monster horrible! under whose ugly doom,
Down in Eternities perpetual night,
Man's temporal sins bear torments infinite:
For change of desolation, must I come
To tempt the earth, and to profane the light;
From mournful silence, where pain dares not rore
With liberty; to multiply it more,
Nor from the loathsome puddle Acheron,
Made foul with common sins, whose filthy dampes
Feed Lethes sink, forgetting all but moan:
Nor from that foul infernal shaddowed Lamp,
Which lights Sisiphus to roll his stone:
These be but bodies plagues, the skirts of hell;
I come from whence deaths seat does death excel.
A place there is upon no center placed,
Deep under depthes, as far as is the sky
Above the earth; dark, infinitely spaced:
Pluto the King, the Kingdom, misery.
The Crystal may Gods glorious seat resemble;
Horror it self these horrors but dissemble.
Privation would reign there, by God not made;
But creature of uncreated sin,
Whose being is all beings to invade,
To have no ending though it did begin:
And so of past, things present, and to come,
To give depriving, not tormenting doom,
But horror, in the understanding mixed;
And memory, by Eternities seal wrought;
Unto the bodies of the evil fixed,
And into reason by our passion brought,
Here rackt, torn, and exiled from unity;
Though come from nothing, must for ever be.
The sins that enter here are capital:
Atheism, where creatures their Creator lose;
Unthankful Pride, nature, and graces fall;
Mate of Mankind, in Man unnatural;
Hypocrites, which bodies leave, and shadows chose.
The persons, either Kings by fortune blessed,
Or men by nature made Kings of the rest.
Here Tyrants that corrupt authority,
Counseled out of the fears of wickedness,
Cunning in mischief, proud in cruelty,
Are furies made, to plague the weaker ghosts,
Whose souls, entising pleasure only lost.
The weaker Kings, whose more unconstant vice
Their States unto their humors made a prey;
For suffering more then Kings to Tyrannise,
Are damned; though here to be, yet not to stay:
For back they go, to tempt with every sin,
As easiest it the world may enter in.
My self sometimes was such; Ormus my state.
I bare the name; yet did my Basshas reign:
Trusts to few windows are unfortunate;
For Subjects growing full is Princes wane.
Lo; all misdeeds procure their own misfate;
For by my trusted Basshas was I slain:
Now sent to tear down my posterity,
That have their sins inheritance from me.
My first charge is, the ruin of mine own,
Hell keeping knowledge still of earthlinesse,
None coming there but spirits ouergrowne,
And more embodied into wickedness:
The body by the spirit living ever;
The spirit in the body ioying never:
In heaven perchance no such affections be;
Those Angell-soules in flesh imprisoned,
Like strangers living in Mortality,
Still more, and more, themselves enspirited,
Refining Nature to Eternity;
By being maids in earths adulterous bed:
And idly forget all here below,
Where we our parents, but to plague them, know.
My next charge is, from this dark Regiment
With wiles to scourge this age effeminate;
Not open force, or humors violent:
Time fashions minds, minds manners, manners fate.
Here rage gives place, wit must rule ill intent.
Proud honor being an ill for this State
Too strong; slight, must misleade the innocent;
Craft, the corrupt. For though none dare be just,
Yet coward ill, with care, grow wicked must.
This present King, weak both in good, and ill;
Loving his trust, and trusting but his guess,
Shall perish in his own faiths wantonness;
Betrayed by Alaham, whom he know'th ill,
Yet to beware lackes active constantnesse,
A destiny of well-beleeuing wit,
That has not strength of judgment joined with it.
Alaham his son; fond of the fathers Throne,
Desire his idol; liberty his might,
As ouerborne with error infinite,
Shall find that fate all secret faults can hit:
For he, that for himself would ruin all,
Shall perish in his craft unnatural.
Hala his wife; diverse, and strong in lust,
Liberal out of self-love, of error proud;
When shameless craft, and rage have served her turn,
In prides vainglorious martyrdom shall burn.
Zophi the eldest Son; whose reason is
With frailty drowned, and silliness consus'd;
Borne but to live, and yet denied this,
(So well knows power what spirits may be abused)
Becomes the prey of factious crafty wit,
Which stirs that ruin up, which ruins it.
Caine Bassha (like the clouds, who live in air,
Th'orbe of natures constant inconstancy)
Now fame, now shame shall in his fortune bear;
His vice, and virtue still in infancy:
Change for his wisdom; and chance for his ends;
Harmed by his hopes, and ruined by his friends.
Mahomet, with honor feign would change the tide
Of times corrupt; here stopping violence,
There contermining craft, and pleading right;
But reason sworn in general to sense
Makes honor, bondage; justice, an offense:
Till liberty, that fair deceiving light,
Turns mischief to an humor popular,
Where good men caught in nets of duty are.
Caelica (because in flesh no seeds are sown
Of heavenly grace, but they must bring up weeds)
Death in her fathers murder she affects,
Seduced by glory; whose excess still feeds
It self, upon the barren steepes of moan.
For humane wit wants power to divide,
Whereby affections into error slide.
Heli the priest; who teaching from without,
Corrupted faith, bound under laws of might;
Not feeling God, yet blowing him about,
In every shape, and likeness, but the right;
Seeking the world; finds change there joined with chance,
To ruin those whom error would advance.
Now mark your charge! Each fury work his part,
In senseless webs of mischief overthwart.
You are not now to work on private thoughts,
One instant is your time to alter all;
Corruption universal must be wrought:
Impossible to you is natural.
Plots, and effects together must be brought;
Mischief, and shame, at once must spring, and fall.
Use more than power of man to bring forth that,
Which (it is meant) all men shall wonder at.
Craft! Go thou forth, work honor into lust.
Malice! Sow in self-love unworthiness.
Fear! Make it safe for no man to be just.
Wrong! Be thou clothed in powers comeliness.
Wit! Play with faith; take glory in mistrust;
Let duty, and Religion go by guess.
Furies! Stir you up war; which follow must,
When all things are corrupt with doubleness.
From vice to vice let error multiply.
With uncouth sins, murders, adulteries,
Incorporate all kinds of iniquity.
Translate the State to foreign Tyrannies.
Keep down the best, and let the worst have power,
That war, and hell may all at once devour.
Actus I. Scena I.
ALAHAM, HELI.

ALaham. Thou coward soul! Why standst thou doubting now?
Why to, and fro? The dice of chance are cast:
Counsels of law, of shame, of love, are past.
Think what the worst have done; what they enjoy,
That pluck down States to put up private laws,
Whom fame enobles while she would destroy.
Honor has many wings: Chance has no books:
Who follow, tread but where men trod before;
Who give example still are something more.
Bear witness yet ye good, and evil spirits!
Who in the air inuisibly do dwell;
That these strange paths I walk of ugliness,
Are forced by threatening gulfes of treachery,
Nourisht by States, and Times injurious.
Nor is it sin, which men for safety choose;
Nor has it shame, which men are forced to use.

Heli. What be these agonies indefinite?
These sudden changes, secret, violent,
Both argue evil luck, and ill intent.

Alah. That which I most did hate, and least did fear,
Is fallen: Nature cares not for native blood.
I wickedly must do, or mischief bear;
I must no more be, or no more be good.

Heli. How grows this change? Reveal this secret work:
Both cures, and wounds do often together lurcke.

Alah. Heli! you know the time when this frail King,
Languish'd, and wantoned in a powerful throne,
Sent to the gods to learn what should befall,
Having but peace; and wealth to doubt withal.
Their answer was: My fathers eldest son
Must be a sacrifice for this Estate,
And with his blood wash out the doom of fate.
The Basshas, swollen by use of ruling Kings,
Presume on God: and what by Gods decree
Was death; by theirs must only exile be.
And proud again with this unjust success,
A second error on the first they build;
And he that lives against the heavenly doom,
Must now not live, but reign: yet only reign,
To put down me they fear, for him they scorn.
Is innocence to no other borne?
And must my right, and Royal blood abide
Traitors, to be my Lords; the dead, my King?
Is honor to so many masters tied?
Shall I not live, except I scorned live?
Well: where the choice is left to kill, or dye;
The best Estates do but in hazard lie.

Heli. It Is rashness to commit our right to chance.

Alaham. It Is madness at the worst to fear mischance.

Heli. Unfold this factious clowdie mystery;
What cannot help, yet will experience be.

Alaham. The days be fresh, when all the world in hate
With Mahomets supreme authority,
The Basshas idly lived; no form of State
Observed; no Counsels held; no Majesty;
Weak spirits did corrupt; the strong did cast;
Worth withered up; craft only was in trust;
The Court a farm; strange, ominous, ill sign,
When public States to priuatenesse incline.
Such was my fathers frail simplicity,
As wanting judgment how to stand alone;
He (passion-ledd) could love, and trust but one.
The world saw all was naught; yet I saw fear
Would, while it murmured, mischiess counsels keep;
So blind are men, or with respects a sleep.
Envy wrought more in me, and made me know,
This passion in the King (which did advance
Mahomet above the reach of overthrow)
Had counter-passions, change, inconstancy,
For wit, and malice, possibility.
I stirred the King with enuies of his slave;
For great Estates enlarge not little hearts.
My charge suspicious, which no answer have;
Power still concluding all in evil part.
With Kings not strong in virtue, nor in vice,
I knew truth was like pillars built on ice.
Factions besides I in the Basshas moved,
And in their diverse wits my malice cast,
Conspiracy with good success I proved:
For Kings are easily ledd away with many,
That hearing all, want strength to judge of any,
Thus we exiled him with pretense of State,
Whom (it is true) I for my self did hate.
But now, when Mahomet was banished hence,
His fellow Bassha's, fond of Government,
To rule their Prince with his name they intend,
And ruin heirs, yet seem successions friends.
For while I by my brothers exile stood,
They hide their minds to undermine the more;
And much to me in pity things they leave,
That craft in good apparel might deceive.

Heli. Their craft, and power against you thus combui'd
How could you shun? or work the Basshas so,
As they might leave to seek your overthrow?

Alaham. I found their craft, and made my good of all.
Some I did win, the rest I did disgrace,
Even binding them by what they gave to me:
So great the scopes of brave ambition be.
Nor staid I here; but as a man in doubt
To trust this tickle art of men too far,
Where many wits to one kept Subject are:
I forthwith sought on fewer heads to lay
This wardshippe of the King effeminate.
A far less servile course for me, that meant
To steal in change into this Government.
This made me think of Caine, whose spirits I saw
Officious were, already entered grace,
Pleasant, and fit to multiply a place.
The scruple that divided him, and me,
Was fear he did too much possess my wife:
With private scorn I waigh'd with public ends;
And saw, who will not see, needs no amends.
For he, to hide his fault, straight puts on faith,
And care of me; a badge of servile lust,
Which ever iniure those it pleases must.
In him I did accept the sacrifice
Of ruling him, that ruled this wauing mass:
Who cannot bear, what can he bring to pass?
Now though by him the present state I gained,
Yet to my after-ends this gave no aid:
For their foundations only were, by fame,
On peoples loves, and wonders to be laid.
How little Princes favors help the same
They know, that mark what feet men go withal,
Who while they rise in grace, in credit fall.
The people then it was that I must seek,
A future, not a present use of power;
Not strength established, but a strength to change;
To all, but only those who work it, strange.
With this Caines place had no Affinity;
It presage being of a Kingdoms fall,
When Kings trust any one to govern all.
His nature less, for it Monarchall was,
Sharp, narrow-humor'd, only fit to rise
By that, which people hate, Crowne-flatteries.
Since nature therefore cannot change her face,
To think one fit, for all were foolishness,
To force an instrument experience fears,
Since wit may take of each the fruit it bears.
Of Mahomet I then bethought my self,
Whose absence pity had. And as in sects,
The present errors do prepare a place
For masked change, to show her pleasing face:
So did the hate of present Government
Forget his faults, as they forget their wounds.
I saw that he alone did fit my ends;
Occasion mother is of truest friends.
My ends were not to broyle the present State,
Norleaue obedience in my fathers days;
But after he was dead, to dispossess
My brother, whom the heavens did depresse.
Chance wrought me good: lest it should work me fear,
I meant to go beyond the ways of spite,
Both stay, and win the world with Mahomet:
For who can stir are fittest means to let.
My father I did move, removed, and sped,
Fear made him pitiful, and folly kind,
In passions Orb most patient to be led;
Each argument begat another mind;
Doubt had no memory, offense was dead,
Distress seemed safety, likelinesse did bind:
For in these captive wits, borne to be thrall,
Who sees one thought beyond them, sees all.
Mahomet returns: But whether deeply shrin'd,
Within the hollow abstracts of his heart,
His malice lay; or that ambitious kind
Be easy, for it self, from all to part;
Respect to me, and honor, laid behind;
Finding this King to be but humors art,
He takes his soul, and miracles he shows;
Restores the lost, the established overthrows.
My elder brother, whom the Gods fore-spake
Laws had deprived, exiled, and men forgot,
He straight calls home; and dares to undertake
That which audacity believes not.
Ah! Error of good meaning, apt to trust,
For want of ill enough, I perish must.
And am I borne for duties sacrifice,
To watch for change of times, or Gods revenge?
Is patience scorn, and hazard yet unwise?
No, No: Confusion reigns; despair is it,
That now makes chance a God; and danger, wit.
Inflamed, distract, confused, put out of fear
I am.
Visions I feel of better hopes arise.
Malice, and rage, whose heats had barrenness,
Are, with ambition of revenge, made wise.
Birth, chance, occasion, right, good fortunes be
To some: and wrong can all these be to me?

Heli. Alaham! I grant these trialls be severe:
But know; temptation is misfortunes spy,
To work in resolution change, or fear:
Attend your fathers death; still hold you there;
Before to undermine a Monarchy
Is hard. Besides, judge you your own intent:
For such your brother is in this to you,
As you before unto your brother were;
He has his own, and you live out of fear.

Alaham. Who measures hopes, and losses by the truth,
Goes ever naked in this world of might:
Mine be the Crown: my brothers be the right.

Heli. Will you exceed his mischief whom you blame?

Alah. When evil strives, the worst have greatest name.

Heli. Goodness is only at the greatest best.

Alaham. Those mischiefs prosper that exceed the rest.

Heli. Thou art but one: for all a sufferer be.

Alaham. That one is more than all the world to me.

Heli. Faults to the State all private faults exceed.

Alaham. My wounds then heal, when all the earth does bleed.

Heli. Let father move thee: Pity thou the State.

Alaham. Father descending kindness signifies:
Our State is there, where our well-being lies.

Heli. Fame ever lives, and ever will defame:
The ruin of thy father; and his Crown.

Alaham. They ever prosper whom the world does blame;
Shame sees not climing up, but falling down.

Heli. Yet fear thy self, if fame thou do not fear;
Revenge falls heavy, when God does forbear.

Alaham. Men only giddie be that be above,
And will look down to doubts, when they be there.
Shall name of King o'erthrow a Kings Estate?
Has public good no friend? Shall private fear
Of one weak man make all unfortunate?
No, No, dear Heli! I Gods Champion am;
And will my father for a while depose,
Lest he the Kingdom, we the Church do lose.

Heli. Alaham! If hands you on your father lay
For private ends, and make the Church your stayres,
By which you clime your own ambitious way;
Your glory will be short, and full of fears:
Since nothing for the Church is done amiss;
And nothing well done that against her is.

Alaham. So be the God eternal my belief;
As I my father from his State depose,
Only for fear the Church should honor lose.
But Heli! Judge not things with common eyes;
The Church it is one link of Government,
Of noblest Kings the noblest instrument.
For while Kings sacred keep her mysteries,
She keeps the world to Kings obedient;
Giving the body to obey the spirit,
So carrying power up to infinite.
But here with us, the discipline is stained;
Form lost; truth scandalized with novelty;
Louingnesse with craft; and faith with Atheism.
Honor, and zeal, with curiosity;
The worst best used; shame carrying honors face,
And Innovation king in every place.
Down must these ruins to be set upright;
Misfortune peec'd grows more unfortunate;
And parents Laws must yield to Laws of State.

Heli. Then see the means: For though the end were good,
Yet for a private man to change a State,
With Monarchs sleights to alter Monarchy,
Seems hard, if not impossible, to me.

Alaham. Impossible is but the faith of fear;
To make hope easy fetch belief elsewhere.
Yet lest these sparks raked up in hollow hearts,
Should spread, and burn before their fury show;
Keep on the course which you have used to go.
Preach you with fiery tongue, distinguish might,
Tyrants from Kings; duties in question bring
Twixt God, and man; where power infinite
Compared, makes finite power a scornful thing.
Safely so craft may with the truth give light,
To judge of Crowns without enammelling;
And bring contempt upon the Monarchs State;
Where straight unhallowed power has peoples hate.
Glaunce at Prerogatives indefinite,
Tax customs, wars, and Laws all gathering;
Censure Kings faults, their spies, and favorites;
Holiness has a privilege to sting.
Men be not wise; bitterness from zeal of spirit,
Is hardly judged; the envy of a King
Makes people like reproof of Majesty;
Where God seems great in Priests audacity.
Thus keep a good: For be he true, or no,
Mixed faith so works on man's idolatry,
That minds, in bonds; bodies, delight in woe.
Religion carrying men above respect:
For what thing else can stand in self neglect?
And when men's minds thus tuned, and tempted are
To change, with arguments against present times,
Then hope awakes, and man's ambition climes.

Heli. What hope can blot the fear of Princes power?

Alaham. Taxes, and scorns of Basshas government,
Which under Kings make present times still sour;
Hope leads the ill, and they the innocent.

Heli. These hopes are poor: For fear is with the^ mixed.

Alaham. All fears are weak, where any hope is fixed.

Heli. Dissolve (it is true) you may with envy, fear,
Craft, treachery, contempt, neglect;
Not build: these sands will no foundation bear:
These engines are to ruin, not erect.
Will you a father, can you a King throw down?

Alaham. Or suffer that the Christians wear his Crown

Heli. The Christians with what faith, or policy,
Can you call in? Such remedies are ill:
For what they conquer, that enjoy they will.
Besides, the force lies in Caine Basshas hands,
In Mahomet wealth, law, and government:
What way to them?

Alaham. My wife, their mutual trust.
These Basshas with themselves she shall betray;
Arts of revenge are written down in lust.
What cannot women do with wit, and play?

Heli. Who would bestow his wife in works of shame?

Alaham. They that think ought more dear than honest name.
Good fortune does in humors market sit,
And those that buy, must sell all else for it.

Heli. The shame is sure; the good in hazard lies.

Alaham. Such stairs they clime, that unto fortune rise.
Opinion reigns without, and truth within:
Who others please, against themselves must sin. Exit Heli.
You spirits then grown subtle by your age!
Not you that do inhabit Paradise,
Whose constant joys most unacquainted be
With all affections, that should make you wise!
No: I inuoke that black eternity,
As apt to put in action, as devise!
Help me, that have to do with Princes power,
To pluck down King, with Kings authority;
And make men slaves, with show of liberty.
Free hope from evil luck, revenge from fear;
Ruin, and change adorn you every where.

Actus Primus: Scena secunda.
MAHOMET: ALAHAM.

Mahomet. MY Lord! So often alone, pulls down the heart
To thoughts, and courses far unmeet for it.
Princes must show themselves in open sight;
Men joy in them that do in men delight.
Triumphs of common peace, sacrifice, thanks, praise,
Prepared are,
To solemnize this universal joy,
Wherein your self the greatest part enjoy.

Alaham. If change were current in Eternity,
As here amongst us in this mortal sphere,
Passion might hope for counterpassion there.
My brothers doom decreed was from above:
Truth varies not: Gods pleasure constant is:
Time present shows not all that is amiss.

Mahomet. Joy opens minds, and envy shuts them in:
God, by your brothers life, adiournes our sin.

Alah. When God speaks unto men, and they expound,
Truth easily scapes, all threatened woes seem light;
Misprision ever gives misfortune might:
For power is proud till it look down to fear,
Though only safe, by ever looking there.
Besides; if fates be past, what means this star,
Whose glorious tail threatens vnglorious days,
Fear unto Kings, and to the State a war?
What mean these bloody showers? These darkened rays
Of Sun, and Moon, which still eclipsed are?
Are all signs chance? For if the stars can work,
These signs that threaten prove their bodies lurk.
What added is in honor to the Crown,
Or what increase of Empire to the King;
That exiles are called home to put me down?
Strange innovation some increase should bring.
Kings fondly else tempt God, and trust to chance,
Where change, and hazard nothing do advance.

Mahomet. Your brothers fault was only Princes fear;
One ill example hurts to many were.

Alaham. Gods law it was, whereby he was deprived;
My elder brothers right, was but the law.
Change in Estates is like unto a steep,
Which, but it self, can nothing constant keep.

Mahomet. It is no chance to give the elder place.

Alah. The wounds are new that present right deface.

Mah. The second borne are not borne to the Crown.

Alah. Hope, which our God sets up, dare man pull down?

Mahomet. Alaham! Our Gods decree did not exile
Thy brother: It was heavenly mystery,
Which faction construed to impiety.
When I returned, I saw foundations laid
In Princes faults, for Basshas tyranny;
Who keeping both the Princes heirs alive,
The one exiled, the other envious,
Would make each plague to other; both, to us.
I wrought, and overcame the Princes hate,
Restored his son, and in his son the State.

Alaham. And wast thou then called into grace by me,
To be the mean that I should ruined be?
No Mahomet: That Labyrinth thy heart,
Artisan of craft, great Empire of deceit,
The plague of all inferiors, and the bait;
In Princes frailty shall not drown this State.
Sense and thy wrongs alike be general;
A Princes power cannot protect them all.
When flattery gives scope to tyrannize,
Extremes then from extremities do rise.

Mahomet. The giddy head that sees with daz'led sight,
Imagines all the world to turn about:
And rage, which to your self makes you seem great,
Is less to me, than if you did entreat.

Alaham. Who truth do only but to hate it know,
They nothing fear, but only to be good:
Unthankfulness is ever valiant so.

Mahomet. To them God thanklesse seems, not thanklesse is,
That sacrifice for leave to do amiss.
If wrongfully you had not banished me;
To whom could my return thank-worthy be?

Alaham. Our gods seemed wroth; and fame spoke strangely ill.
That sure my Wife did worse than dote of thee;
This was dishonor, wrong, and loss to me.
Yet I distract with good belief and fear,
Detest her could not; love forbade it me:
Love her I did not, for mistrust was there;
While I suspected her, I hated thee.
At length ('t is true) I got thee banished;
If not revenge, at least security:
Till humorous Time, that blots to print again,
Showed me in Hala's thoughts Caine Bassha's name.
I called thee home; and though I scorn still bear
By fame, who when she lies, recanteth not,
Yet I forgave the shame, and pardoned fear;
Brought thee good luck, where good turns are forgot.
And is it a return of that you owe,
For you to work your Patrones overthrow?

Mahomet. Alaham! Put off this fruitless peevishness
Of expectation, lost in ill desires.
For you, in witness of my thankful heart,
The Government of old Ormus I got;
And by possession man's hope loses not.
Alaham! Besides, judge both your thoughts, and State:
Kings children are no Kings; Authority
Goes not by blood; she sets another rate:
Use, is her kin; Grace, her affinity.
Then look not on desires earnestness;
Impossible is easy there, wishes effect,
The future great, the present ever less:
Comparison still carrying up the eye
To make all that we have but misery.
Care, bought with blood; and fear, with treachery;
Danger, with wrong; and shame, with venturing;
Uncertain hopes, and certain misery,
The fortunes be of haste to be a King.

Alaham. O God! what is this? Mine inward spirits shake;
Senses do leave their work; thoughts are confused;
Horror and glory now possession take;
New visions to my darkness are infused:
Like Delpho's maid, I find a mighty work;
My heart with more than it self does resolve;
What I think, speak, or do, is not mine own.
I feel what made me wish my brothers fall,
And find what mischief gets, it goes withal.
His safety now, I see, my safety is;
And honor you, that have procured this.

Mahomet. A blessed work, if it be wrought within.

Alaham. It is no work: it is a heavenly bliss,
Which perfect be, as soon as they begin.
Spite! (thou Impostume of aspiring hearts,
Whose nature is, that if the bag remain,
The wicked humors straight will fill again)
I will lay open thee, and all thy arts:
It is no shame to say we were amiss,
Since man does take his name of that he is.
Thy life is sought: Nay more, thy death is sworn.

Mahomet. By whom?

Alah. By them that hate, because they love.
And eithers kindness do in mischief prove.

Mahomet. What is my fault?

Alah. That thou of fault are free.

Mahomet. What his reward?

Alah. Their love that malice thee.

Mahomet. Where lies my hope?

Alah. To kill, or to be killed.

Mahomet. A wicked choice, where mischief is the best.
Is their delight in shedding guiltless blood?

Alaham. What moves the wicked else to hate the good?

Mahomet. Who be the men?

Alah. I to my self am free;
But faith forbids to tell what others be.

Mahomet. Disperse these clouds: Secrecy is evils friend;
Neutrality has never noble end.
Tell me their names, that I my foes may know,
And you, with honor, from ill friendship go.

Alaham. I witness take of these light-bearing stars,
Wherein the doomes are laid of man's desires;
No lack of hope, or power, to conceal;
Remorse alone does them, and me reveal.
My wife has compassed Caine so cunningly
As he has sworn you, by his hand, shall dye.

Mahomet. Incredible it is to think men never change;
To think they alter easily, is as strange.
Upon what grounds should this strange malice move?

Alaham. Upon what grounds do men begin to love?

Mahomet. What moved Caine?

Alah. That which I may not see:
For they love well that do in hate agree.

Mah. Are truth and friendship but ambitious traps,
To feed desire with all that she can get?
Are words, and good turns but hearts counterfeit?

Alaham. When enemies bid enemies take heed,
They trust not them, and yet they will beware;
For disadvantage grows of little care.
Resolve to die; or else resolve to fear.

Mahomet. Good Angels still protect the innocent:
Hell would have all, if harm were ill intent.

Alah. Mischief still hides her self from them she hits
In hopes, and fears of vnresoluing wits.

Mahomet. I well know Caine: his nature to excess
Of good, or ill, is forced by industry:
In others spite lies his impiety.
Appease your wife: for that must lie in you.

Alaham. Call up the dead; for that is less to do.
A woman's hate is ever dipped in blood,
And does exile all counsels that be good.

Mahomet. Reason and truth shall plead to her for me.

Alaham. The eyes of rage it self do only see:
And truth serves unto rage, but for a glass
To deck her self in, and bring spite to pass.
Reason to rage is like hands to a sore,
Whose often stroking makes the anguish more.

Mahomet. Impossible all counsel does refuse.

Alaham. Let Caine be killed: and then my wife accuse.

Mahomet. My heart shall first take counsel with my fate:
If it foretell the worst, it teaches feate;
If it divines no ill, how can it hate?
If what shall fall it feels not; I must bear.
The time grows on: The King (I know) makes haste
To sacrifice to God: For common joys
Are made much dearer by the sorrows past.

CHORUS PRIMVS, Of good Spirits.
WE that are made to guard good men, and bind the ill,
See both miscarried here below, against our power, and will.
As if the earth, and hers, were to the worst left free,
And we made subject, by their curse, to deaths black Colonie.
Yet is our Maker strong, and we his first Creation,
Whereas the state of that dark Quire is merely our privation.
Whence does this ods then grow, which seems to master all;
Since we are more than nature is, they much less, by their fall?
Are we not diligent, or is the good not wise?
Shows Truth less glorious in the earth, than her ill picture Lies?
Then Audit us in gross; at least we equal be:
And if in minutes men seek out true inequality,
Compare words with the life, Eternity with time,
Insulting pride with humble love, pure innocence with crime:
And if these in their natures equally be weighed,
The one lives ever building up, what others have decayed.
So that to make and mar, is our true difference;
To mar, expressing finite power; to make, omnipotence.
The object then it is, from whence this odds does grow,
By which the ill o'reweighs the good in every thing below.
And what is that but Man? A crazed soul, vnfix'd;
Made good, yet fallen, not to extremes, but to a mean betwixt:
Where (like a cloud) with winds he tossed is here, and there,
We kindling good hope in his flesh; they quenching it with fear.
We with our abstract forms, and substance bodilesse,
Image by glaunces into him our glories, their distress.
And in prospectiue Maps make ill far off appear,
Lest it should work with too great power, when it approaches near.
Beauties again of Truth (which those ill spirits conceal)
With Optike glasses we reflect on man to kindle zeal.
But whether idle man, exceeding orders frame,
(As out of heaven justly cast) must Vulcan-like go lame;
Or that those evil spirits so dazzle humane eyes,
As they think foul forbidden things more beautiful, more wise;
We see, though they want power to change our real frame,
Yet in the world they strive to gain, by changing of our name:
Calling the Goodness, weak; Patience, a lack of sense,
Or seeming not to feel, because it dares make no defense.
True Piety in Man, which upward does appeal,
They do deride, as argument of little strength, much zeal.
And as the Painters art, by deeping colors there,
Here sleighting over, and finely casting shadows every where,
Makes from a flat, a face show off, as if imboss'd;
In which the form, not matter, is the sum of all his cost:
So take these Fayries from, or add unto our mean,
With arts fine casting shadows, till they seem to change us clean;
And make a picture which they covet should excel;
And which yet, to be like, must lose the life of doing well.
This image is their wit, and so their Deity,
Which though not keeping one shape long, in all would worshipped be.
In precept, doctrine, rite, and discipline agreed,
That, but prosperity on earth, there is no living Creed:
Out of which fatal guide Alaham now undertakes
The ruin of his King, and father, for ambitions sake;
Against the laws of Nations, power, and native blood;
As if the uttermost of ill a Scepter could make good.
But mark how Vice still makes example her own fate;
For with like mischief Hala shakes both him, and his Estate.
He in his fathers bowels seeks an earthly Throne;
Whence she supplants his heirs again with bastards of her own.
He makes wrong triumph over right, and innocence;
She makes her lust religions lord, confusion her defense.
Thus, as that Tyrant who cut off the Statues head,
Which bare the name of Jupiter Olympian christened;
Even by this scornful act to what was God in name,
Taught people to encroch upon the sacred Monarch-frame:
So while the o'reswoll'n pride of this Mahumetan,
By wounding of his Princely race, plays false with God and man;
He in it does disperse those clouds of reverence,
Which between man, and Monarchs Seat keep sweet intelligence;
And while he would be lord of order, nature, right,
Brings in disorder, that devouring enemy of might,
Which with her many hands vnweaues what time had wrought,
And proves, what power obtaines by wrong, is ever dearly bought.
So that our grief and joy is in this Tragedy,
To see the ill, amongst her own, act vnprosperity;
The corn fall to the ground, the chafe in siues remain,
Which of the corn was once, and yet cannot be corn again.
But as their ancient mates the sudden-kindled Winds,
Broken out of the watery clouds, wherein they were enshrined;
Afflict the sturdy Oak, are heavy to the Reed;
And equally spend out themselves with good or evil speed:
So of these windy spirits, which wander in the air,
By their malignity to blast, both what is foul, and fair;
Whether they prosper do, or fail in their intent,
Their ugliness disclosed is, their violence is spent:
While we uphold the world, and were we all but one,
By Legions of those Angels cursed, could not be oucrthrown'd.
Yet among stories, as the Authors win no praise,
Which truly write; but they who time with flatteries do please:
So in man's muddy soul, the mean does not content,
Nor equally the two extremes; but that which fits his bent.
This makes some soar, and burn; some stoop, and wet their wings;
And some again commit excess, even in indifferent things.
For who maintains one vice to multiply another,
Incestuously begets more heirs upon his own first mother.
And in Venerian acts, as Concubine, and wife,
Only express that difference which pictures do from life;
The act being all in one, and but the same in all,
Save that the bondage of the vice delights to enthrall:
So in man's choice, suppose this ends indifferent:
The good, and ill, like equal ways; yet will the worst content.
Actus secundus: Scena prima.
HALA alone.

HALA. I will no more smother confusedly
This inward war, where modesty and shame
Would subject sense to duties Tyranny:
Wronged with doubt I live; a wife to lust,
A stranger both to honor, love, and trust.
My friends despised, my servants made my spies;
No way, but by betraying me, to rise.
Is this the only right of womanhood?
Then know base Men, in whom all love is lost,
That wit moves wit; power, fear; fear, hate;
No farther bondage has a wives estate.
While Mahomet, that faithless hypocrite,
Canker of love, All-ill in one, that man
Showed love to me;
Alaham was wroth, an husbands honor touched,
He vile, I worse: the eyes of Jealousy
Seeing her own disease in him, and me.
But since this wretch, with his aspiring craft,
To Alaham has falsely sold my shame,
My injuries and dishonours are his fame:
And shall this traffike of ambition thrive,
And bury us in modesty alive?
No Caine: For thy example I resolve
To study spite, and practice cruelty:
Scorn else will grow their sport, our falls their fame,
That glory to deceive, and joy in shame.
But what means this? Alaham hasts to the Crown;
He tries, moves, breaks all that will not be bowed;
Those only stand which help his father down.
Wife is a private name: Ambitions ways
Lie not within the bounds ofloue, but use:
When things are ripe, I must be overthrown.
And shall I lose my self in idle lust?
Each Vassal is as great as Queens in it.
Princes have strength, they err for Empire must.
What fear I then? Eame that is great, is good:
Hazard all men behold with reverent eyes;
And must we only in remorse be wise?
No, no: My heart, and State do more embrace:
Purple shall hide my lust, a Crown my shame:
Passion with passions has such unity,
As one must ever be another frame.
Beyond the truth I am in loving Caine:
The monuments of lust are secrecy,
Suspicion, shame, remorse, adversity,
If Caine be King; the ways to that are change,
Wrong, hazard, care, ruin, confusion, blood;
Poor thoughts, that fear, or rest, have never good.
My partie's strong: I build upon the vice,
Question the yoke of Princes, husband, law;
My good success breaks all the links of awe.
Then Chance! be thou my friend: Desire! my guide.
My heart extended is to great attempts,
Which, if they speed, eternize shall my fame;
If not, it is glory to excel in shame.
Lo where my Husband comes! Now reason must
Disguise these passions, lest I lose my end;
Who hides his mind is to himself a friend.

Actus secundus: Scena secunda.
Hala, Alaham.

HAla. King of my self! Redeemer of our fame!
What secret clouds do ouercast your heart?
Counsel, and time do both work one effect,
And either cure, or clear what we suspect.

Alah. My wounds can have no cure; my fears have cast
Nature, and truth into afflictions moulds;
The works of time, and counsel both are past.
When hearts once from themselves are run astray,
Chance must their guide be, violence their way.

Hala. Chance is not cast in moulds, like other Arts,
Her counsels but the hope of rashness be;
Advice did never any man betray:
If truth be luckie, counsel is the way.

Alaham. If counsel be the guide of undertaking,
Our powers best with our own wits do agree,
Where both the means, and ends together be.

Hala. Who trusts his passion multiplies his care;
All pains within, all cures without us are.

Alaham. If you captiued be I speak withal,
Then from my passion into yours I fall.

Hala. My state of mind, good will, and homage is;
My being, reverence; my end, your will;
Self-love it self pays tribute unto this.

Alah. If love have power to leave, and break her vow;
How can I trust to that you promise now?
If love change not; how can I trust, and know,
That you love Mahomet, my overthrow?

Hala. His place deferu'd respect, his virtue praise;
Our freedom, not inhibited by you,
Found many things indifferent to do.

Alaham. Forbidding is the prison of the thought,
A violence which on themselves they draw,
That inwardly of nothing stand in awe.
But mark the end: he first despises thee,
Then triumphs in thy once forsaken love;
Proclaims deceit to be thy state of mind,
Vncompetible, impossible to find.
So as if I should rule this glorious Throne,
You ruling me (as he assumes you do)
The State and I at once were overthrown.

Hala. Good nature then (I see) is not the art,
With which a woman's honor safe may go
Through hollow seas of man's dissembling heart.
His faithlesnesse yet does this good to me,
That I may freely hate all men, but thee.

Alaham. Hate is the band of fury in the heart,
Without revenge, no more but sense of smart.

Hala. Hate is the print of injury violent,
Only in ruin, and revenge content.

Alaham. Reuenges, in your sex, dishonor be;
And in your strength, impossibility.
Impatience only does with God make war.

Hala. Fury finds arms; wrong has ill destiny;
While God is, it is baseness to despair:
For right more credit has than power there.

Alaham. Yet God, and kings use wisdom in their might,
Reward, and grace do from their own hands part;
They others use for instruments of spite.

Hala. Whom can we use? Since he we hate is great,
And we disgraced: Who hazard will his State
With him, that for his own good must entreat?

Alaham. Aspirers are not void of rival hate:
If any envy him, or love our right,
Revenge lies there; their lives desire Art.

Hala. Of God I ask it; and in men will move,
As much as can be wrought with hope, or love.
But men uncertain are, blown here, and there,
With love, remorse, fears which in frayltie live;
Who need forgiveness, easily do forgive.
The heart which feels, most lively can express
Revenge, that picture of his guiltiness.

Alaham. Ruin, the power (not art) of Princes is:
Caine is engaged as deep as we in this.

Hala. The wounds are mine; to me belongs revenge;
Sense my aduiser is; you Sir, my end:
What needs a woman's passion more to friend?

Alaham. Mischief! now claim thy due. Malice! fear not,
To offer all thy sleights to wicked wits;
Ruin lights not amiss where ere it hits.
My engines work, care is already past;
My hopes arise out of these Basshas blood:
If both, my wish; if either dye, my good.
Hala! Good fortunes are together linkt;
Thy faith stirs up new light within my mind:
Behold, the Throne descends to take me up.
Antiquity, in her vnenuied womb,
Now offers us the fatal president
Of sixteen Kings, my Predecessors, all
Blinded, and then deposed by Basshas hand:
So tickely unworthiness does stand.
Does wit, and courage only rest in slaves?
Has hazard ought more horrible than scorn?
Have I occasions sure, and shall I stay
To give all, but my misery, away?
No Hala, No: Thy dowry shall be fame;
Thy style, a Crown; thy prospect, reverence:
The East shall do thee honor in my name.
Out shall my fathers, and my brothers eyes;
Authority is only for the wise.
But since these mighty works have many parts,
And I but one, which one cannot do all;
I Will send thee Caine: keep firm upon your strengths.
Beauty, and honor, natures Scepters be,
And have on men's desires authority.

Exit. Hala. Now Hala, seek thy sex; lend scorn'e thy wit,
To work new patterns of Reuenges in.
Let rage despise to feed on private blood;
Her honor lies above, where danger is,
In Thrones of Kings, in universal woe.
Work that which Alaham may envy at,
And men wish theirs, that Ill it self may tremble.
Monstrous, incredible, too great for words.
Keep close, and add to fury with restraint;
Do not break forth until thou breakest all.
Is Wrong so proud? Shall Man once dare to fashion
A Woman's ruin, in a woman's passion?
Husband! most odious name: scorn of subjection.
Is love to women but your rage of thoughts?
Are your desires let blood by your enjoying? Ah fools!
We see your lusts relent, you see not ours;
And from that change advantage has her powers.
But on: Still use thy craft: Thy strength lies there.
Ignorance, that sometimes makes the hypocrite,
Wants never mischief; though it often want fear:
For while thou think faith made to answer wit,
Observe the justice that does follow it.
Caine, Mahomet, and me thou hat'st alike,
For unlike cause, and crafty ways do take,
That each may ruined be for others sake.
Shall I, for thee, hazard Caines life I love?
And weigh down my affection with my hate?
Can highest thoughts have any thing above?
Ah! but perchance my safety in the blood
Of Mahomet does rest, the good of Caine:
Then were it loss to make occasion vain.
And shall I look but only to be safe?
Can Injury and Malice add no more?
Ah coward sex! faint, shallow Passion
Far from me be: A work that no age dares
Allow, yet none conceal, I must attempt.
Fury! then spur thy self, embedlam wit;
Poison my thoughts, to make my reason see
Pleasure in cruelty, Glory, in spite:
Rage to exceed examples does delight.
Thoughts! do you blush? To Alaham what is ill?
His death? Obarren wit, and sandy rage!
No marble pillars, no enamells rich,
Buried in silence, worn away with age,
Are furies that no greater plagues devise:
Horrors they be that have eternities.
What says my heart? Grow millions out of one?
Does passion leave her infancy by use?
And shall I, by the death of Mahomet,
More skill, at least more cruelty beget?
Then let him die. But can I venture Caine,
And leave misfortune power over love?
Triumphs to Alaham, if both be slain?
Ah sleepy Sex! how slow is their progression,
That would exactly measure infinite,
By tender fears, or minutes of delight?
Then Hala, leave this circle of self-love.
Begin; go on: hate must stride over fear. Who are secure,
And nothing venture, all things must endure.
For Alaham, that traitors overthrow,
My rage is yet too young to work upon:
What to resolve of him I dare not think,
Till this great frame, wherein our fortunes lie,
Be surer linkt unto prosperity.
Then shall occasion horrors strange devise;
Fools only lose their ends to tyrannize.

Actus secundus; Scena Tertia.
Caine Basha, Hala.

CAine. Princess of me! I find care in your face,
Woe smothered up; I came to know your will;
Nothing which you command me can be ill.

Hala. That which I least did fear is fallen on me,
Wrong and mishap; which needing others love,
Makes them unlovely that unhappy be.
From Kings themselves when fortune turns her face;
Then need they most, yet least may use their own.
So dearly Man's unthankfulness is known.

Caine. What is the cause that makes you thus accuse
The world of faults, your self of inward fear?

Hala. The little faith which all the world does use;
The injuries which strength of heart must bear:
Euui'd of all, if it be set above;
If humble, then too low for men to love.

Caine. Do not forsake your self: For they that do,
Offend, and teach the world to leave them too.
Mortal our God shall be; the truth shall lie;
Darkness shall see her self; fame lose her voice;
Er'e I will leave my love, or my love you:
Afflictions wounds affection do renew.

Hala. Perchance you love both those I hate, and me;
Affections then against affection be.
Perchance a vow, good turns, and good belief
Are mists between your love, and my relief.

Caine. You know I love: speak plain, and do not fear,
That reason other is than kindness there.

Hala. Then hear: and if my judgment you disprove,
You shall have cause to think I trust, and love.
Mahomet the faulty is, his faults be these:
Envious of thee, to my love treacherous;
The King must lose his sight, his Crown, his Son:
This wickedness has Mahomet begun.

Caine. O hell! and is thy seat in fleshly hearts?
Be man's ill thoughts his own ill spirits become?
I well can think that Mahomet aspires;
For love of greatness may with goodness go:
But cannot think that he our death conspires.
Perchance he seeks to do your brother Right,
Which makes our own desires to do us spite.

Hala. Mischief that may be helped, is hard to know;
And danger going on still multiplies.

Caine. Let care as fast then add unto her eyes.

Hala. Where harm has many wings, care arms too late:

Caine. Hasty attempts make chance precipitate.
What shall I do?

Hal. Go forward in thy fear:
Danger does give thee choice to do, or bear.

Caine. My love of him, and truth, do make me loath
To think them wronged: And shall I wrong them both?

Hala. The good belief of mankind is a sea
Where honor drownes, iniquity goes free;
Whose thoughts (like sails) for every weather be.

Caine. With shaking thoughts no hands can draw aright:
True hearts, to do vnnobly, have no sp'rit.

Hala. The fear of some, is guilt with honesty;
Others, with love; thine, with false nobleness.
Yet think not (Coward) wit can hide the shame
Of hearts, which while they dare not strike for fear,
Would make it virtue in them to forbear.
No Caine: In men we women, when we love,
Ask faith, and heart. Our selves have fear, and wit.
In love how can thy soul, and mine agree?
I seek revenge, thou preachest piety.

Caine. More easy motions gentle hearts receive:
His fault was great; yet you may have redress
In State, and honor, without such excess.

Hala. Excess the reason is, and mean of love;
And in the same excess is malice joyed:
I would be safe, and yet have him destroyed.

Caine. If leave, or left the fate of kindness be,
By his example, what becomes of me?

Hala. If blind to all, but to it self, be love;
Whence do your vows, or whence this question move?
Since the true state of true affection is
Wonder, at others worth; Faith, without hire;
Unwearied Pain; vnrecompens'd Desire.

Caine. Great hearts thus given away, in prison are;
Their strength, their bands; and good belief, their smart:
Love never seuers reason from the heart.

Nala. My shame again then unto me impart;
Restore my faith; and I do render thee
Those faithless vows, which thou have made to me.
For since, I see, the spungie hearts of men
Their hollowes gladly fill with women's love,
And nothing yield to them vncrusht again:
What nature works it is folly to complain.
Mahomet, that wretch, has done me injury;
He left my love, and he my life has sought:
Caine! Line at ease; fame is an idle breath;
My body is enough 'twixt thee, and death.

Caine. Distract I am: my reason (like a cloud,
Before a winters storm) rides here, and there:
Like reeds, my thoughts are straight and crooked too;
With diverse breaths, which diverse passions blow.
Against the stream of truth must love still go?
Resolved I am that Mahomet shall die.

Hala. Shame spoke this word: danger appears not yet;
Time, like a medicine, will assuage this pain,
And fear perchance bring back good will again.

Caine. It is not I that live in me, but you;
Whose will has fashioned all my thoughts anew.

Hala. Then on: When thoughts unite all care is ceased;
The heart, vnfetter'd and the hope increased.
Out of his death I see occasion borne,
To greater power than needs to cover scorn.
For he the Justice rules, you rule the War;
His death divided powers will unite:
And in a broken course where dangers be,
Only the Crown can put off misery.

Caine. Far be it off, our hopes should be so vain.
Our secret love already tempts God,
To war him more with infidelity,
Would hasten vengeance, and make sharp his rod.

Hala. God made strict laws for virtues exercise,
An idle word, a wish transgresses them:
Yet in a Throne remorse has glorious eyes.
Alaham does undermine the present State:
When he corrupted has the peoples faith,
Thou have the sword: authority makes way,
Her hand is next when Crowns become a prey.

Caine. We God and man will first try with the death
Of Mahomet: If that do pass for good,
Hope easily makes occasion understood.

Hala. The end agreed, the meanc is yet in doubt.

Caine. By sword.

Hala. That will be easy to descrie;
Danger to miss; and hard to do without.

Caine. By poison then; whereof though doubts may grow,
What one alone may do, is hard to know.

Hala. It often fails: For instruments are base;
Slaves have too slavish hearts; a Basshas name
Is like a superstitious hallowed place.
Men must be forced, or wise that force the same.

Caine. By these two hands, that will not fail their heart,
It shall be wrought.
If poison miss, the sword shall compass it:
When chances often escape, at last they hit.

Hala. Fortune, and Love! Both Gods of humane might,
You like adventure, see it rightly placed:
You live in kindness, see it not disgraced:

Exit. Caine. What I have vowed, both God, and Nature hate;
My heart misgiues; my soul does prophecy,
That evil thoughts procure an evil fate.
But ah! my love I gave, and it gave me.
The choice is past: Thoughts now must think to do
Not what I freely am, but forced unto.

Actus secundus: Scena quarta.
Mahomet; Caine.

MAhomet. Who ever have observed the work of spirits
May see how easily men slide down to ill.
The world has strange examples, false delights,
Which make our senses nets to catch our will.
Who then with men for every fault falls out,
Must hate himself, and all the world about.
Behold! the man I speak of does appear:
Retire aside, stand close, mark what succeeds:
His own destruction, or else mine he breeds.
Caine! what is it, that thus your mind distracts?
Counsels of honor alter not the face;
Hearts only think with pain of doubtful acts.

Caine. In care they live that must for many care;
And such the best, and greatest ever are.

Mah. They purchase care unto themselves, that know
The weight of care; and yet will it embrace.
If care be grievous, why usurp you so?

Caine. I live but to obey the Princes will.

Mahomet. That is, to cherish Prince in their ill:
For they must flatter good, and evil too,
That under Princes all alone will do.

Caine. As sweetest vapors covet to the sky:
So faith, and duty after Princes run;
Ill nature never canindure a Sun.

Mahomet. Flattery so like in all to duty shows,
But finelier dressed in diligence, and care,
As Kings best plea'sd, that most deceived, are.

Caine. Harsh spirit hates them, that do not hate with it,
Miscensures all the world to seem severe;
Binds honesty and truth to have no wit;
These ill-fac'd virtues not of nature be,
But peevishness, true honors enemy.

Mahomet. A just, severe, and universal care
Of people, shorn by Princes favorites,
To spies of Tyranny unpleasing is;
Which ever, like ambitious Adamants,
So fast from people draw to Princes States,
As in the end they must draw up their hares.
Caine! then take heed of your selfe-seeking plot,
Engrossing offices, aspiring all;
For it offends even those it touches not.
Nor is it only this that hazards you;
Ill never goes alone, if fame say true.

Caine. Is fame to censure us that live above,
And must sell justice, if we purchase love?

Mahomet. Fame is the peoples voice, to tell their grief,
Appealing from inferiors to the chief.
If falsely you, and Hala, fame abuse;
Infamy for nothing men unwisely choose:
If fame speak truth, which you would not have known,
Grieve to deserve, but not to bear your own.

Caine. What do I, that the world can well reprove?

Mahomet. Unjustly suffer, or unjustly love.

Caine. Suffer I do; for infamy is there,
Where either malice, envy is, or fear.
Love I confess I do; And what is it,
But natures tax, laid upon good intent,
For right, and honor unto excellent?

Mahomet. Reason must judge of love, not love of it;
Else shall love ground of every mischief be:
For murder, theft, adultery, and spite,
Are but love of revenge, and others right.
Ah Caine! my heart is rackt with inward grief,
Justice has party there, and so has love:
They both have wounds, and yet they both have life;
The one suppressing what the other moves.
I will speak plain: Hala, thou do abuse,
And stayn'st the Princes line with servile lust:
Wherein proud courage, matched with guiltiness,
Adds wrong to wrong; and to or'e-build complaint,
Affects that greatness which makes faults seem less.
Caine! weigh thy course: " Ambitions gilded spheres
" Are like to painted hells, which please the eyes,
" Even while they show the heart where horror lies.
Her gilded Throne built on the ruin is
Of Fame, of true Religion, and of Law:
The labor's great that all the world must draw.
The second place, which with this King you hold,
Yields fear vnfearfull, greatness well secured:
Who stand, or fall with Kings, stand well assured.
Where men that wrongfully aspire a Crown,
While they look upward ever tumble down.
Besides, thy bloody plots discovered be
To work my death; did not the Powers above
Restrain both ill men's malice, and their love.

Caine. Let this bear witness: No false prophets know,
The time, or manner of their overthrow.

Mahomet. Nay let thy life, in his power thou would kill,
Prove, God gives seldom good success to ill.
Behold! Even Natures just accusing spies
Now make thy face blush forth thy guiltiness;
Remorse begets strange contrarieties:
Confusions war of good, and ill, I see,
At once contending for the victory.
But Caine! hold fast these sparks, they be of truth.
These smokes will pass, and light appear again;
Shame past, is honor; Error is virtues book,
Where knowledge does above temptation look:

Caine. What ugly music inward discords make?
Thoughts laid asleep of long do now appear;
Even half my power coniures me for his sake.
What Is this? Me hinkes I feel my shame grow dear.
Hate of my self, and desolation breed,
Where joy, and pleasure I was wont to feed.

Mahomet. Who lose their evils, lose their own despair;
Out of which loss new hopes of honor rise,
To show the world desire with better eyes.

Caine. What can I hope? My fruit of better wit
Is but to know I sailed for lack of it.
Shame is in that I leave, and that I do:
The fault is only mine; and only I,
A sacrifice unto you all, will die.

Mahomet. Favor thy self: Passions are desperate,
And tempt with uncouth woe, as well as joy.
It evil is that glories to destroy;
Her, and her counsels kill, and I agree;
For she is foe alike to thee, and me.

Caine. That is destroy my self; and I consent:
For all any thoughts to thee were evil bent.

Mahomet. Caine! credit not those visions of the ill.
Faults are in flesh, as motes be in the Sun,
Where light does show each little thing amiss.
Presumption, and despair live opposite,
As times false glasses, wherein frailties see,
Their faults too great, or else too little be.
But judge the man from whom these motions grow.
Alaham ambitious is, light, violent;
His end but to surprise his fathers state:
Unto which end, no lets there are but we;
Who won, removed, or ruined must be.
He first tried me with rival jealousy,
Showing me hope, and honor in the start:
Besides revenge, by thy death offering me,
Of our divided powers an unity.
But I stood firm. While he no whit dismayed,
Tempts thee more strongly, whom he hates more;
Resolved who ever kills, shall killed be:
So much the faithless joy in cruelty.

Caine. " Mischief o'reflowes my thoughts; and like a sea,
" Deuoures the dewes, the rain, the snow, the springs,
" And all their sweetness to his saltness brings.
How should I ground a faith, that faithless know
My self to be? Or why should he mistrust,
On whom the worst that can befall is just?

Mahomet. Who live distrusting, yet have time to friend;
But who mistrusting die, make haste to go
To that infernal Monarchy of fear,
Where worse things come to pass, than doubted were.

Caine. Mahomet! Thou have overcome: I yield, by thee
To hold my life, as sentence of my fall;
Thy worths example, no life natural.
Yet grant me thus-much more; to keep thee close,
Till I thy death to Alaham impart;
Conceit it self does ease a broken heart.

Mahomet. Grant me again, while secretly I live,
You guard your self from Alahams treachery;
Lest you have harm; he, joy; I, infamy.

Exit. Caine. Behold my state! bound to my enemies;
Of friends in doubt. To me even good, and ill,
The one despair, the other cowardice.
Hala I love: O word beyond the right,
On which is built that false thought, Liberty,
Which makes great hearts in greatest ills delight.
I sought her love through all the arts of lust;
Where will, is faith; and honor, Tyranny;
Mischief, affections proof; and shame, her trust.
Hard, back from ill, the way to goodness is,
By scorn, remorse, patience, and broken heart,
Impossible to them that do amiss.
Then on: walk in this path of death, or shame;
Alaham is false, or Mahomet, or I;
Resolved I am, that one of us shall die.

CHORUS SECVNDVS, Of Furies:
Malice. Craft. Pride. Corrupt reason. Evil Spirit.

MAlice. Whence grows this fatal stay of our progression?
Who have no friends are deaf to intercession?
What can withstand our power? Our ends are evil;
And so need fear no let from any Devil.

Craft. We diverse are in works, though not in ends;
And thereby every Fury finds some friends.
Besides, we ouer-act, and therein foil
The ruin of Mankind, wherein we toil.

Malice. Give me one instance: wherein do we fail?

Craft. In that we mankind unto fame entayle.

Malice. That breaks Religions bounds, and makes him ours,
By forming his God out of his own powers:
For if by Conscience he did leave, or take;
On that smooth face we could no wrinckle make.

Craft. Yet fame keeps outward order, and supports:
For shame and honor are strong humane forts.
Whereas Confusion is an engine fit
For us, at once to swallow man with it.

Malice. Nay Craft! it is thy faint hypocrisy,
That mankind is so long protected by.
Thy often changes many times appease
Those Furies, which would else destroy at ease.

Craft. Fie Malice! It is you that us deceive,
Who but with violence only can bereave.
For which you find not many natures fit,
And so add little to our Throne by it.
Where I pass thorough all the orbs of vice,
And form in each mould Natures prejudice.
The Christian Church from me is not exempt;
Laws have by me both honor and contempt;
By me the War vpholds her reputation;
And lust, which leaves no certain generation;
Envy, that hates all difference of degree;
And self-love, which has no affinity;
Even you, without me, cannot prosper well:
I am the mould, and Majesty of hell.

Pride. Craft, peace! thou cuttest every thread so thin,
As it destroys thy works ere they begin.
Thy cobwebs, like the Astrologers thin line,
Fit for discourse, for use are ouer-fine.
Thy state is nothing else but change and fear,
Weeds that no fruit, but fading blossoms bear,
Clothed with pied colors of hypocrisy,
Which like to all is, yet can nothing be.
In you no soul finds stayres to rise withal,
Descent to craft, change, fear, being natural.
When I propound in gross, you minutes play,
Which is the cause our Tragic works thus stay.
My wheels go on at once, thine restless pause;
Of little works, with much ado, the cause.
You even in Hala sometimes breed remorse,
At least a doubt that evil has no force.
Thou make Caine in undertaking slow,
Who must, to serve thy turn, like goodness show:
Those Scenes still tedious are, those Acts too long,
Where thy vnresolute Images be strong.
For while you fear your true tormentor, Shame,
I swallow all at once, with honors name.
Then glory not: since where thy links excel,
There we enlarge not, but contract our hell.

Corrupt reason. Peace you base Subalterns! and strive no more,
That but the Carriers be of my rich store.
Perchance you think me the object of you all,
And so no Fury, but the Furies thrall:
Where I give form, and stuff to make you worse,
And so become your Lord, and not your Nurse.
I break the banks of duty, honor, faith;
And subject am to no power, but to death:
Charge me; I grant, Delays grow out of wit:
And are not all your false webs wrought by it?
To time I have respect, to person, place;
I cross my self to give my own acts grace.
I am Base to you all, and so the chief,
Equal with truth, where I find good belief.
I bear the weight of fear, the rage of lust,
With self-love, envy, malice, left in trust.
I calm Man's windy pride, distempered rage,
Giving to each a shape for every age.
Wrong I attire in purple robes of might,
That State may help it to be infinite.
And who is fitter here to rule you all,
Than I, that give you being, by my fall?
Know therefore all you shadow-louing Spirits!
Who have no being, but in man's demerits,
That infinite desires, and finite power,
At once, can never all mankind devour.
Though men be all ours, and all we but one;
The vice yet cannot build, or stand alone.
Be it man's weakness that does interrupt,
Or some power else that cannot be corrupt;
Or be there what there may be else above,
Which may, and will maintain her own by love:
Yet have we scope enough to mar this State;
And to the ever being, what is late?
As men in your names image ugliness,
To check beloved childrens wantonness,
When they would have them do things, or for bear;
And call you when they know you are not there:
So I enammell your deformity,
Making all your excesses like to me.
And that you may believe this to be true;
We are not like: For what am I, but you?

Evil Spirits. Reason! You mar our Mart, by coveting
Not to be equal with us, but our King.
For though you now like Roman Augurs be,
Who, but your staff, have no true mystery;
Yet do you strive to rule, add, or diminish;
And idly so protract what we could finish.
Else how could Alaham, or Hala stay
So long; from making to our ends a way?
Lusts open face this Age will easily bear,
And hope here current is to all, but fear.
Wrong needs no veil, where times do tyrannize;
And what, but lack of heart, is then unwise;
Age has descri'd those toys to be but name,
Which in the worlds youth did bear real fame;
Justice, Religion, Honor, Humbleness;
Shadows, which not well mixed, make beauty less.
They help to smother, not enlarge our fire,
By putting painted maskes on man's desire;
And give time to inactive Theorie,
Which rage it self would not do, were it free.
So that we, Circe-like, change men to beasts,
Which beasts turn men again: Too base a crest
For us, that would quite banish doing well;
And so at once change heaven and earth, to hell.
In which course, who does well observe each part,
Shall find mankind to have so strange a heart;
As being all ill, yet no one ill serves
To work him to that mischief he deserves:
Fear, hope, desire, love, courage being mixed
So nicely in him, as none can be fixed.
Which is our glory: as for every state
To have a Tempter fitted, and a fate.
A fear in Great men still, to lose their might;
And in the mean, ambition infinite;
Truth, in the witty held but as a notion;
Honor, the Old man's God; the Youths promotion.
All which opposing powers, yet do agree
To work corruption in humanity.
Then on: This time is ours: What need we haste?
Since till time ends, our reign is sure to last.

Actus tertius: Scena prima.
ALAHAM alone.

ALaham. I march above the wits, and hearts of men;
Chance at my feet, and power in my hand.
Now King indeed. Obedience does become
Men, that can strength by wisdom overcome.
It honor was, even worthy more than Crowns,
To pass the Basshas in aduenturing:
They were possessed, I dispossessed of all,
But liberty to live, or dye a thrall.
Truth was in vain; no peecing up with might
For me I saw; I had too good a cause:
Counsel is slow, each minute infinite,
When resolution to her ripeness draws.
I saw corruption was the way to rise,
And with that shot I pierced their tyrannies.
Their guard I did corrupt. Base servile spirits,
(I knew) lackt wit to see, or heart to bear
Temptation: For desire is infinite
In them, that wanting honor cannot fear.
Trial is made: The King I do possess:
My right is more; why should my hope be less?
And am I King? And do my foes still live?
Can wounded Greatness slumber in a Throne?
Or that be glory which I feel alone?
No, No: Let rigor speak, which all men hear:
Life, is the work of Nature; death, of Kings:
Ruin it is, that reputation brings.
My Guard is strong; their first employment is
The murder of those men my father trusts;
Not all; for that were cruelty, not wit:
Some simple being, some indifferent spirits:
Their ends, and honors being but delights.
Others ambitious, rash, and violent,
No inward strength of nature: or of grace;
Of present power the noblest instruments.
Transform, and use: wit virtue does exceed:
For it is all, or none, as men have need.
Only my care is how the Plot should prove,
Which for the Basshas now in ambush lies:
My wife has art and rage, which jointly move
Her headstrong spirits unto cruelties.
But if her craft serve not to pluck them down,
The sword wants not pretenses for the Crown.
My friends, and Mates! (You! upon whom I lay
My life, and honor, with this State, in trust)
Be resolute; For scruple does betray;
Since all great works have great examples must.
Take Assem, Zeraphus, and Velladoune:
Blood asks blood: with rauine they did spoil
The people first; and now betray the Crown.
Revenge your parents, Contrymen, and kin:
Blood here is just, true honor, and no sin.
The cancred Calchas, scourge of Tyrannies,
Great master of deceit, Artisan of spoil,
The spy of faults, and spring of subsidies;
Naked deliver him into the Sea,
To plague those faults it cannot wash away.
The rest to bonds, who though they want no spite,
Their frailty yet for innocence shall stand.
All else exile. Obey in every thing:
They happy are that serve a rising King.

Actus tertius: Scena secunda.
Caine, Alaham.

CAine. Placed in a Throne? Guarded? Adored? and Crowned?
What means this change? These signs of Majesty?
Goodness gets not so soon a great Estate:
Mischiefe's foul way to Soueraignity:
This secret haste is sure: all is imbound.
What shall I do? Hold on the course I meant? Why not?
The death of Mahomet will still content.
Thy will is done; and Mahomet is slain.

Alaham. My mind misgaue it self; my thoughts did fear;
Yet knew I they of nothing guilty were.
By fate, or malice is the Bassha slain?

Caine. By fate I think: for Justice fatal is,
As Gods bequest to them that do amiss.

Alaham. By sudden death, by thunder, lightning, fire,
Or by what other anger of the sky?
I pray thee show how Mahomet did die.

Caine. By these hands that owe service to the State,
And by his blood have made it fortunate.

Alaham. What execration did he dying use
Against this violence of broken faith;
Which wounds good souls more than the bodies death?

Caine. In falling down, these only words he spoke:
" Help people! help: My death your bondage brings:
" Behold! these wounds receive I for your sake;
" Reward of them that friend you under Kings.
" Vile Caine! that (like the Axe) do go about,
" To cut thy self an helue to wear thee out.

Alaham. Most wicked act! Could neither faith, nor law,
Reverence of State, remorse of doing ill,
The pains of justice, nor the hopes withdraw
Thy raging hand?
And do thou think the world can suffer this;
That thou should glory to have done amiss?

Caine. Is thy desire grown wanton in her joy?
Or do thou seem to say thy wishes nay,
More kindly in the end with them to play?

Alaham. By fires of hell, which burn, and have no light;
By those foul spirits which ill men only see;
I swear thy death shall Mahomets requite.

Caine. Unto the world although I guilty be;
I did thy will: let me be clear to thee.

Alaham. In vain I should command his death by sleights,
That placed am upon the fathers seat,
Where power can easlier do things, than entreat.

Caine. The State of Kings is large; yet lacks in this,
That easy each thing, but not lawful is.
Besides, you then a second brother were;
Nor knew I, when this plot we did devise,
You should see clearer by your fathers eyes.

Alaham. Rumor, complaints, and scornful thoughts of power,
Are ways of private hearts, that from below
Misiudge those higher powers, they do not know.
But now borne up into a Princes Throne,
Beneath I see that world of discontent,
Where error teaches use of punishment.
Away with him. Entreatie is in vain:
Thy death to him is due, whom thou have slain.

Caine. " Ah fearful friendships with superior powers!
" Whose two parts, they themselves, and their Estates,
" Divide, or join like nets; and be the snare,
" Where love, and fear to power entrapped are.
Alaham! aduow thy deed.
To constant wickedness men honor bear,
Where truth it self has injury by fear.

Alaham. I say; Let him be slain. His fault is this,
That Mahomet most traitorously he slew.

Caine. Stay Sir! I say that he still living is,
And my confession of my self untrue.

Alaham. Traitor unto thy self! and false to me!
What riddles of contempt, and wicke nesse
Are these, which of thy self confessed be?
If Mahomet be dead; then shall thou die:
For murder of thy friend deserves no less.
If Mahomet do live; yet shall thou die:
For if no murder, scorn thou do confess.
Away with him.

Actus tertius: Scena tertia.
Hala. Alaham.

HAla. What tumult's this my Lord?

Alah. The play of Chance,
Which without mischief nothing can advance.

Hala. Yet good Sir! tell me what this tumult is.

Alaham. The fall of him whose heart has done amiss.

Hala. His name, and crime (sweet Lord) I long to know.

Alaham. Report of mischief does infect the heart,
And wisdom bids they should in silence go;
For nature feels every bodies smart.

Hala. Women, belike, are still in infancy.
That must not fear, or provocation see.
The glass of horror is not fact, but fear:
Opinion is a Tyrant every where.

Alaham. If I shall tell you what you long to know,
What boots it? If you think it is not so.

Hala. What leads your reason, leads my reason too,
That all your words conceine in kindness do.

Alaham. The man that was, and is not now, is he
That never was the man he seemed to be.
Caine: What need more to show? with him are dead
His fault, and our goodwills to him mislead.

Hala. What hear I now? O false and weak estate
Of good belief! Wherein shall peace be found?
Since Gods be not, and mankind made to hate.
Caine dead? Even Caine, whom now we loved best,
In instants both grown wicked, and oppressed?
Caine slain by you! Has Caine deserved this?
O God! Like strange his crime, and killing is.
Perchance not dead my Lord! how was he slain?

Alaham. By sword.

Hala. Wounds let forth spirits, yet live again.

Alaham. Nay, dead he is. These eyes did see his breath
Bear all his spirits into the world of death.

Hala. Necessity, that from infernal night
Fatally linked art unto the skies!
Bear thee we cannot, yet we bear thee must.
Now hopes appear: even now my heart resolves
Revenge; and silence is the way to it.
Did he confess his fault? What spoke he last?

Alaham. Ah Mahomet! whose hopes were on me placed.

Hala. Hasty belief (my Lord) has hasty deeds,
And with their wounds, often truth, and wisdom bleeds.

Alaham. When wickedness is ripe, a minute shows
What chance the dice of Innocence throws.

Hala. Pardon me Lord! Good thoughts do live above;
In highest region of unfeigned love:
Doubt and revenge, Nature has placed below
Meaning the space should make the passage slow.

Alaham. God, meaning we should rule, and you obey,
Gave men clear sight, and women good affection:
In us, not in your selves, lies your election.

Hala. My Lord! It Is true: Our frail, and weak Estate
Does labor in excess: A woman's heart
Still in the fever is of love, or hate.
Hardly the love which I did be are to Caine,
Could think he erred; much less approve him slain.
But now his falls approved by heavenly doom,
Our loss in him foretells our gain to come.
Then Sir! Take care his death be not in vain.
Your silly Sire is blind; if he were dead,
This reeling State by you might stand again:
True joy is only hope put out of sear,
And honor hides error every where.
A form the world expects in worldly things:
Caine was a man, a Bassha, and our friend;
Sepulture, as a man; honor, to his estate;
Tears do become a guilty friendships end:
Excess of honor, done to them that die,
Makes living men see our humanity.
Besides, thought-feeding rumor forth will go,
And occupy unquiet peoples spirits,
While in this pile for Caine you may bestow
Their blinded weakness, which withold your right.
People do power, not persons apprehend;
Strength shows like truth; Mankind loves policy:
Defended Kings, but not revenged be.

Alaham. Envy will rise, and both ways fall on us;
Either as having slain an innocent,
Or highly erred by burying treason thus.
In penal justice silence best contents.

Hala. Rumor must needs be borne of doing minds:
Envy is but the smoke of low estate,
Ascending still against the fortunate.

Alaham. I fear the carriage: it has many parts.
And Hazards courses may find ouerthwarts.

Hala. My shame is equally engaged with yours.
Intents ill carried are that men may know;
When things are done, let rumor freely go.

Alaham. Great works do often yield grievous accidents,
Which stir up peoples rage beyond intents.

Hala. People are superstitious, caught with shows:
To power why do they else their freedom give,
But that in others pomp these shadows live?

Alaham. O blessed yoke! that under reason draws
The pleasant load of well-vnited love:
Thy counsel (as mine own) I do approve.

Hala. Then send the Priest. To me bequeath the rest.
For superstition hides ill meaning best.

Actus Tertius; Scena Quarta.
Hala: Nutrix.

HAla. And is he gone? Rage then vnprisoned be!
I like thee well! While Alaham was there,
Thou then did use thy violence on me.
Now prey abroad; swell above all respect;
Fear nothing, if notorious thou will reign:
Thy glories shine, when every one complain.
What now? A child? And do thou idly walk
The beaten paths of common cruelty?
A judge, and no revenger then am I,
If thou no more than his offenses be.
While Caine did live thou thought of more than this:
Shall death, desire, hope, fame, and fortunes lost
Such fading Trophies have?
Can thankfulness abound? And shall offense
Not feel, Revenge has her magnificence?
Rage! now thou art above the Orb of doubt,
Where danger dangerlesse appears to thee;
Divine (I pray thee) what shall fall to me?
Must I be slain?

Nutrix. Monstrous I know, this woman's nature is.
The worst she still; her self she now exceeds,
That dares scarce trust her self with that she breeds.

Hala. Well! now I feel thee rise, when I admire:
When hills have clouds, let all the valleys fear.
Scorn'st thou to make examples out of him?
Have thou found out his children? They are mine,
Proud horror! Do thou choose the innocent?
False conqueror of nature! do thou move
A woman's spite to spoil a mothers love?
Rage! shall we strive which shall give other place?

Nutrix. Hala! suppress; you need not kindle Rage.

Hala. Well! On. So that (like ruin) I may fall,
And ruin him; take children, me, and all.

Nutrix. Hala! distract? have senses lost their use?

Hala. Is there a third that traffiketh abuse?

Nutrix. I bring you piety, duty, reason, love,
Water, to quench these flames that passions move.

Hala. Throw on enough. No Sea can quench this flame;
And then, what cannot quench does but inflame.

Nutrix. For whom do you this sumptuous storm prepare?

Hala. For whom are wives estates inioyn'd to care?

Nutrix. Is malice current where respect is due?

Hala. Power does what likes in her inferiors move;
As we are sess'd, so pay we; hate, or love.

Nutrix. What fault in him moved these effects in you?

Hala. Thoughts are too strict, much less can words contain;
The venom of his malice is too deep
For any power, but Revenge to keep.

Nutrix. Then Rage is lost: For there is naught in man,
That equal pain with such offenses can.

Hala. Be that the gage. Man's senses barren were,
If they could apprehend, but what they feel.
Ills do with place (like Numbers) multiply:
The living, dead, malice, affection, fear,
My womb, and I do his affliction bear.

Nutrix. Will you destroy your own?

Hala. My own are his.

Nutrix. Infamous act!

Hala. Rage does but now begin.

Nutrix. Can thou do worse?

Hala. Else to my self I sin
Life is too short; horror exceeds not faith,
That cannot plague offenses after death.

Nutrix. Ah! Calm this storm; these ugly torrents shun.
Of Rage, which drown thy self, and all besides.

Hala. Furies! no more irregularly run,
But arted: Teach confusion to divide.

Nutrix. If kind be disinherited in thee,
Yet have compassion of this Orphane State.

Hala. That is the work, which men shall wonder at:
For while his ruined are, yet mine shall reign;
His heirs, but yet true issue unto Caine.

Nutrix. These works on Princes ruins must be built.

Hala. For my revenge no baser blood is spilt.

Nutrix. What force can Princes forces ouer-beare?

Hala. That force, which makes their pride it cannot fear.

Nutrix. How enters malice where there is mistrust?

Hala. With tribute into State: to Kings with lust.

Nutrix. What way to these?

Hala. Prosperity, success.

Nutrix. These add more power:

Hala. So much suspect the less.

Nutrix. What can you add?

Hala. Presents, obedience, praise:
They need not knock to enter in that please.

Nutrix. Flatteries are plain.

Hala. To Kings that see their ill.

Nut. Kings jealous are.

Hala. Of truth, not of their will.

Nutrix. Usurpers fear.

Hala. Worth, not humility.
Kings errors are our Agents in their hearts;
Their private passions wound their public States;
Time has her arguments, and place her Arts.
This day he does consummate all his joy:
Glory now at the Full is not suspicious;
And what adds to his pomp shall him destroy.
A Crown, and Mantle of most curious work
I have prepared, even with Egyptian skill;
And poison him in pleasing him I will.

Nutrix. My spirits fail.

Hala. Till Alahams ills do tremble,
Horror is faint; Rage does but Rage resemble.
Depart; keep secret, and be not dismayed:
Imperfect works cannot their glories show;
This goodly World did from a Chaos grow.
Exit. Nutrix. Now Caine! For whose revenge I only live,
Inspire thy ghost, to multiply in me
More sense, to make my senses more enraged;
More love, to make loves losses more in thee;
Double my wit beyond my strength engaged;
Open all lights of possibility;
Let grief, which yet keeps company with death,
Break forth, and poison all things with her breath.

Actus tertius: Scena quinta.
Priest. Hala.

PRiest. Madame! whom men obey, and God does hear:
What zeal, remorse, or charity does move
Your heart? The King leaves all things to your love.

Hala. Caine, who of late did live to both us dear,
It Is true, did fail; and for his fault is slain:
Our hearts are eased, as having lost their fear,
The rites of humane duties yet remain.
A Kings beloved he was; sometimes our friend;
Which must appear in honor of his end.
Such royal Piles, as for the Princely race
Are made a sacrifice unto the sky,
In honor of that God, which gave them place:
Such sumptuous Piles make: But more cost bestow;
Because both just Revenge, and Love they show.
Summon the Mufti, and Soothsayers all,
The Persian Magi, Christian Starre-Diuines,
The first, to sing alike his faith, and fall;
The last, to tell how higher power inclines.
In short; Revenge, and Love shine in those fires;
Power on all pomp that magnifies desires:
As if at once by cross mortality,
The Prince, and Princely line were dead in one;
Let mourning and devotion to the sky
Be offered up in pomp, and public moan.
Magnificence is Princely mystery;
All great Estates by great expense are known.
Prepare excess: Let no cost be forgot;
It makes men wonder, though they honor not.
Music to fix the wandering spirits race,
And sweeten Enuies thoughts in unity;
That sorrow and devotion may have place,
Remorse and pity flow, and multiply.
Lights of all kinds the light of day shut out;
For darkness so enammeld is devout.

Exit. Priest. Unhappy state of Priesthood here below,
Who have to do with curious Atheism,
With sin in flesh, and in the Church with schism.
Our office is an holy mystery,
To teach Kings, God; and every Subject, King;
How one obedience does another bring.
But what boots truth to flesh, or laws to might?
Belief a wonder is, Obedience woe.
And shall we Priests, that under Princes live,
Strive in our selves with vice, abroad with might?
And like the hands which winnow rich men's gain,
Grow poor in all, but only woe, and pain?
No, No: The eyes of Priests look ever low,
To find the key of power, that is above;
When that is found, all faults beneath we know;
But Majesty hides faults, as well as love.
And though these rites of Princely funeral,
By laws divine, should not profaned be,
With less, than with descents of Majesty;
Yet Caine! more Princely, by thy Princes grace,
Shall be thy tomb, than ever Princes was.

CHORUS TERTIVS;
A Dialogue; of Good, and Evil Spirits.

THe Good. What is your scope vain Ghosts? would you o'rebuild the sky?
Were not men's Many tongues, and minds their Babel-destinie?
Your beings discords are; and what can they create,
But disproportion, which is still the fairest mark of fate?

The Ill. Are you afraid poor Souls? Else why do you descend
To question, or confer with us, to whom you are no friends?
Who fear their own Estates do commonly first speak,
As they again put goodness on, who find their party weak.
We do but what we did, which is increase our might;
And as on earth, so in the air; cry down your borrowed light.

The Good. What can you win of us, that must be as we were?
Whereas you, exiles out of heaven, can hope for nothing there.

The Ill. We, that were as you are, know well what you can be;
Where you, that never were like us, what can you in us see?

The Good. That you have first destroyed your selves, and are ordained
To scourge, curse, and corrupt that earth, which you boast to have gained.

The Ill. Why did not you defend that which was once your own?
Between us two, the odds of worth, by odds of power is known.
Besides, Map clearly out your infinite extent,
Even in the infancy of time, when much was innocent;
Could this world then yield ought to envy, or desire,
Where pride of courage made men fall, and baseness raised them higher?
Where they that would be great, to be so, must be least?
And where to bear, and suffer wrong, was virtues native crest?
Man's skin, was then his silk; the worlds wild fruit, his food;
His wisdom, poor simplicity; his Trophies inward good.
No Majesty, for power; nor glories, for man's worth;
Nor any end, but (as the plants) to bring each other forth.
Temples, and vessels fit for outward sacrifice,
As they came in, so go they out, with that which you count Vice.
The Priesthood few, and poor; No Throne, but open air:
For that which you call good, allows of nothing that is fair.
No Pyramid raised up above the force of Thunder,
Nor Babel-walles by Greatness built, for Littleness a wonder.
No Conquest testifying wit, with courage mixed;
As wheels whereon the world must run, and never can be fixed.
No Arts, or Characters to read the great God in;
Nor stories of acts done; for these all entered with the sin.
A lasy calm, wherein each fool a pilot is:
The glory of the skillful shines, where men may go amiss.
Till we came in, there was no trial of your might,
And since we were; in men, your selves presume of little right.
Then cease to blast the earth with your abstracted dreams
And strive no more to carry men against affections streams.
Nay rather tempt, and prove, if long life make them wise,
That must, to have their beauties seen, put out all fleshly eyes.
Or when they be no more, Eternal then to be,
Neglect the joy, and glorious use of times felicity.
Cast out these thinne-weau'd lines, and catch some little flies;
The greater spirits, which are ours, feel not these nimble ^yes.
In Alaham for instance, plead your power, or right;
Entise him from a mortal Crown, with your Crown infinite.
Prove if he will forbear unnatural Parricide,
To see who in the sea of humors shall the Scepter guide.
Try if proud Hala will forget the death of Caine,
And reconciled, in duty, with her own Lord live, and reign.
Move Celica, that spirit reputed for your own,
To see if she, to save her life, would have her fame unknown.
Work Zophi (that poor soul) though blind, to leave his breath:
We only make things cheap, or dear, as Lords of life, and death.
Lastly, persuade the King to live, and save his Crown;
And all the world shall see we raise, and we pull Princes down.
So that your beings here are but a tincture cast
(Like crests upon the Egypt Pharos) to disguise, not last.
Besides; take from the world that which you reckon Sin;
And she must be, as at the first, for ever to begin.
A glorious, spacious womb framed to contain but one;
Since he, that in it will be yours, is sure to be alone.
Keep therefore where you are; descend not, but ascend:
For, underneath the Sun, be sure no brave State is your friend.

The Good. What have you won by this, but that cursed under Sin,
You make, and mar; throw down, and raise; as ever to begin?
Like Meteors in the air, you blaze but to burn out,
And change your shapes (like Phantom'd clouds) to leave weak eyes in doubt.
Not truth, but truth-like grounds is that you work upon,
Varying in all but this, that you can never long be one,
Then play here with your art; false miracles devise;
Deceive, and be deceived still; be foolish, and seem wise;
In peace erect your Thrones; your delicacie spread,
The flowers of time corrupt soon spring, and are as quickly dead.
Let war, which (tempest-like) all with it self o'rethrowes,
Make of this diverse world a stage for blood-enammeld shows.
Successively both these yet this fate follow will,
That all their glories be no more than change from ill, to ill.
So as with peace, or war, if you adorn one realm,
In both, through other Climes again, you run with barren stream.
Rest no where therefore, but still wander, as you do,
And restless be they, as you are, that shall receive you too.
Give Alaham more scope to multiply his error,
With parents blood adorn his Throne; more guilt still adds more terreur.
Let Hala's wicked heart (for all ill births a womb)
By violence of passion, make for many vices room.
Let ill example in to stain the Christian Nation;
The same excess destroys at last, which first gave reputation.
Conspire against the truth, you have an easy foe:
For in the world all that are hers can never current go.
Under the next good, shadow your deformed excess;
Yet shall your masked arts, and horns, your cloven feet express.
Whereby your beauties be so prized among your own;
As they will blush for yours, by name, or nature to be known.
Again, take all the world, if it one soul content;
Then freely let Mankind believe you are omnipotent.
But if your Legions here do in their glories rave,
Tormented while they live on earth, and much more in the grave;
If to be nothing be the best that could be fall;
Your subtle Orbs, to real beings, then must needs be thrall.
And so prove to the good but like those showers of rain,
Which, while they wet the husbandman, yet multiply his gain.

Actus quartus: Scena prima.
King. Celica.

KIng. Celica! thou only child, whom I repent
Not yet to have begot! thy work is vain:
Thou run'st against my Destinies intent.
Fear not my fall; the steep is fairest plain,
And error safest guide unto his end,
Who nothing but mischance can have to friend.
We parents are but Natures nursery,
When our succession springs then ripe to fall;
Privation unto age is natural.
Age there is also in a Princes State,
Which is contempt, grown of misgouernment;
Where love of change begets Princes hate:
For hopes must wither, or grow violent,
If fortune bind desires to one Estate.
Then mark: Blind, as a Man: Scorned, as a King:
A Fathers kindness loathed, and desolate:
Life without joy, or light: what can it bring,
But inward horror unto outward hate?
O safety! thou art then a hateful thing,
When childrens death assures the fathers State.
No; Safe I am not, though my son were slain,
My frailty would beget such sons again.
Besides, if fatal be the heavens will,
Repining adds more force to destiny,
Whose iron wheels stay not on fleshly wit,
But headlong run down steep Necessity.
And as in danger, we do catch at it
That comes to help; and unadvisedly
Often do our friends to our misfortune knit:
So with the harm of those who would us good,
Is Destiny impossibly withstood.
Celica then cease; importune me no more:
My son, my age, the state where things are now
Require my death. Who would consent to live,
Where love cannot revenge, nor truth forgive?

Celica. Though fear see nothing but extremity,
Yet danger is no deep sea, but a Ford,
Where they that yield can only drowned be.
In wrongs, and wounds, Sir, you are to remiss.
To Thrones a passive nature fatal is.

King. Occasion to my son has turned her face;
My inward wants all outward strengths betray;
And so make that impossible I may.

Celica. Yet live:
Live for the State.

King. Whose ruins glasses are,
Wherein see errors of my self I must,
And hold my life of danger, shame, and care.

Celica. When fear propounds, with loss men ever choose,

King. Nothing is left me, but my self, to lose.

Celica. And is it nothing then to lose the State?

King. Where chance is ripe, there counsel comes too late:
Celica! by all thou ow'st the Gods, and me,
I do conjure thee; Leave me to my chance.
What Is past was errors way; the truth it is,
Wherein I wretch can only go amiss.
" If Nature saw no cause of sudden ends,
" She; that but one way made to draw our breath,
" Would not have left so many doors to death.

Celica. Yet Sir! if weakness be not such a sand,
As neither wrong, nor counsel can manure;
Choose, and resolve what death you will endure.

King. This sword, thy hands, may offer up my breath,
And plague my life's remissness in my death.

Celica. Unto that duty if these hands be borne,
I must think God, and Truth, but names of scorn.
Again, this justice were, if life were loved;
Now merely grace; since death does, but forgive
A life to you, which is a death to live.
Pain must displease that satisfies offense.

King. Chance has left death no more to spoil, but sense.

Celica. Then sword! do Justice office thorough me;
I offer more than that he hates to thee.

King. Ah! Stay thy hand. My State no equal has,
And much more matchless my strange vices be:
One kind of death becomes not thee, and me.
Kings plagues by chance, or destiny should fall;
Headlong he perish must that ruins all.

Celica. No cliffe, or rock is so precipitate,
But down it eyes can lead the blind a way;
Without me live, or with me dye you may.

King. Celica! and will thou Alaham exceed?
His cruelty is death, you torments use;
He takes my Crown, you take my self from me;
A Prince of this fallen Empire let me be.

Celica. Then be a King, no Tyrant of thy self:
Be; and be what you will: what nature lent
Is still in hers, and not our government.

King. If disobedience, and obedience both
Still do me hurt; in what strange state am I?
But hold thy course: It well becomes my blood,
To do their parents mischief with their good.

Celica. Yet Sir! hark to the poor oppressed tears,
The just men's moan, that suffer by your fall;
A Princes charge is to protect them all.
And shall it nothing be that I am yours?
The world without, my heart within does know,
I never had unkind, vnreuerent powers.
If thus you yield to Alahams treachery;
He ruins you; it is you, Sir, ruin me.

King. Celica! Call up the dead; awake the blind;
Turn back the time; bid winds tell whence they come;
As vainly strength speaks to a broken mind.
Fly from me Celica! hate all I do:
Misfortunes have in blood successions too.

Celica. Will you do that which Alaham can not?
He has no good: you have no ill, but he:
This Marre-right yeelding's honors Tyranny.

King. Have I not done amiss? Am I not ill,
That ruined have a Kings authority?
And not one King alone; since Princes all
Feel part of those scorns, whereby one does fall.
Treason against me cannot treason be:
All laws have lost authority in me.

Celica. " The laws of power chained to men's humors be.
" The good have conscience; the ill (like instruments)
" Are, in the hands of wise authority,
" Moved, divided, used, or laid down;
" Still, with desire, kept subject to a Crown.
" Stir up all States, all spirits: hope, and fear;
Wrong, and revenge, are current every where.

King. Put down my son: For that must be the way;
A fathers shame, a Princes Tyranny:
The Scepter ever shall misiudged be.

Celica. Let them fear rumor that do work amiss;
Blood, torments, death, horrors of Cruelty,
Have time, and place. Look through these skins of fear,
Which still persuade the better side to bear.
And since thy son thus traitorously conspires,
Let him not prey on all thy race, and thee:
Keep ill example from posterity.

King. Danger is come: and must I now unarm?
And let in hope to weaken resolution?
Passion! be thou my Legacy, and Will;
To thee I give my life, Crown, reputation;
My pompes to clouds; and (as forlorn with men)
My strength to women; hoping this alone,
Though feared, sought, and a King, to live unknown.
Celica! all these to thee: do thou bestow
This living darkness, wherein I do go.

Celica. My soul now joys. Doing breathes horror out.
Absence must be our first sleppe: Let us fly:
A pawse in rage makes Alaham to doubt;
Which doubt may stir in people hope, and fear,
With love, or hate, to seek you every where.
For Princes lives are fortunes misery;
" As dainty sparks, which till men dead do know,
" To kindle for himself each man does blow.
But hark! What Is this? Malice does never sleep:
I hear the Spies of power drawing near.
Sir! follow me: Misfortunes worst is come;
Her strength is change; and change yields better doom.
Choice now is past. Hard by there is a pile
Built, under color of a sacrifice;
If God do grant, it is a place to save;
If God denies, it is a ready grave.

Actus quartus: Scena secunda.
Zophi. Celica.

Zophi. Where am I now? All things are silent here.
What shall I do? Go on from place, to place,
Not knowing what to trust, or whom to fear?
Yet what should I not fear, that live to know
Rights, Kingdoms, parents, all, my overthrow?
Are these the specious hopes of Princes heirs;
Is Right still Subject to aspiring wit?
Have they that stand by Princes, more despaires,
Than they that do supplant anointed heirs!
Is expectation nothing else in me,
But woes forerunner, to make deep impression,
By these surprises, of adversity?
Are these the glorious triumphs of this day?
Absent, in presence; banished, in recalling;
A Throne, a tomb; a Prince become a prey.
Ah cruel, false, ambitious thirst of State!
Bloody-like rage! but more reuengefull still,
Because their ends do more inflame their will.
My rights, and hopes I give, and do forgive:
Wrong! take the world, let me Enjoy my self.
Scorned, blind, I cannot harm. Ah! let me live.
Let power despise
My needless, guiltless blood. The strength of fear
The loss of all things, but of life, can bear.

Celica. What see I here! More spectacles of woe?
And are my kindred only made to be
Agents, and Patients in iniquity?
Ah forlorn wretch! ruins example right!
Lost to thy self, not to thy enemy,
Whose hand, even while thou fliest, thou fal'st into;
And with thy fall, thy father do undo.
Save one I may: Nature would save them both;
But Chance has many wheels, Rage many eyes.
What shall I then abandon innocents?
Not help a helpless brother thrown on me?
Is nature narrow to adversity?
No, No. Our God left duty for a law;
Pity, at large; Love, in authority;
Despair, in bonds; fear, of it self in awe:
That rage of time, and powers strange liberty,
Oppressing good men might resistance find:
Nor can I to a brother be less kind.
Do thou, that can not see, hope to escape?
Disgrace, can have no friend; contempt, no guide;
Right, is thy guilt; thy Judge, iniquity;
Which desolation casts on them that see.

Zophi. Make calm thy rage: pity a ghost distressed:
My right, my liberty, I freely give:
Give him, that never harmed thee, leave to live.

Celica. Nay; God, the World, thy Parents it deny;
A brothers jealous heart, usurped might
Grows friends with all the world, except thy right.

Zophi. Secure thy self. Exile me from this coast:
My fault, suspicion is; my Judge, is fear;
Occasion, with my self, away I bear.

Celica. Fly unto God: For in humanity
Hope there is none. Reach me thy fearful hand:
I am thy sister; neither fiend, nor spy
Of Tyrants rage; but one that feels despair
Of thy Estate, which thou do only fear.
Kneel down; embrace this holy mystery,
A refuge to the worst for rape, and blood;
And yet, I fear, not hallowed for the good,

Zophi. Help God! defend thine Altar! since thy might,
In earth, leaves Innocence no other right.

Celica. Eternal God! that see thy self in us!
If vows be more than sacrifice of lust,
Raised from the smokes of hope, and fear in us;
Protect this innocent; calm Alahams rage;
By miracles faith goes from age, to age.
Affection trembles; reason is oppressed;
Nature, methinkes, does her own entrayles tear:
In resolution ominous is fear.

Actus quartus: Scena tertia.
Alaham. Celica.

ALaham. Sirs! seek the City, examine, torture, rack:
Sanctuaries none let there be: make darkness known:
Pull down the roofes, dig, burn, put all to wrack:
And let the guiltless for the guilty groan.
Change, shame, misfortune in their scaping, lie;
And in their finding our prosperity.
Good fortune Welcome! we have lost our care,
And found our loss: Celica distract I see;
The King is near: She is her fathers eyes.
Behold! the forlorn wretch, half of my fear,
Takes Sanctuary at holy Altars feet:
Lead him apart, examine, force, and try;
These bind the subject, not the Monarchy.
Celica! awake: that God of whom you crave
Is deaf, and only gives men what they have.

Celica. Ah cruel wretch! guilty of parents blood!
Might I, poor innocent, my father free,
My murder yet were less impiety.
But on; devour: fear only to be good:
Let us not escape: thy glory then does rise,
When thou at once thy house do sacrifice.

Alaham. Tell me where thy Father is.

Celic. O bloody scorn?
Must he be killed again that gave thee breath?
Is duty nothing else in thee but death?

Alaham. Leave off this mask; deceit is never wise;
Though he be blind, a King has many eyes

Celica. O twofold scorn. God be revenged for me.
Yet since my Father is destroyed by thee,
Add still more scorn, it sorrow multiplies.

Alaham. Passions are learned, not borne within the heart;
That method keep: Order is quiets art.
Tell where he is: For look what love conceales,
Pain out of Natures Labyrinths reueales.

Celica. This is reward which thou do threaten me:
If terror thou will threaten, promise joys.

Alah. Smart cooles these boiling styles of vanity.

Celica. And if my Father I no more shall see,
Help me unto the place where he remains;
To hell below, or to the sky above:
The way is easy, where the guide is love.

Alah. Confess: where is he hid?

Celica. Rack not my woe.
Thy glorious pride of this vnglorious deed
Does mischief, ripe; and therefore falling, show.

Alah. Bodies have place, and blindness must be led:
Graves be the Thrones of Kings, when they be dead.

Celica. He was (Unhappy) cause that thou art now;
Thou art, ah wicked! cause that he is not;
And fear thou Parricide can be forgot?
Bear witness, Thou Almighty God on high!
And you black Powers inhabiting below!
That for his life my self would yield to die.

Alah. Well Sirs! Go seek the dark, and secret caves,
The holy Temples, sanctified Cells,
All parts wherein a living corpse may dwell.

Celica. Seek him amongst the dead, you placed him there:
Yet lose no pains, good Souls! go not to hell;
And, but to heaven, you may go every where.
Guilty, with you, of his blood let me be,
If any more I of my Father know,
Than that he is where you would have him go.

Alah. Tear up the vaults: behold her agonies!
" Sorrow substracts, and multiplies the spirits;
" Care, and desire do under anguish cease!
" Doubt curious is, affecting piety;
" Woe, loves it self; fear from it self would fly.
Do not these trembling motions witness bear,
That all these protestations be of fear?

Celica. If ought be quick in me, move it with scorn:
Nothing can come amiss to thoughts forlorn.

Alah. Confess in time. Revenge is merciless.

Celica. Reward, and pain; fear, and desire too,
Are vain, in things impossible to do.

Alah. Tell yet where thou thy Father last did see.

Celica. Even where he by his loss of eyes has won,
That he no more shall see his monstrous Son.
First, in perpetual night thou made him go;
His flesh the grave, his life the stage, where sense
Plays all the Tragedies of pain, and woe.
And would thou trayterosly thy self exceed,
By seeking thus to make his Ghost to bleed?

Alah. Bear her away: devise; add to the rack
Torments, that both call death, and turn it back.

Celica. The flattering glass of Power is others pain.
Perfect thy work; that heaven, and hell may know,
To worse I cannot, going from thee, go.
" Eternal life, that ever live above!
" If sense there be with thee of hate, or love;
" Revenge my King, and Fathers overthrow.
" O Father! if that name reach up so high,
" And be more than a proper word of Art,
" To teach respects in our humanity;
" Accept these pains, whereof you feel no smart.

Actus quartus: Scena Quarta.
King. Alaham.

KIng. What sound is this of Celica's distress?
Alaham! wrong not a silly sisters faith.
It Is plague enough that she is innocent;
My child, thy sister; borne (by thee, and me)
With shame, and sin to have affinity.
Break me; I am the prison of thy thought:
Crowns dear enough, with fathers blood, are bought.

Alah. Now feel thou shall, thou ghost unnatural!
Those wounds which thou to my heart then did give,
When, in despite of God, this State, and me,
Thou did from death mine elder brother free.
The smart of Kings oppression does not die:
Time, rusteth malice; rust, wounds cruelly.

King. Flatter thy wickedness; adorn thy rage;
To wear a Crown tear up thy Fathers age.
Kill not thy sister: It is lack of wit,
To do an ill that brings no good with it.

Alah. Go, lead them hence. Prepare the funeral;
Hasten the sacrifice, and pomp of woe.
Where she did hide him, thither let them go.

King. " O God! who made those laws which this " Wretch breaks,
" Let parents blood this curse upon him bring;
" That he, who of a child breaks all respect,
" May, in his children, find the same neglect.

CHORUS QVARTVS, of People.
LIke as strong winds do work upon the Sea,
Stirring, and tossing waves to war each other:
So Princes do with Peoples humors play,
As if Confusion were the Scepters mother.
But Crowns! take heed: when humble things mount high,
The winds often calm before those billows lie.
When we are all wronged, had we all one mind,
Whom could you punish? what could you reserve?
Again, as hope, and fear distract mankind;
Knew Kings their strength, our freedom were to serve.
But Fate does to her self reserve both these,
With each to punish other, when it please.
Grant that we be the stuff for Princes art,
By, and on it, to build their Thrones above us:
Yet if Kings be the head, we be the heart;
And know we love no soul, that does not love us.
Men's many passions judge the worst at length,
And they that do so, easily know their strength:
With bruit, and rumor, as with hope, and fear,
You lay us low, or lift us from our earth;
You try what nature, what our States can bear;
By law you bind the liberties of birth;
Making the People bellows unto Fame,
Which vshers heavy doomes with evil name.
Kings govern People, ouer-racke them not:
Fleece us; but do not clippe us to the quick.
Think not with good, and ill, to write, and blot:
The good does vanish, where the ill does stick.
Hope not with trifles to grow popular;
Wounds that are healed for ever leave a scarre.
To offer People shows makes us too great:
Princes descend not, keep your selves above.
The Sun draws not our brows up, but our swear:
Your safest rack to wind us up is Love.
To mask your vice in pompes is vainly done:
Motes lie not hidden in beams of a Sun.
The stamp of Sovereignty makes current
Home brass to buy, or sell, as well as gold:
Yet mark! the Peoples standard is the warrant
What man ought not to do, and what he should.
Of words we are the Grammar, and of deeds
The harvest both is ours, and eke the seeds.
We are the glass of Power, and do reflect
That Image back, which it to us presents:
If Princes flatter, straight we do neglect;
If they be fine, we see, yet seem content.
Nor can the Throne, which Monarchs do live in,
Shadow Kings faults, or sanctifye their sin.
Make not the Church to us an instrument
Of bondage, to your selves of liberty:
Obedience there confirms your Government;
Our Sovereigns, Gods Subalternes you be:
Else while Kings fashion God in humane light,
Men see, and skorne what is not Infinite.
Make not the end of Justice, Checquer-gaine,
It is the Liberality of Kings:
Oppression, and Extortion ever reign,
When Laws look more on Scepters, than on things.
Make crooked that line which you measure by;
And mar the fashion straight of Monarchy.
Why do you then profane your Royal line,
Which we hold sacred, and dare not approach?
Their wounds, and wrongs prove you are not divine,
And we learn, by example, to encroch.
Your Fathers loss of eyes foretells his end:
By craft, which lets down Princes, we ascend.
How shall the People hope? how stay their fear,
When old foundations daily are made new?
Uncertain is a heavy load to bear;
What is not constant sure was never true.
Excess in one makes all indefinite:
Where nothing is our own, there what delight?
Kings then take heed! Men are the books of fate,
Wherein your vices deep engraven lie,
To show our God the grief of every State.
And though great bodies do not straightwaies die;
Yet know, Your errors have this proper doom,
Even in our ruin to prepare your tomb.
Actus Quintus: Scena Prima.
Alaham alone.

ALaham. Chance now congratulates. This is indeed
A Princely work, and fashions nature new,
To sacrifice the living to the dead;
And with revenge be to a Kingdom led.
My father, brother, sister, and my King;
All slain for me? Obedience! Duty! Love!
Your followers to such height when do you bring.
Now Hala's Present, this Triumphant Robe
Shows all Estates, things real, humors, laws,
Yea Wives themselves owe homage unto might.
Justice in Kings cannot be definite.
Hala, who strove, by strength of wit, and passion,
To change, enforce, deceive, or undermine
Me, as a Man; yet to a Princes place
Humbles her pride, and strives to purchase grace.
When I ordained this mask, and first decreed
A specious death for Prince, and Parent too;
I felt once tenderness, that evil weed,
Which some call Duty; others, Natures Laws.
Should I have lost a Crown for such applause?
No, No: Each State peculiar wisdoms has,
The way of Princes is to hide their minds:
For else each slave will suddenly descrie
Our inward passions, which they traffic by.
Remissness did in me no sooner move,
And only by a pawse it felfe express;
But straightway they diuin'd remorse, or love;
And instantly drew arguments from both,
As if distraction to resolve were loath.
But, like a Sultan, mixing power with art;
When I made good my will, and only said;
Sirs, do your charge. This intermittent passion
Is but the print of natural affection;
The seat of Justice is above compassion:
Straight, as if Furies breath had filled these bladders,
With cruel hearts their charge they undertook;
And ever after made my will their book.
Who govern men, if they will stay above,
Must see, and scorn the downfalls of self-love.
Nay, mark again what glory Order yields,
Where every spirit is fitted to his room.
Did not distress these weak Ghosts well become?
At which fine plays of Chance, and intercession,
Did I relent? Or had I any sense,
But in the glories of Omnipotence?
These Scepter-mysteries Kings must observe,
Or not be Kings. Are private virtues such?
" Want great Estates no other strengths but those,
" Which make them, for good words, good fortune lose?
As Dogs their kennels, these their graves did frame:
'Twas crafty power that gave such laws to fame.
Away they went, rich in selfe-pitties smoke,
No hope of praise, but by their form of death;
Nor of revenge, but in the Peoples breath.
While I ascending roame to look about,
And in the strength of confidence, and power,
Behold the vnprosperities of doubt.
But hark! What mournful harmony is this?
In dole my Triumphs are. What sounds are these;
Change! is thy nature both to grieve, and please?
Confused Echo's! whither do you fly?
Or whence proceed? From grudge? or from applause?
Except my will, craves Mankind any laws?
Solemnity inferres the work is ended:
Yet hear I noise that shows unquiet motion;
As from their ashes some new work intended.
Now shall we know: Behold! I see one come,
Whose looks bring woe, and horror from that Tomb.

Actus quintus: Scena secunda.
Nuntius. Alaham.

NVntius. Distract, confused, are all my inward spirits:
Grief would complain, yet dares not speak for fear.
Horror the place of wonder disinherits.
Caines next of kin so willingly to die,
For pomp, and honor to his funeral;
The flesh to covet that which flesh does fly;
This wonder went I to the Pile to see:
As costly glories of the vanity.
In stead of these; I saw the veyles of Power,
Practice, and pomp, specious hypocrisy,
Rent from her face, even while she did devour.
I saw those glorious styles of Government,
God, Laws, Religion (wherein Tyrants hide
The wrongs they do, and all the woes we bide)
Wounded, profaned, destroyed. Power is unwise,
That thinks in pomp to mask her Tyrannies.
Look where he stands! a Monster grown within,
Still thirsty, and yet full with Parents blood:
Both man, and Tyrant dearly understood.

Alaham. Has meek devotion finished her work?
Tell what their manner was; and how they died;
That to the dead would thus be crucified.

Nuntius. The fire, though merciless, yet sometimes just,
Has done his part; devoured, but refined;
Performed thy will, and yet deceived thy trust.

Alaham. Speak plain: What threatening mysteries be these?

Nuntius. Echos they be of murmurs, which possess
The hearts of men against Powers wickedness.
The first which burnt, as Caine his next of kin,
In blood your Brother, and your Prince in State,
Drew wonder from men's hearts brought horror in.
This innocent, this soul too-meeke for sin,
Yet made for others to do harm withal,
With his selfe-pitty tears, drew tears from us;
His blood, compassion had; his wrong, stirred hate:
Deceit is odious in a Kings Estate.
Repiningly he goes unto his end:
Strange Visions rise; strange Furies haunt the flame;
People cry out; Echo repeats his name.
These words he spoke, even breathing out his breath:
" Unhappy weakness! never innocent!
" If in a Crown, yet but an instrument.
" People! observe; this fact may make you see:
" Excess has ruined what it self did build:
" But ah! the more oppressed, the more you yield.
The next was he, whose age had reverence;
His gesture something more than priuatenesse;
Guided by one, whose stately grace did move
Compassion, even in hearts that could not love.
As soon as these approached near the flame,
The wind, the steame, or furies, raised their vayles;
And in their looks this image did appear:
Each, unto other; life, to neither dear.
These words he spoke: " Behold one that has lost
" Himself within; and so the world without;
" A King that brings authority in doubt:
" This is the fruit of Powers misgouernment.
" People! my fall is just; yet strange your fate,
" That, under worst, will hope for better State.
Grief roares alowd. Your Sister yet remained,
Helping in death to him in whom she died,
Then going to her own, as if she gained,
These mild words spoke with looks to heaven bent:
" O God! It Is thou that suffrest here, not we:
" Wrong does but like it self in working thus:
" At thy will, Lord! Revenge thy self, not us.
The fire straight upward bears the souls in breath:
Visions of horror circle in the flame,
With shapes, and figures like to that of death;
But lighter-tongu'd, and nimbler-wing'd than fame:
Some to the Church; some to the People fly:
A voice cries out; Revenge, and Liberty.
Princes! Take heed; Your glory is your care;
And Powers foundations, Strengths, not Vices, are.

Alaham. What change is this, that now I feel within?
Is it disease that works this fall of spirits?
Or works this fall of spirits my disease?
Things seem not as they did; horror appears.
What sin imbodied, what strange sight is this?
Does sense bring back but what within me is?
Or do I see those shapes which haunt the flame?
What summons up remorse? Shall Conscience rate
Kings deeds, to make them less than their Estate?
Ah silly ghost! is it you that swarm about?
Would thou, that art not now, a father be?
These body laws do with the life go out.
What thoughts be these that do my entrails tear?
You wandering spirits frame in me your hell;
I feel my brother, and my sister there.
Where is my wife? There lacks no more but she:
Let all my own together dwell with me.

Actus quintus: Scena tertia.
Hala. Alaham.

HAla. Wife! Is that name but style of thy remorse?
Must I go where thy silly parents be?
Thou yet but feel'st thy self: thou shall feel me.
A King? And in a Throne built out of blood:
The ashes of your own must give you power.
Glutton Ambition! now thy self devour.
Look in thy Conscience, that vnflattering glass;
See there the wounds of Caine, thy wrongs to me:
Death triumphs now; And I do give it thee.
Caine here begins to live, whilst thou do feed
Upon the poison, that thy wife devised:
Thy debtor yet; but stay I will exceed.
Now war thy self: a King, with Kings must war:
We are too base for friends, or enemies:
For lusts use, not for love, we women are.
All pains of death my self in Caine did feel;
And shall my rage aspire but to be just?
What is but once; be long in doing must.

Alaham. Infernal womb! receive thy right. Of old
This body was thine own, before I was.
Obey my father, brother, sister, me:
I gave their ghosts; they must give mine to thee.
They call, I come. It was my sin alone,
That gloried many ways to tyrannize:
For all the doomes of ill let me suffice.

Hala. My Grief does yet but roame it self in sense:
Hala is more: Rage multiplies with use:
These do but mourn; I must revenge abuse.
Even through thy sense will I send in thine own:
This child, that by thee lived shall in thee die;
In this will Caine, and I possess thy Throne.

Alaham. Ah powerful God! why do thou Thunders spend
(By chance, or without vengeance) on the plants;
Since it is Man, not Trees, that does offend?
Sirs! tear the roof; perfect the work of Power:
I have no being, while she there does sit,
Subject in sex, but King, in rage of wit.

Hala. Women! Behold, our sex I now improve:
Malice were vain, if Kings could it subdue:
This rage reuiues the dead; restores my love.

Alaham. Is this Ormus? Or is Ormus my hell,
Where only Furies, and not Men, do dwell?
The poison works; I feel my spirits faint;
I must beseech; my Power is but complaint.
Yet Wit! thou know what every Power can do;
Be Strength to me. Can Mothers kill their own?
Self-love will spare them. Why should I request?
Words do inflame. But ah! it Hala is:
I must entreat. Her malice keeps no fashion:
Though she have all, that all is but one Passion.
If I entreat; does sense show where to wound?
I owe it mine; does that give malice Power?
Ah God!
What shall I do, that both within, and out,
Authority have lost? Unused to request,
Yet must, and will: Yet, even in doing, know;
Impossible, adds but more scorn to woe.
Hala! I do, with Nature, beg for thine.
Harm me alone thy Husband, and thy King.
Horror has her degrees: there is excess
In all Revenge, that may be done with less.

Hala. Beyond the rule of Law, but not of Lou^,
This child was borne; this not in Love, but Law.
Before thy wrongs I had my passions free:
And in revenge shall ought else limit me?

Alaham. Innocent, thine own, too young for hate, or fear:
His death does only execration bear.

Hala. In him thou art: in him I plague my lust,
Where Sense, and Law, were traitors to affection.
Bear children only but to Caine I must.

Alaham. Disease, or Grief (I know not which) or both:
Languish my powers: Hala! some respite give;
Spare him a while: I have not long to live.

Hala. Hala! make haste to multiply this wretch;
I must have both his sense, and judgment free:
It Is horror, not disease, that honors me.
" All you superior Powers, which from above
" Behold this earth; and earthly mischiefs rod!
" Cast hence your eyes. These works are but for two:
" For him, that suffers; and for me, that do.
Hala! then on: that Alaham may enrage,
Enrage thou first. New married now am I:
Remorse does but for men in ambush lie.

She mistaking, kills Caines child.
Alaham. Earth! Stand'st thou fast under this ugliness?
And fal'st not down to that infernal deep,
Which fears (perchance) worse than it self to keep?
Eyes! close your liddes: There is no more to do:
Yet know, you have seen that before you die,
Which no Age will believe; One worse than I.

Hala. Ah cursed Mortality! So soon put out?
And have I lost the glory of Revenge,
If Fame find greater, as she goes about?
This blood, that bloody throat should have devoured:
Rage lacked in this. Where is the place for scorn;
Since woes be dead in him, as soon as borne?
Flesh is too brittle mould for brave excess.
Yetlet these scraps give nourishment to Fame;
Since Love, and Rage this model may express.

She finds her error.
But what is this? Wake I, or do I dream?
If changed; with whom, or into whom am I?
Does Horror dazell sense, or multiply?
What world is this? Where Is Alaham? where my Son?
Caine! rise, and tell what Furies raised be.
Do Thou remain alive? And art Thou dead?
Who did this deed? None answers. It was I.
Verses here do lengthen.
And am I thus misted to lose Child, Husband, Fame,
Honor, Revenge, my Caine, my Harms, and Fury too?
And cannot harm my self, that those harms to me do.
Must I forgive thee, Hala! that none else forgive?
Scarce trembling does my heart conceive this hateful deed?
Do eyes behold this work, and neither weep, nor bleed?
Shall I complain of Heaven, where fools lay selfe-despaire?
Or Hell shall I inuoke, which ill has every where?
Shall I remain alive, and turn my rage to woe?
Shall I distinguish Guilt, where Chance does overthrow?
Is Caine no more? Is it no more to love?
Has Hala's hate made many hearts to bleed,
Upon the ruins of her love to feed?
Fury! art thou so long in getting up
Above the mists of poor selfe-pittie Tears?
Shall Rage be still a prisoner under fears?
Look! here is death: Return'st thou me remorse?
Here my beloved: Can sighs recall him back?
Here him I loath: Can scorn become his wrack?
My self yet live: Must Fury burn without?
These were in me: May Nature live in one?
What Is due to death? Even Rage that grows to doubt.
Come Infant! Here is Empire. Let us live.
This work is mine: Hell thanks, and enuies me;
And lo! her Spirits, before I come, I see.
Discord, Sedition, Rage, you Furies all!
Possess again the State, where you began:
The Woman you; It Is we deceive the Man.
Enter upon this large infernal womb;
Repay your selves; this mould did make you all.
Why do you stay? Lead me the way: I come.
Flesh is too weak, it has satietie;
Lust, intermittent here; and Fury, poor;
Rage, has respects; Desires, here weary be.
Leave Man this mean: Let us live in excess;
Where power is more, although the joys be less.
This Child is none of mine: I had no part:
Bear him I did with loathing, not desire:
My womb perchance did yield, but not my heart.
With Alaham his father he must dwell:
I will go down, and change this Ghost with hell.
This Tragedy, called Alaham, may be printed, this 23. of June, 1632.

Henry Herbert.
THE SPEAKERS NAMES.
SOLIMAN. MVSTAPHA. ROSTEN. ACHMAT. ROSSA. ZANGER. CAMENA. BEGLARBY NVNTIVS.
PRIEST.
MVSTAPHA
Actus Primus: Scena prima.
SOLIMAN. ROSSA.

SOLIMAN. Rossa! The Eternal wisdom does not covet
Of man, his strength, or reason, but his love.
And not in vain: Since love, of all the powers,
Is it which gouernes every thought of ours.
I speak by Mustapha: For as a Father,
How often deemed I those light-iudging praises
Of multitudes, whom my love taught to flatter,
Truths oracles; and Mustapha's true stories?
So dearly Nature bidds our own be loved:
So ill a Judge is love of things beloved.
But is contempt the fruit of Parents care?
Does kindness lessen Kings authority,
Teaching our Children pride, our Vassalls wit,
To subject us, that subject are to it?
This frailty in my self I conquer must,
And stay the false untimely hopes it works,
Threatening the Fathers ruin in the Son:
Many with trust, with doubt few are undone.
Sent for he is: Nor shall the painted shows
Of fame, or kindness longer seele mine eyes?
For since he strives to undermine my Crown,
I will as firmly watch to keep him down.

Rossa. Solomon my Lord! The knowledge who was Father
To Mustapha, made me (poor silly woman)
Think worth in blood had natural succession:
But now, I see, Ambitions mixtures may
The gold of Natures elements allay.
His Fame untimely borne: Strength strangely gathered,
Honor won with honoring, Greatness with humbleness,
(A Monarchs heir in courses popular,)
Make me divine some strange aspiring mind;
Yet doubtful; for it might be Art, or Kind.
But look into him by his outward ways:
Persia, our old imbrued enemy,
Treats of peace with the Son, without the Father:
A Course in all Estates to Princes nice;
But here much more; where he that Monarch is,
Must (like the Sun) have no light shine, but his.
The Offers; real Crowns, or hopes of Kingdoms.
What sudden knot has bound up our divisions?
Made them that only feared our greater growing,
Offer such proiects for our greater growing?
" It Is true, that private thoughts may easily change:
" But States, whose ways are Time; Occasion, Seat,
" Hane other ends, then Chance, in all they treat.
Yet be it, all the world would us obey;
In Monarchies: which surfeit, more than pine;
The King should judge: Strength knows what strength can weld:
The best foundation, else may ouer-build.
No, no: upon the pitch of high attemps
I see him stand, sporting with Wrong, and Fear:
For Law, and Duty, both are captives there.
His hopes, the hopes of all; for all aspire:
His means, that proud, rebellious Discontent,
Which scorns both Governors, and Government.
Solomon! Fear is broke loose within me.
What will, or may, mee-thinkes already happens;
His power thus great, will fixed, occasion ready,
Shadows of ruin to my heart deliver.
Confused noise within my ears does thunder
Of multitudes, that with obeying threaten.
Solomon! while fear, to lose thee, wishes death,
My fear again, to leave thee, wishes breath.

Solomon. Rossa! I scorn there should be cause of fears
In one man's rage; for hard then were our state,
That reins of all the world desire to bear:
Yet thy disquiet shall increase my hate.
Thy wishes vain to thee yet never were:
For love, and Empire, both alike take pleasure,
Part of themselves upon deserts to measure.
And, but that all my joys have sorrows image,
I could say; I take pride in thine affection:
For Power may be feared; Empire adored;
Rewards may make knees bow; and self-love humble:
But love is only that which Princes covet;
And for they have it least, they most do love it.
Care therefore for thy self; I hold thee dear;
And as for me!
Though Fortune be of glass, and apt to break;
Kings life kept but in flesh, and easily pierced;
Kings Crowns no higher than private arms may reach;
Yet these all-daring spirits are rarely known,
That upon Princes graves dare raise a Throne.

Rossa. Sir! few in number or Time presents children;
Where man ends, there ends discontentments empire;
Nouelty in flesh has always had a dwelling;
Then tell me Lord; what man would choose his room,
That must expect in wickedness a mean,
Or else be sure to feel a fatal doom?
Can that stay in the midst whose center's lowest?
Old age is Natures Poverty, and scorn;
Desires riches live in Princes children;
Their youths are Comets, within whose corruption
Men prophecy new hopes of better fortunes.
Ah Sir! Corrupt occasion still prefers
The wisdom, that for selfe-aduantage erreth.

Soliman. Wisdom is not unto it self in debt,
That leaves nothing, but a God, above it.
Will he return from death unto the living?

Rossa. No Sir! But much may hap before his death;
Who thinking nothing worse, and nothing after,
Knows thought of wrong is death, if Princes live;
Where dead, all heirs their own good do forgive.

Solomon. I sent, he comes; and come is in my power.

Rossa. Before he comes, who knows your fatal hour?
The wicked wrestle both with Might, and Slight:
" While Princes live, each man's life guardeth theirs;
" When they are dead, men's loves go with their fear.
Slain by the way less grudge, more safety were.

Solomon. Wrong is not Princely; and much less is fear.

Rossa. These glorious hazards tempt, and hasten fate;
They well become a Man, but not a State.

Solomon. This fear in women shows a kindness too;
And is for men to thank, but not to do.

Rossa. Is Providence of no more use to Power?

Solomon. Than to preserve the Fame of Power entire,
Which often undermined is by fear.
I do suspect, yet is there nothing done;
I lose my Fame, if I so kill my Son.
Though I yet know not he has done amiss,
I doubt; and heavy Princes doubting is.
Though I resolve I will not kill him there;
It mortal is if Kings see cause to fear.
When Mustapha returns my jealous care
Will very hardly danger ouersee:
Order alone holds States in Unity.

Actus Primus: Scena Secunda.
Beglerbie Nuntius, Solomon. Rossa.

BEeglerbie. Fond Man! distract with diverse thoughts on foot,
That rack'st thy self, and Natures peace do break;
Iudgenot the Gods above: it does not boot,
Nor do thou see that which thou dare not speak.
Power has great scope; she walks not in the ways
Of private truth: Virtues of common men
Are not the same which shine in Kings above,
And do make fear bring forth the works of love.
Admit that Mustapha not guilty be;
Who by his Prince will rise, his Prince must please;
And they that please judge with humility.
Yonder they are, whose charge must be discharged,
In Ross^'s face behold desire speaks,
He keeps the laws, that all laws form breaks.

Solomon. Is Mustapha in health, and coming?

Beg. My Lord! already come: For what can stay,
Where Love, and Duty both teach to obey?

Sol. In what strange balance are man's humors peised?
Since each light change within us, or without.
Turns fear to hope, and hope again to doubt.
If thus it work in Man, much more in Thrones,
Whose tender heights feel all thin aires that move,
And work that change below they use above.
For on the Axis of our humors turn
Church-rites, and Laws; Subjects desire, and wit;
Al^ which, in all men come, and go with it.
Rossa! a King ought therefore to suspect
Fears, fearful counsels which incline to blood,
Wherein, but truths, no Influence is good.
Else will inferior practice ever cast
Such glasly shadows upon all our errors,
As he that sees not ruin, shall see terrors.
Power therefore should affect the Peoples stamp,
" Whose good, or ill thoughts, ever prove to Kings,
" Like air, which either health, or sickness brings.
Now Rossa! by these straight lines, if we sound
The hollow depths of Rostens mystery;
He will the canker of this State be found.
Long has he wau'd betwixt my son, and me,
Making succession sacred, whilst he felt
Practice could not divide the bark, and tree:
His end being not to find, or cherish truth,
But rather vices, where his Art works ruth.
Long has he weighed our humors with his ends,
To find which nature was the fittest mould
For him, to bring to pass in, what he would.
And though his power be on my old age built,
Yet that, as slow to ruin, he dislikes:
Guilt seeking shields for every blow it strikes.
Now in my Son though active powers he find,
Yet what he cannot govern, gives offense;
From birth, or worth, still fearing competence.
He grounds this work on jealousy of Kings,
" Where hopeful goodnesses often in Successors
" Seem not strengths, as they be, but strong oppressors.
And when this Art could not procure his fall,
Nor shape our humors like Procustes bed,
Where all that fit him not, are ruined:
Straight then he offers up unto my Son
My life, my Crown, and all that I have won.
Such slender props are Princes Favorites,
" Who like good fortunes children, love their mother;
" And never can be true to any other.
In these nets shall he then catch him, and me,
And so this high, and sovereign Scepter-power
Sink into slaves by my infirmity?
No, No: when Princes, by defect of mind,
A pronesse feel, to sink into their slaves;
Wherein they make their Creatures their graves:
By Nature have they not a Phenix-fire,
From their own ashes to revive again,
And in their childrens honor, live, and raigne^
Then Rossa! judge: My love has made us one;
And who can judge these humorists, but we;
Since hope, and fear below lack eyes to see?
Mustapha is through misprision hither come,
Brought to the practice of this crafty slave,
Careless in which he make the others tomb:
His netts are laid; our thoughts for stales pitched down,
To catch our selves in, and in us, the Crown.
But Natures laws have conquered Princes doubts;
And between King, and man, what was begone,
Concludes betwixt a Father and a Son.

Rossa. Behold! these sandy hearts have no foundation;
Yet hence must I, with hazard, work my will,
That have to do with thought, nor good, nor ill.
My Lord! your doubts from arguments did rise
Of wanton pride, ambitious seeking love:
" And can remissions be in Nature wise,
" While States upon the steep of danger move?
No: think what pregnant grounds of his ambition
Resolved you first, his Greatness was your danger:
And shall a Father wave a Kings suspicion?
Since Mischief, whilst her head shows in a clowd,
In Pluto's Kingdom does her body shroud.

Solomon. Suspicion may enquire, but not conclude;
Both hope, and fear; do with excess delude.
Tell Beglerbie! how did he welcome thee?
In your access what found you; pomp, or pride?
Was he reserved; or else did he descend?
Appeared I as his Sovereign; or his friend?

Beglerbie. His Court was great; and that which adds to you
Is that all Princes had their Agents there
Confessing, in the Son, the Fathers due:
And from them all the honor done him such,
As if none thought the World for him too much.
Yet I no sooner to his presence came,
But he paid all their homages to me,
The rest looked on, as when men wonders see.

Solomon. What was his cheer? Did thou observe his eyes,
When thou declared'st my will to have him come?

Beglerbie. First, at your name he bowed in humble wise;
The rest appeared to be a joyful doom.
Only the Persian spoke (it seems) with care:
God make these favors good; for they be rare.

Rossa. This is the glass which Father looks not in;
The Workman hides, the instruments discover:
See how it fitts a King to be a lover?
Sir! mark these words: whence should their wonder grow?
His scorn, and grudge, he worshipps, and obeyes:
In him, or for him, what strange works are these?

Solomon. Tell me his manner. How, did he dispose
His followers, and affairs till his return?
The news of war against our Persian foes,
I am sure, made not his undertakers mourn.

Beglerbie. The Persian Agent some distraction showed;
All else their eyes to their Sun rising turn.

Solomon. What Is the discourse of Court? and what the face?
His carriage is it Royally severe,
Reserved, like us, by attributes of place,
Or popular, as power in people were?
Shapes he his course to rule, or gain a State?
Is our course changed, or does he imitate?

Beglerbie. He winds not spirits up with Power, or Fear:
The ancient form he keeps, where it is good:
His proiects reformation every where:
His care to have diseases understood:
Reverend unto your Throne; more to your deeds:
It is no imitation which exceeds.

Solomon. What does he in our Church, or law reprove?
What error in our discipline of war?

Beglerbie. With zeal he does adore the Powers above;
With zeal inferior duties paid him are:
And, for his ends on public centers move,
His ends are served with every bodies love.
His Court, like yours, the image of a Camp:
In yours, your Power; in his, Himself the Lamp.
He sees (men say) but only what he shows,
I mean examples both of Power, and Love:
You see again what from within you grows,
Such humble fear, as fearful power moves.
His Camp, in rest and action both, content;
Assiduous order works this frame in either:
Your discipline now loose, now ouerbent;
Forced to use fear in both, contents in neither.
This freedom Sir! makes them you two compare,
Of whom, both he and they, but shadows are.

Solym. What be his troops? An army, or a Train?
Come they to dwell, or to go back again?

Beglerb. His will was to depart immediately,
With no train, but the Basha, Priest, and I.
Your honor only ministered debate;
Princes (some thought) stood fast by keeping state:
His Pomp gave luster to your Power, some said,
For Princes should be gloriously obeyed.
At this gappe entered Love, and Intercession,
The Multitude all liberties approved,
The Wise to give them way held it discretion,
Where it gave honor to your self above.
Thus to the Coast number and order come,
Where Mustapha leaves all to bide your doom.

Solym. Within the Port, or where does he attend?
What Is the aspect between his own, and ours?
Gains he, or waines he by approaching power?

Beglerb. His foot on land, straight to the Church he goes;
Applause, and wonder follow to that place,
Greater he, by your Influence, still grows,
Your Trophies upon him the people place.
Unto the State men prophecy progression,
And see your age, it is true, in your Succession.
Your Power, and Love both, in his Pomp appear;
For even the Bassha's next you I did meet
Hastening to honor him, whom you hold dear.
What greater Triumph to a glorious Father,
Than such a Son for age to lean unto,
Whence declination may more forces gather,
And impotence retain ability to do?
Goodness exiling jealousy of State,
From him whose duty sets his power a rate.
Now by the way a paper up I took,
Spread by the Mufti, as it should appear,
Foretelling with authority of book,
What those times wrapped in clouds, and these make clear.
Wherein these Prophet-spirits did foreshow
The progress of this Empire to the height;
Under what Princes humors it should grow,
Under whose weakness fall again by weight:
Inferring this; that where declining spirits
To govern mighty Scepters God ordaines,
Order no Basis finds; Honor must fall:
Where man is nothing, Place cannot do all.
Again where worth, and wisdom sovereign be,
And he that is King of Place, is King of Men,
Change, Chance, or Ruin cannot enter then.
And such a King must sit upon this Throne;
Imperfect times (they say) are fully run,
And this perfection present in your Son.

Solym. Change has prepared her moulds for Innovation.
I see inferior wheels of practice move,
Yet they prevail not on the Powers above.
His worth rests constant, and yet works this motion,
They to him, for him, sacrifice at random
All which they have, and have not, in devotion.
He is the Glass, in which their light affections
Come to behold what image they shall take:
If liberty they find, then Anarchie they make.
On time, place, truth, these spirits never rest.
His worth, thus innocent, how can I fear?
Their thoughts, thus violent, can Power digest?
Then Government! thy hand must cut between
My fearful dangers, and his fearelesse praise.
In all States, Power, which oppresses spir^^s,
Imprisons Nature, Empire disinherits.
This Throne grew not by delicate alliance,
Combining State with State, all States to Laws,
Of idle Princes, and base subjects cause.
We grew by curious improuing all;
Our selves to people, people unto us;
Worth, through our selves, in them we planted thus.
And shall I help to make succession less,
Blasting the births of Nature and Example,
In narrow fears of selfe-vnworthinesse?
No, No: The art of Monarchy is more:
Princes must strength by such succession gather,
With future hopes all present smarts are eased;
Age has a veyle, and Majesty is pleased.
Who makes, can mar. Honor, reward, and fear,
Are reins of Power: The ends inherent there.

Ross. Behold! I stand amazed: Sir! ease my heart.
A King less than a man! more than a God!
I know not where to stay, nor how to part.
God has ordained that wickedness shall die:
Sir! who is guilty? Mustapha, or I?

Solym. He now is in the hands of Power, and Time.
His danger is to come, and ours is past;
Lets see into what moulds our own are cast.

Ross. Who will endure the sentence he may give,
Between you two? He must be King that lives.
Your grave prepared is among your own:
Neighbors, Church, People, Soldiers, made the Stage,
Where Hope, and Youth shall ruin Fear, and Age.
Most wretched I, raised to be overthrown.
If you will die, then am I lost in you;
And die you must, if you believe your own.
If he shall live; then am I proved untrue,
Hated by him, whom you have placed above,
Lost unto you, and ruined by my love.
" Ah Confidence! thou Glory of the ill!
" How safely do thou blinded Power assail,
" That having all, yet knows not what it will?

Solym. Rossa! you move me; yet remove I not.
Man comprehends a man, but not a King.
I feel my self ('it is true) and I feel you;
How to it self can Power then prove untrue?
Succession on the present never winnes,
But by the death of body, or of spirit:
All heirs by our mortality run in.
Let not misprision wound me in thy love:
Great inequality of worth you yield
To them, you think can on my ruins build.

CHORUS PRIMVS Of Basha's, or Caddies.
LIke as mixed Humors, drawn up from the ground,
Are unto many forms, and functions bound;
Partly out of their native Property,
Partly the Climes, through which their iourneyes be;
Some into Meteors, that amaze below;
Others to Comets, which fore-threaten woe;
Some into Hailestones, that afflict the earth;
Others to Rain, which hastens every birth;
Lightning, and Thunder only made of those,
Which the cold Regions double heats enclose:
So is frail Mankind, though in other fashion,
Raised, and let fall with his own earthly passion;
Formed, transformed, and made instruments
In many shapes, to serve Powers many bents:
Feeding Superiors, even as Vapors do,
Which spending themselves, scourge their Parents too.
Some in mishaped Meteors, terrifying;
All constant spirits, under Tyrants lying;
Others like Winds, which AEolus makes blow,
To breathe themselves out, while they overthrow;
Some like sweet Dewes, that nourish where they touch;
Like Exhalations, some inflame too much;
Bondage, and ruin, only wrought by those,
That Kings with servile Flattery enclose,
Hatching, in double heats of Power, and Will,
Thunder, and Lightning, to amaze, and kill.
Thus Tyrants deal with Peoples liberty,
The nether Region cannot long live free.
Thus Tyrants deal with us of higher place,
As drawn up only to disperse disgrace.
Ecchos of Power, that pleasingly resound
Those heavy Taxes, where with Princes wound.
Exhausters of frail Mankind by our place,
To make them poor, and consequently base.
With Colonies we eat the Native down,
And, to increase the Person, waine the Crown.
With idle visions trafficking men's minds
To humble moderation, in all kinds
Till under false styles of Obedience,
We take from Mankind all, but suffering sense,
Yet even by these sails, which for Scepters move,
We forced are with modest breath to prove,
Which way these People-tides will pass with ease;
Crowns wounding deeply, when they strive to please.
Whence, as we dare not blow them up to rage;
So again, if we quit this People-stage,
Thrones know not where to act those fancie-playes,
Which catch the lookers on so many ways.
For we, like Dewes, drawn to be clouds above,
Straight grow with that attracting Sun in love;
Which ever raises light things up to fall,
In crafty Power Creation natural.
Wrapped in which Crowne-mists, men cannot discern
How dearly they her glittering tinctures earne,
Till, thorough glassie Time, these Cage-birds see,
That Honor is the badge of Tyranny.
Laws the next pillars be, with which we deal,
As Sophistries of every Commonweal;
Or rather Nets, which people do ask leave,
That they, to catch their Freedoms in, may weaue,
And still add more unto the Sultans power,
By making their own frames themselves devour.
These Lesbian rules, with show of real grounds,
Giving Right, narrow; Will, transcendent bounds.
The Mufti, and their spiritual jurisdictions,
By course succeed these other guilt-inflictions:
Conscience annexing to our Crescent star
All freedoms, that in Man's frail Nature are;
By making doctrines large, strict mild, severe;
As Power intends to stir, up hope, or fear:
Which heavenly shadow, with earth-centers fixed,
Rack men, by truth, and untruths, strangely mixed;
And prove to Thrones such a supporting cause,
As finely gives Law to all other Laws.
Thus like the Wood that yields helues for the Axe,
Upon it self to lay an heavy tax:
We silly Bassha's help Power to confound,
With our own strength exhausting our own ground.
An Art of Tyranny; which works with men,
To make them beasts, and high-rais'd Thrones their den,
Where they, that mischief others, may retire
Safe with their prey, as lifting Tyrants higher.
By which enthralling of our selves, with others,
Prove we not both Confusions heirs, and mothers?
Far unlike Adam, putting Civil names
Upon those errors, which the whole world blames.
For if Power rauine more than is her own;
People, we say, are Chequers to a Throne.
Again, if she to rise up, will pull down;
Creation, we say, still inheres the Crown.
If good men chance to interrupt this way;
Too much in virtue often there is, we say:
Since each inferior limb must from the Head
Receive his Standard and be balanced.
If People grudge their freedom, thus made thrall;
Power is their body, they but shadows all.
If God himself by Law, or Influence,
Seems but to limit this Omnipotence;
Even as in Christian Courts of Chancerie,
Though land, or Titles cannot settled be;
Yet where the Person dares to disobey,
Through him, his Title they imprison may:
So though with Tyrants God transcendent be,
Yet plague they his for too much piety.
And, by distinctions from the Pulpits doom,
Leave still for Crowne-impiety a room.
This is our office under Tyranny,
Where Power, and Passion only current be.
But where the Better rules the Greater part,
And reason only is the Princes Art;
There, as in Margents of great volum'd Books,
The little notes, whereon the Reader looks,
Often aid his ouerpressed memory,
Unto the Authors sense where he would be:
So do true Counselors assist good Kings,
And help their Greatness on, with little things.
Honor, in chief, our Oath is to uphold,
That by no traffic it be bought, or sold.
Else look what brings that dainty Throne-worke down;
Adds not, but still takes something from a Crown.
Proffit, and her true Mine, Frugality,
Incident likewise to our Office be:
As husbanding the Scepters spreading right,
To stretch it self, yet not grow infinite;
Or with Prerogative to Tyrannize,
Whose works prove often more absolute, than wise.
Not mastering Laws, which freedom interrupts;
Nor moulding Pulpits, which is to corrupt,
And help Change in; whose vanity still tends
To work immortal things to mortal ends.
But our part is to keep the Justice free,
As equal peising liberality;
Which both contents the People that receives,
And Princely giver more enabled leaves.
Likewise with foreign States we keep respect
By diligence, which seldom findesneglect.
In Treaties still concluding mutual good;
Since no one byas'd Contracteuer stood.
In Complements we strive to hold such measure,
That outward form consume not inward treasure.
For betwixt Man, and Man; 'twixt King and Kings;
Our place should offer well-digested things.
Else as those Crudities, which do remain
Within the body, all Complexions stain:
So does advantage between State, and State,
Though finely got, yet prove unfortunate:
And often Disorder like in government,
Leave even those that prosper, discontent.
But is our great Lords Character like these?
Are disproportioned humors made to please?
Can Parricide, even unto Nature treason,
Draw any true line from, Man's Zenith, Reason?
Then how can Vice, in this confused estate,
Long escape the doom of neuer-sparing Fate?
For, as we see, when sickness deeply roots,
Meat, drink, and drugges alike do little boot;
Because all what should either nurse, or cure,
As mastered by diseases, grow impure:
So when Excess (the malady of Might)
Has ( Dropsy-like) drowned all the styles of right,
Then does Obedience ( else the food of Power)
Help on that dropsy Canker to devour.
In which crazed times, woe worth foreseeing wit,
Which mar it self may, cannot help with it.
For as those Kings that conquer neighbor Nations,
First by the sword make Chaos of Creations;
Then, Spider-like a curious netting spinne,
Invisible, to catch Inferiors in:
So when the Art of powerful Tyranny
Has vndermin'd man's native liberty;
Then, like Lords absolute of words, and deeds,
They soon change weeds to herbs, and herbs to weeds.
Which ouer-winding while the People fear,
Can Tyrants hope of Sanctuary there?
O^^ when this fear has tied Men's minds together,
Proves this a storm, or constant Winter-weather?
Again, when Selfenesse has men's hearts estranged,
Is not one Sovereign soon to many changed?
Lastly, where absolute seems only wise,
Is not one, envious there, in many eyes?
Disease thus grown, the Crisis, and the Doom,
Show Princes must be ours, or we their Tomb.
For as the Ocean, which is ever deep,
Under her smooth face, does in secret keep
The vast content of deaths devouring womb,
Where those desires which venture find a tomb;
AEolus, with sweet breath, making all things fair,
Till he has bound hope Prentise to his air;
Then adding more breath to that breath they spend,
Makes tide with tide, and wave with wave contend?
Enforcing men, for tax, to throw their goods
Into his merciless, entising floods;
Where swallowing some in sight of those he spares,
Even they that prosper best must swarm with cares:
So does vast Power, at first, spread out her slights
Of Grace, and Honor; smooth bewitching bayts;
And when men's Lives, their Goods, and Liberty,
Are left in trust once with her Tyranny;
Then, Ocean-like, blown up with storms of passion,
Which, but excess, makes all seem out of fashion,
It takes aduange to devour the Just,
Because to Laws, that limit Thrones, they trust
Ruins the Wise, whose eye discernes too much,
And thereby brings Powers errors to the touch;
Discards the Learned, for the difference
They make between the truth, and Princes sense;
Stains the Religious, as if they withstood
Powers will, the stamp of all that is current good:
Yet saues it some, that they may witness bear,
Where Power reigns, there Worth must live in fear.
Thus are we Soothers, as all shadows be,
Sworn to the bodies of Authority.
Thus do Inferiors, caught with their own ends,
Pay double use for all the Scepter lends;
Not seeing, while Man strives to stand by Grace,
He offers Natures freedom up to Place;
Whose true relation, between Men, and Might,
Assures us, Thrones should not be infinite,
Lastly, thus do we suffer God to wayne,
Under the Humors of a Sultans reign.
And in the fatal ruin of his Son,
Cut off our own lives, on a less thread spunne.
Actus secundus: Scena prima.
Achmat solus.

WHo, standing in the shade of humble valleys,
Looks up, and wonders at the state of hills;
When he with toil of weary limbs ascends,
And feels his spirits melt with Phoebus glories,
Or sinews stark with AEolus bitter breathing,
Or thunder-blasts, which coming from the sky,
Do fall most heavy on the places high:
Then knows (though farther seen, and farther seeing
From hills above, than from the humble valleys)
They multiply in woes, that add in glories.
Who weary is of Natures quiet Plains,
A mean estate, with poor, and chaste desires;
Whose Virtue longs for knees, Bliss for opinion;
Who judges pleasures Paradise in purple;
Let him see me: No Governor of Castile,
No petty Princes choice, whose weak dominions
Make weak, unnoble Counsels to be current:
But Bassha unto Solomon; whose scepter,
Nay servants, have dominion over Princes:
Under whose feet, the four forgotten Monarchs,
The footstooles lie of his eternal glory:
Even I thus raised, this Solymans beloved,
Thus carried up by fortune to be tempted,
Must, for my Princes sake, destroy Succession,
Or suffer ruin to preserve Succession.
Oh happy Men! that know not, or else fear
This second slippery place of Honors steep,
Which we with envy get, and danger keep.
Unhappy state of ours! wherein we live,
Where doubts give laws, which never can forgive:
Where Rage of Kings not only ruins be,
But where their very love works misery.
For Princes humors are not like the Glass,
Which in it shows what shapes without remain,
And with the body go, and come again:
But like the Wax, which first bears but his own,
Till it the seal in easy mould receive,
And by the impression only then is known.
In this soft weakness Rossa prints her art,
And seeks to toss the Crown from hand to hand;
Kings are not safe whom any understand.
First, of her self, she durst send Rosten forth
To murder Mustapha, his dearest Son:
He found him only guarded with his worth,
Suspecting nothing, and yet nothing done.
Rosten is now returned: For wicked fear
Did even make him wickedness forbear.
A Beglerbie goes since to call him hither;
The Color, war against the Persian King;
The Truth, to suffer force of Tyranny,
From his enforced Fathers Jealousy.
Who vtters this, is to his Prince a Traitor:
Who keeps this, Guilty is; his life is ruth,
And dying lives, ever denying truth.
Thus has the Fancy-law of Power ordained,
That who betrays it most, is most esteemed:
Who says it is betrayed, is Traitor deemed.
I sworn am to my King, and to his Honor:
His Humors? No: which they, that follow most,
Wade in a Sea, wherein themselves are lost.
Yet Achmat stay! For who does wrest Kings minds,
Wrestles his faith upon the stage of Chance;
Where virtue, to the world by fortune known,
Is often misiudg'd, because she is overthrown.
Nay Achmat stay not! For who truth enuirons
With circumstances of Man's failing wit,
By fear, by hope, by love, by malice erreth;
Nature to natures banckrupts he engages:
And while none dare show Kings they go amiss,
Even base Obedience their Corruption is.
Then Fear! dwell with the ill; Truth is assured:
Opinion! be, and reign with Fortunes Princes.
Policy! go piece the faults of Mortal Kingdoms.
Death! threaten them that live to die for ever,
I first am Natures subject, then my Princes;
I will not serve to Innocencies ruin.
Whose Heaven is Earth, let them believe in Princes.
My God is not the God of subtle murder:
Solomon shall know the truth: I look no further.
Behold! he comes like Majesty confused;
Horror, Revenge, Rage lighten in his eyes.
All Laws give place where Power is joined with these;
And he must go beyond that will appease.
Actus secundus: Scena secunda.
Solomon. Achmat.

Solomon. Mercy, and Love! you Phrases popular,
Which undermine, and limit Princes Thrones,
Go, seek the regions of Equality.
Greatness must keep those Arts by which it grew,
And ever what it wills, or fears, make true.

Achmat. My Lord! what moves these undermining words,
Which showing fear in you, stir fear in us?
Cruelty, and Dissolution enter thus.

Solym. Does Kings restraint of wrath appear like fear?
Shall our remissness suffer more than this?
Can horror only, adoration bear?
Behold, the World lays Homage at my feet,
To them by sword, and fire I am known:
Must Kings that change this likeness lose their own?
Two States I bear; his Father, and his King;
These two, being Relatiues, have mutual bonds;
Neglect in either, all in question brings.
My Son climes up with wings of seeming Merit;
His course, Applause; and mine, the scale of Order;
By Dissolution, he builds up Content;
And I displease, by planting Government.
My Age spends on the stock of Honor won;
Flesh has her buds, her flowers, her fruit, her fall;
Work has his time, and Rest is natural:
His Youth has hope for right; and Fame for end;
Time for a stage; for rival Expectation;
Ascending by the balance we descend.
Let Youth affect goodwill, praise, reputation,
Fashion it self to Times, or Times to it,
Grow strong, and rich in man's imagination:
But when her Fame reflects scorn upon Kings,
Her glory undermines, or else confounds
Of Place, Time, Nature, all the reverend bounds.
These crooked shadows no straight bodies have;
Practice, Ambition, Pride, are here disguised.
And shall Love be a chain, tied to my Crown,
Either to help him up, or pull me down?
No, No: This Father-language fits not Kings,
" Whose public, universal providence
" Of Things, not Persons, always must have sense.
With Justice I these misty doubts will clear.
And he that breaks divine, and humane Law,
Shall no protection out of either draw.

Achm. Sir! where corrupted limbs Art does divide,
It has no name of torment, but of cure:
Let many perish, so the State be sure.

Solym. Then Achmat! Bid the Eunuchs do their charge.
I wound my self in wounding of my Son;
A Kings estates has of a Fathers won.
Aduantagious Ambition! have thou learned
That present Government still gives offenses,
And long life in the best Kings discontenteth?
That discontentments hopes live in succession?
Well! False desires (which in false Glasses show
That Princes Thrones are like enchanted fires,
Mighty to see, and easy to pass over:)
By Mustapha's example, learn to know;
No private thoughts can sound Authority.
Achmat! I mean that Mustapha shall die.

Achmat. My Lord! Good Fortune does me witness bear,
That my hopes need not stand upon Succession,
Where life is poor in all, but woe, and fear:
Then Sir! doubt not my faith, though I withstand
This fearful Counsel, which you have in hand.

Solym. Resolved I am. The form alone I doubt.
Envy, and Murmur I desire to shun,
With which yet great Examples must be done.

Ach. The form of proof precedes the form of death;
Kings honors, and their safeties live in both:
Against these to give counsel I am loath.

Solym. Thought is with God an Act: Kings cannot see
Th'intents of mischief, but with Jealousy.

Ach. In what protection then lives Innocence?

Solym. Below the danger of Omnipotence.

Ach. Are thoughts, and deeds confounded any where?

Solym. In Princes lives, that may not suffer fear.
Where Place unequal equally is weighed,
There Power supreme is balanced, not obeyed.

Ach. This is the way to make Accusers proud,
And feed up starued Spite with guiltless blood.

Solym. A just advantage unto Kings allowed,
Whose safeties do include a common good.

Ach. Sir! I confess, where one man rules all,
There fear, and care are secret ways of wit;
Where All may rise, and only One must fall,
There Pride aspires, and Power must master it:
For worlds repine at those, whom Birth, or Chance,
Above all men, and yet but Men, advance.
I know when easy hopes do nurse desire,
The Deadmen only of the Wise are trusted:
And though crook'd Fear do seldom rightly measure,
As thinking all things, but it self, dissembled:
Yet Solomon! let Fear awake Kings counsels.
But fear not Natures laws, which seldom alter,
Nor rare examples of iniquity,
Which, but with age, of time delivered be:
Fear false Stepmothers rage, Woman's ambition,
Whereof each Age to other is a Glass;
Fear them that fear not, for desire, shame;
Selling their faiths to bring their ends to pass.
Establish Rossa's children for your heirs;
Let Mustapha's hopes fall; translate his right:
And when her proud Ambitions glutted be,
Straight Envy dies; Fear will appear no more:
Nature takes on the shape it had before.

Solym. Shall Error escape by Art? And shall a bare
Stepmothers name, in her that speaks truth,
Disguise, and shadow Parricide from blame?
Intents are seeds, and actions they include.
Princes, whose Scepters must be feared of many,
Are never safe that live in fear of any

Ach. Tyrants they are that punish out of fear,
States wiser than the truth decline, and wear.

Solym. Thou art but one. The rest, in whom I trust,
Discern his fault, and urge me to be just.

Ach. Though Factions strength be great, her slight is more;
Her plots, and instruments inlay'd with Art:
Less care has Truth than has the evil part.

Solym. Traitor! Must I doubt all to credit thee?

Ach. No less is Truth, where Kings deceived will be.

Solym. The greater number holds the safest parts.

Ach. That one is but the least of Factions arts.

Solym. Thy counsel hazards all: Their course but one.

Ach. That painted hazard is but made the Gate,
For ruin of your Son to enter at.
Truth must the measure be to slave, and King.

Solym. Shall Power then lose her odds in any thing?

Ach. God, even to himself, has made a law.

Solym. He does for Fame, what Kings do but for awe.
What, but Desert, makes those that praise accuse?

Ach. The Virtue they admire, and cannot use.

Solym. Dare ought, but Truth, assail a Princes child?

Ach. On Princes frailties Factions ever build.

Solym. Speak plain, and free my soul from this disease,
That with the ruin of mine own would please.

Ach. That which you will not feel, how can you see?
For in your love these works were all inweau'd;
With which most worthy men are most deceived.

Solym. What King, or Man, loves fear, wrong, treachery?
These be the things that now in question be.

Ach. Sir! where Kings doubt, Wisdom, and Laws provide,
Due trial, and restraint of liberty,
And unto Caution their estate is tied:
But where Kings Rage becomes superlatiue,
There people do forbear, but not forgive.
My Lord! then stay: Delays are wisdom, where
Time may more easy ways of safetye show.
Selfe-murther is an ugly work of fear;
And little less is Childrens overthrow.
Mustapha is yours; more Sir! even he
Is not, for whom you Mustapha or'ethrow.
Suspicious common to Successions be;
Honor, and Fear together ever go.
Who must kill all they fear, fear all they see,
Nor Subjects, Sons, nor Neighborhood can bear:
So infinite the limits be of Fear.

Solym. Well Achmat! Stay. I strive to rest my thoughts.
Words rather stir, than quiet fixed impressions.
Kings hearts must judge what Subjects hearts have wrought,
Not your calm heart vnthreat'ned, and upright.
Such Bees fetch home from the self same Flower,
Whence Spiders draw their deep enuenom'd power.
No, No: Experience wounded is the School,
Where man ^^arnes piercing wisdom out of smart;
Innocence includes the serpent, not the fool.
The wager's great of being, or not being.
These Crudities let me within digest;
My Power shall take upon it all the rest.

Actus secundus: Scena tertia.
Camena. Solomon. Achmat.

CAmena. They that from youth do suck at Fortunes breast,
And nurse their empty hearts with seeking higher,
" Like Dropsie-fedde, their thirst does never rest;
" For still, by getting, they beget desire:
" Till thoughts, like Wood, while they maintain the Flame
" O^ high desires, grow Ashes in the same.
" But Virtue! Those that can behold thy beauties,
" Those that suck, from their youth, thy milk of Goodness,
" Their minds grow strong against the storms of fortune,
" And stand, like rocks, in Winter gusts unshaken;
" Not with the blindness of desire mistaken.
O Virtue therefore! whose thrall I think fortune,
Thou who despisest not the sex of Women,
Help me out of these Riddles of my fortune,
Wherein (meethinks) you with your self do pose me:
Let Fates go on: sweet Virtue! do not lose me.
My Mother, and my Husband have conspired,
For Brothers good, the ruin of my Brother:
My Father by my Mother is inspired,
For one child to seek ruin of another.
I that to help by Nature am required,
While I do help, must needs still hurt a Brother.
While I see who conspire, I seem conspired
Against a Husband, Father, and a Mother,
Truth bids me run, by Truth I am retired;
Shame leads me both the one way, and the other.
In what a Labyrinth is Honor cast,
Drawn diverse ways with Sex, with Time, with State?
In all which, Errors course is infinite,
By hope, by fear, by spite, by love, and hate;
And but one only way unto the right.
A thorny way: where Pain must be the guide;
Danger the light; Offense of Power the praise:
Such are the golden hopes of Iron days.
Yet Virtue, I am thine, for thy sake grieved
( Since basest thoughts, for their ill-plac'd desires,
In shame, in danger, death, and torment glory)
That I cannot with more pains write thy story.
Chance therefore! if thou scornest those that scorn thee;
Fame! if thou hate those that force thy Trumpet
To sound aloud, and yet despise thy sounding;
Laws! if you love not those that be examples
Of Natures laws, whence you are fallen corrupted;
Conspire that I, against you all conspired,
Joined with Tyrant Virtue, as you call her,
That I, by your reuenges may be named,
For Virtue, to be ruined, and defamed,
My mother often, and diversely I warned,
What Fortunes were upon such courses builded:
That fortune still must be with ill maintained,
Which at the first with any ill is gained.
I Rosten warned, that man's selfe-louing thought
Still creeps to the rude embracing might
Of Princes grace: a Lease of glories let,
Which shining burns; breeds Serens when it is set.
And, by this creature of my mothers making,
This messenger, I Mustapha have warned,
That Innocence is not enough to save,
Where Good, and Greatness, Fear, and Envy have.
Till now, in reverence I have forborne
To ask, or to presume to guess, or know
My Fathers thoughts; where of he might think scorn:
For dreadful is that Power that all may do;
Yet they, that all men fear, are fearful too.
Lo where he sits! Virtue! work thou in me,
That what thou seek may accomplished be.

Solym. Ah Death! Is not thy self sufficient anguish,
But thou must borrow Fear, that threatening Glass,
Which, while it goodness hides, and mischief shows,
Does lighten Wit to honors overthrows?
But hushed: Meethinks away Camena steals:
Murder, belike, in me it self reueales.
Camena! Whither now? Why haste you from me?
Is it so strange a thing to be a Father?
Or is it I that am so strange a Father?

Camena. My Lord! Meethought, nay, sure I saw you busy:
Your Child presumes, vncall'd, that comes unto you.

Solym. Who may presume with Fathers, but their own,
Whom Natures law has ever in protection,
And guilds in good belief of dear affection?

Came. Nay, Reverence, Sir! So Childrens worth does hide,
As of the Fathers it is least espide.

Solym. I think its true: Who know their children least,
Have greatest reason to esteem them best.

Came. How so my Lord? Since Love in Knowledge lives,
Which unto strangers therefore no man gives.

Solym. The life we gave them soon they do forget,
While they think our lives do their fortunes let.

Came. The tenderness of life it is so great,
As any sign of death we hate too much
And unto Parents Sons, perchance, are such.
Yet Nature meant her strongest unity,
Twixt Sons, and Fathers; making Parents cause
Unto the Sons, of their humanity;
And Children pledge of their eternity.
Fathers should love this Image in their Sons.

Solym. But streams back to their springs do never run.

Came. Pardon my Lord! Doubt is Successions foe:
Let not her mists poor Children overthrow.
Though streams from springs do see me to run away,
' It Is Nature leads them to their Mother Sea.

Solym. Does Nature teach them, in Ambitions strife,
To seek his death, by whom they have their life?

Came. Things easy, to desire impossible do seem:
Why should fear make impossible seem easy?

Solym. Monsters yet be; and being are believed.

Came. Incredible has some inordinate progression:
Blood, Doctrine, Age, corrupting Liberty,
Do all concur, where men such monsters be.
Pardon me Sir! if Duty do seem angry:
Affection must breathe out afflicted breath,
Where imputation has such easy faith.

Solym. Mustapha is he that has defiled his nest;
The wrong the greater, for I Iou'd him best.
He has devised that all at once should die,
Rosten, and Rossa, Zanger, thou, and I.

Came. Fall none but Angels suddenly to hell?
Are Kind, and Order grown precipitate?
Did ever any other man, but he,
In instant lose the use of doing well?
Sir! these be mists of Greatness. Look again:
For Kings, that, in their fearful icie State,
Behold their children, as their winding sheet,
Do easily doubt; and what they doubt, they hate.

Solym. Camena! Thy sweet Youth, that knows no ill,
Cannot believe thine Elders, when they say,
That good belief is great Estates decay.
Let it suffice, that I, and Rossa too,
Are privy what your Brother means to do.

Came. Sir! Pardon me: and nobly as a Father,
What I shall say, and say of holy Mother,
Know I shall say it, but to right a Brother.
My Mother is your Wife: Duty in her
Is love: She loves; which not well governed, bears
The evil Angel of misgiuing Fears;
Whose many eyes, whilst but it self they see,
Still make the worst of possibility:
Out of this Fear she Mustapha accuses:
Unto this Fear, perchance, she ioynes the Love,
Which does in Mothers, for their Children move.
Perchance, when Fear has showed her yours must ^all,
In Love she sees that hers must rise withal.
Sir! Fear a frailty is, and may have grace,
And ouer-care of you cannot be blamed;
Care of our own in Nature has a place;
Passions are often mistaken, and misnamed;
Things simply good grow evil with misplacing.
Though laws cut off, and do not care to fashion,
Humanity of error has compassion.
Yet God forbid, that either Fear, or Care,
Should ruin those that true, and faultlesse are,

Solym. Is it no fault, or fault I may forgive,
For Son to seek the Father should not live?

Came. Is it a fault, or fault for you to know,
My Mother doubts a thing that is not so?
These ugly works of monstrous Parricide,
Mark from what hearts they rise, and where they bide.
Violent, despayr'd, where honor broken is;
Fear lord; Time Death; where Hope is Misery;
Doubt having stopped all honest ways to bliss,
And Custom shut the windows up of shame,
That Craft may take upon her Wisdoms name.
Compare now Mustapha with this despair:
Sweet Youth, sure Hopes, Honor, a Fathers love,
No infamy to move, or banish fear,
Honor to stay, hazard to hasten fate:
Can horrors work in such a Childs estate?
Besides, the Gods, whom Kings should imitate,
Have placed you high to rule, not overthrow;
For us, not for your selves, is your Estate:
Mercy must hand in hand with Power go.
Your Scepter should not strike with arms of fear,
Which fathoms all men's imbecillitie,
And Mischief does, left it should mischief bear.
As reason deals within with frailty,
Which kills not passions that rebellious are,
But adds, substracts, keeps down ambitious spirits;
So must Power form, not ruin instruments:
For flesh and blood, the means twixt heaven, and hell,
Unto extremes extremely racked be;
Which Kings in Art of Government should see.
Else they, which circle in themselves with death,
Poison the air, wherein they draw their breath.
Pardon my Lord! Pity becomes my Sex:
Grace with delay grows weak, and fury wise.
Remember Theseus wish, and Neptunes haste.
Killed Innocence, and left Succession waste.

Solym. If what were best for them that do offend
Laws did inquire, the answer must be, Grace.
If Mercy be so large, where is Justice place?

Came. Where Love despaires, and where Gods promise ends.
For Mercy is the highest reach of wit,
A safety unto them that save with it:
Borne out of God, and unto humane eyes,
Like God, not seen, till fleshly passion dies.

Solym. God may forgive, whose being, and whose harms
Are far removed from reach of fleshly arms:
But if God Equals, or Successors had;
Even God, of safe reuenges would be glad.

Came. While he is yet alive, he may be slain;
But from the dead no flesh comes back again.

Solym. While he remains alive, I live in fear.

Came. Though he were dead, that doubt still living were.

Solym. None has the power to end what he begun.

Came. The same occasion follows every Son.

Solym. Their Greatness, or their Worth is not so much.

Came. And shall the best be slain, for being such?

Solym. Thy Mother, or thy Brother are amiss:
I am betrayed; and one of them it is.

Came. My Mother, if she errres, erres virtuously;
And let her err, ere Mustapha should die.
Kings, for their safety, must not blame mistrust;
Nor, for surmises, sacrifice the just.

Solym. Well: dear Camena! keep this secretly:
I will be well advised before he die.
Come Achmat! to the Church: we will go pray
God, to unfold this probability,
Where Power, and Wit so much offend him may.
In this disease of spirits, the true Appeal
Is to that Judge that every spirit knows;
For we by Error else may honor lose.
His laws, the life, the Innocence, the State
Of Son, and Father now in balance stand.
Kings that have cause to fear, take leave to hate;
Sons, that aspire, as easly lift their hands.
If I fall now, I give that scope to face,
Our equal gage being only Natures bands.
Help comes alike to each of us too late,
If ought between us, and advantage stand.
Yet she, and you, a strife within me move,
And rest I will with counsel from above.

CHORUS SECVNDVS, Of Mohammedan Priests.
IF among Christians, even the best Divines
Conclude, their Church (though thrall to humane might)
Yet to be such a fair mould, as refines
And guides Kings power, else indefinite,
That it no Tyrant, or Prophaner be;
Horrors too frequent in Authority:
May not our conquering true Church then assume,
By Grace, and Duty, to link God to Kings,
And Kings to Man? which what else could presume?
Since Might, and Number, rule all other things.
Then Crowns! what Honor to our Church is due,
That fashions it self thus, to fashion you?
Laws we had none, but what our Priests inspired;
Our right was less; for we had naught to claim:
To propagate it self the Truth defir'd,
And to that end, at all mankind did aim:
So that while Souls we only sought to save,
They are with God, and we their Empires have.
Olli, a Prophet from our Church divided
In outward forms, not lines of inward life,
Like witty Schism, we lovingly decided,
With well-bent spirits in opinions strife.
Europe in chief our Prophets then withstood,
With her three-Mitred God of flesh, and blood.
Her lett'red Greece, that Lottarie of Arts,
Since Mars forsook her subtle, never wise;
Proud of her new-made Gods in fleshly hearts,
As she of old was of her Heathen lies;
We undertook with unity of mind,
And what their Wits dispute, our Swords did bind.
So that ere her gross Sects could danger see,
Their Thrones, Schools, Miters, Idols were resigned
To us, new Trophies of our Monarchy:
Thus are the Muses still by Mars refined:
And thus our Church, by pulling others down,
I fear or'ebuilt it self, perchance the Crown.
For, till of late, our Church and Prince were one,
No latitude left either to divide:
The Word, and Sword endeavored not alone,
But were, like mutual Voice, and Echo, tide
With one desire jointly to move, speak, do;
As if Fates Oracles, and Actors too.
Now while the Crown, and Priesthood joined thus
In equal Ends, though Dignities distinct,
As man's soul to his body linked is:
Crowns, by this tincture of Divine instinct,
So above Nature raised the Laws of Might,
As made all errors of the world our right.
Vices, I grant, our Martial course then had;
For spoil, blood, lust, were therein left too free,
As raising strong Idea's in the Bad,
Brave instruments of Sovereignty.
Like Thieves, at home our Justice was severe;
In other Princes Realms our freedoms were.
Great the Seraglia was, I must confess,
Yet so, as kindle did, not quench our spirits:
Our pleasures never made our natures less;
Venus was joined with Mars, to stir up merits.
In right, or wrong our Course was not precise,
Nor is, in any State that multiplies.
Yet, to redeem this Discipline of Vice,
We added to the glory of our State;
Won honor by them, to the prejudice
Of Strangers, conquering more than we did hate:
Our Emulation was with Crowns, not Men;
Thus did our Vices spread our Empire then.
Where since, though we still spoil that Christian Sect,
Which, by division fatal to their kind,
Friends, duties, enemies, and right neglect,
To keep up some Selfe-humor in the wind;
Yet all we thus win, not by force, but slight,
Poys'd with our Martial Conquests, will lack weight.
For Force, not Right, our Crescents bear in Chief;
Camps, and not Courts, are Mappes of our Estate,
Where Church, Law, Will, all Discipline in brief,
Established are to make Worth fortunate:
We scorn those Arts of Peace, that Civil Tether,
Which, in one bond, tie Craft, and Force together.
Of Cell-bred Sciences we chew no cudde;
Our Food and Garments ouerloade us not;
When one Act withers, straight another buddes;
Our Rest is doing; good success our Lot;
Our Beasts are no more delicate than we:
This odds have Turks of Christianity.
Yet by your traffike with this dreaming Nation,
Their Conquered Vice has stain'dour Conquering State,
And brought thin Cobwebs into reputation
Of tender Subtlety; whose stepmother Fate
So inlayes Courage with ill shaddowing Fear,
As makes it much more hard to do, than bear.
And as in Circles, who breaks any part,
That perfect form does utterly confound:
Or as amongst the feigned lines of Art,
One only Right is, all else Crooked found:
So from our Prophets Sawes when Sultans stray,
In humane Wit Power finds perplexed way.
Hence, though we make no Idols, yet we fashion
God, as if from Powers Throne he took his being;
Our Alchoran as warrant unto passion;
Monarchs in all laws but their own will seeing.
He whom God chooses out of doubt does well:
What they that choose their God do, who can tell?
Again, when Great States learn Ciuility
Of petty Kingdoms, learn they not to fall?
Nay Monarchies, when they declining be,
Brook they those Virtues which they rose withal?
Had Mustapha been borne in Selims time,
What now is Fearful, then had been Sublime.
The Christian bondage is much more refined,
Though not in real Things, in real Names,
Laws, Doctrine, Discipline, being all assigned
To hold upright that witty Man-built frame;
Where every limb, though in themselves distinct,
Yet finely are unto the Scepter linckt.
An Art by which Man seems, but is not free;
Crowns keeping all their specious guiding reins,
Fast in the hand of strong Authority;
So to relax, or wind up Passions chains,
As before humble people know their grief,
Their states are used to look for no relief.
Yet if by parts we travail to compare,
What differences 'twixt these two Empires are:
We buildno Cittadells, our Strengths are Men,
And hold Retreit to be the Losers den:
They, by their Forts, mow their own People down;
A way perchance to keep, not spread a Crown.
Of bondage we leave our Succession free;
Office, and Action, are our liberty.
They may inherit Land; we hope for Place:
They give the Wealthy; we the Active grace.
We hear the fault, and so demand that Head,
Which has in Martial duties been mislead:
Their process is to answer, and appear;
But under Laws, which hold the Scepter dear.
Our Law is Martial, sudden, and severe;
For Fact can rarely intricatenesse bear:
Their Laws take life from Sovereignty,
Thanklesse to which, Power will not let them be.
So that the Mussell-man sends home his head;
The Christian keeps his own, till he be dead.
Our trade is Tax, comprising Men, and Things:
And draw not they Mankindes wealth under Kings?
Soothing the Tyrant, till by his excess,
Want makes the Majesty of Thrones grow less,
By taxing Peoples Vice at such a rate,
As to fill up a Sieve, exhausts a State:
Lastly; so shuffling Trade, Law, Doctrine, Will,
As no soul shall find peace in good, or ill;
Both being Trappes alike used, to entice
The weak, and humble into prejudice.
Our Sultans rule their charge by Prophets Sawes,
And leave the Mufti Judge of all their Laws:
The Christians take, and change Faith with their Kings,
Which under Miters often the Scepter brings.
We make the Church our Sultans instrument:
They with their Kings will make their Church content.
They wrangle with themselves, and by dispute
In questions, think to make the one side mute:
If not, then sacrifice the weaker part;
As if, in Thrones, blood were Religions Art;
Forcing the will, which is to catch the wind,
As if man's Nature were more than his mind:
We in subduing Christians conquer both,
And to lose use of either part are loath.
So that we suffer their fond zeal to pray,
That it may well our conquering armies pay.
And where we are, there Christians feign would be,
If lack of Power were not their modesty.
Thus do all Great States safely manage things,
Which danger seems to Thrones of petty Kings.
For though the Sick have sense of every breath,
And shun all what they feel, for fear of death:
Yet in strong States, those storms they feel give health,
And by their Purgings spoil Infections stealth;
A play of Sunne-motes, from man's small World come,
Upon the great World to work heavy doom.
For proof: Behold in Solomon that fear,
Which Torrid Zones of Tyranny must bear.
For who has lost man's Nature in his passion,
Can never see the World in better fashion:
But credit gives to limitlesse Suspicion,
Which unto all vice gives one Condition,
Confusions Orb; where men may hate their own,
Nature, and Reason there being overthrown.
Hence go out Mandates of conspiracy
Against Mustapha, who must not guiltless be
In such a Father, and a Monarchs eyes,
As will see nothing, but destruction, wise.
Hence Mustapha, from like dreams of the heart,
Sees his destruction wrought by Tyrants Art,
And yet yields things to names; his right to passion;
Which misplaced duties help Power to disfashion.
Nay, hence Mankind, by crafty power oppressed,
Where it has given part, still gives the rest;
And thinking Thrones in all their practice true,
Dare not of their own Creatures ask their due:
But rather, like mild Earth with Weeds or'egrowne,
Yields to be plough'd, manured, and overthrown.
Lastly, thus Scepters fall with their own weight,
When climing Power, once risen to her height,
Descends to make distinction in her lust,
Which grants that absolute may be unjust;
And so subjects to censure what should reign;
Steps to bring Power to People back again.
Whence I conclude: Mankind is both the Form,
And Matter, wherewith Tyrannies transform:
For Power can neither see, work, or devise,
Without the Peoples hands, hearts, wit, and eyes:
So that were Man not by himself oppressed,
Kings would not, Tyrants could not make him beast.
Actus tertius: Scena Prima.
Rossa. Rosten.

ROssa. O wearysome Obedience, Wax to Power!
Shall I in vain be Mustapha's accuser?
Shall any Justice equal him and me?
Is Love so open-ear'd; my power so weak,
As ought against me to my Lord dare speak?
" Sands shall be numbered first and Motion fixed,
" The Sea exchange her channel with the fire,
" Before my will, or reason stand in awe
" Of God, or Nature, common Peoples law.

Rosten. Rossa! whence grows this strange unquiet motion?
Govern your thoughts. What want you to content you,
That have the King of Kings at your devotion?

Ross. Content? O poor estate of Woman's Wit!
The latitude of Princes is Desire,
Which all, it has enjoyed, still carries higher.
Say you the World is left to my devotion?
Who questioned am both in my State, and Fame,
Must lose my Will, and cannot lose my Shame:
For Mustapha, long since condemned to die,
Now lives again.
To boast of marriage then what ground have I?

Roast. Conclude not now: For Thoughts that be offended.
Are seldom with their present visions mended.
Rage sees too much; Security too little;
Affections are, like glassy metal brittle.

Ross. Ah servile Sex! must Yokes our honor be,
To make our own loves our captivity?
No Rossa, no: look not in Languisht Wit,
For none can stand on Fortunes steep with it.
" Think Innocence harm; Virtue dishonor;
" Wound Truth; and ouerweigh the scale of Right:
Sexes have ways apart; States have their fashions:
The virtues of Authority are Passions.

Roast. Rossa! Take heed.
Your Honors, like Kings humors, brittle are,
Which broken once, repayr'd can hardly be;
And these once stained, what is Humanity?
Rossa! first judge your Ends, and then your Means.
You seek to undermine a Princes State,
Deep rooted in by Time, Power, Reverence;
Established on Succession fortunate
Of many Turks: from men that servile be,
Use having lost the use of Liberty.
I understand a Monarchs State too well,
To bid you purchase Peoples idle breath,
That have no power of Honor, Life, or Death:
These ways are wrong, uncertain, fearful too,
In absolutes, which all themselves will do.
But turn your eyes up to the will of one;
Know you must work a Father from his Son.

Rossa. This Parents dotage, as it weakness is,
So works it with the vigor of disease,
Still undermining with the things that please.
Upon this Quick-sand what can be begun?

Roast. Sons love with self-love must be overthrown
By force of Natures law there is nothing won.
Strifes in the Fathers mind you must beget,
And him above his sweet affections bear,
To take impressions both of hope, and fear.

Ross. Those silly natures apt to louingnesse,
Which ever must in others power live,
With Doubt become more fond, with Wrong more thral:
Fear here wants eyes, Hate has no sting at all.

Roast. All these false Strengths of native Confidence,
With their Excess, have their Inconstancy:
The laws of Kind, with Tyrants, nothing be.
Besides, dear Rossa! Ills have such alliance,
As in what subject any one is grown,
The seeds of all, even in that one, are sown.

Ross. This mass of Passions who can deal withal?
Too nice, and subtle is Inconstancy.
Shall Wrong faire-written still in Patience be?
Must my desire so many Cautions have,
And wait on those thoughts that have worshipped me?
I cannot bear this Mediocrity.

Roast. Rossa! Take heed. Extremes are not the means,
To change Estates, either in good, or ill.
Therefore yield not; since that makes Nature less:
Nor yet use Rage, which vainly drives on
The mind to working without instruments:
Besides, it does make partial our intents,
Discredits Truth, condemns indifferent things.
But take upon you quiet Providence,
The Princes State, with his Authority;
Teach Power to doubt; for Doubt is her defense.
Degrees of Passions, as of Spirits there be;
Choose now for Use, and not for Dignity.
Love spreads the wit to play, but not to arm,
Has many feet to walk an easy pace,
Slow to mistrust, and never apt to harm:
But fear of Credit is within the mind,
Strengthened by Nature with the strength of all;
In Men, and Tyrants states both, natural.
The Project of this fear must yet be made
The Princes safety, Honor of the State:
Such glorious Styles may easily ouershade
The ways of Spite; for Treason is in hate.
Flattery straight speaks aloud in Powers right,
Carrying things under names, Truth under might.
" Who dare distinguish in a Tyranny,
" Where fraud it self has Powers authority?
" Who shall correct Errors, made for the King,
" But Kings themselves; who Actors in their fears,
" Most honor those that most suspicion bring.
" Who there sees Right, or dare use Honors name,
" Where both are sure of death, and doubtful fame?
Then Rossa! plant you here; accuse the Son;
Although you fail his death, you need not doubt:
In Tyrants state never was man undone
By miscomplaints. Besides, what comes about
In earth, but it has lets, and finds delays?
Yield not: but multiply malice in patience;
Honor is only form, form Tyrants ways.
Accuse his Friends, speak doubtful, charge, and praise.
Put Truth to silence: People dare not see
The pride of Power in formal Tyranny.
I know my time; the Bassha's how they bend;
Faction still wakes; and Competence has spite;
It Is fault enough that Achmat is his friend;
His lightness, and his power well understood.
Things may so pass as Mustapha may die,
Ere Counsel, or Remorce put Fury by.
But if Extremity chance to require
A more audacious Figure; then use Rage:
It give sometimes an Honor to desire;
It shows a Plainness, credible to Age:
While it is ruled, it may have time, and place;
But if it rule, in prophesies disgrace.

Rossa. I feel my heart now rise; my spirits work;
Confused thoughts all words have ouergrowne,
When Mustapha is dead, what Star has motion,
But Achmat; in whom Solomon yet trusts?
They who their Ends, by Change, strive to advance,
Must never doubt to go the way of Chance.

Rosten. Achmat is wise, and Solymans beloved:
Even Tyrants covet to uphold their fame;
Not fearing evil Deeds, but evil Name.

Rossa. When Childrens blood the Fathers forehead stains,
What privilege for Counselors remains?

Roast. What arguments against him?

Rossa. Use of killing;
Suspicion, the favorite of Tyrants;
Delight of Change; Favors past; and fear of Greatness,
Sharp'ned by Achmats harsh, and open dealing,
Which mighty Tyrants liberty would draw
Into the narrow scope of humane Law.

Roast. Let Mustapha be dead.

Rossa. how dead while Achmat reigns?
Down is the Idol, but the Workmanliues:
His favor, virtue, reputation, course,
To us are still that Mustapha, or worse.
Then down he must, and shall. My chiefest End
Is, first to fix this World on my Succession;
Next so to alter, plant, remove, create,
That I, not he, may fashion this Estate.

Actus Tertius: Scena Secunda.
Beglerbie. Rossa. Rosten.

BEglerbie. Rossa, and Rosten! while you stand debating
The joys, or sorrows of your private Fortunes,
Some evil Angel does traduce you both.
Achmat is called for: Wit, Art, Spite he has;
And while for Sons with Fathers men entreat,
Affection makes each good appearance great.

Ross. Rosten! make haste: go hence, and carry with thee
My life, fame, malice, fortune, and desire:
For which, set all established things on fire.
You ugly Ange^ls of the infernal Kingdoms!
You who most bravely have maintained your beings
In equal power, like Rival, to the heavens!
Let me reign, while I live, in my desires;
Or dead, live with you in eternal fires.

Beg. Ross^! Not words, but deeds please Hell, or Heaven:
I fear to tell; I tremble to conceal;
Fortune, unto the death, is then displeased,
When remedies do ruin the diseased.

Ross. Use not these Parables of coward Fear:
Fear hurts less when it strikes, than when it threatens.

Beg. If Mustapha shall die, his death miscarries
Part of thy end, thy Fame, thy Friends, thy Joy:
Who will, to hurt his foes, himself destroy?

Ross. My self? What is it else but my desire?
My Brother, Father, Mother, and my God,
Are but those steps which help me to aspire.
Mustapha had never truer friend than I,
That would not with him live, but with him die.
Yet tell: What is the worst?

Beg. Camena must, with him, a Traitor be;
Or Mustapha, for her sake, must be free.

Ross. O cruel Fates! that do in Love plant Woe,
And in ^elights make our Disasters grow.
But speak: What has she done?

Beglerb. Undone thy doing.
Discovered unto Mustapha his danger:
And from these relikes, I do more than doubt,
Her confidence brings Solomon about.

Ross. Nay, black Auernus! so I do adore thee,
As I lament my Womb has been so barren,
To yield but one to offer up before thee.
Who thinks the Daughters death can Mothers stay
From ends, whereon a Woman's heart is fixed,
Weighs harmless Nature, without passion mixed.

Beg. Is Mother by the woman overthrown?

Ross. Rage knows no Kin: Power is above the Law,
And must not curious be of base Respect,
Which only they command that do neglect.

Beg. Your Child's death angers him whom you must please.

Ross. My ends are great: Small things are wrought with ease.

Beg. This plants confusion in the Powers above.

Ross. My end is not to quiet, but to move.

Beg. God plagues Injustice in so great excess.

Ross. The doing minds feel not that idleness.

Beg. What if this Work prove not conspiracy,
But care, that with all duties may agree?

Ross. It Is private Fortune that is built on Truth:
Justice is but of great Estates the youth.

Beg. Yet by the Love of Mothers to their Children,
By all the pains of travail, so well known,
Punish, but yet spare life; It is your own.

Ross. I do protest no Terrors, no Desires,
Glories of fame, nor Rumors injuries,
Could, in a Mothers heart, have quenched the fire
Of loving kindness, to her children borne:
It conquered is with nothing, but with scorn.
I am resolved to move the wheels of Fate.
Her Triumph shall be pain; her Glory shame:
Horror is of excess a just reward:
The giuers of example have regard.

CHORUS TERTIVS; Of Time: Eternity.
TIME.

WHat mean these mortal children of mine own,
Ungratefully, against me to complain,
That all I build is by me overthrown?
Vices put under to rise up again?
That on my wheels both Good, and Ill do move;
The one beneath, while the other is above?
Day, Night, Hours, Arts, All; God, or Men create,
The world does charge me, that I restless change;
Suffer no being in a constant state:
Alas! Why are my revolutions strange
Unto these Natures, made to fall, or clime,
With that sweet Genius, euer-mouing Time?
What Weariness; what loathsome Desolations
Would plague these life and death-begetting Creatures?
Nay what absurdity in my Creations
Were it, if Time-borne had Eternal features;
This nether Orb, which is Corruptions Sphere,
Not being able long one shape to bear.
Could Pleasure live? Could Worth have reverence?
Laws, Arts, or Sects (mere probabilities)
Keep up their reputation in Man's sense,
If Novelty did not renew his eyes;
Or Time take mildly from him what he knew,
Making both me, and mine, to each still new?
Daughter of Heaven am I; but God, none greater;
Pure like my Parents; life, and death of Action;
Author of ill success to every creature;
Whose pride against my Periods makes a faction:
With me who go along, rise while they be;
Nothing of mine respects Eternity.
Kings! why do you then blame me, whom I choose,
As my Anointed, from the Potters oar;
And to advance you made the People lose,
While you to me acknowledged your power?
Be confident all Thrones subsist in me:
I am the measure of Felicity.
Mahomet in vain, one Trophee of my might,
Raised by my changed aspect to other Nations,
Strives to make his Succession infinite,
And rob my wheels of growth, state, declination.
But he, and all else, that would master Time,
In mortal Spheres, shall find my power sublime.
I bring the Truth to light; detect he Ill;
My Natiu greatness scorneth bounded ways;
Untimely Power a few days ruin will;
Yea, Worth it self falls, till I list to raise.
The Earth is mine: of earthly things the care
I leave to Men, that like them, earthly are.
Ripe I yet am not to destroy Succession;
The Vice of other Kingdoms give him Time.
The Fates, without me, can make no progression;
By me alone, even Truth does fall, or clime:
The Instant petty webs, without me spunne,
Untimely ended be, as they begun.
Not Kings, but I, can Nemesis send forth,
The judgments of Revenge, and Wrong, are mine:
My Stampes alone do warrant real Worth;
How do untimely Virtues else decline?
For Son, or Father, to destroy each other,
Are bastard deeds, where Time is not the mother.
Such is the work this State has undertaken,
And keeps in Clouds; with purpose to advance
False counsels; in their selfe-craft justly shaken,
As grounded on my slave, and shadow Chance.
Nay more; My child Occasion is not free
To bring forth good, or evil, without me.
And shall I for revealing this misdeed,
By tying Future to the Present ill,
Which keeps disorders ways from happy speed;
Be guilty made of Man's still-erring will?
Shall I, that in my self still golden am,
By their Gross metal, bear an Iron name?
No; Let Man draw, by his own cursed Square,
Such crooked lines, as his frail thoughts affect:
And, like things that of nothing framed are,
Decline unto that Center of defect:
I will disclaim his downfall, and stand free,
As native rival to Eternity.
ETERNITY.
What means this Newborn child of Planets motion?
This finite Elfe of Man's vain acts, and errors?
Whose changing wheels in all thoughts stir commotion?
And in her own face, only, bears the Mirror.
A Mirror in which, since Time took her fall,
Mankind sees Ill increase; no Good at all.
Because in your vast mouth you hold your Tail,
As coupling Hges past with times to come;
Do you presume your Trophies shall not fail,
As both Creations Cradle, and her Tomb?
Or for beyond your self you cannot see,
By days, and hours; would you Eternal be?
Time is the weakest work of my Creation,
And, if not still repayr'd, must straight decay:
The Mortal take not my true constellation,
And so are daz'led, by her nimble sway,
To think her course long; which if measured right,
Is but a Minute of my Infinite.
A Minute which does her subsistence tie;
Subsistencies which, in not being, be:
Shall is to come; and was is passed by;
Time present cements this Duplicitie:
And if one must, of force, be like the other,
Of Nothing is not Nothing made the mother?
Why strives Time then to parallel with me?
What be her types of longest lasting glory?
Arts, Miters, Laws, Moments, Supremacy,
Of Natures erring Alchymie the story:
From Nothing sprang this point, and must, by course,
To that confusion turn again, or worse.
For she, and all her mortal offsprings, build
Upon the moving Base of selfe-conceipt;
Which constant form can neither take, nor yield;
But still change shapes, to multiply deceit:
Like playing Atomi, in vain contending,
Though they beginning had, to have no ending.
I, that at once see Times distinct progression;
I, in whose bosom was, and Shall, still be;
I, that in Causes work The Effects Succession,
Giving both Good, and Ill, their destiny;
Though I bind all, yet can receive no bound;
But see the finite still it self confound.
Time! therefore know thy limits, and strive not
To make thy self, or thy works Infinite,
Whose Essence only is to write, and blot:
Thy Changes prove thou have no stablish't right.
Govern thy mortal Sphere, deal not with mine:
Time but the servant is of Power Divine.
Blame thou this present State, that will blame thee;
Brick-wall your errors from one, to another;
Both fail alike unto Eternity,
Goodness of no mixed course can be the mother.
Both you, and yours do covet states Eternal;
Whence, though pride end, your pains yet be Infernal.
Ruin this Mass; work Change in all Estates,
Which, when they serve not me, are in your power:
Give unto their corruption doomes of Fate;
Let your vast womb your Cadmus-men devour.
The Vice yields scope enough for you, and hell,
To compass ill ends by not doing well.
Let Mustapha by your course be destroyed,
Let your wheels, made to wind up, and untwine,
Leave nothing constantly to be enjoyed:
For your Scithe mortal must to harm incline,
Which, as this World, your maker, does grow old,
Doomes her, for your toys, to be bought, and sold.
Cross your own steps; hasten to make, and mar;
With your Vicissitudes please, displease your own:
Your three light wheels of sundry fashions are,
And each, by others motion, overthrown.
Do what you can: Mine shall subsist by Me:
I am the measure of Felicity.
Actus Quartus: Scena Prima.
Solomon. Achmat.

Solomon. Achmat! Go, charge the Bassha's to assemble:
God only is above me, and consulted.
Take freedom; not, as often Kings servants do,
To bind Church, State, and all Power under you.
Visions are these, or bodies which appeared?
Raised from within, or from above descending?
Did vows lift up my soul, or bring down these?
God's not pleased with us, till our hearts find ease.
What horror's this? Safety, Right, and a Crown,
Thrones must neglect that will adore Gods light.
His will, our good: Suppose it pluck us down;
Revenge is his. Against the ill what right?
What means that Glass borne on those glorious wings,
Whose piercing shadows on my self reflect
Stains, which my vows against my children bring?
My wrongs, and doubts, seem there despayres of Vice;
My Power a Turret; built against my Maker;
My danger, but disorders prejudice.
This Glass, true Mirror of the Infinite,
Shows all; yet can I nothing comprehend.
This Empire, nay the World, seems shadows there;
Which mysteries dissolve me into fear.
I that without feel no Superior power,
And feel within but what I will conceive,
Distract; know neither what to take, nor leave.
I, that was free before, am now captived;
This Sacrifice has raised me from my Earth,
By that I should, from that I am deprived.
In my affections Man, in knowledge more,
Protected no where, far more disunited;
Still King of Men, but of my Self no more.
In my Sons death, it shows this Empires fall;
And in his life, my danger still included:
To die, or kill, alike unnatural.
My powers, and spirits, with prayer thus confused,
Nor judge, nor rest, nor yield, nor reign I can:
No God, no Devil, no constant King, nor Man.
The Earth draws one way, and the sky another.
If God work thus, Kings must look upwards still,
And from these Powers they know not, choose a will.
Or else believe themselves, their strength, occasion;
Make wisdom conscience; and the world their sky:
So have all Tyrants done; and so must I.

Actus quartus: Scena secunda.
Beglerbie. Solomon.

BEglerbie. Solomon! If Rossa you will see alive,
You must make haste: for her Despair is such,
As she thinks all things but her Rage, too much.

Solym. Fortune! have thou not moulds enough of Sorrow,
But thou must those of Love, and Kindness borrow?
Tell me: Out of what ground grows Rossa's passion?

Beg. When hither I from Mustapha returned,
And had made you account of my Commission;
Rossa, whose heart in care for your health burned,
Curiously after Mustapha inquiring,
A token spies, which I from hence did bear,
For Mustapha by sweet Camena wrought;
Yet gave it not; for I began to fear,
And something in it more than kindness thought.
No sooner she espied this precious gift,
But, as enraged, hands on her self she lays;
From me, as one that from her self would shift,
She runs; nor till she found Camena stays.
I follow, and find both their voices high,
The one as doing, the other suffering pain:
But whether your Camena live, or die,
Or dead, if she by rage, or guilt be slain;
If she made Rossa mad, or Rossa mad
To hurt things dearest to her self be glad,
I know not. But o Solomon! make haste;
For Man's despair is but occasion past.

Actus Quartus: Scena Tertia.
Rossa. Solomon. Beglerbie.

ROssa. What! Am I not mine own? Who dare usurp
To take this Kingdom of my self from me?
Nature has lied. She says, Life unto many
May be denied, but not death unto any.
O Solomon! I have at once transgressed
The laws of Nature, and thy laws of State:
I wretched am, and you unfortunate.

Solym. Declare what Storm is this? What Accident?
Thy selfe-accusing does excuse intent.

Rossa. Sir, odious is the fact on every side:
The remedy is more than you can bear;
And more must fall upon you than you fear.

Solym. What threatning's this? what horror? what despite?
Kings thoughts to Jealousy are ouer-tender.

Rossa. And any weakness many does engender.

Solym. Rossa! what means this venom of thy breath?

Rossa. Revenge, and Justice both require my death.

Solym. Then tell.

Rossa. And lose the privilege of death.

Solym. Then tell, and die.

Rossa. Nay tell, and live a worthy death.
Rippenot my wounds, dear Lord! silence is fit:
My life has shame, and death must cover it.

Solym. What should be secret unto thoughts that love?

Ross. All imperfections that offense do move.

Solym. What guiltiness cannot Goodwill forgive?

Rossa. These horrors which in stained souls do live.

Solym. Are thy faults to thy self, or unto me?

Rossa. To both alike. Remediless they be.

Solym. Yet show me trust: it proves your heart is pure,
To me, and all crimes else Kings can endure.

Ross. Imagine all the depths of wickedness:
My womb as hell; my soul the world of sin;
Confusion in my thoughts, fear merciless;
Without me Shame; Impenitence within.

Solym. These words are not of charge, but intercession,
As arguing not your Guilt, but your Oppression.
Yet least I fail, and error multiply,
Declare what is done? What moves this agony?

Ross. Thy Child is slain. These hands imbrued are,
Even in her bowels, whom I nursed with care.

Solym. So strange a death includes some odious crime.

Ross. She did conspire. Silence deuoures the rest.

Solym. Horror I apprehend, Danger, Despair:
All these lie hidden in this word, Conspire.

Ross. This Wretch conspired the ruin of this State.
Sir! ask no more: for Ills go in a blood;
You hear already more than does you good.

Solym. But tell: what made Camena think this thought?
Or by whom could she think to have it wrought?

Ross. Mischief it self is cause of mischief done.
What should she fear; since with her is combined
Mustapha, this States Successor, and your Son?

Solym. Can this be true? Is humane Nature such,
As in the worst part none can think too much?

Ross. The ruins of my own may show my faith:
For I can see no comforts after you;
Yet to your Bassha's know I not what is true.

Solym. Discover how these Treasons came to light.

Ross. Call Achmat first: for Truth is but a blast,
Till it his censures Oracle has past.

Solym. What scorns be these? how am I thus possessed?
Has Achmat other Greatness than by me?

Ross. If greater by you than your self he be.

Solym. In Kings the secrets of Creation rest.

Ross. Sir! you created him: he all the rest.

Solym. I gave that to his Worth, Faith, Industry.

Ross. And so these gifts tied to your children be.

Solym. What can his Age expect by innovation?

Ross. Ambition gets by doing, Estimation.

Solym. His power has no true Basis, but my Grace.

Ross. Sir? Strength, like Number, multiplies by place.

Solym. Decrepit slave, vile creature of mine;
Lies it in his base thoughts, and shaking hands,
To move the props whereon my Empire stands?

Ross. The name of Power is yours; the being his;
By whom Creation, Hope; Reward, and Fear
Spread, and disposed still are, every where.
Besides, there is no Age in man's desire,
Which still is active, young, and cannot rest:
For Achmat knows you will not what you can;
Since Crowns do change a State, but not the Man.

Solym. His Life, and Fortune stand upon my breath.

Ross. Contempt deposes Kings, as well as death.

Solym. But tell: How does their Treachery appear?
Has she confessed? Or who does them accuse?

Ross. This Guidon, with her own hand wrought, and sent,
Bears perfect record what was their intent.

Solym. Expound: What is the meaning of this work,
Under whose Art the arts of Mischief lurk?

Ross. These Clouds, they be the house of Jealousy,
Which fire, and water both, within them bear,
Where Good shows less, Ills greater than they be.
Saturn here feeds on Children that be his.
His word;
A fatal winding sheet Succession is.
This precious Hill, where daintynesse seems wast,
By Natures art, that all Art will exceed,
In careless finesse shows the sweet estate
Of Strength, and Providence together placed:
Two Intercessors reconciling hate,
And giving fear even of it self a taste.
Those Waves, which beat upon the cliffes, do show
The cruel storms, which Envy has below.
The Border round about in Characts has
The mind of all; which in effect is this:
It Is hard to know; as hard, and harder too,
When men do know, to bring their hearts to do.

Solym. What said she, when you showed her this work?

Ross. Like them that are descried, and feign would lurk.
For while she would have made her self seem clear,
She made her fault still more and more appear.

Solym. How brook'd she that the wicked only fear?
Her death (I mean) with what heart did she bear?

Ross. She neither stubburne was, nor overthrown;
And, but for Mustapha, made no request:
As if his harms had only been her own.
Solomon! Take heed.
" Malice, like Clockes woond up to watch the Sun,
" Hasting a headlong course on many wheels,
" Have never done, until they be undone.
I slew my Child; my Child would have slain thee:
All bloody Fates in my blood written be.

Solym. I swear by Mahomet, my Son shall die.
Revenge is Justice, and no cruelty.
Beglerbie! attend. This glorious Phaeton here,
That would at once subvert this State, and Me,
Safe to the Eunuchs carried let him be.
These spirits of practice, that contend with fate,
Must, by their deaths, do honor to a State.

Actus Quartus; Scena Quarta.
Beglerbie. Priest. Mustapha.

BEglerbie. Ah humorous Kings? how are you tossed, like waves,
With breaths, that from the earth beneath you move;
" Observed, and betrayed; known and undone;
" By being nothing, unto all things won.
" Frail man! that mould'st misfortune in thy Wit,
" By giving thy made I doll leave to fashion
" Thy ends to his. For mark; what comes of it?
" Nature is lost, our being only Chance,
" Where Grace alone, not Merit, must advance.
The one my Image: Solymans the other:
He, with himself, is wrought to spoil his own:
I, with my self, am made the instrument,
That Courts should have no great hearts innocent.
But stay: why wander I thus from my ends?
New counsels must be had when Planets fall:
Change has her periods, and is natural.
The Saint we worship is Authority,
Which lives in Kings, and cannot with them die.
True faith makes Martyrs unto God alone:
Misfortune has no such odds in a Throne.
But see! This Football to the Stars is come,
Mustapha I mean, in Innocence secure,
Which, for it will not give Fate, must endure.
Heli distract, fixed, and aghast, I see,
And will go nearer to observe the rest,
That Wit may take occasion at the best.
For if they feel their State, and know their Strength,
How prone this Mass is for another head;
Did ever hazard find Occasion dead?
Whether he get the Crown, or lose his blood,
The one is ill to him; to me both good.

Priest. False Mahomet! Thy Laws Monarchall are,
Unjust, ambitious; full of spoil, and blood,
Having, not of the best, but greatest, Care.
Must life yield up it self to be put out,
Before this frame of Nature be decayed?
Must blood the tribute be of Tyrants doubt?
O wretched Flesh! in which must be obeyed
Gods law, that wills Impossibility;
And Princes wills, the gulfes of Tyranny.
We Priests, even with the mystery of words,
First bind our selves, and with our selves the rest
To servitude, the sheath of Tyrants sword;
Each worst unto himself, approving best.
People! Believe in God: we are untrue,
And spiritual forges under Tyrants might:
God only does command what is good for you:
Where we do preach your bodies to the War;
Your goods to Tax; your Freedom unto bands;
Duties, by which you owned of others are;
And Fear, which to your harms does lend your hands.
Ah forlorn Wretch! with my hypocrisy,
I Mustapha have ruined, and this State.
I am the Evils friend, Hells Mediator,
A Fury unto man, a man to Furies.

Must. Whence grows this sudden Rage thy gesture vtters?
These Agonies, and furious Blasphemings?
Man then does show his Reason is defaced,
When Rage thus shows it self with Reason graced.

Priest. If thou have felt the selfe-accusing War,
Where knowledge is the endless hell of thought,
The ruins of my Soul there figured are,
For where despair the Conscience does fear
My wounds bleed out that Horror which they bear.

Must. Horror, and Pride, in Nature opposite;
The one makes Error great, the other small:
Where rooted habits have no sense at all.
Heli! judge not thy self with troubled mind,
But show thy heart: when Passions steames breathforth,
Even woes we wondered at are nothing worth.

Priest. I have offended Nature, God, and Thee:
To each a sin, to all impiety.

Must. The faults of man are finite, like his merits:
His Mercies infinite that judges spirits.
Tell me thy Errors, teach me to forgive,
Which he that cannot do, knows not to live.

Priest. Can thou forgive? Rather avoid the cause
Which else makes Mercy more severe than Laws.

Must. From man, to man duties are but respects,
The grounds where of are mere Humanity:
Can Justice other there than Mercy be?

Priest. Thought is an act. Who can forgive remorse,
Where Nature, by her own Law, suffers force?

Must. What shall I do? Tell Me. I do not fear.

Priest. Preserve thy Father, with thy Self, and me:
Else guilty of each others death we be.

Must. Tell how.

Priest. Thy Father purposes thy death:
I did advise: Thou offerest up thy breath.

Must. What have I to my Father done amiss?

Priest. That wicked Rossa thy step mother is.

Must. Wherein have I of Rossa ill deserved.

Priest. In that the Empire is for thee reserved.

Must. Is it a fault to be my Fathers son?
" Ah foul Ambition! which, like Water-flouds
" Not channell-bound, do neighbors overrun;
" And growest nothing when thy rage is done.
Must Rossa's heirs out of my ashes rise?
Yet Zanger! I acquit thee of my blood;
For, I believe, thy heart has no impression
To ruin Mustapha for his Succession.
But tell what Colors they against me use;
And how my Fathers love they first did wound.

Priest. Of treason toward him they thee accuse:
Thy Fame, and Greatness, gives their malice ground.

Must. Good World, where it is danger to be good.
Yet grudge I not power of my self to Power:
This baseness only in Mankind I blame,
That Indignation shoul give laws to fame.
Show me the Truth. To what rules am I bound?

Priest. No man commanded is by God to die,
As long as he may Persecution fly.

Must. To fly has scorn; it argues Guiltiness,
Inherits Fear, weakly abandons Friends,
Gives Tyrants fame, takes Honor from distress.
Death! do thy worst. Thy greatest pains have end.

Priest. Mischief is like the Cockatrices eyes;
Sees first, and kills; or is seen first; and dies.
Fly to thy strength, which makes misfortune vain^.
Rossa intends thy ruin: What is she?
Seek in her bowels for thy Father lost:
Who can redeem a King with viler cost?

Must. O false, and wicked colors of Desire!
Eternal bondage, unto him that seeks
To be possessed of all things that he likes!
Shall I a Son, and Subject seem to dare,
For any Selfenesse, to set Realms on fire,
Which golden titles to rebellions are?
Heli! even you have told me, Wealth was given
The wicked, to corrupt themselves, and others:
Greatness, and health, to make flesh proud, and cruel.
Where, in the good, Sickness mowes down desire;
Death glorifies; Misfortune humbles.
Since therefore Life is but the throne of Woe,
Which sickness, pain, desire, and fear inherit,
Ever most worth to men of weakest spirit:
Shall we, to languish in this brittle Iayle,
Seek, by ill deeds, to shun ill destiny?
And so, for toys, lose immortality?

Priest. Fatal Necessity is never known
Vntillit strike: and till that blow become,
Who falls, is by false visions overthrown.

Must. Blasphemous love! safe conduct of the ill!
What power has given man's wickedness such skill?

Priest. Ah servile Men! how are your thoughts bewitched
With hopes, and fears, the price of your subjection,
That neither sense, nor time can make you see,
The art of Power will leave you nothing free?

Must. Is it in us to rule a Sultans will?

Priest. We made them first for good, and not for ill.

Must. Our Gods they are, their God remains above.
To think against anointed Power is death.

Priest. To worship Tyrants is no work of faith.

Must. It Is rage of Folly that contends with Fate.

Priest. Yet hazard something to preserve the State.

Must. Sedition wounds what should preserved be.

Priest. To wound Powers humors, keeps their honors free.

Must. Admit this true. What sacrifice preuailes?

Priest. Force the petition is that never fayles.

Must. Where then is Natures place for innocence?

Priest. Prosperity; that never makes offense.

Must. Has Destiny no wheels but mere Occasion?

Priest. Could East upon the West else make invasion?

Must. Confusion follows where Obedience leaves.

Priest. The Tyrant only that event deceaues.

Must. And are the ways of Truth, and Honor such?

Priest. Weakness does ever think it owes too much.

Must. Has Fame her glorious colors out of fear?

Priest. What is the world to him that is not there?

Must. Tempt me no more. Goodwill is then a pain,
When her words beat the heart, and cannot enter.
I constant in my counsel do remain,
And more lives, for my own life will not venture.
My fellows! rest. Our Alcoran does bind,
That I alone should first my Father find.

Beg. Sir! by our Lords commandment, here I wayt,
To guide you to his presence:
Where, like a King, and Father, he intends
To honor, and acquaint you with his ends.

Must. Heli! Farewell. All Fates are from above
Chained unto humors that must rise, or fall.
Think what we will: Men do but what they shall.

Priest. Are Men no more? Are Kings anointed blood
Profane to them, and sacred unto us?
Plays Power with laws of God, and Nature thus?
Shall sorrow write this story of oppression
Only in idle tears, and not in blood?
Where is Man's zeal to God, his love to men?
Shall that false Labyrinth of humane fear
Keep Honor, and Revenge still captive there?
No: let the spirit of Wrong stir up affection,
By smart to make both men, and Tyrants know,
There is in each, of each, the overthrow.
Are hell, and heaven peopled out of us?
Keep we the Keys of Conscience, and of Passion,
And can no just revenge in either fashion?
Was ever change unwelcome unto man?
Restless Mortality still hates the present:
No one Rule please the Universal can.
This Empires constitution Martial is,
Where hopes, and fears, must never be unbent:
Anarchie is called for here by discontent.
To Mustapha I know the worlds affection;
To Solomon fear only draws regard,
And men stir easily where the reyne is hard.
Then let them stir, and tear away this veyle
Of pride from Power; that our great Lord may see
Vnmiracled, his own Humanity.
People! Look up above this Diuans name;
This rent of Error; snare of Liberty;
Where punishment is Tyrants tax, and fame.
Abolish these false Oracles of might,
Courts subalterne, which bearing Tyrants seal,
Oppress the People, and make vain, Appeal.
Ruin these spetious maskes of Tyranny,
These Crowne-payd Caddies of their makers fashion;
Which, Power-like, for Right distribute Passion.
Confound Degrees, the Artifice of Thrones
To bear down Nature; while they raise up Art
With gilded Titles, to deceive the heart.
The Church absolues you: Truth approues your work.
Craft, and oppression every where God hates.
Besides, where Order is not, Change is free,
And gives all rights to Popularitie.

CHORUS QVARTVS, Of Conuerts to Mahometisme.
ANgels fell first from God, Man was the next that fell:
Both being made by him for Heaven, have for themselves made Hell.
Defection had, for ground, an essence which might fall,
Grown proud with glories of that God, like whom they would be all.
Hence each thing, but himself, these fallen Powers comprehend,
Nor can beyond depriuings ill their knowledge extend.
But in that darckned Orb, through mists which vice creates,
Ioylesse, enjoy a woeful glimpse of their once happy States.
And Serpent-like, with cursed eternity of evil,
Active in mischief many ways to add more to the Devil,
They take on every shape of vice that may delight,
Striving to make Creation less, Privation infinite.
Whence Man from goodness strayed, and wisdoms innocence,
Yea subject made to grave, and hell, by errors impotence,
Labors, with shaddowed light of imbecillitie,
To raise more towers of Babel up, above the Truth to be.
Among which Phantasms mounts that roof of Tyrants power,
The outward Church, whose nature is her Founders to devour.
And, through an hollow charm of life-forsaken words,
Entangle real things, to reign on all the earth affords:
By irreligious rites, helping Religions name
To blemifh truth, with gilded lies cast in Opinions frame.
Whence she that erst raised Kings, by pulling freedom down,
Now seeks to free inferior Powers, and only bind the Crown.
In which aspiring pride, where Wit encountreth Wit,
The power of the Thrones unequal is, and turns the scale with it:
Mastering those greedy swarms of superstitious rites,
Which by the sinners fear, not faith, makes her scope infinite.
Hence grows it that our Priests, erst Oracles of State,
Against whose doom our Sultans durst trust nothing unto fate,
At once were censured all, in one house to the fire,
As guilty in their idle souls of Icarus desire.
So free, and easy is it to cast down again
The creatures pride, which his Creator couets to restrain:
Again, so easy is it to bring States to death,
By urging those Powers to oppose, whose union gave them breath.
Thus from the lives of Priests kings first their doctrine stain,
And then let Sect, Schism, Question in, to qualify their reign.
Nor can this swollen Excess be well reformed in either,
While both stand mixed of good, and ill, which join not well together.
Kings seeking from the Church the rights of deity;
The Church from Kings, not nursing help, but Gods supremacy.
A strife wherein they both find loss, in stead of gain;
Since neither State can stand alone, much less divided reign.
The strife, and peace of which; like Ocean ebbs, and floods;
Successively, do here contract, and there disperse our goods.
And by this mutual spleen amongst these Sovereign parts
While each seeks gain by others loss, the Universal smarts.
For as souls, made to reign, when they let down their State
Into the bodies humors, straight those humors give them fate:
So, when the Church, and Crown (the souls of Empire) fall
Into Contempt, which humane Power cannot subsist withal,
They strive, turn, and descend, feel Errors destiny,
Which in a well-form'd Empire is, a Vagabond to be.
Thus, in Disorders chain, while each link wresteth other,
Incestuous Error, to her own, is made both child, and mother.
So as their doing is vndoings still to breed,
And fatally entombe again each other, in each deed.
Hence Humane Laws appealed, as Moderators come,
Who, under show of compremise, take on them Sovereign doom;
Entering in at the first, like Wisdom, with applause,
And though propounded from our faults, yet by, consent, made Laws;
Or rather scales, to weigh Opinion with the Truth,
Which, like Stepmothers, often bring the better side to ruth.
And as of active ill (from whence they took their root)
Guilty, and so not strong to stand upon a constant foot,
They wave, strive, and aspire, can bear no weight above,
But, as with Sovereign Power it self, and nothing else in love,
That rival spleen, which Equals still to Equals bear,
Forgotten, or a-sleepe, as if desire had conquered fear,
They factiously a peace with their chief rival make,
And let in Wars, which, like a Flood, all Sea-banks ouer-rake.
In which one act Laws prove, though nature gave them ground,
That they both mould, and practice took from War, which has no bound.
Because, like Mars his seed, they feed upon their own;
And by the spoil of Crowns, and Men, take glory to be known.
In which dear enterchange between Church, Laws, and Might,
While all their counsels are allayed, by oueracting, Right;
They leave their supreme pitch to servile Craft impawn'd,
Descending each to traffike there, where he ought to command.
Till fondly thus engaged into a Civil War,
They casting off all public ends, do only make to mar.
Yet keep a scope in show to counterpoise each other,
And save the health, and honor up of Monarchy their mother.
" But as in Man, whose frame is chiefly four Complexions,
" Really joined, dispersed, mixed with opposite connexions,
" When any of these fourefold, or distract too far,
" Diseases reign, which but Disorders native children are;
" From which contention stirred 'twixt Nature, and her Foes,
" While humor weaken humor does, to health the Body grows:
" So in these diverse Powers, excess of Opposition,
" Often, by begetting strange diseases, proves the States Physician.
Mauors, that monster, borne of many-headed Passion,
While it seems to destroy al moulds, to each mould giving fashion.
" Yet as these Elements, thus opposite in kind,
" While, balanced by superior ties, they live, as if combinde
" To make their Discords base unto that harmony,
" In whose sweet union mildely linkt all Powers concur to be;
" When any breaks too much that poyse wherein they stood,
" To make his own subsistence firm, with show of common good;
" By oueracting, straight it breaks that well built frame,
" Wherein their being stood entire, although they lost their name:
" So in that Noble work of public Government,
" When Crowns, Church, Soldiers, or the Laws, do overmuch dissent,
" That frame, wherein they lived, as fatally dissolved;
" And each in gulfes of selfe-Conceipt, as fatally, inuolu'd.
Thus reeles our present State, and her foundation waves,
By making Trophies of times past, of present time the graves.
Laws strive to curb the Church, the Church wounds Laws again;
The Soldier would have Church, Throne, Laws kept low, that he might reign.
And as before, while they joined to make Empire large,
All unto greatness raised were, by doing well their charge:
So now, by pulling quils each from the others wings,
They jointly all are cried down, by letting fall their Kings.
A fate prepared to shake that Ottoman succession,
Which erst, removed from men's eyes, wrought reverend impression.
Where now, this Sultans line profaned when men shall see,
They soon will scorn Grace, Hope, and Fear; the Scepters mystery.
Nor will they more by Faith, or Zeal, in war be led
To sacrifice their lives to Power, for fame when they be dead.
Or, to shun Mortal pains, provoke the Infinite;
Wrong in Man's nature stirring sparks, that give both heat, and light,
To gather in again those strengths they gave away;
And so pluck down that Sampsons post, on which our Sultans stay.
Actus Quintus: Scena Prima.
Zanger solus.

NOurisht in Court, where no Thoughts peace is nourisht,
Used to behold the Tragedies of ruin,
Brought up with fears that follow Princes fortunes;
Yet am I like him that has lost his knowledge,
Or never heard one story of Misfortune.
My heart does fall away: fear falls upon me.
Tame Rumors, that have been mine old acquaintance
Are to me now (like Monsters) fear, or wonder.
My Love begins to plague me with Suspicions.
My Mothers promises of my advancement;
The name of Mustapha so often murmured,
With whose name ever I have been rejoiced,
Now makes my heart misgiue, my spirits languish.
Man then is Augur of his own misfortune,
When his joy yields him arguments of anguish.
Actus Quintus: Scena Secunda.
Achmat. Zanger.

AChm. Tyrants! Why swell you thus against your Makers?
Is raised Equality so soon grown wild?
Dare you deprive your People of Succession,
Which Thrones, and Scepters, on their freedoms build?
Have fear, or love, in Greatness no impression?
Since people, who did raise you to the Crown,
Are ladders standing still to let you down.

Zang. Achmat! what strange Events beget these Passions?

Achm. " Nature is ruined; Humanity fallen a sunder;
" Our Alcoran profaned; Empire defaced;
" Ruin is broken loose; Truth dead; Hope banished.
My heart is full; my voice, and spirits tremble.

Zang. Yet tell the worst.
By Counsel, or Comparison things lessen.

Achm. No Counsel, or Comparison can lessen
The loss of Mustapha, so vily murth'red.

Zang. How? dead? what Chance, or Malice has prevented
Mankindes good fortune?

Achmat. Fathers unkindly doubts.

Zang. Tell, how?

Achmat. when Solomon, by cunning spite
Of Rossa's witchcrafts, from his heart had banished
Justice of Kings, and Louingnesse of Fathers,
To wage, and lodge such camps of heady passions,
As that sects cunning practices could gather;
Envy took hold of worth: doubt did misconster:
Renown was made a lie, and yet a terror:
Nothing could calm his Rage, or move Compassion:
Mustapha must die. To which end fetched he was,
Laden with hopes, and promises of Favor.
So vile a thing is Craft in every heart,
As it makes Power it self descend to Art.
While Mustapha, that neither hoped, nor feared,
Seeing the storms of Rage, and Danger coming,
Yet came; and came accompanied with power.
But neither Power, which warranted his safety;
Nor Safety, that makes Violence a Justice;
Could hold him from Obedience to this Throne:
A Gulf, which has devoured many a one.

Zang. Alas! Could neither Truth appease his fury?
Nor his unlooked Humility of coming?
Nor any secret witnessing remorses?
Can Nature, from her self, make such divorces?
Tell on; that all the World may rue, and wonder.

Achm. There is a place environed with Trees,
Upon whose shaddowed center there is pitched
A large, embrodered, sumptuous Pauillion;
The stately Throne of Tyranny, and Murder.
Where Mighty men are slain, before they know
That they to other than to Honor go.
Mustapha no sooner to the Port did come,
But thither he is sent for, and conducted
By six slave Eunuchs, either taught to color
Mischief with reverence, or forced, by Nature,
To reverence true Virtue in misfortune.
While Mustapha, whose heart was now resolved,
Not fearing Death, which he might have prevented;
Nor craving Life, which he might well have gotten,
If he would other duties have forgotten;
Yet glad to speak his last thoughts to his Father,
Desired the Eunuchs to entreat it for him.
They did; wept; they and kneeled to his Father.
But bloody Rage, that glories to be cruel;
And Jealousy, that fears she is not fearful;
Made Solomon refuse to hear, or pity.
He bids them haste their charge: and bloody-ey'd
Beholds his Son, whilst he obeying died.

Zan. How did that doing Heart endure to suffer? Tell on.
Quicken my Powers hardened, and dull to good,
Which, yet unmoved hear tell of brothers blood.

Achm. while these six Eunuchs to this charge appointed
(Whose hearts had never used their hands to Pity,
Whose hands, now only, trembled to do Murder)
With Reverence, and Fear, stood still, amazed;
Loath to cut off such Worth, afraid to save it:
Mustapha with thoughts resolved, and united,
Bids them fulfill their charge, and look no further.
Their hearts afraid to let their hands be doing,
The Cord, that hateful instrument of Murder,
They lifting up let fall, and falling lift it:
Each sought to help, and helping hindered other.
Till Mustapha, in haste to be an Angel,
With heavenly smiles, and quiet words, foreshowes
The joy and peace of those souls where he goes.
His last words were; O Father! Now forgive me;
Forgive them too, that wrought my overthrow:
Let my Grave never minister offenses.
For, since my Father coueteth my death,
Behold, with joy, I offer him my breath.
The Eunuchs rore: Solomon his Rage is glutted:
His thoughts divine of Vengeance for this Murder:
Rumor flies up, and down: the People murmur:
Sorrow gives Laws before men know the truth;
Fear prophecieth aloud, and threatens ruth.

Zang. Remiss, and languisht are men's coward Spirits,
Where God forbids Revenge, and Patience too:
Yet to the dead Nature or daineth rites,
Which idle Love, I feel, has power to do.
I will go hence, and show to them that live,
That God Almighty cannot all forgive.

Actus Quintus: Scena Tertia.
Rosten. Achmat.

Roast. Help Achmat! help: Furies runs over all.
Pity my state, that with the Empire fall.

Achm. What sound is this of Ruin, and Confusion?
Terror afraid? Cruelty come for Pity?
Seditious Rosten, running from Sedition?
And Malice forced to enemies for succor?

Roast. Achmat! The mysteries of Empire are dissolved.
Fury has made the People know their forces.
Majesty (as but a Mist,) they breed, and spread.
Nothing, but things impossible will please.
Mustapha must live again, or Rosten perish.
Oh wretchedness! which I cannot deny;
I am ashamed to live, and loath to die.

Achm. Tell on the dangers which concern the State:
For thee! thou Rod ordained unto the fire,
Thy other doomes let Acheron enquire.

Roast. When Mustapha was by the Eunuchs strangled,
Forthwith his Camp grew doubtful of his absence:
The guard of Solomon himself did murmur.
People began to search their Princes Counsels:
Fury gave Laws: the Laws of Duty vanished:
Kind Fear of him they loved Selfe-feare had banished.
The headlong spirits were the heads that guided:
He that most disobeyed, was most obeyed.
Fury so suddenly became united,
As while her forces nourished Confusion,
Confusion seemed with Discipline delighted.
Toward Solomon they run: and as the Waters,
" That meet with banks of Snow, make Snow grow Water:
So, even those Guards, that stood to interrupt them,
Give easy passage, and pass on amongst them.
Solomon, who saw this storm of Mischief coming,
Thinks absence his best argument unto them:
Retires himself, and sends me to demand,
What they demanded, or what meant their coming?
I spoke: they cried: For Mustapha, and Achmat.
Some bid away; some kill; some save; some hearken.
Those that cried, Save, were those that sought to kill me.
Who cried, Hark, were those that first brake silence,
They held that bad me Go. Humility was guilty;
Words were reproach; Silence in me was scornful;
They answered ere they asked; assured, and doubted.
I fled; their Fury followed to destroy me;
Fury made haste; Haste multiplied their Fury;
Each would do all; none would give place to other.
The hind most struck; and while the foremost listed
Their arms to strike, each Weapon hindered other:
Their running let their strokes, strokes let their running.
Desire, mortal enemy to desire,
Made them, that sought my life, give life unto me.
Now Achmat! Though Blood-thirst deserve no Pity;
Malice no love; though just Revenge be Mercy;
Yet save me. For, although my death be lawful,
The Judges, and the manner are unlawful.
If I die; what has Solomon for warrant?
Mischief is still the Gouerness of Mischief.
If Solomon be slain; where will they stay,
That Thorough God, and Majesty make way?

Achm. Rosten! dare thou name Duty, Laws, or Mercy?
Owe not thy self to him thou would destroy;
Make good thy love of Murder; die with Joy.

Roast. If Solomon who has been thy best Fortune,
Safe thou will see, or safe his state preserve,
Make haste. The State did never ill deserve.

Exit. Achm. Occasion! when art thou more glorious,
Than even now; when thou requir'st of me,
To fall with States in common destiny?
States trespass not: Tyrants they be that swerve,
And bring upon all Empires age, or death.
By making Truth but only Princes breath.
This Monarchy first rose by Industry;
Honor held up by universal Fame,
Stirring men's minds to strange Audacitie:
Great ends procured our Armies greater name:
To enemies no Injury had blame:
Worth was not proud: Authority was wise;
And did not on her own then tyrannize.
Now owned by humor of this dotard King
(Who, swollen with practice of long Government,
Does stain the Public with ill managing)
Honor is laid a-sleepe: Fame is unbent:
His Will, his End; and Powers right every where:
Now, what can this, but dissolution, bear?
Whether our choice, or Nature gave us Kings,
The end of either was the good of all:
Where many strengths make this Omnipotence,
The good of many there is natural.
One draws from all: Can that be fortunate?
All leave this one: Can this be Injury?
And shall I help to stay the Peoples rage
From this Estate, thus ruined with Age?
No People, No. Question these Thrones of Tyrants;
Revive your old equalities of Nature;
Authority is more than that she makes.
Lend not your strengths to keep your own strengths under.
Proceed in Fury: Fury has Law, and Reason,
Where it does plague the wickedness of Treason.
For when whole Kingdoms surfeit, and must fall,
Justice diuides not there, but ruins all.
Besides of Duties 'twixt the earth, and sky,
He can observe no one that cannot die.
But stay! Shall Man the Damme, and Grave of Crowns,
With Mutiny, pull sacred Scepters down?
People of Wisdom void, with Passion filled,
While they keep names still press to ruin things:
Freedom dissolues them; Order they refuse:
Worth, Freedom, Power, and Right while they destroy;
Worth, Freedom, Power, and Right they would enjoy.
What soul then loving Nature, Duty, Order,
Would hold a life of such a statelesse State,
As, made of Humors, must give Honor fate?
No Achmat! Rather, with thy hazard, strive
To save this high raised Sovereignty,
Under whose wings there was Prosperity.
I yield. But how?
Force is impossible; for that is theirs:
Counsel shows, like their enemy, Delay:
Order turns all desires into fears:
Their Art is violence: and Chance their end:
What, but Occasion, there can be my friend?
Behold where Rossa comes, in her looks varying,
Like rage, that with it self, still fears miscarying.

Actus Quintus; Scena Quarta.
Rossa. Achmat.

ROssa. Who ever thinks by Virtue to aspire,
And Goodness dreams to be but Fortunes star;
Or who by Mischiefs wit seeks his desire,
And thinks, no Conscience, ways to Honor are:
He, Mustapha! here seeing thee, and me;
Sees no Man's good, or ill rules Destiny.
Then ah! woe worth them that with God contend,
And would exchange the course of Fate by Wit,
Which God makes work, to bring his works to end,
And with it self, even often, does ruin it.
Ah Tyrant Fate! to them that do amiss:
For nothing left me, but my Error, is.

Achm. What Glories this that with it self is sad?
Good luck makes all hearts, but the guilty, glad.

Ross. Zanger, for whom even Mustapha was slain,
And unto whom Camena's blood was shed;
Zanger, for whom all Worlds on me complain,
Has done that which nor Law, nor Truth could do:
(Horror, and doubt in my desires breed)
Murdered himself, and overthrown me too.

Achm. Tell why? And how he so unthankful died?

Ross. In every Creatures heart there lives Desire,
Which men do hallow as appearing good:
For Greatness they esteem it to aspire,
Although it weakness be, well understood.
This unbound, raging, infinite Thought-fire
I took; nay it took me, and placed my heart
On hopes to alter Empire, and Succession.
Chance was my faith, and Order my despair:
Sect, Innovation, Change of Princes right,
My studies were: I thought Hope had no end,
In her, that has an Emperor to friend.
Whence like the Storms (that then like storms do blow,
When all things, but themselves, they overthrow)
I ventured; first to make the Father fear,
Then hate, then kill, his most beloved Child.
My Daughter did discover him my way,
To Mustapha she opened mine intent:
For she had tried, but could not turn my heart.
Yet no hurt to me she in telling meant,
Though hurt she did me to disclose my Art.
I sought Revenge: Revenge it could not be;
For, I confess, she never wronged me.
Remorse, that has a Faction in each heart,
Womanish Shame, which is Compassions friend,
Conspired with Truth to have restrained me;
Yet killed I her whom I did dearly love;
Furies of choice, what arguments can move?
I killed her: for I thought her death would prove
That Truth, not Hate, made Mustapha suspected:
The more it seemed, against a Mothers love,
The more it showed, I Solomon affected:
Thus, underneath severe, and upright dealing,
A mischievous Stepmothers malice stealing,
It took effect: For few mean ill in vain.
Which wicked Art although the Father knew,
Yet his Affection turned my ill to good:
Vice, but of hers, being only understood.
Fear grew discreet, and would not speak in vain;
Courage turned all the strengths of heart to bear;
Justice it self durst murmur, not complain:
So little care the Fates for us below:
So little men fear God, they do not know.
But ah! Woe worth each false preposterous way,
Which promises good luck to evil deeds:
Since Mustapha, whose death I made my Glory,
Has left me no power now, but to be sorry.
For Zanger, when he saw his Brother dead,
Confusedly with diverse shapes distract,
He silent stood, with Horrors compassed:
His Duty mixed with woe; Kindness with rage;
Reverence, Revenge, both representing shame,
Equally against, and with a Mothers name.
But as these shadows vanished from his mind,
The Globes of his enraged eyes he threw
On me, like Nature justly made unkind:
And for this hateful fault my Love did make,
From Pity, Woe, and Anger, thus he spoke:
" Mother! Is this the way of Woman's heart?
" Have you no Law, or God; but Will, to friend?
" Can neither Power, nor Goodness escape your Art?
" Be these the Counsels by which you ascend?
" Is there no Hell? Or do the Devils love fire?
" If neither God, Heaven, Hell, or Devil be;
" It Is plague enough that I am borne of thee.
" Mother! O monstrous Name! shall it be said,
" That thou have done this fact for Zangers sake?
" Honor, and Life, shall they to one upbraid,
" That, from thy Mischief, they their Honor take?
" O wretched Men! which under shame are laid,
" For faults which we, and which our Parents make.
" Yet Rossa! to be thine, in this I glory;
" That, being thine, gives power to make thee sorry.
He wounds his heart; and falling down with death
On Mustapha, who there for his sake died;
These words he spoke:
" Ah base Ambition! mould of Cruelty,
" In thy vast narrow bosom ever breed
" These hideous Counsels, light-abhorring deeds.
" Yet you pure souls that Mahomet adore!
" Read in these wounds my horror of his death,
" And to the Christians carry thou it, Breath.
He dies. Woes me. When in my heart I look,
Horror I see: all there lost but despair:
My Love, and Joy become Afflictions book;
Eternity of Shame is printed there.
To think of God! Alas, that so I may:
Yet Power, and Goodness can but show me Fear:
Mercy I cannot crave, that cannot trust:
Nor die I will; for death concludes pains:
Nor languish in conceit; for then I must
Abhor my soul, in which all Mischiefs reign.
I will bear with me, in this Bodies dust,
What curse soever to the earth remains.
I will bear with me Envy, Rage, Desire,
To set all Hearts, all Times, all Worlds on fire.
You weak Souls! whose true Love has made you base,
And fixed your Quiets upon others will:
You humble Hearts! which unto Power give place,
For conscience bearing yokes of Tyrants skill:
You poor Religious! who in hope of grace,
Bear many sore temptations of the ill,
Rejoice: Unkindness, Cruelty, Disgrace,
Vengeance, and Wrong bear hence with me I will.
Rather take heed: where can more Danger be,
Than where these Powers may be disposed by me?

CHORUS QVINTVS Tartarorum.
VAst Superstition! Glorious style of Weakness!
Sprung from the deep disquiet of Man's passion,
To desolation, and despair of Nature:
Thy Texts bring Princes Titles into question:
Thy Prophets set on work the sword of Tyrants:
They manacle sweet Truth with their distinctions:
Let Virtue blood: teach Cruelty for Gods sake;
Fashioning one God; yet him of many fashions,
Like many-headed Error, in their Passions.
Mankind! Trust not these Superstitious dreams,
Fears Idols, Pleasures Relikes, Sorrows Pleasures.
They make the wilful hearts their holy Temples:
The Rebels unto Government their Martyrs,
No: Thou child of false miracles begotten!
False Miracles, which are but ignorance of Cause,
Lift up the hopes of thy abiected Prophets:
Courage, and Worth abjure thy painted heavens.
Sickness, thy blessings are; Misery, thy trial;
Nothing, thy way unto eternal being;
Death, to salvation; and the Grave to Heaven.
So Blessed be they, so Angel'd, so Eternized
That tie their senses to thy senseless glories,
And die, to cloy the after-age with stories.
Man should make much of Life, as Natures table,
Wherein she writes the Cipher of her glory.
Forsake not Nature, nor misunderstand her:
Her mysteries are read without Faiths eyesight:
She speaks in our flesh; and from our Senses,
Delivers down her wisdoms to our Reason.
If any man would break her laws to kill,
Nature does, for defense, allow offenses.
She neither taught the Father to destroy:
Nor promised any man, by dying, joy.
CHORUS SACERDOTVM.
" OH wearisome Condition of Humanity!
" Borne under one Law, to another bound:
" Vainly begot, and yet forbidden vanity,
" Created sick, commanded to be sound:
What means Nature by these diverse Laws?
Passion and Reason, selfe-diuision cause:
Is it the mark, or Majesty of Power
To make offenses that it may forgive?
Nature herself, does her own self defloure,
To hate those errors she her self does give.
For how should man think that, he may not do
If Nature did not fail, and punish too?
Tyrant to others, to her self unjust,
Only commands things difficult and hard.
Forbids us all things, which it knows is lust,
Makes easy pains, impossible reward.
If Nature did not take delight in blood,
She would have made more easy ways to good.
We that are bound by vows, and by Promotion,
With pomp of holy Sacrifice and rites,
To teach belief in good and still devotion,
To preach of Heavens wonders, and delights:
Yet when each of us, in his own heart looks,
He finds the God there, far unlike his Books.
FINIS.
This Tragedy called MVSTAPHA, may be printed: Dated the three and twentieth
Day of JUNE, in the year of our LORD GOD, one thousand, six hundred, thirty
and two.

HENRY HERBERT.
SONNET I.
Love, the delight of all well-thinking minds;
Delight, the fruit of virtue dearly loved;
Virtue, the highest good, that reason finds;
Reason, the fire wherein men's thoughts be proved;
Are from the world by Natures power bereft,
And in one creature, for her glory, left.
Beauty, her cover is, the eyes true pleasure;
In honors fame she lives, the ears sweet music,
Excess of wonder grows from her true measure;
Her worth is passions wound, and passions physic,
From her true heart, clear springs of wisdom flow,
Which imag'd in her words and deeds, men know.
Time feign would stay, that she might never leave her,
Place does rejoice, that she must needs contain her,
Death craves of Heaven, that she may not bereave her,
The Heavens know their own, and do maintain her,
Delight, Love, Reason, Virtue let it be,
To set all women light, but only she.
SONNET II.
Fair Dog, which so my heart do tear asunder,
That my liues-blood, my bowels ouerfloweth,
Alas, what wicked rage conceal'st thou under,
These sweet enticing joys, thy forehead shows?
Me, whom the light-wing'd God of long has chased,
Thou have attained, thou gave that fatal wound,
Which my souls peaceful innocence has rased,
And reason to her servant humor bound.
Kill therefore in the end, and end my anguish,
Give me my death, me thinks even time vpbraideth
A fullness of the woes, wherein I languish:
Or if thou will I live, then pity pleads
Help out of thee, since Nature has revealed,
That with thy tongue thy bytings may be healed.
SONNET III.
MOre than most fair, full of that heavenly fire,
Kindled above to show the Makers glory,
Beauties firstborn, in whom all powers conspire,
To write the Graces life, and Muses story.
If in my heart all Saints else be defaced,
Honor the Shrine, where you alone are placed.
Thou window of the sky, and pride of spirits,
True Character of honor in perfection,
Thou heavenly creature, Judge of earthly merits,
And glorious prison of man's pure affection,
If in my heart all Nymphs else be defaced,
Honor the shrine, where you alone are placed.
SONNET IV.
YOu little stars that live in skies,
And glory in Apollo's glory,
In whose aspects conioined lies
The Heavens will, and Natures story,
Joy to be likened to those eyes,
Which eyes make all eyes glad, or sorry,
For when you force thoughts from above,
These overrule your force by love.
And thou o Love, which in these eyes
Have married Reason with Affection,
And made them Saints of beauties skies,
Where joys are shadows of perfection,
Lend me thy wings that I may rise
Up not by worth but thy election;
For I have vowed in strangest fashion,
To love, and never seek compassion.
SONNET V.
WHo trusts for trust, or hopes of love for love,
Or who beloved in Cupids laws does glory;
Who joys in vows, or vows not to remove,
Who by this light God, has not been made sorry;
Let him see me eclipsed from my Sun,
With shadows of an Earth quite overrun.
Who thinks that sorrows felt desires hidden,
Or humble faith with constant honor armed,
Can keep love from the fruit that is forbidden,
Change I do mean by no faith to be charmed,
Looking on me, let him know, loves delights
Are treasures hid in caves, but kept with spirits.
SONNET VI.
EYes, why did you bring unto me those graces,
Graced to yield wonder out of her true measure,
Measure of all joys stay to fancy traces
Module of pleasure.
Reason is now grown a disease in reason,
Thoughts knit upon thoughts free alone to wonder,
Sense is a spy, made to do fancy treason,
Love go I under.
Since then eyes pleasure to my thoughts betray me,
And my thoughts reasons-leuell have defaced,
So that all my powers to be hers, obey me,
Love be thou graced.
Graced by me Love? no, by her that owes me,
She that an Angels spirit has retained
In Cupids fair sky, which her beauty shows me,
Thus have I gained.
SONNET VII.
THe World, that all contains, is ever moving,
The Stars within their spheres for ever turned,
Nature ( the Queen of Change) to change is loving,
And Form to matter new, is still adiourned.
Fortune our phansie-God, to vary likes,
Place is not bound to things within it placed,
The present time upon time passed strikes,
With Phoebus wandering course the earth is graced.
The Air still moves, and by its moving clears
The Fire, up ascends, and planets feeds,
The Water passes on, and all lets wears,
The Earth stands still, yet change of changes breeds;
Her plants, which Summer ripes, in Winter fade,
Each creature in unconstant mother lies,
Man made of earth, and for whom earth is made,
Still dying lives, and living ever dies;
Only like fate sweet Myra never varies,
Yet in her eyes the doom of all Change carries.
SONNET VIII.
SElfe-pitties tears, wherein my hope lies drowned,
Sighs from thoughts fire, where my desires laguish,
Despair by humble love of beauty crowned,
Furrows not worn by time, but wheels of anguish;
Dry up, smile, joy, make smooth, and see
Furrows, despaires, sighs, tears, in beauty be.
Beauty, out of whose clouds my heart tears rained,
Beauty, whose niggard fire sighs smoke did nourish,
Beauty, in whose eclipse despaires remained,
Beauty, whose scorching beams make wrinkles flourish;
Time has made free of tears sighs, and despair,
Writing in furrows deep; she once was fair.
SONNET IX.
OLoue, thou mortal sphere of powers divine,
The paradise of Nature in perfection,
What makes thee thus thy Kingdom undermine,
Vailing thy glories under woes reflection?
Tyranny counsel out of fear does borrow,
To think her Kingdom safe in fear, and sorrow.
If I by nature, Wonder and Delight,
Had not sworn all my powers to worship thee,
Justly mine own revenge receive I might,
And see, thee Tyrant, suffer tyranny:
See thee thy selfe-despaire, and sorrow breeding,
Under the wounds of woe and sorrow bleeding.
For sorrow holds man's life to be her own,
His thoughts her stage, where tragedies she plays,
Her orb she makes his Reason overthrown,
His love foundations for her ruins lays;
So as while love will torments of her borrow,
Love shall become the very love of sorrow.
Love therefore speak to Caelica for me,
Show her thy self in every thing I do;
Safely thy powers she may in others see,
And in thy power see her glories too;
Move her to pity, stay her from disdain,
Let never man, love worthiness in veins.
SONNET X.
Love, of man's wandering thoughts the restless being,
Thou from my mind with glory wast invited,
Glory of those fair eyes, where all eyes, seeing
Virtues and beauties riches, are delighted;
What Angels pride, or what selfe-disagreeing,
What dazzling brightness has your beams benighted,
That fallen thus from those joys which you aspired,
Down to my darkened mind you are retired?
Within which mind since you from thence ascended,
Truth clouds it self, Wit serves but to resemble,
Envy is King, at others good offended,
Memory does worlds of wretchedness assemble,
Passion to ruin passion is intended,
My reason is but power to dissemble;
Then tell me Love, what glory you divine
Your self can find within this soul of mine?
Rather go back unto that heavenly quire
Of Natures riches, in her beauties placed,
And there in contemplation feed desire,
Which till it wonder, is not rightly graced,
For those sweet glories, which you do aspire,
Must, as Idea's, only be embraced
Since excellence in other form enjoyed,
Is by descending to her Saints destroyed.
SONNET XI.
IVno, that on her head Loves liuerie carried,
Scorning to wear the marks of Io's pleasure,
Knew while the Boy in AEquinoctiall tarried,
His heats would rob the heaven of heavenly treasure,
Beyond the Tropicks she the Boy does banish,
Where smokes must warm, before his fire do blaze,
And Childrens thoughts not instantly grow Mannish,
Fear keeping lust there very long at gaze:
But see how that poor Goddess was deceived,
For Women's hearts far colder there than ice,
When once the fire of lust they have received,
With two extremes so multiply the vice,
As neither party satisfying other,
Repentance still becomes desires mother.
SONNET XII.
Cupid, thou naughty Boy, when thou were loathed,
Naked and blind, for vagabunding noted,
Thy nakedness I in my reason clothed,
Mine eyes I gave thee, so was I devoted.
Fie Wanton, fie; who would show children kindness?
No sooner he into mine eyes was gotten,
But straight he clouds them with a seeing blindness,
Makes reason wish that reason were forgotten.
From thence to Mira's eyes the Wanton strayeth,
Where while I charge him with ungrateful measure,
So with fair wonders he mine eyes betrayeth,
That my wounds, and his wrongs, become my pleasure;
Till for more spite to Myra's heart he flies,
Where living to the world, to me he dies.
SONNET XIII.
Cupid, his Boys play many times forbidden
By Venus, who thinks Mars best manhood boyish,
While he shot all, still for not shooting chidden,
Weeps himself blind to see that Sex so coyish.
And in this blindness wandreth many places,
Till his foe Absence, has him prisonner gotten,
Who breaks his arrows, bow and wings defaces,
Keeps him till he his Boys play has forgotten.
Then lets him loose, no God of years, but hours
Cures and restores him all things, but his blindness,
Forbids him nothing but the constant powers,
Where Absence never can have power of kindness:
Ladies, this blind Boy that ran from his Mother,
Will ever play the wag with one or other.
SONNET XIV.
WHy how now Reason, how are you amazed?
Is Worth in Beauty shrind up to be clothed?
Shall Natures riches by your self be razed?
In what but these can you be finely clothed?
Though Myra's eyes, glasses of joy, and smart,
Daintly shadowed, show forth love and fear,
Shall fear make reason from her right depart?
Shall lack of hope the love of worth forbear?
Where is the homage then that Nature owes?
Love, is a tribute to perfection due,
Reason in selfe-loues-liuerie bondage shows,
And has no freedom, Myra, but in you;
Then Worth, Love, Reason, Beauty be content,
In Myra only to be permanent.
SONNET XV.
WHen gentle Beauties ouer-wanton kindness,
Had given love the liberty of playing,
Change brought his eyesight by and by to blindness,
Still hatching in excess her own decaying;
Then cut I selfe-loues wings to lend him feathers,
Gave him mine eyes to see in Myra's glory,
Honor and Beauty reconciled togethers
Of Love, the birth, the fatal tomb and story.
Ah Wag, no sooner he that sphere had gotten,
But out of Myra's eyes my eyes he wounds;
And, but his Boyes-play having all forgotten,
His heat in her chaste coldness so confounds,
As he that burns must freeze, who trusts must fear,
Ill quartered coats, which yet all Lovers bears.
SONNET XVI.
Fie foolish Earth, think you the heaven wants glory,
Because your shadows do your self be-night?
All Is dark unto the blind, let them be sorry,
The heavens in themselves are ever bright.
Fie fond desire, think you that Love wants glory,
Because your shadows do your self benight?
The hopes and fears of lust, may make men sorry,
But love still in her self finds her delight.
Then Earth stand fast, the sky that you benight
Will turn again, and so restore your glory;
Desire be steady, hope is your delight,
An orb wherein no creature can be sorry;
Love being placed above these middle regions,
Where every passion wars it self with legions.
SONNET XVII.
CYnthia, whose glories are at Full for ever,
Whose beauties draw forth tears, and kindle fires,
Fires, which kindled once are quenched never,
So beyond hope your worth bears up desires.
Why cast you clouds on your sweet looking eyes?
Are you afraid they show me too much pleasure?
Strong Nature decks the grave wherein it lies,
Excellence can never be expressed in measure.
Are you afraid, because my heart adores you?
The world will think I hold Endymion's place
Hippolytus, sweet Cynthia, kneeled before you,
Yet did you not come down to kiss his face.
Angels enjoy the heavens inward Quires:
Starre-gazers only multiply desires.
SONNET XVIII.
I Offer wrong to my beloved Saint,
I scorn, I change, I falsify my love,
Absence and time have made my homage faint,
With Cupid I do every where remove.
I sigh, I sorrow, I do play the fool,
Mine eyes like Wether-cocks, on her attend:
Zeal thus on either side she puts to school,
That will needs have inconstancy to friend.
I grudge, she says, that many should adore her,
Where love does suffer, and think all things meet;
She says, All selfe-nesle must fall down before her:
I say, Where is the sauce should make that sweet?
Change and contempt (you know) ill speakers be;
Caelica; and such are all your thoughts of me.
SONNET XIX.
AH silly Cupid, do you make it coy
To keep your seat in Cala's furrowed face?
Think in her beauty what you did enjoy,
And do not service done you so disgrace.
She that refused not any shaft you shot,
Lent dewes to Youth, and sparks to Old desire;
If such flat homage be so soon forgot,
Many good fellows will be out of hire.
Good Archers ever have two bows at least,
With boauty faded shoot the elder sort;
For though all be not to shoot at the best,
Yet Archers with their Butting-bowes make sport:
The glory that men in good Kingdoms see,
Is when both Young, and Old in traffic be.
SONNET XX.
WHy how now Cupid, do you covet change?
And from a Stealer to a Keepers state,
With barking Dogs do you the Couerts range,
That carried bread to still them but of late?
What shall we do that with your Bow are wounded?
Your Bow which blinds each thing it does hit,
Since fear and lust in you are so confounded,
As your hot fire bears water still in it.
Play not the fool, for though your Dogs be good,
Hardy, loud, earnest, and of little sleep,
Yet mad desires with cries are not with-stood,
They must be better armed that mean to keep:
And since vnweapon'd care makes men forlorn,
Let me first make your Dog an Unicorn.
SONNET XXI.
Satan, no Woman, yet a wandering spirit,
When he saw ships sail two ways with one wind,
Of Sailors trade he hell did disinherit:
The Devil himself loves not a halfe-fast mind.
The Satyr when he saw the Shepherd blow
To warm his hands, and make his pottage cool,
Manhood forsweares, and half a beast did know,
Nature with double breath is put to school.
Cupid does head his shafts in Women's faces,
Where smiles and tears dwell ever near together,
Where all the Arts of Change give Passion graces;
While these clouds threaten, who fears not the weather?
Sailors and Satyrs, Cupids Knights, and I,
Fear Women that swear, Nay; and know they lie.
SONNET XXII.
IWith whose colors Myra dressed her head,
I, that ware posies of her own hand making,
I, that mine own name in the chimnies read
By Myra finely wrought ere I was waking:
Must I look on? in hope time coming may
With change bring back my turn again to play.
I, that on Sunday at the Church-stile found,
A Garland sweet, with true-loue knots in flowers,
Which I to wear about mine arm was bound,
That each of us might know that all was ours:
Must I now lead an idle life in wishes?
And follow Cupid for his loaves, and fishes?
I, that did wear the ring her Mother left,
I, for whose love she gloried to be blamed,
I, with whose eyes her eyes committed thest,
I, who did make her blush when I was named;
Must I lose ring, flowers, blush, theft and go naked,
Watching with sighs, till dead love be awaked?
I, that when drowsy Argus fell asleep,
Like Jealousy o'rewatched with desire,
Was even warned modesty to keep,
While her breath speaking kindled Natures fire:
Must I look on a-cold, while others warm them?
Do Vulcans brothers in such fine nets arm them?
Was it for this that I might Myra see?
Washing the water with her beauties, white,
Yet would she never write her love to me;
Thinks wit of change while thoughts are in delight?
Mad Girls must safely love, as they may leave,
No man can print a kiss, lines may deceive.
SONNET XXIII.
MErlin, they say, an English Prophet borne,
When he was young and governed by his Mother,
Took great delight to laugh such fools to scorn,
As thought, by Nature we might know a Brother.
His Mother chid him often, till on a day,
They stood, and saw a Coarse to burial carried,
The Father tears his beard, does weep and pray;
The Mother was the woman he had married.
Merlin laughs out aloud in stead of crying;
His Mother chides him for that childish fashion;
Says, Men must mourn the dead, themselves are dying,
Good manners does make answer unto passion.
The Child (for children see what should be hidden)
Replies unto his Mother by and by,
" Mother, if you did know, and were forbidden,
" Yet you would laugh as heartily, as I.
" This Man no part has in the child he sorrows,
" His Father was the Monk that sings before him:
" See then how Nature of Adoption borrowes,
" Truth couets in me, that I should restore him.
" True fathers singing supposed fathers crying,
" I think make women laugh, that lie a-dying.
SONNET XXIV.
PAinting, the eloquence of dumb conceit,
When it would figure forth confused passion,
Having no tables for the Worlds receipt,
With few parts of a few, does many fashion.
Who then would figure Worthiness disgraced,
Nature and Wit imprisoned, or sterued,
Kindness a scorn, and Courtesy defaced,
If he do well paint Want, has well deserved.
But who, his Art in worlds of woe, would prove,
Let him within his heart but cipher Love.
SONNET XXV.
Cupid, my pretty Boy, leave off thy crying,
Thou shall have Bells or Apples; be not peevish;
Kiss me sweet Lad, beshrew her for denying;
Such rude denyalls do make children theeuish.
Did Reason say that Boys must be restrained?
What was it, Tell: has cruel Honor chidden?
Or would they have thee from sweet Myra weyned?
Are her fair breasts made dainty to be hidden?
Tell me (sweet Boy,) does Myra's beauty threaten?
Must you say Grace when you would be a playing?
Does she cause thee make faults, to make thee beaten?
Is Beauties pride in innocents betraying?
Give me a Bow, let me thy Quiver borrow,
And she shall play the child with love, or sorrow.
SONNET XXVI.
WAS ever Man so ouer-match't with Boy?
When I am thinking how to keep him under,
He plays and dallies me with every toy;
With pretty stealths, he makes me laugh and wonder.
When with the child, the child-thoughts of mine own
Do long to play and toy as well as he,
The Boy is sad, and melancholy grown,
And with one humor cannot long agree.
Straight do I scorn and bid the child away
The Boy knows fury, and soon shows me
Caelica's sweet eyes, where Love and Beauty play,
Fury turns into love of that I see.
If these mad changes do make children Gods,
Women, and children are not far at odds.
SONNET XXVII.
Cupid, in Myra's fair bewitching eyes,
(Where Beauty shows the miracles of pleasure)
When thou laist bound for honors sacrifice,
Sworn to thy hate, equality and measure.
With open hand thou offeredst me her heart,
Thy bow and arrows, if I would conspire,
To ruin honor, with whose frozen Art
She tyrannized thy Kingdom of desire.
I glad to dwell, and reign in such perfections,
Gave thee my reason, memory, and sense,
In them to work thy mystical reflections,
Against which Nature can have no defense;
And will thou now to nourish my despair,
Both head and feather all thy shafts with fear?
SONNET XXVII.
YOu faithless Boy, persuade you me to reason?
With virtue do you answer my affection?
Virtue, which you with liuerie and seisin
Have sold and changed out of your protection.
When you lay flattering in sweet Myra's eyes,
And played the wanton both with worth, and pleasure,
In beauties field you told me virtue dies,
Excess and infinite in love, was measure.
I took your oath of dalliance and desire,
Myra did so inspire me with her graces,
But like a Wag that sets the straw on fire,
You running to do harm in other places,
Swear what is felt with hand, or seen with eye,
As mortal, must feel sickness, age and dye.
SONNET XXVIII.
FAction, that ever dwells
In Courts where Wit excels,
Has set defiance:
Fortune and Love have sworn,
That they were never borne,
Of one alliance.
Cupid, that does aspire
To be God of desire,
Swears he gives laws:
That where his arrows hit,
Some joy, some sorrow it,
Fortune no cause.
Fortune swears weakest hearts,
The books of Cupids arts
Turn with her wheel:
Senses themselves shall prove,
Venture has place in love,
Ask them that feel.
This discord it begot
Atheists, that honor not
Nature, thought good;
Fortune should ever dwell
In Courts, where Wits excel:
Love keep the Wood.
Thus to the Wood went I
With Love to live and dye;
Fortune's forlorn:
Experience of my youth
Thus makes me think the truth,
In desert borne.
My Saint is dear to me,
Myra her self is she,
She fair, and true:
Myra that knows to move,
Passions of love with love:
Fortune Adieu.
SONNET XXIX.
ROme, while thy Senate governors did chose,
Your Soldiers florish'd, Citizens were free,
Thy State by change of Consuls did not loose,
They honored were that served or ruled thee:
But after thy proud Legions gave thee Laws,
That their bought voices Empire did bestow,
Worthiness no more was of election cause,
Authority her owners did not know.
Sweet Myra, while good will your friends did choose,
Passions were dainty, sweet desires free,
By one friend marriage did no honor loose,
They were esteemed, that served or ruled thee:
But after flattring Change did give thee laws,
That her false voices did thy faith bestow,
Worthiness no more was of affection cause,
Desire did many heads like monsters show;
Thus Rome and Myra acting many parts,
By often changes lost commanding arts.
SONNET XXX.
GOod-fellowes whom men commonly do call,
Those that do live at war with truth, and shame,
If once to love of honesty they fall,
They both lose their Good-fellowes, and their name;
For thieves, whose riches rest in others wealth,
Whose rents are spoils, and others thrift their gain,
When they grow bankrupts in the Art of Stealth,
Booties to their old fellows they remain.
Cupid, thou free of these Good-Fellowes art:
For while Man cares not who, so he be one,
Thy Wings, thy Bow, thy Arrows take his part,
He neither lives, nor loves, nor lies alone;
But be he once to Hymen's close yoke sworn,
Thou straight brau'st this Good Fellow with the horn.
SONNET XXXI.
Heavens! see how bringing up corrupts or betters;
Cupid long prentice to his Mother bound,
Has taken oath only to escape her fetters,
That he will still like to her self be found.
Which is fair in his Youth, in Old age painted,
Kind out of lust, and humble for his pleasure,
Not long agreeing with things well acquainted,
Covetous, yet prodigal of same and treasure.
Now as they wrong themselves, that for it thunders
Blame sky, or air, wherein these tempests blow:
So does he that at Women's changes wonders,
Since strange it should not be that all men know:
Therefore if Myra change as others do,
Free her; but blame the Son, and Mother too.
SONNET XXXII.
Cupid, thy folly belares sweet Myra's eyes,
For like the blind, that upwards look for light,
You fix those fatal stars on Fortunes skies,
As though such planets gave not Fortune might.
Base Boy, what heart will do him sacrifice,
That wraps repentance in his greatest pleasure?
And his true servants under Fortune ties,
As though his own coin were no current treasure?
Must Danaes lap be wet with golden showers?
Or through the seas must bulls Europa bear?
Must Leda only serve the higher Powers?
Base changeling Boy, and would thou have me swear;
The well-knowne secrets of Astolpho's cup,
Not to disclose, but with white wax seal up?
SONNET XXXIII.
THe Gods to show they joy not in offenses,
Nor plague of humane Nature do desire,
When they have made their rods and whipped our senses,
They throw the rods themselves into the fire.
Then Cupid, thou whom Man has made a God,
Be like thy fellow Gods in weight and fashion,
And now my faults are punished, burn the rod
In fires blown with many-headed passion.
Thy rod is Worth, in Myra's beauty placed,
Which like a Sun has power to burn another,
And though it self can no affections taste,
To be in all men else affections mother:
Therefore if thou will prove thy self a God,
In thy sweet fires, let me burn this fair rod.
SONNET XXXIV.
Cupid, my little Boy, come home again,
I do not blame thee for thy running hence,
Where thou found'st nothing but desires pain,
Jealousy, with selfe-vnworthinesse, offense.
Alas, I cannot Sir, I am made lame,
I light no sooner in sweet Myra's eyes,
(Whence I thought joy and pleasure took their name)
But my right-wing of wanton passion dies.
And I poor child am here in stead of play,
So whipped and scourged with modesty and truth,
As having lost all hope to escape away,
I yet take pleasure to 'tice hither youth:
That my Schoole-fellowes plagu'e as well as I,
May not make merry, when they hear mercy.
SONNET XXXV.
KIngs that in youth like all things else, are fine,
Have some who for their childish faults are beaten;
When more years unto greater vice incline,
Some, whom the world does their errors threaten:
So Cupid, you, who boast of Princes blood,
For Women's Prince like weakness are blamed,
And common error, yet not understood,
Makes you for their New-fanglenesse, defamed.
Poor Women swear, they ignorant of harms,
With gentle minds perchance take easy motions;
Sweet nature yielding to the pleasing charms
Of Man's false lust disguised with devotion;
But which are worse, Kings ill, or easly led,
Schools of this truth are yet not brought a-bed.
SONNET XXXVI.
A These, risen early up to seek his prey,
Spieth a pretty Boy, whereas he lay,
Crying fast by a well:
He wills him why to tell,
And swears to make him well, if that he may.
The pretty Boy smileth, and thanketh the man,
Told him, that he has fallen his Fathers Can,
All of Gold in the deep,
Which loss did make him weep;
Prays him counsel keep; help if he can.
The Man not for conscience, but only for hope,
Puts off his clothes, goes down by the rope,
Meaning to have the Cup,
If he can get it up;
He spills that steals a sup; have loses hope.
For while in the water the false fellow sought,
The pretty Boy steals his cloak, well was he taught,
Wet comes the fellow up,
He cannot find the Cup;
His cloak is taken up; falsehood is naught.
Little lad Cupid, by night and by day,
Wonted in beauties face wanton to play,
Fast bound and imprisoned lies,
In Myra's stealing eyes,
Woefully whence he cries, to run away.
I asked the Boy, the Boy tells his cause,
He says, that Virtue seeks Beauties disgrace,
Virtue that grieves to find,
With what an humble mind,
Men are to Beauty kind, and her deface.
Virtue thinks all this is long of my bow,
Which hiding her Beauties do counterfeits show,
And Beauty Virtues arm,
With such a modest charm,
As my shafts do no harm: she can say, No.
I that was wont to make wisdom a toy,
Virtue a pastime, am now made a boy,
I am thrown from the heart,
Banished is Passions art,
Neither may I depart, nor yet enjoy.
This was the cause, he said, made him complain,
He swears, if I help him, to help me again;
And straightwayes offers me,
If Virtue conquered be,
Beauty and Pleasure free; Joy without pain.
I glad, not for pity, but hope of the prize,
And proud of this language from Caelica's eyes,
Threw off my liberty,
Hoping that blessed I
Shall with sweet Cupid fly, in Beauties skies.
But when in my heart I had peeced his bow,
And on the air of my thoughts made his wings go,
The little Lad fears the rod,
He is not there a God,
I, and delight are odd: Myra says, No.
The Flint keeps fire, the Lad he says true,
But bellows it will not be kindled by you;
He that takes stars with staves,
Yet has not all he craves;
Love is not his that raues: hope is untrue.
SONNET XXXVII.
CAElica, I ouernight was finely used,
Lodged in the midst of paradise, your Heart:
Kind thoughts had charge I might not be refused,
Of every fruit and flower I had part.
But curious Knowledge, blown with busy flame,
The sweetest fruits had in down shadows hidden,
And for it found mine eyes had seen the same,
I from my paradise was straight forbidden.
Where that Curre, Rumor, runs in every place,
Barking with Care, begotten out of fear;
And glassy Honor, tender of Disgrace,
Stands Ceraphin to see I come not there;
While that fine soil, which all these joys did yield,
By broken fence is proved a common field.
SONNET XXXVIII.
THe pride of Flesh by reach of humane wit,
Did purpose once to ouer-reach the sky;
And where before God drowned the world for it,
Yet Babylon it built up, not to dye.
God knew these fools how foolishly they wrought,
That Destiny with Policy would break,
Straight none could tell his fellow what he thought,
Their tongues were changed, and men not taught to speak:
So I that heavenly peace would comprehend,
In mortal seat of Caelica's fair heart,
To babylon my self there, did intend,
With natural kindness, and with passions art:
But when I though my self of her self free;
All Is changed: she understands all men but me.
SONNET XXXIX.
THe Nurse-life Wheat within his green husk growing,
Flatters our hope, and tickles our desire,
Natures true riches in sweet beauties showing,
Which set all hearts, with labors love, on fire.
No less fair is the Wheat when golden care,
Shows unto hope the joys of near enjoying:
Fair and sweet is the bud, more sweet and fair
The Rose, which proves that time is not destroying.
Caelica, your youth, the morning of delight,
Enameled over with beauties white and red,
All sense and thoughts did to belief inuit,
That Love and Glory there are brought to bed;
And your ripe years love none; he goes no higher,
Turns all the spirits of Man into desire.
SONNET XL.
ALas poor soul, think you to master Love,
With constant faith; do you hope true devotion
Can stay that Godhead, which lives but to move,
And turn men's hearts, like Vanes, with outward motion.
No; proud Desire thou run'st Misfortunes way,
Love is to hers, like Vessels made of glass;
Delightful while they do not fall away;
But broken, never brought to that it was.
When Honors Audit calls for thy receipt,
And charge on thy head much time misspent;
Nature corrupted by thy vain conceit,
Thy Reason servile, poor, and passion-rent.
What shall be thy excuse, what can thou say?
That thou have erred out of Love and wonder?
No heretic, thou Cupid do betray
And with religion would bring Princes under.
By merit banish Chance from Beauties sky,
Set other laws in Women's hearts, than will;
Cut Changes wings, that she no more may fly,
Hoping to make that constant, which is ill;
Therefore the doom is, wherein thou must rest,
Myra that scorns thee, shall love many best.
SONNET XLI.
PElius, that loath was Thetis to forsake,
Had counsel from the Gods to hold her fast,
Fore-warned what loathsome likeness she would take,
Yet, if he held, come to her self at last.
He held; the snakes, the serpents, and the fire,
No monsters proved, but trauells of desire.
When I beheld how Caelica's fair eyes,
Did show her heart to some, her wit to me;
Change, that does prove the error, is not wise,
In her misshap made me strange visions see,
Desire held fast, till Loves unconstant zone,
Like Gorgon's head transformed her heart to stone.
From story she turns again into a cloud,
Where water still had more power, than the fire,
And I poor Ixion to my Juno vowed,
With thoughts to clip her, clipped my own desire:
For she was vanished, I held nothing fast,
But woes to come, and joys already past.
This Cloud straight makes a stream, in whose smooth face,
While I the Image of my self did glass,
Thought Shadows I, for beauty did embrace,
Till stream and all except the cold did pass;
Yet faith held fast, like foyles where stones be set,
To make toys dear, and fools more fond to get.
Thus our desires besides each inward throw,
Must pass the outward toils of Chance, and Fear,
Against the streams of real truths they go,
With hope alone to balance all they bear,
Spending the wealth of nature in such fashion,
As good and ill luck, equally breeds passion.
Thus our Delights, like fair shapes in a glass,
Though pleasing to our senses, cannot last,
The metal breaks, or else the Visions pass,
Only our griefs in constant moulds are cast:
I Will hold no more, false Caelica, live free;
Seem fair to all the world, and foul to me.
SONNET XLII.
CAElica, when you look down into your heart,
And see what wrongs my faith endures there,
Hearing the groans of true love, loath to part,
You think they witness of your changes bear.
And as the Man that by ill Neighbors dwells,
Whose curious eyes discern those works of shame,
Which busy Rumor to the people tells,
Suffers for seeing those dark springs of fame.
So I because I cannot choose but know,
How, constantly you have forgotten me,
Because my Faith does like the Sea-marks show,
And tell the strangers where the dangers be,
I, like the child, whom Nurse has overthrown,
Not crying, yet am whipped, if you be known.
SONNET XLIII.
THe Golden-Age was when the world was young,
Nature so rich, as Earth did need no sowing,
Malice not known, the Serpents had not stung,
Wit was but sweet Affections ouerflowing.
Desire was free, and Beauties first-begotten;
Beauty then neither net, nor made by art,
Words out of thoughts brought forth, and not forgotten,
The Laws were inward that did rule the heart.
The Brazen Age is now when Earth is worn,
Beauty grown sick, Nature corrupt and naught,
Pleasure untimely dead as soon as borne,
Both words and kindness strangers to our thoughts:
If now this changing World do change her head,
Caelica, what have her new Lords for to boast?
The old Lord knows Desire is poorly fed,
And sorrows not a wavering province lost,
Since in the guilt-Age Saturn ruled alone,
And in this painted, Planets every one.
SONNET XLIV.
ABsence, the noble truce
Of Cupids war:
Where though desires want use,
They honored are.
Thou art the just protection,
Of prodigal affection,
Have thou the praise;
When bankrupt Cupid braueth,
Thy mines his credit saves,
With sweet delays.
Of wounds which presence makes
With Beauties shot,
Absence the anguish slakes,
But heals not:
Absence records the Stories,
Wherein Desire glories,
Although she burn,
She cherishes the spirits
Where Constancy inherits
And Passions mourn.
Absence, like dainty Clouds,
On glorious-bright,
Natures weak senses shrowds,
From harming light.
Absence maintains the treasure
Of pleasure unto pleasure,
Sparing with praise;
Absence does nurse the fire,
Which starues and feeds desire
With sweet delays.
Presence to every part
Of Beauty ties,
Where Wonder rules the heart
There Pleasure dies:
Pleasures plagues mind and senses
With modesties defenses,
Absence is free:
Thoughts do in absence venture
On Cupids shadowed center,
They wink and see.
But Thoughts be not so brave,
With absent joy;
For you with that you have
Your self destroy:
The absence which you glory,
Is that which makes you sorry,
And burn in vain:
For Thought is not the weapon,
Wherewith thoughts-ease men cheapon,
Absence is pain.
SONNET XLV.
PAtience, weak fortuned, and weak minded Wit,
Persuade you me to joy, when I am banished?
Why preach you time to come, and joys with it,
Since time already come, my joys has vanished?
Give me sweet Cynthia, with my wonted bliss,
Disperse the clouds that coffer up my treasure,
Awake Endymion, with Diana's kiss,
And then sweet Patience, counsel me to measure,
But while my Love feels nothing but correction,
While carelessness o're-shadowes my devotion,
While Myra's beams show riuall-like reflection,
The life of Patience then must be commotion;
Since not to feel what wrong I bear in this,
A senseless state, and no true Patience is.
SONNET XLVI.
ATlas upon his shoulders bare the sky,
The load was heavy, but the load was fair:
His sense was ravished with the melody,
Made from the motion of the highest sphere.
Not Atlas I, nor did I heaven bear,
Caelica, it is true, once on my shoulder sat,
Her eyes more rich by many characts were
Than Stars or Planets, which men wonder at:
Atlas bare heaven, such burdens be of grace,
Caelica in heaven, is the Angels place.
SONNET XLVII.
Mankind, whose lives from hour to hour decay,
Left sudden change himself should make him fear
For if his black head instantly waxt gray,
Do you not think man would himself forswear?
Caelica, who ouernight spoke, with her eyes
My Love complains, that it can love no more,
Showing me shame, that languisheth and dies,
Tyrannis'd by love, it tyrannis'd before;
If on the next day Cynthia change and leave,
Would you trust your eyes, since her eyes deceive?
SONNET XLVIII.
PRinces, who have (they say) no mind, but thought,
Whose virtue is their Pleasure, and their end,
That kindness, which in their hearts never wrought,
They like in others, and will praise a Friend.
Cupid, who, People say, is bold with blindness,
Free of excess, and enemy to measure,
Yet glories in the reverence of kindness,
In silent-trembling eloquence has pleasure.
Princes we comprehend, and can delight,
We praise them for the good they never had;
But Cupids ways are far more infinite
Kisses at times, and curt'sies make him glad:
Then Myra give me leave for Cupids sake,
To kiss thee often, that I may curt'sie make.
SONNET XLIX.
SCoggin his wife by chance mistook her bed;
" Such chances often befall poor Women-kind,
" Alas poor souls, for when they miss their head,
" What marvel it is, though the rest be blind?
This bed it was a Lords bed where she light,
Who nobly pitying this poor Woman's hap,
Gave alms both to relieve, and to delight,
And made the Golden shower fall on her lap.
Then in a freedom asks her as they lay,
Whose were her lips and breasts: and she swear, His:
For hearts are open when thoughts fall to play.
At last he asks her, Whose her backside is?
She vowed that it was Scoggins only part,
Who never yet came nearer to her heart.
Scoggin o're-heard; but taught by common use,
" That he who sees all those which do him harm,
" Or will in marriage boast such small abuse,
" Shall never have his Night-gowne furred warm:
And was content, since all was done in play,
To know his luck, and bear his Arms away.
Yet when his Wife should to the market go,
Her breast and belly he in canuasse dressed,
And on her backe-side fine silk did bestow;
Ioying to see it brauer than the rest.
His Neighbors asked him, Why? and Scoggin swear,
That part of all his Wife was only his:
The Lord should deck the rest, to whom they are,
For he knew not what Lordly-fashion is.
If Husbands now should only deck their own,
Silk would make many by their backs be known.
SONNET L.
CAElica, because we now in absence live,
Which lived so long in freeborn love at one,
Straight curious Rumor does her censure give,
That our Aspects are to another Zone.
Yet Caelica, you know I do not change,
My heart bears witness that there is no cause,
Authority may bid Good Will be strange,
But True desire is subject to no laws:
If I have spoken to the common sense,
It Envy kills, and is a wise Offense.
SONNET LI.
AWay with these selfe-louing Lads,
Whom Cupids arrow never glads:
Away poor souls, that sigh and weep,
In love of those that lie asleep:
For Cupid is a meadow-God,
And forces none to kiss the rod.
Sweet Cupids shafts like Destiny
Do causeless good or ill decree;
Desert is borne out of his bow,
Reward upon his wing does go;
What fools are they that have not known,
That Love likes no Laws but his own.
My songs they be of Cynthia's praise,
I wear her Rings on Holy days,
In every Tree I write her name,
And every Day I read the same.
Where Honor Cupids rival is
There miracles are seen of his.
If Cynthia crave her Ring of me,
I blot her name out of the Tree,
If doubt do darken things held dear,
Then welfare Nothing once a year
For many run, but one must win,
Fools only hedge the Cuckoe in.
The worth that worthinesle should move,
Is Love, that is the bow of love,
And Love as well thee foster can,
As can the mighty Nobleman.
Sweet Saint it is true, you worthy be,
Yet without Love naught worth to me.
SONNET LII.
But that familiar things are never wonder,
What greater beauty than the heavens glories?
Where Phoebus shines, and when he is gone under,
Leaves in fairest stars man's fatal stories;
Yet Venus choose with Mars the netty bed,
Before that heauenly-life, which Vulcan led.
Who does entreat the Winter not to rain,
Or in a storm the wind to leave his blowing?
Ladies, show you how Juno did complain,
Of Jupiter unto Europa going.
Fair Nymphs, if I woo Cynthia not to leave me,
You know it is I my self, not she deceaues me.
Masters that ask their Scholars leave to beat them,
Husbands that bid their Wives tell all they know,
Men that give Children sweet meats not to cate them,
Ladies, you see what destiny they go:
And who entreats, you know entreats in vain,
That Love be constant, or come back again.
SONNET LIII.
LIght, Rage and Grief, limbs of imperfect love,
By ouer-acting ever lose their ends;
For Grief while it would good affection move,
With selfe-affliction does deface her friends;
Putting on poor weak Pitties pale reflection,
Whereas Good Will is stirred with good complexion.
Rage again fond of her inflamed desire,
Desire which conquers by close invasion,
Forgetting light and heat live in one fire,
So ouerblowes the temper of Occasion,
That scorched with heat, by light discovered,
Untimely borne is, and untimely dead.
Poor fools, why strive you then since all hearts feel
That idle Chance so gouernes in affection,
As Cupid cannot turn his fatal wheel,
Nor in his own orb banish her election?
Then teach Desire hope; not rage, fear, grief,
Powers as unapt to take, as give relief.
SONNET LIVE.
CYnthia, because your Horns look diverse ways,
Now darkened to the East, now to the West;
Then at Full-glorie once in thirty days,
Sense does believe that Change is Natures rest.
Poor earth, that dare presume to judge the sky;
Cynthia is ever round, and never varies,
Shadows and distance do abuse the eye,
And in abused sense truth often miscarries:
Yet who this language to the People speaks,
Opinions empire senses idol breaks.
SONNET LV.
ALL my senses, like Beacons flame,
Gave Alarm to desire
To take arms in Cynthia's name,
And set all my thoughts on fire:
Furies wit persuaded me,
Happy love was hazards hire,
Cupid did best shoot and see
In the night where smooth is fair;
Up I start believing well
To see if Cynthia were awake;
Wonders I saw, who can tell?
And thus unto my self I spoke;
Sweet God Cupid where am I,
That by pale Diana's light:
Such rich beauties do epsy,
As harm our senses with delight?
Am I borne up to the skies?
See where Jove and Venus shine,
Showing in her heavenly eyes
That desire is divine:
Look where lies the Milken way,
Way unto that dainty throne,
Where while all the Gods would play,
Vulcan thinks to dwell alone,
I gave reins to this conceit,
Hope went on the wheel of lust:
Phansies scales are false of weight,
Thoughts take thought that go of trust.
I stepped forth to touch the sky,
I a God by Cupid dreams,
Cynthia who did naked lie,
Runs away like silver streams;
Leaving hollow banks behind,
Who can neither forward move,
Nor if rivers be unkind,
Turn away or leave to love.
There stand I, like Articke pole,
Where Sol passes over the line,
Mourning my benighted soul,
Which so loses light divine.
There stand I like Men that preach
From the Execution place,
At their death content to teach
All the world with their disgrace:
He that lets his Cynthia lie,
Naked on a bed of play,
To say prayers ere she dye,
Teaches time to run away:
Let no Loue-desiring heart,
In the Stars go seek his fate,
Love is only Natures art,
Wonder hinders Love and Hate.
None can well behold with eyes,
But what underneath him lies.
SONNET LVI.
CAElica, you blame me that I suffer not,
Absence with joy, Authority with ease:
Caelica, what Powers can Natures inside blot?
They must look pale without that feel disease.
You say that you do like fair Tagus streams,
Swell over those that would your channells choke,
Yielding due tribute unto Phoebus beams,
Yet not made dry with loss of Vapors smoke.
Caelica, it is true, Birds that do swim and fly,
The waters can endure to have and miss:
Their feet for seas, their wings are for the sky,
Nor error is it, that of Nature is.
I like the fish bequeathed to Neptunes bed,
No sooner taste of air, but I am dead.
SONNET LVII.
THe tree in youth proud of his leaves, and springs,
His body shadowed in his glory lays;
For none do fly with Art, or others wings,
But they in whom all, save Desire, decays;
Again in age, when no leaves on them grow,
Then borrow they their green of Misseltoe.
Where Caelica, when she was young and sweet,
Adorned her head with golden borrowed hair;
To hide her own for cold, she thinks it meet
The head should mourn, that all the rest was fair;
And now in Age when outward things decay,
In spite of age, she throws that hair away.
Those golden hairs she then used but to tie
Poor captived souls with she in triumph led,
Who not content the Suns fair light to eye,
Within his glory, their sense dazeled:
And now again, her own black hair puts on,
To mourn for thoughts by her worths overthrown.
SONNET LVIII.
WHo ever sails near to Bermuda coast,
Goes hard aboard the Monarchy of Fear,
Where all desires (but Life's desire are lost,
For wealth and fame put off their glories there.
Yet this I Will poyson-like, by mischief known,
Weanes not desire from her sweet nurse, the Sea;
But unseen shows us where our hopes be sown,
With woeful signs declaring joyful way.
For who will seek the wealth of Western Sun,
Often by Bermuda's miseries must run.
Who seeks the God of Love, in Beauties sky,
Must pass the Empire of confused Passion,
Where our desires to all but Horrors die,
Before that joy and peace can take their fashion.
Yet this fair Heaven, that yields this Soule-despaire,
Weanes not the heart from his sweet God, Affection;
But rather shows us what sweet joys are there,
Where constancy is servant to perfection.
Who Caelica's chaste heart then seeks to move,
Must joy to suffer all the woes of Love.
SONNET LIX.
CAElica, you said, I do obscurely live,
Strange to my friends, with strangers in suspect,
( For darkness does suspicion ever give,
Of hate to men or too much selfe-respect)
Fame you do say, with many wings does fly,
Who leaves himself, you say, does living dye.
Caelica, it is true, I do in darkness go,
Honor I seek not, nor hunt after Fame:
I am thought bound, I do not long to know,
I feel within, what men without me blame:
I scorn the world, the world scorns me, it is true;
What can a heart do more to honor you?
Knowledge and fame in open hearts do live,
Honor is pure hearts homage unto these,
Affection all men unto Beauty give,
And by that Law enjoined are to please,
The world in two I have divided fit;
My self to you, and all the rest to it.
SONNET LX.
CAElica, while you do swear you love me best,
And ever loved only me,
I feel that all powers are oppressed
By Love, and Love by Destiny.
For as the child in swadlin-bands,
When it does see the Nurse come nigh,
With smiles and crows does lift the hands,
Yet still must in the cradle lie:
So in the boat of Fate I row,
And looking to you, from you go.
When I see in thy once-beloued brows,
The heavy marks of constant love,
I call to mind my broken vows,
And child-like to the Nurse would move;
" But Love is of the Phaenix-kind,
" And burns it self, in selfe-made fire,
" To breed still new birds in the mind,
" From ashes of the old desire:
" And has his wings from constancy,
" As mountains called of moving be.
Then Caelica lose not heart-eloquence,
Love understands not, come again:
Who changes in her own defense,
Needs not cry to the deaf in vain.
Love is no true made Looking-glass,
Which perfect yields the shape we bring,
It ugly shows us all that was,
And flatters every future thing.
When Phoebus beams no more appear,
It Is darker that the day was here.
Change I confess it is a hateful power,
To them that all at once must think,
Yet Nature made both sweet and sower,
She gave the eye a lid to wink:
And though the Youth that are estranged
From Mothers lap to other skies,
Do think that Nature there is changed
Because at home their knowledge lies;
Yet shall they see who far have gone,
That Pleasure speaks more tongues than one.
The Leaves fall off, when Sap goes to the root,
The warmth does clothe the bough again;
But to the dead tree what does boot,
The silly man's manuring pain?
Unkindness may piece up again,
But kindness either changed or dead,
Selfe-pittie may in fools complain,
Put thou thy Horns on others head:
For constant faith is made a drudge,
But when requiting love is judge.
SONNET LXI.
Who worships Cupid, does adore a boy,
Boys earnest are at first in their delight,
But for a new, soon leave their dearest toy,
And out of mind, as soon as out of sight,
Their joys be dallyings and their wealth is play,
They cry to have, and cry to cast away.
Marsis an Idol, and Man's lust, his sky;
Whereby his glories still are full of wounds,
Who worships him, their fame goes far and nigh,
But still of ruin and distress it sounds.
Yet cannot all be won, and who does live,
Must room to neighbors and succession give.
Those Mercurists that upon humors work,
And so make others skill, and power their own,
Are like the Climats, which far Northward lurk,
And through long Winters must reap what is sown;
Or like the Masons, whose Art building well,
Yet leaves the house for other men to dwell.
Mercury, Cupid, Mars, they be no Gods,
But humane Idols, built up by desire,
Fruit of our boughs, whence heaven makes rods,
And babyes too for child-thoughts that aspire:
Who sees their glories, on the earth must prye;
Who seeks true glory must look to the sky.
SONNET LXII.
THe greatest pride of humane kind is Wit,
Which all Art out, and into method draws,
Yet Infinite, is far exceeding it,
And so is Chance, of unknown things the cause,
The feet of men against our feet do move,
No wit can comprehend the ways of Love.
He that direct on paralells does sail,
Goes Eastward out, and Eastward does return;
The shadowed man, whom Phoebus light does fail,
Is black like him, his heat does ouerburne;
The wheels of high desire with force do move,
Nothing can fall amiss to them that love.
Vapors of earth which to the Sun aspire,
As Natures tribute unto heat or light,
Are frozen in the midst of high desire,
And melted in sweet beams of selfe-delight,
And who to fly with Cupids wings will prove,
Must not bewail these many airs of Love.
Men that do use the Compass of the Sea,
And see the Needle over Northward look,
Some do the virtue in the Loadstone lay,
Some say, the stone it from the North-starre took,
And let him know that thinks with faith to move,
They once had eyes, that are made blind by love.
SONNET LXIII.
CAElica, when I did see you every day,
I saw so many worths so well united,
As in this union while but one did play,
All others eyes both wondered and delighted:
Whence I conceau'd you of some heavenly mould,
Since Love, and Virtue, noble Fame and Pleasure,
Contain in one no earthly metal could,
Such enemies are flesh, and blood to measure.
And since my fall, though I now only see
Your back, while all the world beholds your face;
This shadow still shows miracles to me,
And still I think your heart a heavenly place:
For what before was filled by me alone,
I now discern has room for every one.
SONNET LXIV.
CAElica, when I was from your presence bound,
At first good will both sorrow'd and repined,
Love, Faith, and Nature felt restraint a wound,
Honor it self, to Kindness yet inclined;
Your vows one way, with your desires did go,
Selfe-pittie then in you did pity me,
Yea sex did scorn to be imprisoned so,
But fire goes out for lack of vent, we see.
For when with time, Desire had made a truce,
I only was exempt, the world left free,
Yet what win you by bringing change in use,
But to make current Infidelity?
Caelica, you say, you love me, but you fear,
Then hide me in your heart, and keep me there.
SONNET LXV.
CAElica, you (whose requests commandments be)
Advise me to delight my mind with books,
" The Glass where Art does to posterity,
" Show nature naked unto him that looks,
Enriching us, shortning the ways of wit,
Which with experience else dear buyeth it.
Caelica, if I obey not, but dispute,
Think it is darkness; which seeks out a light,
And to presumption do not it impute,
If I forsake this way of Infinite;
Books be of men, men but in clouds do see,
Of whose embracements Centaures gotten be.
I have for books, above my head the Skies,
Under me, Earth; about me Air and Sea:
The Truth for light, and Reason for mine eyes,
Honor for guide, and Nature for my way.
With change of times, laws, humors, manners, right;
Each in their diverse workings infinite.
Which powers from that we feel, conceive, or do,
Raise in our senses through joy, or smarts,
All forms, the good or ill can bring us to,
More lively far, than can dead Books or Arts;
" Which at the second hand deliver forth,
" Of few men's heads, strange rules for all men's worth.
False Antidotes for vicious ignorance,
Whose causes are within, and so their cure,
Error corrupting Nature not Mischance
For how can that be wise which is not pure?
So that Man being but mere hypocrisy,
What can his arts but beams of folly be?
Let him then first set straight his inward spirit,
That his Affections in the serving rooms,
May follow Reason, not confound her light,
And make her subject to inferior doomes;
For till the inward moulds be truly placed,
All is made crooked that in them we cast.
But when the heart, eyes light grow pure together,
And so vice in the way to be forgot,
Which threw man from creation, who knows whither?
Then this strange building which the flesh knows not,
Reuiues a new-form'd image in man's mind,
Where Arts revealed, are miracles defined.
What then need halfe-fast helps of erring wit,
Methods, or books of vain humanity?
Which dazell truth, by representing it,
And so entayle clouds to posterity.
Since outward wisdom springs from truth within,
Which all men feel, or hear, before they sin.
SONNET LXVI.
Unconstant thoughts where light desires do move,
With every object which sense to them shows,
Still ebbing from themselves to Seas of Love,
Like ill led Kings that conquer but to lose,
With blood and pain these dearly purchase shame,
Time blotting all things out, but evil name.
The double heart that loves it self best,
Yet can make self-love bear the name of friend,
Whose kindness only in his wit does rest,
And can be all but truth, to have his end,
Must one desire in many figures cast,
Dissemblings then are known when they are past.
The heart of man mis-seeking for the best,
Often doubly or inconstantly must blot,
Between these two the misconceipt does rest,
Whether it ever were that lasts not,
Inconstancy and doubleness depart,
When man binds his desires to mend his heart.
SONNET LXVII.
WHile that my heart an Altar I did make,
To sacrifice desire and faith to love,
The little Boy his Temples did forsake,
And would for me no bow nor arrow move.
Dues of disgrace my incense did depresse:
That heat went in, the heart burnt not the less.
And as the man that sees his house oppressed,
With fire; and part of his goods made a prey,
Yet does pull down the roof to save the rest,
Till his loss give him light to run away:
So when I saw the bell on other sheep,
I hid my self, but dreams vex them that sleep.
My exile was not like the barren tree,
Which bears his fruitless head up to the sky,
But like the trees whose boughs o'reloaden be,
And with selfe-riches bowed down to die;
When in the night with songs, not cries, I moan,
Lest more should hear what I complain of one.
SONNET LXVIII.
WHen all this All does pass from age to age,
And revolution in a circle turn,
Then heavenly Justice does appear like rage,
The Caves do roar, the very Seas do burn,
Glory grows dark, the Sun becomes a night,
And makes this great world feel a greater might.
When Love does change his seat from heart to heart,
And worth about the wheel of Fortune goes,
Grace is diseased, desert seems overthwart,
Vows are forlorn, and truth does credit lose,
Chance then gives Law, Desire must be wise,
And look more ways than one, or lose her eyes.
My age of joy is past, of woe begun,
Absence my presence is, strangenesle my grace,
With them that walk against me, is my Sun:
The wheel is turned, I hold the lowest place,
What can be good to me since my love is,
To do me harm, content to do amiss?
SONNET LXIX.
Cupid did pine, Venus that loved her son,
Or lackt her sport, did look with heavy heart:
The Gods are called, a Council is begun,
Delphos is sought, and AEsculapius art.
Apollo says, Love is a Relative,
Whose being only must in others be;
As bodies do their shadows keep alive,
So Eros must with Anteros agree;
They found him out a mate with whom to play,
Love straight enjoyed, and pined no more away.
Caelica, this image figures sorth my heart,
Where Venus mournes, and Cupid prospers not,
For this is my affections overthwart,
That I remember what you have forgot;
And while in you my self I seek to find,
I see that you your self have lost your mind.
When I would joy, as I was wont to do,
Your thoughts are changed, and not the same to me;
My love that lacks her play-fellow in you,
Seeks up and down, but blinded cannot see.
The Boy has stolen your thoughts some other way,
Where wantonlike they do with many play.
SONNET LXX.
Love, I did send you forth enameled fair
With hope, and gave you seisin and livery
Of Beauties sky, which you did claim as heir,
By objects and desires affinity.
And do you now return lean with Despair?
Wounded with Riualls war, scorched with Jealousy?
Hence Changeling; Love does no such colors wear:
Find suerties, or at Honors sessions dye.
Sir, know me for your own, I only bear,
Faiths ensign, which is Shame, and Misery,
My Paradise, and Adams diverse were:
His fall was Knowledge, mine Simplicity.
What shall I do, Sir? do me Prentice bind,
To Knowledge, Honor, Fame or Honesty;
Let me no longer follow Womenkinde,
Where change does use all shapes of tyranny;
And I no more will stir this earthly dust,
Wherein I lose my name, to talk on lust.
SONNET LXXI.
CAElica, you that excel in flesh and wit,
In whose sweet heart Love does both ebb and flow
Returning says more than it took from it,
Whence does the Change, the World thus speaks on, grow?
If Worthiness do joy to be admired,
My soul, you know, only be-wonders you;
If Beauties glory be to be desired,
My heart is nothing else; What need you new?
If loving joy of worths, beloved be,
And joys not simple, but still mutual,
Whom can you more love, than you have loved me?
Unless in your heart there be more than all;
Since Love no doomes-day has, where bodies change,
Why should new be delight, not being strange?
SONNET LXXII.
MYraphill, it is true, I loved, and you loved me,
My thoughts as narrow as my heart, then were;
Which made change seem impossible to be,
Thinking one place could not two bodies bear.
This was but earnest Youths simplicity,
To fadome Nature within Passions wit;
Which thinks her earnestness eternity,
Till selfe-delight makes change look thorough it:
You banished were, I grieved, but languish'd not,
For worth was free and of affection sure;
So that time must be vain, or you forgot,
Nature and Love, no Vacuum can endure,
I found desert, and to desert am true;
Still dealing by it, as I dealt by you.
SONNET LXXIII.
IN the window of a Graunge,
Whence men's prospects cannot range
Over groves, and flowers growing,
Natures wealth, and pleasure showing;
But on graves where shepherds lie,
That by love or sickness die;
In that window saw I sit,
Caelica adorning it,
Sadly clad for sorrows glory,
Making joy, glad to be sorry:
Showing Sorrow in such fashion,
As Truth seemed in love with Passion,
Such a sweet enamell gives
Love restrained, that constant lives.
Absence, that bred all this pain,
Presence healed not straight again;
Eyes from dark to sudden light,
See not straight, nor can delight.
Where the heart reuiues from death,
Groans do first send forth a breath:
So, first looks did looks beget,
One sigh did another fet,
Hearts within their breast did quake,
While thoughts to each other spoke.
Philocell entraunced stood,
Rackt, and ioyed with his good,
His eyes on her eyes were fixed,
Where both true Love and Shame were mixed:
In her eyes he pity saw,
His Love did to Pity draw:
But Love found when it came there,
Pity was transformed to Fear:
Then he thought that in her face,
He saw Love, and promised Grace.
Love calls his Love to appear,
But as soon as it came near,
Her Love to her bosom fled,
Under Honors burdens dead.
Honor in Loves stead took place,
To grace Shame, with Loves disgrace;
But like drops thrown on the fire,
Shames restraints, enflamed Desire:
Desire looks, and in her eyes,
The image of it self espies,
Whence he takes selfe-pitties motions
To be Cynthia's own devotions,
And reso^ues Fear is a liar,
Thinking she bids speak Desire,
But true love that fears, and dare
Offend it self with pleasing Care,
So diverse ways his heart does move,
That his tongue cannot speak of love.
Only in himself he says,
How fatal are blind Cupids ways?
SONNET LXXIV.
ENdymions poor hapt is,
That while Love sleeps, the heavens kiss,
But silent Love is simple wooing,
Even Destiny would have us doing.
Boldness never yet was chidden,
Till by Love it be forbidden,
Myra leaves him, and knows best,
What shall become of all the rest.
SONNET LXXV.
IN the time when herbs and flowers,
Springing out of melting powers,
Teach the earth that heat and rain
Do make Cupid live again:
Late when Sol, like great hearts, shows
Largest as he lowest goes,
Caelica with Philocell
In fellowship together fell:
Caelica her skin was fair,
Dainty aborne was her hair;
Her hair Nature dyed brown,
To become the morning gown,
Of hopes death which to her eyes,
Offers thoughts for sacrifice.
Philocell was true and kind,
Poor, but not of poorest mind,
Though Mischance to harm affected
Hides and holds Worth suspected,
He good Shepherd loved well,
But Caelica scorned Philocell.
Through enameled Meades they went,
Quiet she, he passion-rent.
Her Worths to him hope did move;
Her Worths made him fear to love.
His heart sighs and feign would show,
That which all the World did know:
His heart sighed the sighs of fear,
And durst not tell her love was there;
" But as Thoughts in troubled sleep,
" Dreaming fear, and fearing weep,
" When for help they feign would cry,
" Cannot speak, and helpless lie:
So while his heart, full of pain,
Would it self in words complain,
Pain of all pains, Lovers fear,
Makes his heart to silence swear.
Strife at length those dreams does break,
His despair taught fear thus speak:
" Caelica, what shall I say?
You, to whom all Passions pray,
Like poor Flies that to the fire,
Where they burn themselves, aspire:
You, in whose worth men do joy,
That hope never to enjoy,
Where both grace, and beautie's framed,
That Love being might be blamed.
Can true Worthiness be glad,
To make hearts that love it, sad?
What means Nature in her Jewel,
To show Mercies image cruel?
Dear, if ever in my days,
My heart joyed in others praise:
If I of the world did borrow,
Other ground for joy or sorrow:
If I better wish to be
But the better to please thee;
I say, if this false be proved,
Let me not love, or not be loved.
But when Reason did inuit
All my sense to Fortunes light;
If my love did make my reason,
To it self for thy self treason;
If when Wisdom showed me
Time and thoughts both lost for thee;
If those losses I did glory,
For I could not more lose, sorry;
Caelica then do not scorn
Love, in humble humor borne.
Let not Fortune have the power,
Cupids Godhead to devour.
For I hear the Wisemen tell,
Nature works often as well,
In those men whom chance disgraceth,
As in those she higher places.
Caelica, it is near a God,
To make even Fortunes odd;
And offarre more estimation,
Is Creator, than Creation.
Then Dear, though I worthless be,
Yet let them to you worthy be,
Whose meek thoughts are highly graced,
By your image in them placed.
Herewithall like one oppressed,
With selfe-burthens he did rest,
Like amazed were his senses,
Both with pleasure and offenses.
Caelica's cold answers show,
That which fools feel, wise men know:
How selfe-pitties have reflection,
Back into their own infection:
And that Passions only move
Strings tuned to one note of Love:
She thus answers him with Reason,
Never to desire in season;
" Philocell, if you love me,
(For you would beloved be)
Your own will must be your hire,
And desire reward desire.
Cupid is in my heart sped,
Where all desires else are dead.
Ashes over Loves flames are cast,
All for one is there disgraced.
Make not then your own mischance,
Wake your self from Passions-traunce,
And let Reason guide affection,
From despair to new election.
Philocell that only felt
Destinies which Cupid dealt;
No laws but Loue-lawes obeying,
Thought that Gods were won with praying.
And with heart fixed on her eyes,
Where Love he thinks lives or dies,
His words, his heart with them leading,
Thus unto her dead love pleading:
" Caelica, if ever you
Loved have, as others do;
Let my present thoughts be glassed,
In the thoughts which you have passe^,
Let selfe-pittie, which you know,
Frame true pity now in you;
Let your forepast woe, and glory,
Make you glad them, you make sorry.
Love reuengeth like a God,
When he beats he burns the rod:
Who refuse alms to desire,
Dye when drops would quench the fire.
But if you do feel again
What peace is in Cupids pain,
Grant me, Dear, your wished measure,
Pains but pains that be of pleasure;
Find not these things strange in me,
Which within your heart we see;
For true Honor never blames,
Those that Love her servants names.
But if your heart be so free,
As you would it seem to be,
Nature has in free hearts placed
Pity for the poor disgraced.
His eyes great with child with tears
Spies in her eyes many fears,
Sees he thinks, that sweetness vanish
Which all fears was wont to banish.
Sees, sweet Love, there wont to play,
Armed and dressed to run away,
To her heart where she alone,
Scorneth all the world but one.
Caelica with clouded face,
Giving unto anger grace,
While she threatened him displeasure.
Making anger look like pleasure,
Thus in fury to him spoke,
Words which make even hearts to quake:
" Philocell, far from me get you,
Men are false, we cannot let you;
Humble, and yet full of pride,
Earnest, and not to be denied;
Now us, for not loving, blaming,
Now us, for too much, defaming:
Though I let you posies bear,
Wherein my name cyphred were,
For I bid you in the tree,
Cipher down your name by me:
For the Bracelet pearle-like white,
Which you stale from me by night,
I content was you should carry
Left that you should longer tarry,
Think you that you might encroach,
To set kindness more abroach?
Think you me in friendship tied,
So that nothing be denied?
Do you think that I must live,
Bound to that which you will give?
Philocell, I say, depart,
Blot my love out of thy heart,
Cut my name out of the tree,
Bear not memory of me.
My delight is all my care,
All laws else despised are,
I will never rumor move,
At least for one I do not love.
Shepherdess, if it prove,
Philocell she once did love,
Can kind doubt of true affection.
Merit such a sharp correction?
When men see you fall away,
Must they wink to see no day?
It is worse in him that speaks,
Than in her that friendship breaks?
Shepherdess, when you change,
Is your fickleness so strange?
Are you thus impatient still?
Is your honor slave to will?
They to whom you guilty be,
Must not they your error see?
May true Martyrs at the fire
Not so much as life desire?
Shepheardesses, yet mark well,
The Martyrdom of Philocell:
Rumor made his faith a scorn,
Him, example of forelorne,
Feeling he had of his woe,
Yet did love his overthrow;
For that she knew love would bear,
She to wrong him did not fear;
Jealousy of riuals grace,
In his passion got a place;
" But Love, Lord of all his powers,
" Does so rule this heart of ours,
" As for our beloved abuses,
" It does ever find excuses.
Love tears Reasons law in sunder,
Love, is God, let Reason wonder.
For nor scorns of his affection,
Nor despair in his election,
Nor his faith damned for obeying,
Nor her change, his hopes betraying,
Can make Philocell remove,
But he Caelica will love.
Here my silly Song is ended,
Fair Nymphs be not you offended,
For as men that trauell'd far,
For seen truths, often scorned are,
By their neighbors idle lives,
Who scarce know to please their Wives;
So though I have sung you more,
Than your hearts have felt before,
Yet that faith in men does dwell,
Who trauells Constancy can tell.
SONNET LXXVI.
FOrtune, art thou not forced sometimes to scorn?
That see Ambition strive to change our state?
As though thy Scepter slave to lust were borne?
Or Wishes could procure themselves a fate?
I, when I have shot one shaft at my mother,
That her desires a-foote think all her own,
Then straight draw up my bow to strike another,
For Gods are best by coffeehouse known.
And when I see the poor forsaken sp'rit,
Like sick men, whom the Doctor says must dye,
Sometime with rage and strength of passion fight,
Then languishing enquire what life might buy:
I smile to see Desire is never wise,
But wars with Change, which is her paradise.
SONNET LXXVII.
THe Heathen Gods finite in Power, Wit, Birth,
Yet worshipped for their good deeds to men,
At first kept Stations between heaven, and earth,
Alike just to the Castle, and the Den;
Creation, Merit, Nature duly weighed,
And yet, in show, no rule, but will obeyed.
Till time, and selfenesse, which turn worth to Arts,
Love into complements, and things to thought,
Found out new Circles to enthrall Men's hearts
By Laws; wherein while Thrones seem ouerwrought,
Power finely has surpised this faith of man,
And taxed his freedom at more than be can.
For to the Scepters Judges Laws reserve
As well the practicke, as expounding sense,
From which no Innocence can painlesse swerne,
They being Engines of Omnipotence:
With equal shows, then is not humble man
Here finely taxed at much more than he can?
Our modern Tyrants, by more gross ascent,
Although they found distinction in the State
Of Church, Law, Custom, Peoples government,
Mediums (at least) to give excess a rate
Yet fatally have tried to change this frame,
And, make will law, Man's wholesome laws but name.
For when Power once has trod this path of Might,
And found how Place aduantagiously extended
Waines, or confounds all Inferiors right
With thin lines hardly seen, but never ended;
It straight drownes in this gulf of vast affections,
Faith, truth, worth, law, all popular protections.
SONNET LXXVIII.
THe little Hearts, where light-wing'd Passion reigns,
More easily upward, as all frailties do;
Like Strawes to Ieat, these follow Princes veins,
And so, by pleasing, do corrupt them too.
Whence as their raising proves Kings can create;
So States prove sick, where toys bear Staple-rates.
" Like Atomi they neither rest, nor stand,
" Nor can erect; because they nothing be
" But baby-thoughts, fed with time-presents hand,
" Slaves, and yet darlings of Authority;
" Eccho's of wrong; shadows of Princes might;
" Which glow-worme-like, by shining, show it is night.
" Curious of fame, as foul is to be fair;
" Caring to seem that which they would not be;
" Wherein Chance helps, since Praise is powers heir,
" Honor the creature of Authority:
" So as borne high, in giddie Orbs of grace,
" These Pictures are, which are indeed but Place.
" And as the Bird in hand, with freedom lost,
" Serves for a stale, his fellows to betray:
" So do these Darlings raised at Princes cost
" Tempt man to throw his liberty away;
" And sacrifice Law, Church, all real things
" To soar, not in his own, but Eagles wings.
Whereby, like AEsops dog, men lose their meat,
To bite at glorious shadows, which they see;
And let fall those strengths which make all States great
By free Truths changed to servile flattery.
Whence, while men gaze upon this blazing star,
Made slaves, not subjects, they to Tyrants are.
SONNET LXXIX.
AS when men see a Blazing star appear,
Each stirs up others leuitie to wonder,
In restless thoughts holding those visions dear,
Which threaten to rent Government in sunder;
Yet be but horrors, from vain hearts sent forth,
To prophecy against Anointed worth:
So likewise mankind, when true Government
Her great examples to the world brings forth,
Straight in the errors native discontent,
Sees apparitions opposite to worth;
Which gathers such sense out of Enuies beams,
As still casts imputation on Supreames.
SONNET LXXX.
Clear spirits, which in Images set forth
The ways of Nature by fine imitation,
Are often forced to Hyperboles of worth,
As often again to monstrous declination;
So that their heads must lined be, like the Sky,
For all Opinions arts to traffike by.
Dull Spirits again, which love all constant grounds,
As comely veyles for their vnactiuenesse,
Are often forced to contract, or stretch their bounds,
As active Power spreads her beams more, or less:
For though in Natures waine these guests come forth;
Can place, or stamp make current ought but worth?
SONNET LXXXI.
Under a Throne I saw a Virgin sit,
The red, and white Rose quartered in her face;
Star of the North, and for true guards to it,
Princes, Church, States, all pointing out her Grace.
The homage done her was not borne of Wit,
Wisdom admired, Zeal took Ambitious place
State in her eyes taught Order how to fit,
And fix Confusions vnobseruing race.
Fortune can here claim nothing truly great,
But that this Princely Creature is her seat.
SONNET LXXXII.
You that seek what Life is in Death,
Now find it air that once was breath.
New names unknown, old names gone:
Till time end bodies, but souls none.
Reader! then make time, while you be,
But steps to your Eternity.
SONNET LXXXIII.
WHo Grace for Zenith had, from which no shadows grow,
Who has seen Joy of all his hopes, and end of all his woe,
Whose Love beloved has been the crown of his desire,
Who has seen sorrows glories burnt, in sweet affections fire:
If from this heavenly state, which souls with souls unites,
He be fallen down into the dark despaired war of spirits;
Let him lament with me, for none does glory know,
That has not been above himself, and thence fallen down to woe:
But if there be one hope left in his languish'd heart,
If fear of worse, if wish of ease, if horror may depart,
He plays with his complaints, he is no mate for me,
Whose love is lost, whose hopes are fled, whose fears for ever be.
Yet not those happy fears which show Desire her death
Teaching with use a peace in woe, and in despair a faith:
No, no, my fears kill not, but make uncured wounds,
Where joy and peace do issue out, and only pain abounds,
" Impossible are help, reward and hope to me,
" Yet while impossible they are, they easy seem to be.
" Most easy seems remorse, despair and deaths to me,
" Yet while they passing easy seem, impossible they be.
So neither can I leave my hopes that do deceive
Nor can I trust mine own despair, and nothing else receive.
Thus be unhappy men blessed, to be more accursed;
Near to the glories of the Sun, clouds with most horror burst.
" Like Ghost raised out of graves, who live not, though they go,
" Whose walking fear to others is, and to themselves a woe:
So is my life by her whose love to me is dead,
On whose worth my despair yet walks, and my desire is fed;
I swallow down the bait, which carries down my death;
I cannot put love from my heart, while life draws in my breath;
My Winter is within which withers my joy;
My Knowledge, seat of Civil war, where friends and foes destroy,
And my Desires are Wheels, whereon my heart is borne,
With endless turning of themselves, still living to be torn.
My Thoughts are Eagles food, ordained to be a prey
To worth; and being still consumed, yet never to decay.
My Memory, where once my heart laid up the store
Of help, of joy, of spirits wealth to multiply them more;
Is now become the Tomb wherein all these lie slain,
My help, my joy, my spirits wealth all sacrificed to pain.
In Paradise I once did live; and taste the tree,
Which shadowed was from all the world, in joy to shadow me.
The tree has lost his fruit, or I have lost my seat,
My soul both black with shadow is, and ouer-burnt with heat:
Truth here for triumph serves, to show her power is great,
Whom no desert can overcome, nor no distress entreat.
Time past lays up my joy; and time to come my grief,
She ever must be my desire, and never my relief.
Wrong, her Lieutenant is; my wounded Thoughts are they,
Who have no power to keep the field, nor will to run away.
O ruefull Constancy, and where is Change so base,
As it may be compared with thee in scorn, and in disgrace?
" Like as the Kings forlorn, deposed from their estate,
" Yet cannot choose but love the Crown, although new Kings they hate;
" If they do plead their right, nay, if they only live,
" Offenses to the Crown alike their Good and Ill shall give;
So (I would I were not) because I may complain,
And cannot choose but love my Wrongs, and joy to Wish in vain;
This faith condemns me, my right does rumor move,
I may not know the cause I fell, nor yet without cause love.
Then Love where is reward, at least where is the fame
Of them that being, bear thy cross, and being not, thy name?
The worlds example I, a Fable every where,
A Well from whence the springs are dried, a Tree that does not bear:
" I like the Bird in cage at first with cunning caught,
" And in my bondage for delight with greater cunning taught.
" Now owners humor dies, I neither loved nor fed,
" Nor freed am, till in the cage forgotten I be dead.
The Ship of Greece, the Streams and she be not the same
They were, although Ship, Streams and she still bear their antique name.
The Wood which was, is worn, those waves are run away,
Yet still a Ship, and still a Stream, still running to a Sea.
She loved, and still she loves, but does not still love me,
To all except my self yet is, as she was wont to be.
O, my once happy thoughts, the heaven where grace did dwell,
My Saint has turned away her face, and made that heaven my hell.
A hell, for so is that from whence no souls return,
Where, while our spirits are sacrificed, they waste not though they burn.
Since then this is my state, and nothing worse than this,
Behold the map of death-like life exiled from lovely bliss,
Alone among the world strange with my friends to be,
Showing my fall to them that scorn, see not or will not see.
My Heart a wilderness, my studies only fear,
And as in shadows of cursed death, a prospect of despair.
My Exercise, must be my horrors to repeat,
My Peace, Joy, End, and Sacrifice her dead Love to entreat.
My Food, the time that was; the time to come, my Fast;
For Drink, the barren thirst I feel of glories that are past;
Sighs and salt tears my Bath; Reason, my Looking-glass,
To show me he most wretched is, that once most happy was.
Forlorn desires my Clock to tell me every day,
That time has stolen Love, Life, and All, but my distress away.
For Music heavy signs, my Walk an inward woe,
Which like a shadow ever shall before my body go:
And I my self am he, that does with none compare,
Except in woes and lack of worth, whose states more wretched are
Let no man ask my name, nor what else I should be;
For Greiv-Ill, pain, forlorn estate do best decipher me.
SONNET LXXXIV.
FArewell sweet Boy, complain not of my truth;
Thy Mother loved thee not with more devotion;
For to thy Boys play I gave all my youth,
Young Master, I did hope for your promotion.
While some sought Honors, Princes thoughts observing,
Many wooed Fame, the child of pain and anguish,
Others judged inward good a chief deserving,
I in thy wanton Visions joyed to languish.
I bowed not to thy image for succession,
Nor bound thy bow to shoot reformed kindness,
Thy plays of hope and fear were my confession,
The spectacles to my life was thy blindness:
But Cupid now farewell, I will go play me,
With thoughts that please me less, and less betray me.
SONNET LXXXV.
Love is the Peace, whereto all thoughts do strive,
Done and begun with all our powers in one:
The first and last in us that is alive,
End of the good, and there with pleased alone.
Perfections spirit, Goddess of the mind,
Passed through hope, desire, grief and fear,
A simple Goodness in the flesh refind,
Which of the joys to come does witness bear.
Constant, because it sees no cause to vary,
A Quintessence of Passions overthrown,
Raised above all that change of objects carry,
A Nature by no other nature known:
For Glorie's of eternity aframe,
That by all bodies else obscures her name.
SONNET LXXXVI.
THe Earth with thunder torn, with fire blasted,
With waters drowned, with windy palsy shaken
Cannot for this with heaven be distasted,
Since thunder, rain and winds from earth are taken:
Man torn with Love, with inward furies blasted,
Drowned with despair, with fleshly lustings shaken,
Cannot for this with heaven be distasted,
Love, fury, lustings out of man are taken.
Then Man, endure thy self, those clouds will vanish;
Life is a Top which whipping Sorrow drives;
Wisdom must bear what our flesh cannot banish,
The humble lead, the stubborn bootlesse strives:
Or Man, forsake thy self, to heaven turn thee,
Her flames enlighten Nature, never burn thee.
SONNET LXXXVII.
WHen as Man's life, the light of humane lust,
In soacket of his earthly lantern burns,
That all this glory unto ashes must,
And generations to corruption turns;
Then fond desires that only fear their end,
Do vainly wish for life, but to amend.
But when this life is from the body fled,
To see it self in that eternal Glass,
Where time does end, and thoughts accuse the dead,
Where all to come, is one with all that was;
Then living men ask how he left his breath,
That while he lived never thought of death.
SONNET LXXXVIII.
MAN, dream no more of curious mysteries,
As what was here before the world was made,
The first Man's life, the state of Paradise,
Where heaven is, or hells eternal shade,
For Gods works are like him, all infinite;
And curious search, but crafty sins delight.
The Flood that did, and dreadful Fire that shall,
Drown, and burn up the malice of the earth,
The diverse tongues, and Babylons downe-fall,
Are nothing to the man's renewed birth;
First, let the Law plough up thy wicked heart,
That Christ may come, and all these types depart.
When thou have swept the house that all is clear,
When thou the dust have shaken from thy seete,
When Gods All might does in thy flesh appear,
Then Seas with streams above the sky do meet;
For Goodness only does God comprehend,
Knows what was first, and what shall be the end.
SONNET LXXXIX.
THe Manicheans did no Idols make,
Without themselves, nor worship gods of Wood,
Yet Idols did in their Idea's take,
And figured Christ as on the cross he stood.
Thus did they when they earnestly did pray,
Till clearer Faith this Idol took away:
We seem more inwardly to know the Son,
And see our own salvation in his blood;
When this is said, we think the work is done,
And with the Father hold our portion good:
" As if true life within these words were laid,
" For him that in life, never words obeyed.
If this be safe, it is a pleasant way,
The Cross of Christ is very easily borne:
But six days labor makes the sabbath day,
The flesh is dead before grace can be borne.
The heart must first bear witness with the book,
The earth must burn, ere we for Christ can look.
SONNET XC.
THe Turkish government allows no Law,
Men's lives and states depend on his behest;
We think Subjection there a servile awe,
Where Nature finds both honor, wealth and rest,
Our Christian freedom is, we have a law,
Which even the Heathen think no Power should wrest;
Yet proves it crooked as power lists to draw,
The rage or grace that lurkes in Princes breasts.
Opinion bodies may to shadows give,
But no burnt Zone it is, where People live.
SONNET XCI.
REwards of earth, Nobility and Fame,
To senses Glory, and to conscience we,
How little be you, for so great a name?
Yet less is he with men that thinks you so.
For earthly Power, that stands by fleshly wit,
Has banished that Truth, which should govern it.
Nobility, Powers golden fetter is,
Where with wise Kings subjection do adorn,
To make man think her heavy yoke, a bliss,
Because it makes him more than he was borne.
Yet still a slave, dimmed by mists of a Crown,
Lest he should see, what rises, what pulls down.
Fame, that is but good words of evil deeds,
Begotten by the harm we have, or do,
Greatest far off, least ever where it breeds,
We both with dangers and disquiet woo.
And in our flesh ( the vanities false glass)
We thus deciau'd adore these Calves of brass.
SONNET XCII.
VIrgula diuina, Sorcerers call a rod,
Gathered with vows, and Magic sacrifice;
Which borne about, by influence does nod,
Unto the silver, where it hidden lies;
Which makes poor men to these black arts devout,
Rich only in the wealth which hope finds out.
Nobility, this precious treasure is,
Laid up in secret mysteries of State,
Kings creature, subiections gilded bliss,
Where grace, not merit, seems to govern fate.
" Mankind I think to be this rod divine,
" For to the greatest ever they incline.
Eloquence, that is but wisdom speaking well,
(The Poets faigne) did make the savage tame;
Of ears and hearts chained unto tongues they tell;
I think Nobility to be the same:
" For be they fools, or speak they without wit,
" We hold them wise, we fools be-wonder it.
Invisible there is an Art to go,
(They say that study Natures secret works)
And art there is to make things greater show;
In Nobleness I think this secret lurks,
" For place a Coronet on whom you will,
" You straight see all great in him, but his Ill.
SONNET XCIII.
THe Augurs were of all the world admired,
Flatter' by Consulls, honored by the State,
Because the event of all that was desired,
They seemed to know, and keep the books of Fate:
Yet though abroad they thus did boast their wit,
Alone among themselves they scorned it.
Mankind, that with his wit does gild his heart,
Strong in his Passions, but in Goodness weak;
Making great vices over the less an Art,
Breeds wonder, and moves ignorance to speak,
Yet when his Fame is to the highest borne,
We know enough to laugh his praise to scorn.
SONNET XCIV.
MEn, that delight to multiply desire,
Like tellers are that take coin but to pay,
Still tempted to be false, with little hire,
Black hands except, which they would have away:
For, where power wisely Audits her estate,
The Exchequer Men's best recompense is hate.
The little Maid that wears out the day,
To gather flowr's still covetous of more,
At night when she with her desire would play,
And let her pleasure wanton in her store,
Discernes the first laid underneath the last,
Withered, and so is all that we have past:
Fixed then on good desire, and if you find
Ambitious dreams or fears of ouer-thwart;
Changes, temptations, bloomes of earthy mind,
Yet wave not, since earthy change, has change of smart.
For lest Man should think flesh a seat of bliss,
God works that his joy mixed with sorrow is.
SONNET XCV.
MAlice and Love in their ways opposite,
The one to hurt it self for others good;
The other, to have good by others spite,
Both raging most, when they be most withstood;
Though enemies, yet do in this agree,
That both still break the hearts wherein they be.
Malice a habit is, wrought in the spirit,
By intricate opinions information;
Of scornful wrong or of suppressing merit,
Which either wounds men's states or reputation;
And Tyrant-like, though show of strength it bear,
Yet is but weakness grown, enraged by fear.
Love is the true or false report of sense,
Who sent as spies, returning news of worth,
With over-wonder breed the hearts offense,
Not bringing in, but carrying pleasure forth,
And child-like must have all things that they see,
So much less lovers, than things loved be.
Malice, like ruin, with it self overthrows
Mankind, and therefore plays a devils part;
Love pulls it self down, but to build up those
It loves, and therefore bears an Angels heart.
Tyrants through fear, and malice feed on blood,
Good Kings secure at home, seek all men's good.
SONNET LXXXXVI.
IN those years, when our Sense, Desire and Wit,
Combine, that Reason shall not rule the heart;
Pleasure is chosen as a Goddess fit,
The wealth of Nature freely to impart;
Who like an Idol does apparel'd sit
In all the glories of Opinions art;
" The further off, the greater beauty showing,
" Lost only, or made less by perfect knowing,
Which fair Usurper runs a Rebels way,
For though elect of Sense, Wit and Desire,
Yet rules she none, but such as will obey,
And to that end becomes what they aspire;
Making that torment, which before was play,
Those dewes to kindle, which did quench the fire:
" Now Honors image, now again like lust,
" But earthly still, and end repenting must.
While man, who Satyr-like, then knows the flame,
When kissing of her fair appearing light,
He feels a scorching power hid in the same,
Which cannot be revealed to the sight,
Yet does by over heat so shrink this frame,
Of fiery apparitions in delight;
That as in Orbs, where many passions reign,
What one Affection joys, the rest complain.
In which confused sphere Man being placed
With equal prospect over good or ill;
The one unknown, the other in distaste,
Flesh, with her many moulds of Change and Will,
So his affections carries on, and casts
In declination to the error still;
As by the truth he gets no other light,
But to see Vice, a restless infinite.
By which true map of his Mortality,
Man's many Idols are at once defaced,
Andall hypocrisies of frail humanity,
Either exiled, waued, or disgraced;
Fallen nature by the streams of vanity,
Forced up to call for grace above her placed:
Whence from the depth of fatal desolation,
Springs up the height of his Regeneration.
Which light of life does all those shadows war
Of woe and lust, that dazell and inthrall,
Whereby man's joys with goodness bounded are,
And to remorse his fears transformed all;
His six days labor past, and that clear star,
Figure of Sabboths rest, raised by this fall;
For God comes not till man be overthrown;
Peace is the seed of grace, in dead flesh sown.
Flesh but the Top, which only Whips make go,
The Steel whose rust is by afflictions worn,
The Dust which good men from their feet must throw,
A liuing-dead thing, till it be newborn,
A Phenix-life, that from selfe-ruine grows,
Or Viper rather thorough her parents torn,
A boat, to which the world it self is Sea,
Wherein the mind sails on her fatal way.
SONNET XCVII.
Eternal Truth, almighty, infinite,
Only exiled from man's fleshly heart,
Where ignorance and disobedience fight,
In hell and sin, which shall have greatest part:
When thy sweet mercy opens forth the light,
Of Grace which gives eyes unto the blind,
And with the Law even plowest up our sprite
To faith, wherein flesh may salvation find.
Thou bid st us pray, and we do pray to thee,
But as to power and God without us placed,
Thinking a wish may wear out vanity,
Or habits be by miracles defaced.
One thought to God we give, the rest to sin,
Quickly unbent is all desire of good,
True words pass out, but have no being within,
We pray to Christ, yet help to shed his blood;
For while we say believe, and feel it not,
Promise amends, and yet despair in it.
Hear Sodom judged, and go not out with Lot,
Make Law and Gospel riddles of the wit:
We with the Jews even Christ still crucify,
As not yet come to our impiety.
SONNET XCVIII.
Wrapped up, o Lord, in man's degeneration;
The glories of thy truth, thy joys eternal,
Reflect upon my soul darkedesolation,
And ugly prospects over the spirits infernal.
" Lord, I have sinned, and mine iniquity,
" Deser ues this hell; yet Lord deliver me,
Thy power and mercy never comprehended,
Rest lively imag'd in my Conscience wounded;
Mercy to grace, and power to fear extended,
Both infinite, and I in both confounded;
" Lord, I have sinned, and mine iniquity,
" Deserves this hell, yet Lord deliver me.
If from this depth of sin, this hellish grave,
And fatal absence from my Saviors glory,
I could implore his mercy, who can save,
And for my sins, not pains of sin, be sorry:
Lord, from this horror of iniquity,
And hellish grave, thou would deliver me.
SONNET XCIX.
Down in the depth of mine iniquity,
That ugly center of infernal spirits;
Where each sin seeles her own deformity,
In these peculiar torments she inherits,
Deprived of humane graces, and divine,
Even there appears this saving God of mine.
And in this fatal mirror of transgression,
Shows man as fruit of his degeneration,
The errors ugly infinite impression,
Which bears the faithless doom to desperation;
Deprived of humane graces and divine,
Even there appears this saving God of mine.
In power and truth, Almighty andeternall,
Which on the sin reflects strange desolation,
With glory scourging all the Spr'its infernal,
And uncreated hell with vnpriuation;
Deprived of humane graces, not divine, i
Even there appears this saving God of mne.
For on this sp'rituall Cross condemned lying,
To pains infernal by eternal doom,
I see my Savior for the same sins dying,
And from that hell I feared, to free me, come;
Deprived of humane graces, not divine,
Thus has his death raised up this soul of mine.
SONNET C.
IN Night when colors all to black are cast,
Distinction lost, or gone down with the light;
The eye a watch to inward senses placed,
Not seeing, yet still having power of sight.
Gives vain Alarums to the inward sense,
Where fear stirred up with witty tyranny,
Confounds all powers, and thorough selfe-offence,
Does forge and raise impossibility:
Such as in thick depriving darkness,
Proper reflections of the error be,
And images of selfe-confusednesse,
Which hurt imaginations only see;
And from this nothing seen, tells news of devils,
" Which but expressions be of inward evils.
SONNET CI.
Man's Youth it is a field of large desires, (please,
Which pleased within, does all without them
For in this love of men live those sweet fires,
That kindle worth and kindness unto praise,
And where self-love most from her selfenesse gives,
Man greatest in himself, and others lives.
Old Age again which deemes this pleasure vain,
Dulled with experience of unthankfulness,
Scornful of fame, as but effects of pain,
Folds up that freedom in her narrowness,
" And for it only loves her own dreams best,
" Scorned and contemned is of all the rest.
Such working Youth there is again in state,
Which at the first with Justice, Piety,
Fame, and Reward, true Instruments offate,
Strive to improve this frail humanity:
By which as Kings enlarge true worth in us,
So Crowns again are well enlarged thus.
But States grow old, when Princes turn away
From Honor, to take pleasure for their end,
For that a large is, this a narrow way,
That winnes a world, and this a few dark friends;
" The one improuing worthiness spreads far,
" Under the other good things prisoners are.
Thus Scepters shadow-like, grow short or long,
As worthy, or unworthy Princes reign,
And must contract, cannot be large or strong,
If man's weak humors real powers restrain,
" So that when Power and Nature do oppose,
" All but the worst, men are assured to lose.
For when Respect, which is the strength of States,
Grows to decline by Kings descent within
That Powers babie-creatures dare set rates
Of Scorn upon Worth, Honor upon Sin;
Then though Kings, Player-like, act Glories part,
Yet all within them is but Fear and Art.
SONNET CII.
THe Serpent, Sin, by showing humane lust,
Visions and dreams enticed man to do
Follies, in which exceed his God he must,
And know more than he was created to,
A charm which made the ugly sin seem good,
And is by fallen Spirits only understood.
Now man no sooner from his mean creation,
Trod this excess of uncreated sin,
But straight he changed his being to privation,
Horror and death at this gate passing in;
Whereby immortal life, made for man's good,
Is since become the hell of flesh and blood.
But grant that there were no eternity,
That life were all, and Pleasure life of it,
In sins excess there yet confusions be,
Which spoil his peace, and passionate his wit,
Making his Nature less, his Reason thrall,
To tyranny of vice unnatural.
And as Hell fires, not wanting heat, want light;
So these strange witchcrafts, which like Pleasure be,
Not wanting fair inticements, want delight,
Inward being nothing but deformity;
And do at open doors let frail powers in
To that straight binding Little-ease of sin.
Is there ought more wonderful than this?
That Man, even in the state of his perfection,
All things vncurst, nothing yet done amiss,
And so in him no base of his defection;
Should fall from God, and break his Makers will,
Which could have no end, but to know the Ill.
I ask the rather since in Paradise,
Eternity was object to his passion,
And he in goodness like his Maker wise,
As from his spirit taking life and fashion;
What greater power there was to master this,
Or how a less could work, my question is?
For who made all, it is sure yet could not make,
Any above himself, as Princes can,
So as, against his will no power could take,
A Creature from him; nor corrupt a man;
" And yet who thinks he marred, that made us good,
" As well may think God less than flesh and blood.
Where did our being then seek out privation?
Above, within, without us all was pure,
Only the Angels from their discreation,
By smart declared no being was secure,
But that transcendent Goodness which subsists,
By forming and reforming what it lists.
So as within the Man there was no more,
But possibility to work upon,
And in these spirits, which were fallen before,
An abstract cursed eternity alone;
Refined by their high places in creation,
To add more craft and malice to temptation.
Now with what force upon these middle spheres,
Of Probable, and Possibility,
Which no one constant demonstration bears,
And so can neither bind, nor bounded be;
What those could work, that having lost their God,
Aspire to be our Tempters and our Rod.
Too well is witnessed by this fall of ours,
For we not knowing yet that there was ill,
Gave easy credit to deceiving powers,
Who wrought upon us only by our will;
Persuading, like it, all was to it free,
Since where no sin was, there no law could be.
And as all finite things seek infinite,
From thence deriuing what beyond them is;
So man was led by charms of this dark sp'rit,
Which he could not know till he did amiss;
To trust those Serpents, who learned since they fell,
Knew more than we did, even their own made hell.
Which crafty odds made us those clouds embrace,
Where sin in ambush lay to overthrow
Nature, (that would presume to fadome Grace)
Or could believe what God said was not so:
" Sin, then we knew thee not, and could not hate,
" And now we know thee, now it is too late.
SONNET CIII.
OFalse and treacherous Probability,
Enemy of truth, and friend to wickedness;
With whose bleare eyes opinion learnes to see,
Truths feeble party here, and barrenness.
When thou have thus misled Humanity,
And lost obedience in the pride of wit,
With reason dare thou judge the Deity,
And in thy flesh make bold to fashion it.
Vain thought, the word of Power a riddle is,
And till the vayles be rent, the flesh newborn,
Reveals no wonders of that inward bliss,
Which but where faith is, every where finds scorn;
" Who therefore censures God with fleshly sp'rit,
" As well in time may wrap up infinite.
SONNET CIV.
TWo Sects there be in this earth opposite,
The one make Mahomet a Deity,
A tyrant Tartar raised by War and Slight,
Ambitious ways of infidelity:
The World their heaven is, the World is great;
And racketh those hearts, where it has receipt.
The other Sect of cloystered people is,
Less to the world, with which they seem to war,
And so in less things drawn to do amiss,
As all lusts, less than lust of conquest are:
Now if of God, both these have but the name,
What mortal Idol then, can equal Fame?
SONNET CV.
THree things there be in Man's opinion dear,
Fame, many Friends, and Fortunes dignities:
False visions all, which in our sense appear,
To sanctify desires Idolatry.
For what is Fortune, but a watery glass?
Whose crystal forehead wants a steely back,
Where rain and storms bear all away that was,
Whose ship alike both depths and shallowes wrack.
Fame again, which from blinding power takes light,
Both Caesar's shadow is, and Cato's friend,
" The child of humor, not allied to right,
Living by often exchange of winged end.
And many Friends, false strength of feeble mind,
Betraying equals, as true slaves to might;
Like Echoes still send voices down the wind,
But never in adversity find right.
Then Man, though virtue of extremities,
The middle be, and so has two to one,
By Place and Nature constant enemies,
And against both these no strength but her own,
Yet quit thou for her, Friends, Fame, Fortunes throne;
Devils, there many be, and Gods but one.
SONNET CVI.
HOw falls it out, the sincere Magistrate,
(Who keeps the course of Justice sacredly)
Reapes from the people reverence, and hate,
But not the love which follows liberty?
The cause is plain, since tax on Peoples good,
Is hardly borne, Sense having no foresight,
Hates reasons works as strange to flesh and blood,
Whence he that strives to keep man's heart upright
Taxes his phansies at an higher rate;
And laying laws upon his frailty,
Brings all his vices to a bankrupt state,
So much is true worth more refined than we:
Again, who taskes men's wealth, pierce but their skin,
Who roots their vice out, must pierce deeper in.
SONNET CVII.
Isis, in whom the Poets feigning wit,
Figures the Goddess of Authority,
And makes her on an Ass in triumph sit,
As if Powers throne were man's humility;
Inspire this Ass, as well becoming it,
Even like a Type of wind-blowne vanity:
With pride to bear Powers gilding scorching heat
For no hire, but opinion to be great.
So as this Beast, forgetting what he bears,
Bridled and burdend by the hand of might,
While he beholds the swarms of hope and fears,
Which wait upon ambition infinite,
Proud of the glorious furniture he wears,
Takes all to Isis offered, but his right;
Till weariness, the spur, or want of food,
Makes gilded curbs of all beasts understood.
SONNET XCIX.
WHat is the cause, why States, that war and win,
Have honor, and breed men of better fame,
Than States in peace, since war and conquest sin
In blood, wrong liberty, all trades of shame?
Force-framing instruments, which it must use,
Proud in excess, and glory to abuse.
The reason is; Peace is a quiet Nurse
Of Idleness, and Idleness the field,
Where wit and Power change all seeds to the worse,
By narrow self-wit upon which they build,
And thence bring forth captived inconstant ends,
Neither to Princes, nor to People friends.
Besides, the sins of Peace on Subjects feed,
And thence wound power, which for it all things can,
With wrong to one despaires in many breed,
For while Laws, oaths, Powers creditors to man,
Make humble Subjects dream of native right,
Man's faith abused adds courage to despite.
Where conquest works by strength, and stirs up Fame,
A glorious Echo, pleasing doom of pain,
" Which in the sleep of death yet keeps a name,
" And makes detracting loss speak ill in vain.
For to Great Actions time so friendly is,
As ore the means (albeit the means be ill)
It casts forgetfulness; vailes things amiss,
With power and honor to encourage will.
Besides things hard a reputation bear,
To dye resolved though guilty wonder breeds,
Yet what strength those be which can blot out fear,
And to selfe-ruine joyfully proceeds,
Ask them that from the ashes of this fire,
With new lives still to such new flames aspire.
SONNET CIX.
SYon lies waste, and thy Jerusalem,
O Lord, is fallen to utter desolation,
Against thy Prophets, and thy holy men,
The sin has wrought a fatal combination,
Profaned thy name, thy worship overthrown,
And made thee living Lord, a God unknown.
Thy powerful laws, thy wonders of creation,
Thy Word incarnate, glorious heaven, dark hell,
Lie shadowed under Man's degeneration,
Thy Christ still crucified for doing well,
Impiety, o Lord, sits on thy throne,
Which makes thee living light, a God unknown.
Man's superstition has thy truths entombed,
His Atheism again her pomps defaceth,
That sensual insatiable vaste womb,
Of thy seen Church, thy unseen Church disgraceth;
There lives no truth with them that seem thine own,
Which makes thee living Lord, a God unknown.
Yet unto thee, Lord, (mirror of transgression)
We, who for earthly Idols, have forsaken
Thy heavenly Image (sinlesse pure impression)
And so in nets of vanity lie taken,
All desolate implore that to thine own,
Lord, thou no longer live a God unknown.
Yet Lord let Isreal's plagues not be eternal,
Nor sin for ever cloud thy sacred Mountains,
Nor with false flames spiritual but infernal,
Dry up thy mercies ever springing fountains,
Rather, sweet Jesus, fill up time and come,
To yield the sin her everlasting doom.
FINIS.
A LETTER TO AN HONORABLE LADY.
CAP. I.
Right honorable Lady,
YOU are desirous, in regard of the trust you put in me, to understand mine
opinion, how you should carry your self through that labyrinth, wherein it
seems time, and mischance have imprisoned you. It was a wisdom among our
Ancestors not to deal between the bark and the tree, otherwise than with
Confessors, Shrifts, and such like superstitious rites, as discharging our
selves, did vainly charge others with our desires. But the twine is so strong,
wherewith your Worth and Favor have bound me, as I will imagine our
Predecessors aphorisms in that point, to be rather a modesty out of sloth, or
ignorance; than any Precept, fit to guide our loves, or lives by. For first,
the liberality of Knowledge makes no man poorer; and then the charity is much
more meritorious, that releeues distressed minds, than distressed bodies.
Therefore to break through these mists (with how little wisdom soever, yet
with reverent good will) I must first compare the state you were in, with that
wherein you stand now: then your nature with your Lords: and lastly, the
privileges of a Wife, with the authorities of a Husband.

When you married him, I know for your part, he was your first Love; and I
judge the like of him. What the freedom, and simplicity of those humors were,
every man is a witness, that has not forgotten his own youth. And though it
be rather a counsel of remorse than help, to lay before you your errors past;
yet because they teach you to know, that time is it which makes the same thing
easy, and impossible, leaving withal an experience for things to come; I must
in a word lay occasion past before you.

Madame! In those near conjunctions of society, wherein death is the only
honorable divorce, there is but one end, which is mutual joy in procreation;
and to that end two assured ways: The one, by cherishing Affection with
Affection: The other, by working Affection, while she is yet in her pride, to a
Reverence, which has more power than it self. To which are required aduanta
ge, or at least equality; Art, as well as Nature. For Contempt is else as near
as Respect, the louingest minds being not ever the most lovely. Now though it
be true that affections are relatiues, and love the surest Adamant of love; yet
must it not be measured by the intemperate elne of it self, since prodigality
yields fullness, satiety a desire of change and change repentance: but so
tempered even in trust, enjoying, and all other familiarities, that the
Appetites of them we would please may still be covetous, and their Strengths
rich. Because the decay of either is a point of all Huswifery, and they that
are first bankrupt shut up their doors.

In this estate of minds, only governed by the unwritten laws of Nature, you
did at the beginning live happily together. Wherein there is a lively image of
that golden Age, which the Allegories of the Poets figure unto us. For there
Equality guided without absoluteness, Earth yielded fruit without labor,
Desert perished in reward, the names of Wealth and Poverty were strange, no
owing in particular, no private improuing of humors; the traffic being love,
for love and the Exchange, all for all: exorbitant abundance being never
curious in those selfe-seeking Arts, which tear up the bowels of the earth for
the private use of more than milk, and honey. Notwithstanding, since in the
vicissitudes of things, and times, there must of necessity follow a Brazen Age;
there ought to be a discreet care in love: in respect the advantage will else
prove theirs that first usurp, and breaking through the laws of Nature,
strive to set down their own reaches of Will.

Here Madame! had it been in your power; you should have framed that second
way of peace, studying to keep him from evil, whose corruption could not be
without misfortune to you. For there is no man, but does first fall from his
duties to himself, before he can fall away from his duty to others. This second
way is, that where affection is made but the gold, to hold a Jewel far more
precious than it self: I mean Respect, and Reverence; which two powers, well
mixed, have exceeding strong, and strange variety of working. For instance,
take Coriolanus, who ( Plutarch says) loved worthiness for his Mothers sake.
And though true love contain them both, yet because our corruption has, by
want of differences, both confounded words, and beings, I must vulgarly
distinguish names, as they are current.

The ways to this Respect, and Reverence (as shadows to the bodies of worth)
are placed not in the Sense, but Understanding; where they stand upon diverse
degrees, and strengths of Reason, not to be approached with the flattering
familiarity of inferior humors; as having no affinity with desire, and
remorse; high, or low estate: Whence we see Kings sometimes receive them not
from their Vassals, but rather pay them as tributes to them. In this mystery
lies hidden that which some call (applying it to matters of Estate) the Art of
Government; others the Art of men; whereby Equality is made unequal, and
freedom brought into subjection. Example all Sovereign Estates commanding
over other men, borne as free as their Rulers; and those Sovereigns ruled
again, by the advantage of worth in their inferiors,

Into this superiority ( Noble Lady) it seems, your Husband has stepped before
you, not by any counsel of Worth, which with a natural motion draws respect
and reverence upward; but by a crafty observing the weakness of men,
wherewith men are best acquainted. For as our desires are more vntemperately
earnest than Women's; so are our repentances more strange, and easily inclined
to change, if not to loathing. Of which forbidden tree when the affections have
once tasted, presently, as in the Brazen age, naked Eve must hide her shame,
sow that she will reap, and no more enjoy the full measures of reciprocal
love, but be stinted with the unconstant proportions of Power, and Will.
Because the knowledge of evil does ever teach the first Offender to seek
advantage; and so when they have sinned against the true Equalities of love, to
take privilege in the false sanctuaries of place, person, sex, or time;
deceiving the truth with that which should defend it. Here division draws out
her unreconciled Paralels, to make the unity of man and wife, to become less
one; and then it follows, that they which yield most do not command most, as
before in the laws of natural affection: but contrariwise, they that give,
enrich them that take, they that love must suffer, and the best is sure to be
worst used. Because the ends of society are no more now to love, or equally
participate, but absolutely to rule; and where that is the contention, what
need Statutes, or Recognizances to tie those humble natures, that pass away
the Fee-simple of themselves, either with Selfe-louingnesse, or superstitious
opinion of Duty? For it is with them, as with the Rivers that run out their
waters into the Sea Caspium; the more goodness, the less return.

Upon this step, it seems, your Husband stood, when he began to think of
something more than mutual enjoying; as drawing the familiarity of native
Affections under the affected absoluteness of a Husbands power. Here false
Pleasure (which springs and withers with our flesh) began, as Gluttony does, to
kindle new appetite with variety of meats. Here comes in change of delights,
and delight in change; the riches of desire in that it has not; the triumphs
of opinion, which though the flesh of any one be a true Map of all flesh, yet
does it rack us still with idolatrous longing after strange, and ugly Images
of it. For the restless confusion of Error has this plague, that her peace
must be still in the power of others, where Nature has placed both the way,
and guide of true peace within our selves. But who are they that can walk this
milky way? Not those unconstant spirits, which are wandered into the wilderness
of desire; nor those, whose ugly prospect is unrepentant horror; whose senses
are but Spies of Conscience upon their faults; their Reasons purchased into
bondage, by offers of their seruant-affections; and whose informing Consciences
stand, like Tormentors, with stained tables to give in evidence of secret
deformity. No Madam; This milkin way for those single, and simple spirits, who
foolish, and ignorant in evil, think the passage to it hard, if not
impossible; or when they idly slip, do yet recover, with a regenerate
industry; not ioying, as those other vagabond souls, after they have deceived
themselves, to stray abroad, and deceive others.

This is a general description of the fall of Minds; wherein there is
notwithstanding an Infancy, and a Man's estate; because as easy as the evil
is, yet no man grows by and by to her extremities. Besides, there are degrees,
and differences, according to the state, frame, and mixture of Humors in the
body: some inclined to one frailty, some to another; some languishing, some
violent; some proper to ages, fortunes, times, with such expectations as are in
particulars under all universal rules.

CAP. 2.
SInce therefore in this Glass you may see where you were, and where you are;
there rests now a consideration of the limited authorities of a Husband, and
the privileges of a Wife; upon which I will not stand long: Because you poor
Wives do in that, run a common fortune with those Estates, which by
usurpation of time, or violence, have nothing left of their former Conquests,
or greatness, but fame, and ruin. So as I will not vainly travail to win
that again, which corruption, and confusion have won of you, and the truth;
but only make mention of their names, or natures in passing; as they serve to
your end; and open those other three ways, which in the fallen estate, wherein
you stand, offer themselves to your advantage. The first is to mend him: the
second, to master both his evil, and his estate: the third, to please him.

Unto amends ( Miracles being above our power) there is required either the
authority of credit, or favor. For credit, how you should have any by the
truth, where it has none, your own Wisdom can answer you; and that it has
none, his faults to himself, and you, are pregnant witnesses. What little
favor you have, if you repeat the story of his life to your self, it will be
manifest. For first (you know) his devotion, and affection, are long since
carried from you to his Mistress; by which reverend name men commonly call
those, whom they mean, by corrupting, to make their servants. And though she,
either out of craft, or coldness, deny him the enjoying of her body; yet is
that no advantage to you: To him it is the Art of his ruin. For unsatisfied
desire is too earnest for counsel, too confident for mistrust, too omnipotent
for remorse. So as, right like the poetical image of Phaeton, it inflameth the
whole Horizon of Man's nature with irregular, and disproportioned motions. What
wonderful effects those entising denials have wrought, there are records in
every Age. The same Poets make, in the chastity of Diana, Endymion our example.
Hippolytus, with his constante refusal of Phaedra, and his devotion to Phoebe,
a Martyr. The fable of Ixion, where instead of Juno he embraced a cloud,
begetting monsters in strong imagination; with many more. All which do but
express, how far greater wonder we stand in of this well-disguised ashes,
your flesh, while the wheels of desire are woond up, than when they are run
out with enjoying. For in this crafty forge are framed wanton modesty, entising
shamefac'dnesse, faint reproves, with what other charms soever are fit to
stir up the blindness of our Self-love, or Pity.

But methinkes ( Noble Lady) I even now see your face blush, while your
thoughts tell me, that your Lords affections have so many vents, as there is no
danger of breaking the vessel with fullness; nor yet of multiplying devotion,
by restraint. It is true, that Liberty disperseth, and so makes the streams of
fantasy less violent: Notwithstanding, Dotage is an vnscrutable depth, it
puts seals to blancks, makes contradictories true, and sees all things in the
superlatiue degree. To be short, it is a prospect into the Land of Ignorance;
which (they say) no man can describe, but he that is past it. Nay, it is such a
kind of enchantment, as makes the easiness of others endeere her bewitching
refusalls; satiety, which judges with scorn, yet honors her; Impossible
being no more able to qualify desire, than Entreaty is to revive it. So as you
being already bankrupt in his favor, in this course of amends, I will only
advise you to pray, if your faith serve: or if you will go farther, I must
bring against you the fatal doomes of Sisyphus, rolling the stone; Belides
filling the sieue; with the Poets phrases of catching the wind, ploughing the
Seas, and such like Metaphorical Hyperboles, as describing infinite, and
impossible, lay them to your charge. Therefore ( worthy Lady) remember AEsop;
seek not your Husband against the stream, until he be dead.

To Master his mind, which is the second way, has yet in the forefront some
more possibility. For the evil is malicious, and yet subject, changing,
because imperfection cannot stand alone; amorous, for that every thing seems
lovely, compared with the deformity of evil it self. But it may please you
to remember, that Inconstancy has so strong a wall of craft about it, as it is
hard by sophistication of Wit; to master the experience of evil: it being old
borne with us, and acquainted with every corner, access and recesse of our mi
ndes. Besides, it comes not into the nature of man with clear, and open
evidence, as true theirs do; but as Usurpers, whose underminings are hardly to
be seen, while they may be prevented; and when they are seen, beyond care,
or contention. For the being of e uill being nothing, but only a depriving of
the good, and the captiuing of our free-will-lights to the works of darkness;
it must needs come to pass, that when her conquering venimes are once
distilled through all our powers, and we won with our selves, that there can
be no thought within us to hear, or entreat; and without us, though Authority
may cut off the infection of ill Example from others, yet can it no more take
away the Devils part in us, than call up the dead. Out of which I conclude:
whatsoever cannot be mended (without Authority) cannot be ruled.

Now if you will examine the preeminences of a Husbands estate, you shall soon
discover what huge armies of Usurpation, Custom, Municipall Laws, are in this
strife of mastering him against you; truth in some degree; fortune, and opinion
universally. Archime des held that it was possible by Art to remove the
unremovable Earth, if he could find upon what Basis he might fix the foot of
his engine: the same doubt I may make to you, which is, where you will lay the
ground of that strength, which should master him? If upon his Humors; then (as
I said) the center is Craft; the circumference Inconstancy; neither strong
virtues, nor vices; but changing, and irregular fantasy; as unfit to rule, as
hard to beruled: especially since ill Nature and good Fortune learn easilyto
know their strengths, and like proud Cowards, tyrannize where they find right
in the guard of love, or weakness. If upon his estate, then do you assail
him in his strength. For he is by laws above you: the words of your Contract,
obedience; of his, Love: the Reuenew his, Liberty his friend, Honor scarce
indifferent, Fame against you; protesting ever on the side of Strength, not of
right.

So as contention with Superiors is but that which the Poets figure in the
fable of Anteus wrestling with Hercules, wherein they feign him ever too
weak, while he was lifted from his earth, and his only recovery of strength
by falling to it. This earth of your estate is Patience, and Humility; above
which what light desire, or offense soever does lift you, lifts you above the
privileges of a Wife, and with more harm, and loss, will at the last make
you fall, to understand your own estate.

If you trust not these profane Images, I will lay a divine before you; that
you may see iniust and impossible have like condemnation both in Nature, and
Grace. When the fleshly Babylonians went about to prevent a second deluge, and
so with Man's power to limit Gods; they purposed to raise a Tower equal to the
heavens, thinking thereby, that God should either favor their dwellings, or
destroy his own. What came upon them? Marry, a confusion of tongues, to the
end, that they which understood not their Maker, might much less understand
themselves. An excellent course of the Wisdom, to punish vain ends by
fruitless labors. And sure the like Destiny lies wrapped up still, to fall upon
those, that for want of measuring their desires with the circumstances of time,
estate, and worth, do undertake the Giants war, and so bury themselves in
their own earth. Therefore by my consent ( Honorable Lady) you shall in stead
of mastering him, master your self; and avoid that other violent course, which
requires wilful urging, servile patience, broken shame, with all kinds of
indecorum; such as the worst speed best with; and yet so, as they that win
their Ends, are sure to lose their Honors. Yea, the Truth is in every part
such a proof of it self, as who so will narrowly observe the complexions of
those Wives, that usurp upon the authority of their Husbands, shall see, that
the very change of the office, works almost a Metamorphosis in Nature; the
Woman growing mannish, and the Man womanish. For it is most true that Ages, and
Sexes have their distinct Laws; so as the same is not the same in both, but
diverse; as the Wise man says Virtues be in men, and women. Our fame lying in
hazard, armies, blood; theirs in silence, modesty, restraint: Our Reputations
not easily shaken, and many ways repaired; theirs, like Glass, by and by
broken, and impossible to be healed. Since therefore your own Genius, Honor,
and Impossibility, do all oppose against this aduentrous practice, let us
leave it; and conclude with the Poet, that Who so will the Devils Master be,
Must have a mind more mischievous than he.


The last point, which is to please, has in it a face both of Divine, and
humane Duty; possibility in the censure of rumor, that speaks most, and
knows least. Besides, the means that are used in it, as Vows, Prayers,
Sacrifice, Obedience, etc. are all mild Counsels; and such as rather enrich,
than impouerish those that use them. Let us therefore strive to wade through or
swim over this depth of Pleasing: in which there are two branches, either to
please him with your self; or with his own humors. To please him with your
self (considering the Map we have already described his Nature in) I think
you must be sometimes short, sometimes long; now fair, now brown; wanton,
modest, and al at once. For they must take on many shapes, that will please a
man of many minds; sense being there a Judge; motion quiet; and their felicity
in such wandering desires, as only joy till they do enjoy. So as these two
excellent mediators; Worth, and Merit; can be no more to them than light is to
blindness, or music to the dease. Nay, Beauty it self, which is the object
of uncorrupted sense, is nothing unto these sensual natures; who are so
bewitched with this disease of Nouelty, as vnwealdy fatness, discolored
skin, and such like uncouth prouokers of appetite, are often dearest unto
them. What hope then to stay, or fix this vagabond Lust? Since as those
Shadows that go before the bodies which make them, can never by the same
bodies be overtaken: so these shadowy natures have neitherstrength enough to
leave worshipping of others, nor to esteem those that worship themselves; but
like Smokes, kindled with every flame, are dissolved again into every new air
about them.

The second of these branches is, to please him with himself. For the better
understanding of which course, if we do examine the ways that common Subjects
do hold under the unquiet nature of Power; we shall find that way does
corrupt us, in not working a largeness, but narrowness of heart: and so
making us, like the little flies, apt to covet after the flattering light,
wherein we burn. For upon this Stage, if Superiors delight in lust, Panders
are the Ministers of Credit; if in wealth, the sparing negative voices be the
counsels of Advancement; if they be jealous, then the deprauing Corporations,
which keep down all spirits of hope, all encouragements of honor, with false
narrow axioms of Tyranny, are the charmers we must give ear unto: helping to
drown our Superiors in the inundation of their own follies, and make their
Thrones a Grange, wherein there shall be nothing but selling of Honor, to
purchase scorn abroad, and servile fear at home. For it is most true; that
the Jealousy of Unworthiness in power is so infinite, as where sloth,
ignorance or baseness have once given it leave to give Law, it endures none
under it, but such as are either outwardly deformed, and so borne with their
own crosses; or inwardly defective in wit, and courage; the right estate of
those minds, which though they be borne free in the laws of Nations, are yet
slaves in the narrow moulds of their own affections; or lastly, such, as in the
extremity of want, or obscurenesse of birth, must be long Prentises to their
Superiors. How ugly a prospect such roots, and branches must be to all free
minds, you shall easily see, if it please you to look upon the Poetical
Map; wherein the Painter lively describing a Pageant of worldly vanities,
with the plagues, and deformities of every sin, represents misshapen humane
shapes unto us; either long tails, cloven feet, horns, or such like Antikes,
as with too many, or too few members lively represent us the monstrous births
of error. And when you have exactly viewed it, I dare undertake, you shall not
see in that Map so horrible, and fearful images to the souls of men; as
you shall in those tyrannical courts to the bodies, and fortunes of the
worthiest, and not without danger to the Libertines. Since as true Worth is
ever jealous to the fearful nature of Tyrants: so are extreme vnworthinesses
a scorn, both to their pride, and power.

Now Madame! by the ill example, and dangerous consequence in these misgouern'd
Courts of Princes, you may comparatively see what such by-ways will work in a
private family: Faults having there no purple to cover them, nor yet great
hopes to excuse errors. So that, the ends, and instruments, being both of
necessity base; and neither with Virtue, nor Fortune redeemed from the scorn
of servile vices; it must needs be with them, as with the sinkes, and vessels
of dishonor, which they that use are ashamed to have appear. Besides, the
reproach will be greater in mean estates; because there they want the helps of
fear, which maks Murmur wary how she speaks aloud of Power; and redeemes
imperfections with rewards of magnificence and liberality. Again, if you will
needs corrupt your self, to make the line you level by, more crooked; then
must your first step be over the shoes in Shame. For you must combine with his
Mistress, who will perchance measure you forth some part of that, whereof the
whole is yours: I mean your Husbands love. And whether she will, in this false
glass of Dotage, discover your fall of spirit, and so teach him to be more
absolute, it is doubtful; because the more sandy the foundations of Craft be,
the more charge, and care is ever to be used in building upon it. Moreover,
this is one essential difference, between the counsel of Honor, and Craft;
that if the success of Subtilty be evil, it does blast, and black the stock
it is grafted in, where the counsel of Honor does in mischance it self,
improve the reputations of them that be governed by it.

Therefore (as I said) if you will adventure upon these unfound counsels, which
have base conditions, hazarding success, and infallible infamy; you must first
deface honor, shame, religion, and all other honest limits in your self:
because it is an unprosperous, and halfwitted course, to think of remorse,
after counsel taken to have good by the Devil. And who but those natures that
can be as evil as they list, are fit to guide themselves by that iron Industry,
wakefull Faithlesnesse, aduantageous Contracts, which they must pass through
that intend to master, or please corrupted Power? The conclusion, and end of my
counsel therefore is, only to persuade you, that you never study to be wiser
than the truth; and so neither strive to master, mend, or please him.

CAP. 3.
NOw if I leave you here, I have only laid before you a glass of Disquiet,
and raised up such mists of opinion, as make your woes seem greater, and
thereby (like an ignorant Critic) rather dissolved those rests you had, than
erected you any new. But though there be less labor, and art required in
overthrowing than establishing (the common Errors of men giving authority to
Censurers, and a reputation of piercingnesse to the Reprouers) yet my selfe-end
being nothing but your favor, and my true end your good; how unequal soever my
spirits be, to build you any certain felicity upon this broken foundation, yet
shall they be sufficient, I hope, to pull down those ruins of yours, that
threaten (while you labor under them) to fall upon you, or while you piece
with them, suddenly to fall away; and so leave you weaker, with the travel,
and charge of many thoughts. For it is most true, that as the old and new,
agree together in nothing so the mixtures of Good and Evil are Incompetible.
Therefore Madam! Let me first digress a little, and remember that the metal
you are made of is Earth, your habitation a World; both mortal, and so no
perfection at all to be expected in them: those petty Shadows of rest which
are there being full of temptation, lets, or dangers; which I must take notice
of, both to diminish your expectation that else will prove an enemy to you; and
besides to warn your steady mind, that a slip is not strange in an icie way.

To begin therefore with our flesh. Ever since the curse of bondage, which
God breathed out upon the first sin, each degree of life in it is only a
change, and variety of servitude. The Child's innocence being in weakness, his
food in the Nurse, his frailties under the rod; Man under man, his faults under
Laws, rewards under will; nothing constant but the inconstancy of the evil,
and her appearance of liberty the extremest of of all bondage Nay, to go
further; the universal corruption of inferior Elements is such, as even
worldly wisdom it self works but as our vulgar Physic does, which passing
through the imperfections, and contrarieties of our natures, and diseases, does
help and hurt together; still multiplying the curse of our fall, in the false
changes of diseases, and cures; appetites and opinions. Neither can the
confluence of worldly things yield any other rest or stability, than such as is
in the Kingdom of sleep, where the best is but a dream. Because where
imperfection is, there disquiet must be; and where disquiet gouernes, there
Nature is as apt to wander, as to be weary. Novelties (like instants) come, and
pass; that which we desire proves like to that we have enjoyed; the fair
deceiues, and the untasted is only pleafing. We may therefore as well seek
fish upon the mountains, trees in the Sea, as peace in flesh: which is only a
promise to them that care not to find it there. To prove this; if we observe
the progress between God and us: In his first Testament, the Sabbath is there
annexed to the condition of six days labor, not of rest: here a figure only,
hereafter a being; in this life a thing we taste of by faith, performed in
eternity to them that have passed through this flesh as an Inn, not as an
habitation. So as this Body, this composition of Elements, is but only a
purgatory of the soul, either to cleanse, or corrupt, as the Affections of it
look up or down.

And Madame! now that we have done with this fleshly prospect, if we consider
the World, we shall find that to be unto a man (like a Sea to an Island) full
of storms, vncertaineties, violence; whose confusions have neither justice,
nor mercy in them. If we examine the motives that caused the man to make Art
his Nature, and borrow wooden feet to walk over her moving waters; we shall
find them to have been Necessity, Covetousness, Curiosity, Ambition, and
some such other enemies to rest, as with false Greatnesses (while men could not
endure little things) enforced them through pain, and danger, to suffer all
the torments of uncertainty. To apply which comparison Madame! you shall see
the same impotent humors are they, who having first wearied us within, do
after persuade us to seek peace in the World without; where we being forced to
wrestle with others, because we could not overcome our selves, in stead of one
evil are constrained to encounter many. And justly; since where in all inward
ways to peace, man needs no Laws but Gods, and his own Obedience; if he once
go into traffic with the World, his desires are there bound with the snares
of Custom, the heavy hand of Power, the enammels of Authority, which conceal
(as the Poets say) under the golden garments of Pandora, all the venom of her
brazen tonne. And in that bottomless pit of Humors shall we not find deceit
as infinite as desire; Honor but the throne of Care; Prosperity both the child
and mother of labor? To be short, we shall there find (though too late) that
all Fortunes, and Misfortunes are but moulds of momentary Affections, spunne
out with proportion, or disproportion of Time, Place, and Natures. So as since
no estate can privilege this life from death, sickness, pain ( Power it
self being alike feared, and fearful) must we not think to gather our roses
among thorns, and consequently the World to be a flattering glass, wherein
man rather sees how to change, or adorn his evils, than any way to reduce, or
amend them?

Through this false Paradise ( Noble Lady) we must therefore pass, as Ulysses
did by the enchanted deserts of Circe; stopping our ears, and closing our
eyes, lest our rebellious senses, as apt to flatter, as to be flattered, chance
to take part with the diversity of beguiling objects, and so lead our misty
understandings captive to perdition. The company of Ulysses (like multitudes
strange in sense, and weak in reason) by making love to their own harm, were
with open cares, and eyes, transformed into sundry shapes of beasts: the Poets
figuring to us, in them, the diverse deformities of bewitching frailties,
wherewith for lack of divine Grace, or humane Caution, they get power to
ensnare us. And in this captivity, let no Ignorance seem to excuse Mankind;
since the light of truth is still near us; the tempter, and accuser at such
continual war within us; the Laws that guide, so good for them that obey;
and the first shape of every sin so ugly, as whosoever does but what he
knows, or forbeares what he doubts, shall easily follow Nature unto Grace: and
if he in that way obtain not the righteousness of eternity, yet shall he
purchase the Worlds time, and eternity, by moral fame. For Obedience, not
curiosity; as in heavenly, so in earthly things is the most acceptable
sacrifice of mankind. Because this inherent tribute of Nature unto Power (like
a revealed light of universal Grace) refines Man's reason, rectifies his will,
turns his industries, and learnings inward again whence they came, ioynes
words with things, and reduces both of them to their first beings. To
conclude, this is that inward fabric, by which we do what we think, and
speak what we do.

Now Madame! In this narrow path, your helps, both against inward assaults, and
outward temptations, must be those moderate sweet humors which I have known
to be in you, and some of yours. This Moderation of desires being a far
freer, and surer way, than the satisfying of them can be; Repentance following
the one, and Peace the other; the one course making Nature go as well too fast
back, as forwards; and so must consequently offend others with that which
first offended themselves: where these moderate Affections do with a natural
Harmony please themselves, and then must not the Air of that untroubled world
naturally yield peace to every creature that breathes in or about it? Besides,
this Moderation brings forth few desires; strong humblenes to pay the tributes
of Power, Patience, as an armor against oppression; Truth, as a sacrifice:
whereby the World which gives but what it has; and the evil of others, that
desires to oppress, or infect; can the hardlier find means to trouble them,
or color why they should study to do it. My counsel is therefore Madame!
that you enrich your self upon your own stock; not looking outwardly, but
inwardly for the fruit of true Peace, whose roots are there; and all outward
things but ornaments, or branches, which impart their sweet fruits with the
humble spirit of others.

Yet Noble Lady! because you are a Woman, and a Wife; and by the Laws of both
these estates, in some measure ordained to live under mean, and supreme
authority: my intent is not, while I persuade you from the captious Labyrinth
of practice; to leave you without such reasonable latitudes, as Passengers have
in their travails, who when they cannot clime over steep mountains, find
means to go about them, and so by length cut away the danger, or possibility
of precipitation. In which course Madam! because presidents are esteemed the
best guides for humane ignorance to follow; I will first lay before you the
Opinions of worthy men, borne under Tyrants, and bound to obey, though they
could not please; the comparison holding in some affinity between a Wifes
subjection to her Husband, and a Subjects obedience to his Sovereign. Brutus
would leave nothing in his mind fearful to Power, nor in his fortune
exorbitantly to be coueted; as resolute either to be safe by Innocence, or
Contempt; or if both failed yet to have extremity a warrant against
extremities. Some have thought the way of security to be in not understanding
the abstruse courses of Power. Others advise us (with the Moon) to acknowledge
all our light to the Sun. Some would have us imitate the Spheres, who carried
about with the violent course of the first Mouer, do yet steal on in their
nature all, which slow, and insensible motion; with many of like nature, which I
forbear to number, in respect that no man can govern his life wholly by
precepts: Humane Wisdom it self varying with circumstance of occasion, place,
time, and nature; and so neither the same in all things, nor still the same in
any.

CAP. 4.
THerefore Madam! lest you should think I would foolishly conclude the state
of all minds in the aphorisms of a few: I will leave this bondage of precepts,
to walk in a larger field; and through an improper comparison of Divine, and
Humane power together, show you by Humility a way into the one; and by discreet
Constancy a passage out of the other. For as the two Authors differ in the
disproportion of infinite good, and finite evil; so do their workings within
us. The one makes faith a wisdom; the other infidelity a freedom: the one
giving ability to walk over the deep sea of Gods Commandments, which while
they seem impossible prove easy; the other drowning weak faith in the
shallow dewes of mistrust, vanity, selfenesse, and such other irregular
humo^rs, as while they seem easy prove impossible: my intent being, by this
Map, Noble Lady! to make you afraid of trusting your peace in a leaking ship
of humane Power, and Affections. Because all things there are so governed by
the two false rudders of hope and fear, as though (like the boat of Charon)
they refuse no passinger, yet carry they none over either into Rest, or Honor.
In example of Divine power; when God led the children of Israel out of bondage
into the land of promise, to witness his Omnipotency, he used the miracle of
cloud and pillar; one to lighten darkness, the other to shadow the beams of
glory: which two signs the people of God had reason to adore; since it is
credible that he who created the world should be in love with his work; and
consequently he not curious to deceive, in whose power it was to create,
maintain, and destroy. Besides to give all, and take nothing, proceeds of an
vncaused goodness, and so necessarily of an vnabusing.

The Princes of the earth have two like ensigns; viz. Fear and Hope: the
pretense of the one, to awake our dull spirits out of the idle sleeps of
ignorance to serve the ends of active spirits; the other, to keep the
exorbitant desires of multitudes under the service, and cautious of supreme
Will. Of these humane clouds, and pillars we have more reason to be jealous.
First, in respect that whatsoever is created, is afraid of dissolution, and so
in love with it self. Then because we know, that as many Rivers must lose
their names, to make up one Sea: so Absoluteness must win, and keep above,
with the loss of all, or at least many branches of universal Freedom. And
therefore the Fox did not conclude amiss, when he saw his fellows steps march
toward the Lions den, and none return, Nos haec vestigia terrent. But more
clearly to discern these gilt, or painted fetters, from a true golden
freedom, let us examine the specious wisdoms of man's absolute Gouernements:
and for the most part we shall find them to maintain that which is stolen by
craft; usurpations by might; and for a further enlargement of their narrow
foundations, to stroke us with our own hands, threaten us with our own
strengths, and reward us with the spoils of our own fortunes.

Yea, so much they abhor equality from whence they came, as they clime over
Law, Religion, and Truth, to keep more and more above that sweet or be of
humane, and equal peasing Laws. If then even the Coward, and foolish spirits
do feel enough to acknowledge this, of what have we more cause to be
idealous, than of these two cloudy pillars Hope, and Fear? Since by no other
rack can the Nature of man be more highly improued to the advantage of Power,
and disadvantage of his native freedom: the one bewitching, the other amazing
us; the one mastering the strength of number with a multitude of scattered
desires, the other entising, or forcing us to give away our rights for fear to
lose them: both (as they say of Esops dog) making us forsake the true flesh,
to catch at the reflection of Shadows. So that the best course for us
inferiors is, neither (like little children) to play away our times with the
babies which we our selves have made; nor yet to fear the Antickes of our own
painting; since we lend the horns, and nails which make them ugly, but rather
to suppress desire, and affections within our selves, by which we shall wither
Hope, and Fear ( two crafty spies of Power) giving intelligence what may be
forced within us, hereby to enhaunse the tributes of Tyranny, till it have
drawn up our brows after our sweat, and given laws to thirst, as well as
drinking. Therefore Madame! until the smart of sense have so united will and
understanding, as all men in like fortunes may have like ends; till the beasts
begin to know their strengths; the unwritten laws blot out the written; and
the temporal cease under the eternal; there is neither in yours, nor in any
other subjection, any true peace to be gotten by trust of Superiors; nor honor
by strife against them. Whence may I not demonstratiuely conclude, that
wakefull Power must needs win of all inferiors, who strive or venture to win
of it?

Now Madame! when Nature in her universal knowledge foresaw this distress, or
tax, like to fall upon her freedom; she, which is no stepmother to any of
hers, straightwaies gave Honor more wings than one, to the end, those which
cannot have it in commanding, might have it in obeying; and those that want
power to do nobly, may yet find latitudes to suffer nobly in. Out of this
came the Wise-mans words, delivered unto us from the travails of his mind:
That there are times to rest, and times to labor; Times to be well, and times
to be sick; times to hope, and times to vnhope, etc. In which vnhoping time
you must resolve to find your self, and by counsel of the Wisdom limit all
unquietness of desires; lest they being unseasonable, add shame to your other
misfortunes. Let nothing therefore make you hope, where an eclipse of many
humors has darkened your Sun. Trust not; for vnlouelinesse, and
unworthiness are ever unsafe. Venture not; for besides that this fortune is in
it self misfortune, Power being too hard for right, the very Multitude, who
judge of actions by the whorish conduct of effects, will by and by censure them
that undertake, and prosper not, either vainly to have fixed impossible ends
to themselves, or foolishly neglected the means: and from these grounds ever
conclude adversity in the wrong, and prosperity in the right. If your Ladyship
desire a reason of this error, it is; because Men's common judgments upon
common same, neither will, nor indeed can, well examine the different
constellation between your Husbands nature, and yours; your merits, his
demerits: but will infallibly stick fast in the skin, and outside of
estates, preeminences, and authorities; judging well of that in their folly,
which in their baseness they resolved to worship.

To be short; the Wit of People is so many times under the truth, and their
Care so much less than their Wit; as it is with them ever a less fault to do
injury than to have ill luck.

Therefore Noble Lady! I cannot advise you either to complain, or mutiny
against the stronger; for the one discouers inconsiderate weakness, the other
languishing errors: but rather as the vegetable things in the wisdom of nature
do, so advise your Ladyship to do; which is draw all your sap, in this Winter
of thoughts, down to the root; and be content to want leaves, till the sweet
Spring of time, or occasion come to inuit them up again. For besides that
these Iuries of common opinion will ever when they do best look upon Law, and
not Equity; upon Custom, not on Nature; Strength, and not Right: even the
clearest humane judgments will hardly conceive so monstrously of mankind, as
shall be sufficient to acquit you, and condemn your Husband. The reason is;
because these extremities of good, or evil will not easily be believed to
reign in these middle natures of flesh, and blood: In respect that GOD has
decreed the Angels to heaven, the Devils to hell; and left the earth to Man, as
a mean creation between these two extremes. So that he must be a kind of
Devil himself, that can easily believe there should be Devils reigning
within, or amongst us. Besides Madame! how uncomely it were for you (like the
Crow) to go out of your Arc of duty, and discover extraordinary Seas of
vanity in your Husband, the Laws of Honor will tell you. Let God the searcher
of hearts, and Time the discouerer offaults, move those links of shame, and
punishment, whereto our errors are tied; and let it be enough for you
hence-forwards not tow orship Idols, who have eyes that see not, and ears that
hear not. For, as they say, when every particular dies, he has his own
doom; though the general Doomes-day be to come: so may I say; that what
soever your husband has to all the world else, he has neither life, love nor
sense to you. Therefore since Power lies in him; Desire and Duty in you; pay
your tribute, do your homage, and make your reward to be the secret peace of
welldoing; cutting off all other thoughts of rest by him, who not having of it
in himself, cannot possibly bestow it upon others. For by that means your
Honor will be safely guarded from these muddy visions of Hope, which (as I
said) is one chief pillar of incroaching Power; and in which the fools of the
world, sleeping away their liberties, do vainly make Authority their heirs.

Now that we have shaken our hopes, the next chief engine of power is terror;
a breath which seems to pierce nearer, and not to leave us safe or free
within our selves. Because it has slander at commandment, spies, accusers,
violence, and oppression; which fools understand not, and base men give
overmuch reverence unto. Against these I can only say this; that they be the
fires in whose heat Worthiness is re-purified; and by whose light the glories
of it are farthest seen. So as for these violences of temptations, I persuade
you to make Job your example; a type whom God gave the Devil leave to persecute
in his goods, his children, and in his person with such infirmities of body, as
had both pain, and lothsomenesse in them. And mark again in the same
afflicted Job, in whom the excellent wisdom of constancy is figured; he
neither did sacrifice to his evil Angel, nor studied amends, or relief at
the hands of his tempter, but walled his flesh with patience, and his
conscience with innocence: leaving to the Devil that which was his; I mean
his body, and fortune, subject by Adams discreation to the Prince of
sensuality. And what small power the Princes of this world have over the
resolutions of Faith, Honor, or Nature, examine (if it please you) by those
pains, which your selves suffer for children, heretics for opinion, pride for
fame, fear for fear; wherein the rod makes the child endure the corrosiue. So
as the unmeasurable measures of these things have some resemblance with the
infinite, yet merciful word of God; wherein the Lambs may safely wade, while
the vaste bodies of the Elephants shall be drowned. Believe therefore with the
wise; that between misty objects, and more misty senses, many things do
rather terrify, than oppress; and so force frail mankind often to labor
more in opinion, than in things. To go farther in this example of Job; you may
remember, that it was his Wife that bade him, Curse God, and dye: in her sex
the Scripture expressing weakness; and in weakness, the boasts of rage, and
childish violences of passion: yet did Job refuse the Counsel, but not the
Wife: The way of righteousness being to hate the vices, and not the persons;
lest contrary to the duties of Charity, and Affinity, we should make our selves
a war with all flesh.

Now, to deal more particularly with this threatening power; there are but
three ways in which it can be heavy unto you. Ill dealing with your self: a
hard hand upon your children: or separation. For your children; remember the
Image of Cecropia: in whose narrow, and unloving nature, there is yet expressed
an unmeasurable, and bewitched love of her own. Besides, the rule is
universal; that where there is no worth within, merits (like Ciphers) stand
for nothing: because it must be a spark that can be made a fire with blowing.
Rest therefore your religious, and motherly care in this, neither upon merit,
nor demerit, but only upon his self-love, which is such an inseperable knot
between frailty and her own, as it is impossible either to add, or substract
any thing from it. And be confident, that while your Husband remains subject
to his selfe-affections, there will ever be partiality enough within him, to
keep his children safe from disinheriting.

For your self; if in your estate he restrain you; first, consider you have
lost his love, a thing far more precious to your mind (I know) than his
fortune can be. And you have lost withal the experience of that loss, if you
have not learnt by it, to bear the rest more easily. Besides, it is desire
that makes us poor, or rich; so as where you cannot feel necessity, the
measure of enough, or too little, is in your own moderation; and in this
according to the old proverb; No body hurt, but by their own excess. Again,
of all the Apostles, remember who it was that carried the purse; and whether the
error be a destiny to the Office, or Officer; it is Childish to complain,
and Madness to strive with Disadvantage.

But perchance this credulous selfe-pittie (which ever makes Opinion more, or
less than the Truth) may persuade you, that these imprisonments of fortune do
really both imprison Honor, and Nature. Wherein (for answer) be pleased to
consider; that there is none so poor, but he may have liberal thoughts; of
wisdom as much use as of the Elements: For she is patience in Misfortune,
and moderation in good: Chastity needs no purple to become it self: and as
for Devotion; Princes can neither command, nor forbid it. Besides, affliction
is rather a spur than a bridle to that virtue; our flesh being like a Top
which only goes upright with whipping. Lastly, pleasure it self is not
banished out of bondage; since there may be peace within, and Fame without, to
the sincere conscience: So that the error is only man's, in his not seeking
rest in that fortune under which he lives; but in Change, which is ever in the
power of others. To prove this, let us go a little further, and examine of how
many complexions this pleasure is; some find it in labor, others in ease;
some in women, others in books, etc. So as there being no truth, but opinion
in it; fortune can have no advantage of those excellent tempered natures, that
when they may not choose delights, can yet make them to themselves. And who so
are not indifferent to this indifferent humor, are but like little children,
that cry when their parents, or fellows take their toys from them. Yea, so
subject is our life to the oppressions of Power, Chance, and negligence, as the
practice of times will show; that he who cannot endure to lose, can much more
more hardly endure to live.

Of separation, which is the last, I will bestow few words; because I am well
acquainted with your goodness, and severe laws over your self. Besides, I
know your Husbands nature, which is rather weakly than strongly evil; full of
respects, desires, fears; jealous, and careless; factious, and vnresolute;
rather inclining to Craft, than Violence. What be the counsels of such
natures? Whispering, murmur, conspiracy in speech, slander; swear, and break;
loath, and keep; dispraise, and love; a tyrant (in words) valiant over a Wife.
And from thence all the harm, only a threatening of those excellent humors in
you, which unacquainted with the degrees of evil; while you think him worse
than he is, are amazed; and when you hope for better, wounded with being
deceived in him. But learn to know for your own ease, that every man, though
he would, yet cannot become excellently evil at once; since both weeds, and
herbs are more, or less perfect in their kinds; according to the temper of
earth, and air, wherein they grow. So that your Ladyship may be assured it is
impossible for his hollow, and wauing mind to go over the shame, and
opposition of the World; the swarm, and faction of Wives; the courage and
credit of your private Friends; and the customs of England, to a divorce;
though you were as ill as he would have you: much less having a well-gouerned
Innocence, with all these other humane guards, to break thorough.

CAP. 5.
IF you therefore stand firm against the temptations of Fear and Hope; there
remains an excellent end in your passage, to which all those necessities, and
misfortunes are no other kinds of lets, than rain, or storms upon the land
be, which cannot stay resolved passengers, though it moyle their clothes, and
make their way slippery. This end is, to have the honor of being an excellent
wife: in which womanlike ambition, the principal actor is Obedience; an
attribute from inferior to superior duties. I speak not of love, since that
wonderful affection must be stirred either by extraordinary worth, or by a
natural sympathy of love again; both which objects I think your estate in
your Husband to be very barren of, and therefore advise you to nothing
unnecessary, or impossible. To satisfy our selves that Obedience is necessary,
let us again examine the nature of Authority; and we shall find it to be, A
commanding power, that has relation to the obedience of inferiors. And then if
we consider from what root it springs, we shall find it to be, out of nature
in some things, in others from a lavish giving away of our own liberties.
Thirdly, that prescription, which binds equals, still gives superiors an
increase of freedom. Fourthly, that custom priuiledgeth humors above nature,
so as time must pull down that which advantage, and time has established. Out
of which particulars I think we may conclude Obedience to be necessary; and
that they who strive to remove the unremovable rocks with chains draw
themselves to the rocks, but not the rocks to them. Neither in this question
is the difference between supreme, or mean authority material, nor what
diverse foundations they have; since it falls out in Power, as it does in
Knowledge; that who is any thing at all, is all the world above us. Therefore
Madame! be pleased to weigh what folly it is for a Subject under a Prince, or a
Wife under the yoke of a Husband, to strive alone with the strong corporation
of Power: Since in Obedience we need overcome but one (our self I mean) where
in these other contentions, we must serve many Masters, worship Equals, flatter
Inferiors, and trust in Strangers: that course being (as I have showed)
subject besides to treachery, ignorance, and inconstancy of instruments;
together with Mischance, which has greatest rule in all these unruled hazards.
The fearful examples of those men that have walked this icie path, and been
unfortunate, by disproportion between their natures, places, and times they
lived in, are innumerable. Seianus under Tiberius, the Duke of Guise under
Henry of France, many of our Dukes, and Barons under our own Kings, in that
false stage of our Barons wars. All which I shortly lay before you, because
your estate is (as I said) such a model of Subjects estates under Princes, as
man's little world is of the great; differing only in more, or less.

That Obedience is just, the Customs of Nations, and Laws of Nature will
assure you; who give the mightier, Preeminence, and the stronger, Rule. Again,
those excesses which arise out of Authority, are they not either rods of trials
which we inferiors must kiss, and that God only may burn, which made them;
or else mists of mutinous self-love, which deceive, and make man as well
misunderstand his diseases, as their remedies? And so by misplacing equality,
and inequality, at once ruin both public and private security. These be
indeed Meteors, that encourage man to undermine Government, examine
Soueraignity, and measure the Arcana of all Estates by the crooked line of our
own Opinions. Now Madame! If you please to apply this to your self, it has
this instruction in it; that if because you are unequal, and have advantage of
your Husband in love, chastity, piety, and sincerenesse, you will think your
self equal with him in liberty, wealth, and power; whereof some are proper by
nature to his sex, as a Man; some by ordinance unto his person, as a Husband;
you shall err in confusion of merit, while you do not distinguish virtue from
virtue, right from right; but out of selfe-loues counsels, strive to have
equality in one become an equality in all. In which false path, the iron pot
does often meet with the earthen; and then you know which is broken. Besides
Madame! in these contentions between crafty strength, and well-beleeuing
weakness, spies must be maintained, and rumors paid to the watching of
errors, and uncovering of shame in your own nest; which quire of foul
spirits, if the Inferiors be so foolish to conjure up, the Superiors will
ever take advantage by; authority giving authority to untruths: so that all
strifes with Superiors must needs prove idle, where we cannot; and unnoble,
where we may not either stand, or leave with the prosperity of Honor.
Therefore, let us conclude, that necessity is the Law of time; and consequently
whatsoever is just to be only, and really wise.

If you desire an example of this Obedience, which I urge you to; It may please
you, in that arch-story of love, to read the licentious affection of Antonie
toward Cleopatra. Where you shall see, that if his virtuous wife Octauia had
striuen to master his dissoluteness; Augustus was her Brother, and his
Competitor in the Empire; whereby Right, and Strength, might with some
possibility have lifted up her ambition, and revenge from the barren grounds of
Duty. If she had striuen to please him with change, whom she could not keep
from it; the pride of Rome did then minister variety of delights, and the
servile instruments of Time, and Greatness, would soon have had an eye to
their Gain, and her Fortune. If she would have rolled the stone of Sysiphus,
and studied with merit to call back his love; she was as young, equal in
beauty, stronger in honor; but ever the same, which (she knew) was not so
pleasing to him, as the same in others. Besides, she had the color of Estate
to enammell all reuenges upon his ungratefulness. Notwithstanding this worthy
Lady would never yield to adventure her Honor upon the dice of Chance, nor
vainly seek to have power over him, that had none over himself; but dividing
her innocence from his errors with the middle wall of a severe life, she
remained still his good Angel with Octauius; tempered public iealousies, and
all advantages of private wrongs; and to be short, was content, when she could
not do the works of a well-beloued Wife, yet to do well, as becomes all
excellent Women. In which course of moderation, she neither made the World her
Judge, nor the Market her Theater, but contented her sweet mind with the
triumphs of Patience, and made solitariness the tomb of her Fame: which Fame,
as true to her Worth, and envious to his Lasciviousness, has multiplied her
Honor, and his Shame, to live (as you see) many ages after them both.

Where, if on the other side she had, with her first thoughts, descended into
the counsels of impatiency, pleaded distress in tears, and wrongs in
complaint; who sees not that she had therein not only lost Greatness of
reputation, the true shadow of great hearts; but stirred up Murmur, which
handles all things, but either never concludes any, or at least concludes in
the worst part? And so perchance, by ouer-acting, might have brought her right,
and his errors into an equal balance. For it is most true, that exorbitancies
of Passions do many times (like Players upon stages) represent the office of a
King, in the person of a beggar. Aristides constancy, with the weakness of
Philautus; and the resolute courage of Turnus; with the cowardice of Nicias,
acting that which they are not; and consequently, either out of felt, or
adopted impressions, vainly striving to deny Chance her Tributes; Error her
Changes; and Tyranny her Injustice; fall suddenly into that kind of weakness,
which under Power must be forced to endure many storms, and burdens; because
it could not endure the petty, and incident passages of life. Therefore good
Madame! Since I have showed you by reason, that Obedience is just, and
necessary; by example that it is possible; be not restiue in their weak
stubburnnesse; that will either keep, or lose all: but think what folly it
were for a man, in the natural decaies of age, not to go because he cannot
run: and believe that it will prove the like kind of headiness in a Wife, to
forsake herself, for his ill that has already forsaken her. Therefore Noble
Lady! proceed constantly to your end; bear, and deal with these weaknesses
of your Husbands; not with hate of your self, or of him: but as Mothers do
with the wantonness of children; who cry not to still them, nor threaten
imperfection, and malice with one rod, but first take away the offense, then
suffer them to enjoy those toys they delight in. For look what a Mothers love
is toward her children, the like is a Husbands power over a Wife: They will
not punish, you cannot.

To confirm this more clearly; let us examine the commodities that arise out
of this just, and necessary Obedience. The Poets, who sometimes under clouds of
beasts, describe the beastly courses of degenerate men, tell you; that Jupiter
after he had made many wandering pilgrimages from heaven down to the earth,
brought still some of that earthly metal up with him; so as his affection
became divided, and every day less kind to Juno. She (as a Goddess)
acquainted with his power, and with all the tempestuous powers of Lust, found
that she, which hitherto had brought to pass many things by his love, could
now work nothing by it. Nevertheless wisely considering that all affections
mixed between heaven and earth, have wauing hopes, revenge, desire, fear, and
repentances in them, which contrariety of passions had likewise their times,
and places of reign; Sensualities in man not being made of one, but many
humors. Out of these peircing grounds, she neither forsakes herends, nor takes
upon her that languishing despair, which made the first Monk, nor that
earnestness of rage, which is ever revenged of it self: but where strength of
Credit failed, she there uses the traffic of Wit; observing his humors,
and their changes; learning out of them so to temper, and allay one thought
with another, now bearing, now urging, that (as those grave Authors affirm)
Carthage was long kept up by luno's industry, in despite of Venus her constant
ambition to build Rome upon the ruins of it: which proves, that no man being
made all of love, they have not lost all, that have (how unhappily soever) lost
it. The art wherewith she thus wrought Jupiter, lay vndisclos'd; as the faults
of Power do; self-love covering them within, and flattery without: under which
two veyles the will of Supreme Authority is many times stolen away; and the
Lions skin become the Foxes privilege: The Agents going still unpunished,
because it is not stealing, but stealing ill, which Husbands as well as Princes
take offense at.

Therefore Noble Lady! as the straight line shows both it self, and the
crooked: so does an upright course of life, yield all true ways of advantage,
and by mastering our own affections, anatomizeth all inferior passions, making
known the distinct branches out of which the higher powers of kindness,
respect, and admiration do arise. A Map, wherein we may by the same wisdom
of Moderation, choose for our selves that which is least in the power of
others. Besides, it plainly discouers; that Jealousy acknowledges advantage
of worth, and so becomes the triumph of Libertines; that Grief is the
punishment of wrong, or right ill used; Curiosity ever returns ill news;
Anger how great soever it seems, is but a little humor, springing from
opinion of Contempt; her causes less than vices, and so not worthy to be
loved, or hated; but viewed, as lively images to show the strength, and yet
frailty of all passions: which Passions being but diseases of the mind, do so
disease-like thirst after false remedies, and deceiving visions; as the weak
become terrified with those glowworm lights, out of which wise Subjects often
fashion arts to govern absolute Monarchs by. For Madame! as nourishment which
feeds, and maintains our Life, is yet the perfect pledge of our Mortality: so
are these light-moued Passions true, and assured notes of little natures,
placed in what great Estates soever. Besides, by this practice of Obedience,
there grow many more commodities. Since first, there is no loss in duty; so as
you must at the least win of your flesh by it, and either make it easy for
you to become unfortunate, or at least find an easy, and honorable passage
out of her intricate lines, and circles. Again, if it be true, which the
Philosophers hold; that virtues and vices, disagreeing in all things else, yet
agree in this; that where there is one in esse, in posse there are all: then
cannot any excellent faculty of the Mind be alone, but it must needs have
Wisdom, Patience, Piety, and all other enemies of Chance to accompany it; as
against, and amongst all storms, a calmed, and calming Men's adepta.

CAP. 6.
NOw worthy Lady! If you please from this humble mountain, unto which no
panting desire can ascend, but thoughts of long breath; I say, if it please you
to pause, and make your prospect backward, over the courses we have past;
which are, the Impossibility to amend, Danger to master, Casualty to please;
then our metal, and that of the Worlds we live in; lastly, the justice,
necessity, and commodities of Obedience: You shall see the proportions between
one Excellency, and all other are such; and the lets unto them of such
affinity; as he that has overcome, or profited in any, is in an easy way to
more perfection in them all. Out of which grounds Madame! from a good Wife to
an excellent creature, the travail must needs prove pleasant, and familiar.
Yet because they that rest in Fame, or Virtue, keep not the estate they were
in, but decline; let us from this humble pinnacle cast our eyes before our feet,
and look to the even, or unevenness of this well-shadowed path, we are to
pass thorough. Wherein our first prospect must be over our own natures,
examining our strengths, and weaknesses; with our desires, and ends; then the
particular differences, and contrarieties of other men's humors, which (as
instruments in the Workmans hands) must prove helps, or hindrances, according
to the Art, or Ignorance of those that use them. In the consideration of which,
we shall find some spirits narrow, and woond all upon one wheel; others upon
many: Diverse pleased (like children) with little things; while the greater
bodies must have greater minds to move them: some (like Heraclitus) bewailing
the World with the tears of Selfe-pittie; others (like Democritus) iouially
laughing at griefs, afflictions; rather with an easiness of nature than any
strength of worth, or counsel: Chance the end of many, and Change of more:
together with the libertine, or servile effects of too many, or too few
distinctions, or respects in our moral lives. To be short; in the whole view
of Mankind, you shall observe only such nice division, and differences, as
there are in the kingdom of beasts; where some are rauinous, and spoiling;
others weak, and apt to be preyed upon: their strengths, and weaknesses
diverse ways laid; some in one member, some in another: all subject alike to
deliver their skins to those deceivers which are above them; but dangerously
envious to equals, or inferiors. To conclude; when they are wild, ill
neighbors, worse friends; but excellent servants, when they are tamed. Out of
which diversity of Natures, and Affections, we may gather again, that even
those Misfortunes, or Afflictions, which be diseases to some; unto others
health, or cure: Error, and Offense in the minds of men coming from as
diverse causes, as imperfections do in the sight; either by too much uniting
or dispersing the beams. So that many may say as truly with comfort, Injury
often makes way for better fortune, as others may with grief, What Tyrant has
taken away our Godhead from us.

Now Madam! If you apply this to your self, it has this morality in it; to
let you know, that without your Husbands unkind dealing, you would perchance
have doted too much in the worship of one man; neglecting for that one humor,
all other ways of Honor, as bewitched affections use to do. So that left the
other excellent powers of your mind should be in vain to you, and to the
world; it seems, even by the providence of Mischance, you are driven from
these narrow sanctuaries of selfe-affections, which imprisoned you; to take
into your heart new Idea's, larger ends, and nobler ways. And in this new
deliberation, it will be no impertinent counsel; first, to examine the
difference of worths required in seeking to win one, or the world; or in a
third progress, by losing both to win credit with God. In which mystical
work, the fine mixture of Grace, and Nature together, makes it more easy to
mend our errors, than before it was to cover them; and consequently our flesh
as capable to receive the immortality of good, as it was to run headlong under
the eternal curse of Sin. Again, since it is flesh only that receives
immortality of Good, or Evil; and upon the same flesh no heavier tax laid in
these worthier courses than you were charged with before; I mean a resolution
to turn all things within, and without you to the best: Noble Lady! gather
your powers together; and know that where, in the former imprisonment of
Thoughts, Reason, Wrong; and Occasion were all kept subject to an ouer-tender
affection in our selves; they shall in this be set at liberty, and spread as
far as the limits of Nature, or Grace, can possibly be extended. Besides, in
all the course of Choice, or Change, whosoever will but compare what advantage
the strength of one Mouer has over another, he shall see all hardness, and
inequality in the ways to be reconciled in the force, and preeminen^ of the
Mouers: so as pleasure having a weak entrance, and an easy Adamant; Honor, a
crabbedfirst step, but an omnipotent object; the light goes as easy upward, as
the heavy, down.

To begin therefore with the first, which is the winning of one; there is in
that course required neither exact Virtue, nor Vice; but a happy temper in
both, to a nimble use of either. Here yielding, soothing, serving must be our
sacrifices; humors, our study; and we bound (like Shadows) neither to be
shorter, nor longer, than befitteth those bodies we resolve to worship: so as
the most factious spirits, are often the most fortunate in these courses. For
as in Coins it is the stamp, not the metal that goes current; that which is
gold here, going perchance every where else but as copper, so do the unworthy
choices of favor often make Natures meanest creations pass for superlatiue.
Nay more, if by the influence of a good Destiny, we chance to honor a worthy
man; yet shall we but take on, and not take in Worth by that traffic: and
then how can they truly merit, that do well for any respect, but goodness it
self? This was it, that made the piercing Judgments of times past, note a
difference between the affability of Scipio, and Caesar; it being artificial
in this to his end, and in the other a natural sweetness of bowels; in the
one an art of Ambition, in the other nobleness, and ingenuity. Whereby we may
conclude; that it is no great enriching of man's Nature to bring forth pleasing
fruits to one Landlord, how fantastical, or imperious soever. Besides, these
humour-hunters only master those affections of mind, which are not honorable
in the large extents of Truth, but in the narrow limits of Opinion; and thereby
sometimes make us creatures to our Equals; servants to Unworthiness; less
than our selves, by seeking to win a man perchance worse than our selves;
rather improuing Craft, than Wisdom; Servitude, than Honor. In all which,
true Worth must necessarily suffer allay, as being changed from general
approuings to particular; and thereby forced to imprison Nature within
Municipall, and servile Humors, or Constitutions.

The second part, which is the winning of the World, has many, and large
respects in it: since therein our mediator must be Fame, a spirit never
entreated, but commanded up; our study Honor, as a pledge which the world does
trust, and believe in; Magnanimity must be our Scepter, wherein the Equal
find strength, and the Inferior protection; Liberality, that all desires may
hope; Justice which distinguishes right from estate, or persons; Mercy, that
frailty may not despair with such like great strengths of mind, as are
universally current, and do give evidence to the World that we despise those
petty things; which the rest do wonder at; and by affecting the general love
of all men, bring forth that, which all men love in us. Besides, the end is
more noble to win Reverence, than to yield it; to create, than pay tribute;
the powers of the mind, that are used more strong, as doing, and not suffering
affections; the proportion of the means larger, and of more difficulty,
requiring better forms, perfecter health, and greater strengths: because in
our ends, we embrace the ends of all men; and thereby are advanced without
prejudice, or discontent to any. Hence, from Equalities of Nature, grew up all
Estates of Superiority; this is that serving of the Multitude, which commands
them; this is to be least, and greatest; one, and rule many: yea, even this is
that great Art, which has ever flourished in the brauest spirits, and most
flourishing Ages; and which being forgotten by the corruption, or vicissitude
of times (as the most excellent Sciences have been) is grown strange among
men; and which being but renewed in show, the vain World (made to be
deceived) will without suspicion embrace; as a lively picture of her ancient
Pomp, and Greatness.

Again, since the nature of the Multitude is not unlike the Earth; which (not
made for it self) while it lies common brings forth nothing to enrich, but
conceales many treasures under her skin, and bowels; and on the other side,
moved, or manured, yields reward for his pains that husbands her: since (I
say) these two being paralelled; even as the first authors in all Innouations,
while their mend not, but change the complexion of Passions, shall find
audacity in undertaking the hardest of their work; as being forced to be
presidents to themselves: so again, the consequence must of necessity prove
fair, and easy, in respect that novelty is ever as welcome, as fearful;
and the whole flock apt to follow the first sheep: In which undertaking to
become an example; has some thing in it worthy of adventure. Therefore, if you
compare the winning of one, and the world together, you shall find the world
exceeds one both in number, weight and measure; and then as our English
proverb says, The more cost, the more worship.

From this second step if you will climb up to the third, and though with
absurdity, yet for understandings sake, compare finite, and infinite together;
I mean the winning of the world with the worship of God, the center with the
circumference, him that made all things with that which was made of nothing;
the ends differ no more in excellency, than the ways, and means to attain it
do. For in the one we work with our own strengths, which are but
weaknesses; in this with his, that is Omnipotent; in the first with flattering
promises, that will deceive; in this with him that is greater than all things,
and only equal with his word; as whose each part is of his own essence,
indivisible, infinite and eternal.

Not finished.
A Letter written by Sir Fulke Greuill to his Cousin Greuill Varney residing in
France; wherein are set down certain rules and observations, directing him
how he may make the best use of his Travels.

MY good Cousin, according to the request of your Letter, dated the 19. of
October, at Orleance, and received here the 18. of November, I have sent you by
your Merchant for your present supply, and had sent you a greater sum, but
that my extraordinary charges this year have utterly unfurnished me.

And now Cousin, though I will be no severe exacter of account, either in your
money or time, yet for the love I bear you, I am very desirous both to
satisfy my self, and your friends, how you prosper in your Travels, and how
you find your self bettered thereby, either in knowledge of God or the world;
the rather because the days you hauc already spent abroad are now sufficient
both to give you light how to fix your self an end with counsel, and
accordingly shape your course constantly unto it. Besides, it is a vulgar
scandal of Travelers that few return more religious than they went out.
Wherein both my hope and request is to you, that your principal care be to
hold your foundation, and to make no other use of informing your self in the
corruptions and superstitions of other Nations, than only thereby to engage
your own heart more firmly unto the truth. You live indeed in a Country
Bigarre of two several Professions, and you shall return a Nouice from
thence, if you be not able to give an account of the ordinances, progress, and
strength of each in reputation, and party, and how both are supported,
balanced, and managed by the State, as being the contrary humors, in the
temper, or predominancy whereof the health of disease of that body does consi
st.

These things you will observe, not only as an Englishman, whom it may
concern to know what interest his country may expect in the consciences of her
neighbors, but also as a Christian, to consider both the beauties and
blemishes, the hopes and dangers of the Church in all places.

Now for the world, I know it too well to persuade you to diue into the
practices thereof, rather stand upon your guard against all that tempt you
thereunto, or may practice upon you in your conscience, your reputation, or your
purse. Resolve that no man is wise or safe, but he that is honest. And let this
persuasion turn your studies and observations from the complement and
impostures of this debauched Age to more real grounds of wisdom, gathered
out of the stories of Time past, and out of the government of the present
State.

Your guide to these is the knowledge of the Country and the People among whom
you live.

For the Country; though you cannot see all places, yet if as you pass along
you enquire carefully, and further help your self with Books that are
written of the Cosmography of those parts; you shall thereby sufficiently
gather the strength, riches, traffic, havens, shipping, commodities, vent;
and the wants and disaduantages of all places. Wherein also for your own use
hereafter, and for your friends, it will be fit to note their Building,
Furniture, their Entertainments, all their Husbandry, and ingenious Inventions
in whatsoever concerns either Pleasure or Profit.

For the People, your traffic among them while you learn their language will
sufficiently instruct you in their Habilities, Dispositions and Humors; if you
enlarge the priuacy of your own nature to seek acquaintance with the best
sort of Strangers, and restrain your affection, and participation from your
own country men of whatsoever condition.

In the story of France you have a large and pleasant field in the three lines
of their Kings, to observe their Alliances and Successions, their Conquests,
their Wars, especially with us, their Counsels, their Treaties, and all Rules
and Examples of Experience and Wisdom, which may be lights and remembrances to
you hereafter to judge of all occurrents at home and abroad.

Lastly, for the government; your end must not be like an Intelligencer, to
spend all your time in fishing after the present news, humors, graces, or
disgraces of Court, which happily may change before you come home; but your
better and more constant grounds will be to know the Consanguinities,
Alliances, and Estates of their Princes; the proportion between the Nobility
and Magistracy, the constitutions of the Courts of Justice, the state of their
Laws, as well for the making, as for the executing thereof. How the
Sovereignty of the King infuseth it self into all acts and ordinances: How
many ways they lay Impositions and Taxations, and gather Revenues to the
Crown; what be the Liberties and Seruitudes of all degrees; what Discipline
and preparations for Wars; what Inventions for increase of Traffic at home,
for multiplying their commodities, encouraging Arts or Manufactures, or of
worth in any kind: Also what good Establishments to prevent the necessities
and discontentments of the People, to cut off suits at Law, and Duels, to
suppress Thieves and all disorders.

To be short, because my purpose is not to bring all your observations to
heads, but only by these few to let you know what manner of return your
Friends expect from you, let me for these and all the rest give you this one
note, which I desire you to observe as the counsel of a Friend: Not to spend
your spirits, and the precious time of your travail, in a captious prejudice,
and censuring of all things, nor in an infectious collection of base vices and
fashions of Men and Women, and general corruptions of these times; which will
be of use only among Humorists for jests and table-talke: but rather strain
your wits and industry soundly to instruct your self in all things between
heaven and earth which may tend to Virtue, Wisdom, and Honor, and which may
make your life more Profitable to your Country, and your self more
Comfortable to your Friends and acceptable to God.

And to conclude; let all these riches be treasured up not only in your
Memory, (where time may lessen your stock) but rather in good Writings, and
Books of account; which will keep them safe for your use hereafter. And if in
this time of your liberal traffic, you will give me any advertisement of
your commodities in these kinds, I will make you as liberal a return from my
self and your friends, here as I shall be able. And so commending all your
good endeauours to him that must either wither or prosper them, I very kindly
bid you farewell.

Your very loving Cousin, FVLKE GREVILL.
From Hackney this 20. of November, 1609.
FINIS.

