MYSTICAL BEDLAM, OR THE WORLD OF Madmen.

BY THO: ADAMS.

2. TIMOTH. 3. 9. Their Madness shall be manifest to all men. AVGVSTIN. de
Trinit. Lib. 4. cap. 6. Contrarationem nemo sobrius. LONDON Printed by George
Purslowe, for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his shop in Paul's
Churchyard, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Sir THOMAS EGERTON, Knight, Baron of Ellesmere, Lord
high Chancellor of England, one of his Majesty's right Hon. Privy Counsel, the
true Pattern of virtue, and Patron of good Learning.
RIght Honorable: it is a labor that has neither recompense nor thanks, to
tell them their madness, that feign would think themselves sober. Having
therefore presumed (not to trouble the peace, but) to disquiet the security of
our Israel: I durst not but aspire to some noble Patronage, that might shield
both my self and labors, from the blows of all maleuolent Censurers. In
which thoughts, I was bold to center my self in your Honor; as the
individual point of my refuge, wherein I have been taught the way by more
worthy precedents: your Honorable Name having long stood, as a communis
terminus, or Sanctuary of protection, to the labors and persons of many
Students. The vn-erring hand of God has placed your Lordship in the Seat of
Justice, and Chair of Honor, (especially if it be true, what S. Hieron:
says, that Su^ma apud Deu^ nobilitas, claru^ essevirtutibus: whereby you have
power and opportunity, to whet the edge of virtue with encouragements, and to
give vice the just retribution of deserved punishments. Happy influences have
been derived from you, sitting as a Star in the Star Chamber: conscionable
mitigations of the Laws rigor in the Court of Chancery. To punish when you
see cause, is not more Justice then Mercy: Justice against the offender, Mercy
to the Commonwealth. Those punishments are no other then actual Physic
ministered to the Inheritance, Liberty, Body, to the bettring of the Conscience,
1. Cor. 5. 5.
and saving of the soul in the day of the Lord Jesus. Behold, my pen has but
written after the original Copy of your Honors actions: desiring rather to
learn by your doings, how to say; then to teach you by my sayings, how to do.
I have spoken (God knows with what success) to these mad times: and he that
would bind the frantic, though he loves him, angers him. The detector of
men's much-loued sins, needs a Protector, that is both good and great. I am sure
my elecio^ is happy; if it shall please your Honor to cast the eye of acceptance
on my weak labors. A young plant may thrive, if the Sun shall warm it with
his beams. That Sun of righteousness, that has saving health under his
wings, shine for ever on your Lordship, Mal. 4. 2.
who has been so liberal a fauorer to his Church, and among the rest to his
unworthiest servant, and

Your Honors in all duty and thankful observance bounden THO: ADAMS,

Mystical Bedlam, OR, THE WORLD OF MADMEN.
The first Sermon.
ECCLESIASTES, CAP. 9. VER. 3. The heart of the Sons of men is full of evil,
and madness is in their heart while they live: and after that, they go to the
dead.
THe Subject of the discourse is Man; and the speech of him has three Points,
defined and confined in the Text. 1. His Comma, 2. his Colon, 3. his Period. 1.
Men's hearts are full of evil, there is the Comma. 2. Madness is in their hearts
whiles they live: there is the Colon. 3. whereat not staying, after that they
go down to the dead. And there is their Period. The first begins, the second
continues, the third concludes their Sentence.

Here is Man's setting forth, his peregrination, and his iourneyes end. 1. At
first putting out, His heart is full of evil. 2. Madness is in his heart, all
his peregrination, whiles they live. 3. His iourneyes end, is the Grave, He
goes to the dead.

First, Man is borne from the womb, as an arrow shot from the Bow. 2. His
flight through this air, is wild, and full of madness; of indirect courses.
3. The Center, where he lights, is the Grave.

First, his Comma begins so harshly, that it promises no good consequence in
the Colon. 2. The Colon is so mad and inordinate, that there is small hope of
the Period. 3. When both the premises are so faulty, the Conclusion can never
be handsome. Wickedness in the first proposition, Madness in the second: the Ergo
is fearful, the conclusion of all is Death.

So then, 1. the beginning of Man's race is full of evil; as if he stumbled at
the thresshold. 2. The further he goes, the worse: Madness is joined- Tenant in
his heart with life. 3. At last, in his frantic flight, not looking to his
feet, he drops into the pit goes down to the dead.

To begin at the uppermost stayre of this graduall descent; the Comma of this
tripartite sentence gives man's heart, for a vessel. Wherein observe

1. The Owners of this vessel, men, and deriuatiuely, the sons of men.

2. The vessel it self is earthen, a Pot of Gods making, and man's marring,
the Heart.

3. The Liquor it holds is Evil, a defective, privative, abortiue thing, not
instituted, but destituted, by the absence of original Goodness.

4 The measure of this vessels pollution with evil liquour. It is not said
sprinkled, not seasoned, with a moderate and sparing quantity. It has not an
aspersion, nor imbution, but impletion; it is filled to the brimme: full of
evil. Thus, at first putting forth, we have Man in his best member corrupted.

1. The Owners or Possessors, Sons of men.
Adam was called the son of God, Luke 3. Luke 3. 38.
Enos was the son of Seth, Seth the son of Adam, Adam the son of God: But
all his posterity the sons of men: we receiving from him both flesh, and the
corruption of flesh, yea, and of soul too; though the substance thereof be
inspired of God, not traduced from man: for the purest soul becomes stained
and corrupt, when it once touches the body.

The sons of men. This is a deriuatiue and diminutiue speech; whereby man's
conceit of himself is lessened, and himself lessoned to humility. Man, as
Gods creation left him, was a goodly creature, an abridgement of heaven and
earth, an Epitome of God and the world: resembling God, who is a Spirit, in his
Soul, and the World, which is a Body, in the composition of his. Deus maximus
inuisibilium, mundus maximus visibilium: God the greatest of invisible natures,
the World the greatest of visible creatures: both brought into the little
compass of Man.

Now Man is grown less; and as his body in size, his soul in vigor, so
himself in all virtue is abated: so that the son of man is a phrase of
diminution, a bar in the Arms of his ancient glory, an exception of his
derogate and degenerate worth.

Two instructions may the sons of men learn in being called so. 1. Their
spiritual corruption. 2. Their natural corruptiblenes.

1. That corruption and original prauity, which we have derived from our
Parents. Psalm. 51. Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold, says David, I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. The original word is, warm me: as if the first heat derived to
him, were not without contamination. I was borne a sinner, says a Saint.

It is said, Genesis 5. Genesis 5. 3.
that Adam begat a son in his own likeness, after his image, and called
his name Seth. This image and likeness cannot be understood of the Soul: for
this Adam begat not. Nor properly and merely of the Bodies shape; so was Cain
as like to Adam, as Seth, of whom it is spoken. Nor did that image consist in
the piety and purity of Seth: Adam could not propagate that to his son, which
he had not in himself: virtues are not given by birth, nor does grace follow
generation, but regeneration. Neither is Seth said to be begotten in the Image
of Adam, because mankind was continued and preserved in him. But it intends
that corruption, which descended to Adams posterity by natural propagation.
The Pelagian error was, Peccatum primae transgressionis in alios homines, non
propagatione, sed imitatione transisse: that the guilt of the first sin was
derived to other men, not by propagation, but by imitation: but then could not
Adam be said, to begette a son in his own image: neither could Death have
seized on Infants, who had not then sinned. But all have sinned, Romans 5. Romans
5. 12.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: so death passed
upon all men, for that all have sinned.

This title then, the sons of men, puts us in mind of our original
contamination, whereby we stand guilty before God, and liable to present and
eternal judgments. Dura, tremenda refers: You will say with the Disciples,
Ioh. 6. Ioh. 6. 60.
This is an hard saying, who can hear it, bear it? nay, be ready to conclude
with a sadder inference, as the same Disciples, after a particular instance,
Math. 19. Math. 19. 23.
Who then can be saved?

I answer, We derive from the first Adam, sin and death: but from the second
Adam, Grace and Life. As we are the sons of men, our state is wretched, as
made the sons of God, blessed. It is a peremptory speech, 1. Cor. 15. 50. 1.
Cor. 15. 50.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does corruption
inherit incorruption. It is a reviving comfort in the 6. Chapter of the same
Epistle: Such we were, 1. Cor. 6. 11.
but we are washed, but we are sanctified, but we are justified, in the name
of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. The conclusion or inference
hereon is most happy. Romans 8 1.
Now therefore there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus, who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit. We may live in the flesh,
but Ver. 13.
if after the flesh, we shall die. Si voluntati and voluptati carnis
satissacere conemur: If our endeavors be wholly armed and aimed to content the
Flesh: but if we be led by the spirit, cum dilectione, cum delectatione, with
love, with delight, we are of the sons of men, made the Ver. 14.
sons of God.

It is our happiness, not to be borne, but to be Ioh 3. 3.
newborn. The first birth kills, the second gives life. It is not the seed of
man in the womb of our mother; but the 1 Pet. 1. 23.
seed of Grace in the womb of the Church, that makes us blessed. Generation
lost us; it must be regeneration, that recouers us. As the tree falls, so it
lies: and lightly it falls to that side, which is most laden with fruits and
branches. If we abound most with the fruits of obedience, we shall fall to
the right hand, life: if with wicked actions, affections, to the left side,
death.

It is not then, worth the ascription of glory to, what we derive naturally
from man. David accepts it as a great dignity, to be son in law to a King. To
descend from Potentates, and to fetch our pedigree from princes, is held
mirabile, et memorabile decus, a dignity not to be slighted or forgotten. But
to be a Monarch; Imperium Oceano, famam quiterminat astris.
Whose fame and Empire no less bound controules, Virg. 2. Aenea.

Then the remotest sea, and both the Poles.


Oh, this is Celsissima gloria mundi, the supremest honor of this world, yet
Princes are but men, says the Psalmist. Psalm. 146. 3.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no
help. His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth. They may be high by
their calling, Princes; yet they are but low by their nature, sons of men. And
merely to be the son of man, is to be corrupt and polluted. They are
sinful, the sons of men: weak, there is no help in them: corruptible,
their breath goes forth: dying, they return to their earth.

It is registered as an evident praise of Moses his faith, that for the rebuke
of Christ, he refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter. There is no
ambition good in the sons of men, but to be adopted the sons of God: under
which degree there is no happiness, above which no cause of aspiring.

2. Our Corruptiblenesse is here also demonstrated. A mortal Father cannot
beget an immortal son. If they that brought us into the world, have gone out
of the world themselves, we may infallibly conclude our own following. He that
may say, I have a man to my Father, a woman to my mother in his life; may in
death, with Job say to Corruption, Thou art my Father: to the worm, Ioh. 17. 14.
Thou art my mother, and my sister.

It has been excepted against the justice of God, that the sin of one man
is deuolued to his posterity; and that for the fathers eating sour grapes,
the childrens teeth are set on edge, according to the Jewish Proverb, Ier. 31.
29. Ezekiel. 18. 2.
As if we might say to every son of man, as Horace sung to his friend:
Delicta maiorum immeritus lues: Thou being innocent, do suffer for thy
nocent superiors. This a Philosopher objected against the gods; strangely
conferring it, as if for the fathers disease, physic should be ministered to
the son.

I answer, Adam is considered as the root of mankind: that corrupt mass,
whence can be deduced no pure thing. Can we be borne Morians without their
black skins? It is possible to have an Amorite to our father, and an Hittite
to our mother, without participation of their corrupted natures? If a man
slip a syense from a hawth orne, he will not look to gather from it grapes.
There is not then a son of man in the cluster of mankind, but ( eodem modo
and nodo, vinctus and victus) it is liable to that common and equal law of
death. Vnde superbis homo, natus, satus, ortus ab hum^?
Proud man forgets, Earth was his native womb;
Whence he was borne: and dead; the Earth's his Tomb.
Morieris, non quia aegrot as, sed quia viuis: says the Philosopher: Thou
shall die, oh son of man, not because thou art sick, Sen. Ep. 99. ad Lucil.
but because the son of man. Cuinasci contigit, mori restat: Who happened to
come into the world, must upon necessity go out of the world.

It is no new thing to die, since life it self is nothing else, but a journey to
death. Quicquid ad summum peruenit, adexitum properat: He that has climbed to
his highest, is descending to his lowest. All the sons of men die not one
death, for time and manner: for the matter and end, one death is infallible to
all the sons of men. The corn is sometimes bitten in the spring, often trod
down in the blade, never fails to be cut up in the ear, Sen ibid.
when ripe: Quisquis queritur hominem mortuum esse, queritur hominem fuisse:
Who laments, that a man is dead, laments that he was a man.

When Anaxagoras heard that his son was dead, he answered without
astonishment, Scio me genuisse mortalem: I know that I begat a mortal man. It
was a good speech, that fell from that shame of Philosophy, Epictetus: Non sum
aeternitas, sed homo: particula vniuersi, vt hora diei: venire igitur oportet
vt horam, praeterire vt horam: I am not eternity, but a man: a little part of
the whole, as an hour is of the day: like an hour I came, and I must depart
like an hour. Mors dominos seruis, and sceptra ligonibus aequat:
Dissimiles simili condition ligat.
Deaths cold imparciall hands are used to strike
Princes and Peasants, and make both alike.
Some fruit is plucked violently from the tree, some drops with ripeness;
all must fall, because the sons of men.

This should teach us, to arm our selves with patience and expectation, Sen.
to encounter Death: Saepe debemus mori, nec volumus: morimur, nec volumus:
Often we ought to prepare for death, we will not: at last, we die indeed, and
we would not. Adam knew all the beasts, and called them by their names: but
his own name he forgot, Adam, of earth. What bad memories have we, that
forget our own names and selves, that we are the sons of men, corruptible,
mortal? Incertum est, quo loco te mors expectat: itaque tu illam omni loco
expecta. Thou know, in what place Death looks for thee: therefore do thou
look for him in every place. Watch therefore; Math. 24. 42.
for you know not what hour your Lord does come. Thus for the Owners.

2. The vessel it self is the Heart.
The Heart is Man's principal vessel. We desire to have all the implements in
our house good: but the vessel of chiefest honor, principally good. Quanm
male de te ipse meruisti, etc. says Saint August. How mad is that man that
would have all his vessels good, but his own heart! We would have a strong
nerve, a clear vein, a moderate pulse, a good arm, a good face, a good
stomach, only we care not how evil the heart is, the principal of all the
rest.

For, howsoever the Head be called the Tower of the mind, the Throne of Reason,
the house of wisdom, the Treasure of memory, the Capitol of judgment, the
shop of affections: yet is the Heart the receptacle of life, Cor receptaculum
vitae.
And Spiritus, Spiritus in iecore naturalis, animalis cerebro, in vitalis in
cord.
which (they say) is Copula animae and corporis, a virtue uniting the soul and
the body: if it be in the Liver natural, in the Head animal, yet is in the
Heart vital. It is the member, that has first life in man, and is the last
that dies in man; and to all the other members gives vivification.

As man is Microcosmus, an abridgement of the world, he has heaven resembling
his soul: earth his heart, placed in the midst as a center: the Liver is
like the sea, whence flow the lively springs of blood: the Brain, like the
sun, gives the light of understanding: and the senses are set round about,
like the stars. The Heart in man is like the root in a tree: the organ or
lung-pipe, that comes of the left cel of the heart, is like the stock of the
tree, which diuides it self into two parts, and thence spreades abroad (as it
were) sprayes and boughs into all the body, even to the arteries of the head.

The Egyptians have a conceit, that man's growing or declining follows his
Heart. The Heart of man, say they, increases still, till he come to fifty
years old, every year two drachmes in weight, and then decreaseth every year
as much, till he come to an hundred: and then for want of Heart, he can live
no longer. By which consequence, none could live about an 100. years: which
conceyted demonstration has often proved false. But it is a vessel, a living
vessel, a vessel of life.

It is a vessel properly, because hollow: hollow to keep heat, and for the
more facile closing and opening. It is a spiritual vessel, made to contain
the holy dewes of grace, which Psalm. 46 4.
make glad the City of God. It is ever full, either with that precious juice,
or with the pernicious liquor of sin. As our Savior says, Math. 15. Out of
the heart proceed evil thoughts, Math. 15. 19.
murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness, blasphemies. 1 Cor.
3. 16.
Know you not, says his Apostle, that you are the Temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you? If our Corpus be Templum Domini, sure our Cor
is Sanctum sanctorum. It was the answer of the Oracle, to him that would be
instructed, what was the best Sacrifice. Damedium Lunae, solemn simul, and canis
iram. Give the half Moon, the whole Sun, and the dogs anger.

Which three Characters make Cor the heart. The good heart is a receptacle for
the whole Trinity: and therefore it has three Angels, as if the three Persons
of that one Deity would inhabit there. The Father made it, the Son bought,
the Holy Ghost sanctifies it: therefore they all three claim a right in the
Heart. It has three cells for the three persons, and is but one Heart for one
God. The world cannot satisfy it: a Globe cannot fill a Triangle. Only God
can sufficiently content the Heart.

God is, Ambros.
says a Father, non corticis, sed cordis Deus: not regarding the rind of the
lips, but the root of the Heart. Hence Satan directs his malicious strength
against the Heart. The fox does gripe the neck, the mastiffe flies at the
throat, and the Ferret nippes the Liver: but the Devil aims at the Heart,
inficere, interficere. The Heart he desires, because he knows, God desires it:
and his ambition still inclines, intends his purposes and plots, to rob God
of his delight. The Heart is the chief Tower of life to the body, and the
spiritual Citadell to the whole man: always besieged by a domestical enemy,
the Flesh: by a civil, the world: by a professed, the Devil. Every perpetrated
sin does some hurt to the walls; but if the Heart be taken, the whole
Corporation is lost.

How should Christ enter thy house, and suppe with thee, when the Chamber is
taken up, wherein he would rest, Reu. 3. 20
the Heart? All the faculties of Man follow the Heart, as servants the
Mistress, wheels the poyse, or linkes the first end of the chain. When the
Sun rises, all rise; beasts from their dens, birds from their nests, men
from their beds. So the Heart leads, directs, moves the parts of the body, and
powers of the soul: that the mouth speaks, hand works, eye looks, ear
listneth, foot walks; all producing good or evil, from the good or evil
treasure of the heart. Luke 6. 45.
Therefore the penitent Publican beat his Heart, as if he would call up that, to
call up the rest.

It is conspicuous then, that the heart is the best vessel, whereof any son
of man can boast himself possessour: and yet ( prohdolor!) even this is
corrupted. To declare this pollution, the next circumstance does justly
challenge: only one caveat to our hearts, of our Hearts, ere we leave them.
Since the Heart is the most precious vessel, man has in all his corporal
household, let him have good regard to it. Omni custodia custodi cor tuum:
Keep thy heart with all diligence, says Solomon. GOD has done much for the
Heart, naturally, spiritually.

For the former; He has placed it in the midst of the body, as a General in
the midst of his Army: bulwarck'd it about with breast, ribs, back. Lest it
should be too cold, the liver lies not far off, to give it kindly heat:
lest too hot, the lungs lie by it, to blow cool wind upon it. It is the
chief, and therefore should wisely temper all other members: by the spleen we
are moved to laugh; by the gall to be angry: by the brain we feel, by the
liver we love, but by the heart we be wise.

Spiritually, he has done more for the heart, giving the blood of his Son
to cleanse it, soften it, sanctify it, when it was full, both of hardness and
turpitude. By his omnipotent grace he vnroosted the Devil from it, who had
made it a stable of uncleanness: and now requires it (being created new) for
his own chamber, for his own bed. The purified heart is Gods Sacrary, his
Sanctuary, his House, his Heaven. As Saint August. glosseth the first words of
the Pater noster. Our Father which art in heaven, that is, in a heart of an
heavenly disposition. Quampropitia dignatio ista, that the King of Heaven will
vouchsafe to dwell in an earthly Tabernacle!

The Heart then being so accepted a vessel, keep it at home: having but one
so precious supellectile or moveable, part not with it upon any terms. There
are four busy requirers of the Heart, besides he that justly owes it.
Beggars, Buyers, Borrowers, Thieves.

1 He that begges thy Heart, is the Pope: and this he does not by word of
mouth, but byletters of comme^dations, condemnations rather, his Seminary
factors. He begs thy Heart, and offers thee nothing for it, but crucifixes,
images, etc. mere images or shadows of reward: or his blessing at Rome;
which, because it is so far distant, as if it lost all the virtue by the way,
does as much good, as a candle in Sunshine.

2* He that would buy this vessel of us, is the Devil; as one that distrusts
to have it for nothing: and therefore set what price thou will upon it, he
will either pay it, or promise it. Satan would feign have his Iewell-house
full of these vessels, and thinks them richer ornaments, 2 Reg. 20. 13.
then the Babylonian Ambassadors thought the treasures of Hezechiah. Haman
shall have grace with the King, Absolon honor, Iezabel revenge, Ammon his
lusts satisfied, Judas money, Demas the world, if they will sell him their
Hearts,. If any man, like Ahab, sell his heart to such a purchaser, let him
know, that qui emit, interimit: he does buy it, to butcher it.

3 The Flesh is the Borrower, and he would have this vessel to use, with
promise of restoring. Let him have it a while, and thou shall have it again;
but as from an ill neighbor, so broken, lacerated, deformed, defaced; that
though it went forth rich, like the Prodigal, it returns home tattered and
torn, and worn, no more like a heart, then Michols image on the pillow was
like David. This Sutour borrowes it of the Citizen, till usury has made him an
Alderman: of the Courtier, til ambition has made him noble: of the Officer,
till bribery has made him master: of the Gallant, till riot has made him a
beggar: of the Luxurious, till lust has filled him with diseases: of the
Country Churl, till couetise has swelled his barnes: of the Epicure, till he
be fatted for death: and then sends home the heart, like a Jade, tired with
unreasonable travel. This is that wicked borrower, in the Psalm, which pays
not again. Thou would not lend thy beast, nor the worst vessel in thy
house to such a neighbor: and will thou trust him with thy heart? Either not
lend it, or look not for it again.

4. The World is the Thief, 2. Sam. 5. 6.
which (like Absolon) steals away the heart. This cunningly insinuates into
thy breast, Quam minimo custos munere possit emi?
beguiling the Watch or Guard, which are thy senses, and corrupting the
servants, which are thy affections. The world has two properties of a Thief:
first, It comes in the night time, when the lights of reason and understanding
are darkened, and security has gotten the heart into a slumber. This dead
sleep, if it does not find, it brings.

Sunt quoque quae faciunt altos medicamina somnos, Ovid. Amor.

Vitaque Lethaealumina nocte premunt.
The world's a potion; who thereof drinks deep,
Shall yield his soul to a Lethargicke sleep.
2 It makes no noise in coming, lest the family of our revived thoughts wake,
and our sober knowledge discern his approach. This thief takes us, as it took
Demas, napping: terrifies us not with noise of tumultuous troubles, and alarm
of persecutions; but pleasingly gives us the music of gain, and lappes us
warm in the couch of lusts. This is the most perilous oppugner of our hearts:
neither beggar, buyer, nor borrower could do much without this thief. It is
some respect to the world, that makes men either give or sell, or lend the
vessel of their heart. Astus pollentior armis: Fraud is more dangerous then
force. Let us beware this thief.

First, turn the beggar from thy door, he is too saucy, in asking thy best
moveable, whereas beggars should not choose their alms. That Pope was yet a
little more reasonable, that showed himself content with a King of Spaines
remuneration; The present you sent me was such, as became a King to give, and
S. Peter to receive: But da pauperibus: the Pope is rich enough.

Then reject the buyer: set him no price of thy heart, for he will take it of
any reckoning. He is near driven, that sels his heart. I have heard of a Jew
that would for security of his lent money, have only assured to him a pound of
his Christian debtors living flesh: a strange forfeit, for default of paying a
little money. But the Devil, in all his covenants, indents for the heart. In
other bargains, caveat emptor, says the Proverb: Let the buyer take heed: in
this, let the seller look to it. Make no mart nor market with Satan.

Non been pro multo libertas venditur auro.

The heart is ill sold, what ever the price be.

Thirdly, for the borrower: Lend not thy heart in hope of interest, lest thou
lose the principal. Lend him not any implement in thy house, any affection in
thy heart: but to spare the best vessel to such an abuser, is no less then
mad charity.

Lastly, ware the thief: and let his subtilty excite thy more provident
prevention. Many a man keeps his goods safe enough from beggars, buyers,
borrowers, yet is met withal by thieves.

Therefore lock up this vessel with the Key of faith, bar it with
resolution against sin, guard it with supervisiting diligence, and repose it
in the bosom of thy Savior. There it is safe from all obsidious, or insidious
oppugnations: from the reach of fraud or violence. Let it not stray from this
home, lest like Dinah it be defloured. If we keep this vessel our selves,
we endanger the loss. Jacob bought Esau's birthright, and Satha stole Adams
Paradise, whiles the tenure was in their own hands. An Apple beguiled the one,
a mess of pottage the other. Trust not thy heart in thine own custody; but
lay it up in heaven with thy treasure. Commit it to Him, that is the maker and
preserver of men: who will lap it up with peace, and lay it in a bed of joy,
where no adversary power ca^ invade it, nor thief break through to steal it.

3. The Liquor this vessel holds, is evil.
Evil is double, either of Sin, or of Punishment: the deserving and
retribution: the one of man's own affecting, the other of Gods just inflicting.
The former is simpliciter malum, simply evil of it own nature: the latter but
secundum quid, in respect of the sufferer, being good in regard of Gods glory,
as an act of his Justice. For the Evils of our sufferings, as not intended
here, I pretermit. Only, when they come, we learn hence how to intertaine
them; in our opinion, as our due rewards: in our patience, Romans 3. 3.
as men, as Saints: that tribulation may as well produce patience, as sin
has procured tribulation. Non sentire mala sua non est hominis, and non far
non est viri: Sen.
He that feels not his miseries sensibly, is not a man: and he that bears
them not courageously, is not a Christian.

The juice in the heart of the sons of men is evil, all have corrupted their
ways. Solomon speaks not here in indiuiduo, this or that son of man: but
generally, with an universal extent, the sons of men. And leaving the
plural with the Possessors, by a significant salaecisme, he names the vessel
in the singular; the heart, not hearts: as if all mankind had cor vnum in
vnitate malitiae: one heart in the unity of sin: the matter of the vessel
being of one polluted lump; that every man, that has an heart, has naturally
an evil heart. Adam had no sooner by his one sin slain his posterity, but
he begote a son, that slew his brother. Adam was planted by God a good Vine,
but his Apostasy made all his children sour grapes. Our nature was sown
good, behold, we are come up evil. Through whose default arises this
badnesse?

God created this vessel good; man poisoned it in the seasoning. And being
thus distayned in the tender newness, seruat odorem testa diu: it smells of the
old infection, till a new juice be put into it, or rather it self made new.
As David prays: Create in me, oh Lord, a clean heart, Psalm 51. 10.
and renew a right spirit within me. GOD made us good, we have marred
ourseluesa,nd behold: we call on him, to make us good again. Yea, even the
vessel thus recreated, is not without a tang of the former corruption. Paul
confesses in himself a body of Death, Romans 7.
as well as David a native uncleanness. Psalm. 51.
The best grain sends forth that chafe, whereof before the sowing, it was
purged by the fan. Our contracted evil had been the less intolerable, if we
had not been made so perfectly good. He that made heaven and earth, air and
fire, Sun and Moon, all elements, all creatures good, surely, would not make
him evil, for whom these good things were made. How comes he thus bad? Deus
hominem fecit, homo se interfecit. In the words of our Royal Preacher, Eccles.
7. Lo, this only I have found, Eccles. 7. 29.
that God has made man upright: but they have sought out many inventions. Man
was created happy, but he found out tricks, to make himself miserable. And
his misery had been less, if he had never been so blessed: the better we
were, we are the worse. Like the posterity of some profuse or tainted
Progenitour, we may tell of the Lands, Lordshippes, honors, titles, that were
once ours; and then sigh out the song, fuimus Troes, we have been blessed.

If the heart were thus good by creation, or is thus good by redemption, how
can it be the continent of such evil liquour? when by the word of His mouth
that never erred, Math. 7. 18.
A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruits. I answer, that saying must be
construed in sensu composito: a good tree continuing good, cannot produce evil
fruits. 1. Ioh. 3. 9.
The heart borne of God (in quanto renatum est, not peccat) does not commit
sin, so far as it is borne of GOD. Yet even in this vessel, whiles it
walks on earth, are some drops of the first poison. And so, Dat dulces fons
vnus aquas, qui et praebet amaras. The same fountain sends forth sweet water
and bitter; Iam. 3. 11.
though not at the same place, as Saint James propounds it.

But Solomon speaks here of the heart, as it is generate, or degenerate, not
as regenerate: what it is by nature, not by grace: as it is from the first
Adam, not from the second. It is thus a vessel of evil. Sin was brewed in
it, and has brewed it into sin. It is strangely, I know not how truly,
reported of a vessel, that changes some kind of liquour put into it, into it
self: as fire transformes the fuel into fire. But here the content does
change the continent; as some mineral veins do the earth, that holds them.
This evil juice turns the whole heart into evil; as water powered upon snow,
turns it to water. The wickedness of man was so great in the earth, Genesis 6. 5.
that it made every imagination of the thoughts of his heart only evil
continually.

Here, if we consider the dignity of the vessel, and the filthiness of the
evil it holds, or is rather holden of; (for non tam tenet, quam tenetur) the
comparison is sufficient to astonish us.

Quam male conueniunt vas aureum, atrumque venenum! Oh! ingrate, in considerate
man! to whom God has given so good a vessel, and he filles it with so evil
sap. 2. Tim. 2. 20.
In a great house there be vessels of honor, and vessels of dishonor; some
for better, some for baser uses. The heart is a vessel of honor, sealed,
consecrated for a receptacle, for an habitacle of the graces of GOD. Shall we
take the member of Christ, 1. Cor. 6. 15.
and make it an harlots; the vessel of God, and make it Satan's? did God infuse
into us so noble a part, and shall we infuse into it such ignoble stuff? was
fraud, falsehood, malice, mischief, adultery, idolatry, variance, variablenes
ordained for the heart, or the heart for them? when the seat of holiness is
become the seat of hollownesse: the house of innocence, the house of
impudence: the place of love, the place of lust: the vessel of piety, the
vessel of prauity: the throne of God, the court of Satan; the heart is become
rather a Ielly, then an heart. Wherein there is a tumultuous, promiscuous,
turbulent throng, heaped and amazed together, like a wine-drawers stomach;
full of Dutch, French, Spanish, Greek, and many country wines; envy, lust,
treason, ambition, avarice, fraud, hypocrisy obsessing it, and by long tenure
pleading prescription: that custom, being a second nature, the heart has lost
the name of heart, and is become the nature of that it holds, a lump of evil.

It is detestable ingratitude in a Subject, on whom his Sovereign has
conferred a golden cup, to employ it to base uses; to make that a wash-potte,
which should receive the best wine he drinks. Behold, the King of heaven and
earth has given thee a rich vessel, thy heart; wherein, though it be a piece
of flesh or clay of it self, he has placed the chief faculties of thy
spirit and his: how adverse to thankfulness and his intent is thy practice,
when thou shall power into this Cup lees, dregs, muddy pollutions,
tetricall poisons, the waters of hell, wines which the infernal spirits drink
to men: taking the heart from him that created it, from him that bought it,
from him that keeps it; and bequeathing it in the death of thy soul, to him
that infects, afflicts, tempts, and torments it: making him thy Executour,
which shall be thy executioner; that has no more right to it, then Herod had
to the bed of his sister? What injury, what indignity is offered to God, when
Satan is gratified with his goods: when his best moveable on earth is taken
from him, and given to his enemy?

The heart is flos solis, and should open and shut with the sun of
righteousness. Mal. 4. 2.
To him, as the Landlord, duplici iure, it should stand open, not suffering him
to knock for entrance, Cant. 5. 2.
till his locks be wette with the dew of heaven. Alas! how comes it about,
that he which is the owner can have no admission? That we open not the doors
of our hearts, that the King of glory might enter; who will then one day open
the doors of heaven, that a man of earth may enter? Did God erect it as a
lodging for his own Majesty; leaving no window in it, for the eye of man (so
much as) to look into it, as if he would keep it under lock and key to
himself, as a sacred Challice, whereout he would drink the wine of faith,
fear, grace and obedience, wine which himself had sent before for his own
supper: Reu. 3. 20.
and must he be turned forth by his own Steward, and have his Chamber let
out for an Ordinary, where sins and lusts may securely revel? Will not He
that made it, one day break it with a rod of iron, Psalm. 2. 9.
and dash it in pieces like a Potters vessel?

Shall the great Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 2.
that Tyrant of Hell, sit drinking his wines of abomination and wickedness, in
the sacred boules of the Temple, the vessels of God, the hearts of men, without
ruin to those that delightfully suffer him? was it a thing detestable in the
eyes of God, to profane the vessels of the Sanctuary; and will he brook with
impunity the hearts of men to be abused to his dishonor? Sure, his justice will
punish it, if our injustice do it. The very vessels under the Law, that had
(but) touched an unclean thing, must be rinced or broken. What shall become of
the vessels under the Gospel, ordained to hold the faith of Christ, if they be
(more then touched) polluted with uncleanness? They must either be rinced with
repentance, or broken with vengeance.

I am willingly led to prolixity in this point. Yet in vain the Preacher
amplifies, except the hearer applies. Shall none of us, in this visitation of
hearts, ask his own heart, how it does? Perhaps, Security will counterfeit
the voice of the heart, as Jacob did Esaus hands, to supplant it of this
blessing; saying, I am well: and stop the mouth of diligent scrutinie with a
presentment of Omnia been. Take heed; the heart of man is deceitful above
measure. Audebit dissimulare, qui audet malefacere: He will not stick to
dissemble, that dares to do evil. Thou needst not rip up thy breast, to see what
blood thy heart holds, though thou have been unkind enough to it in thine
iniquities: behold, the beams of the Sun on earth witness his shining in
heaven; and the fruits of the Tree declare the goodness or badnes. Non ex
folijs, non ex floribus, sed ex fructibus dignoscitur arbor.

What is lust in thy heart, thou adulterer; malice in thine, thou envious:
usury in thine, thou covetous; hypocrisy in yours, ye sons of Gibeon; pride
in yours, ye daughters of Iezabel; falsehood in yours, ye brothers of Ioab;
and treachery in yours, ye friends of Judas? Is this wine fit for the Lords
boule, or dregs for the Devil to carouse of? Reu. 22. 11.
Perhaps the sons of Belial will be filthy; let them be filthy still. Who can
help them, that will not be saved? let them perish.

Let me turn to you, that seem Christians, (for you are in the Temple of
Christ, and I hope, come hither to worship him,) with confidence of better
success. What should uncleanness do in the holy City, evil in a heart
sanctified to grace, sealed to glory? The vessel of every heart is by nature
temperde of the same mould; nor is there any, (let the proud not triumph)
Quorum praecordia Titan de meliore luto sinxit. But though nature knew none
grace has made difference of hearts; and the sanctified heart is of a purer
metal, then the polluted. A little living stone in Gods building is worth a
whole quarrey in the world. One poor man's honest heart is better then many rich
evil ones. These are dead; that is alive: and a living dog is better then a
dead Lion. Solomon's heart was better then Absolons, Cap. eod. ^. 4.
Iudes then Judas, Simon Peter's then Simon Magus his: all of one matter, clay
from the earth, but in regard of qualities, and Gods acceptance, the richest
mine and coursest mould have not such difference. There is with nature grace,
with flesh faith; with humanity Christianity in these hearts.

How it becoms it such a heart, to have hypocrisy, injustice, fraud,
covetousness leen in it? Let these bitter waters live in heathen cesterns. To
the master of maledictio^, and his ungodly imps we leave those vices: our hearts
are not vessels for such liquour. If we should intertaine the^, we give a kind
of warrant to others imitatio^. Whiles Polygamie was restrained within Genesis 4.
19.
Lamechs doors, it did but moderate harm: but when it once insinuated into Genesis
26. 34. 35.
Isaac's family, it got strength, and prevailed with great prejudice. The
habites of vices, whiles they dwell in the hearts of Belials children, are merely
sins: but when they have room given the^ in the hearts of the sons of God, they
are sins and examples: not simply evil deeds, but warrants to evil deeds.
Bis peccat, qui exemplo peccat.
Especially with such despisers and despiters of goodness; who, though they
love, embrace and resolve to practice evil, yet are glad, they may do it by
Patronage, and go to hell by example.

But how can this evil juice in our hearts be perceived? what beams of the
Sun ever pierced into that abstruse and secret pauilion? The anatomizing of
the heart remains for the work of that last and great day. Eccl. 12. 14.
Rom, 2. 16. As no eye can look into it, so let no reason judge it. But our
Savior answers, Out of the heart proceed actual sins: the water may be
close in the fountain, but will be discerned issuing out. The heart cannot so
contain the unruly affections, but like headstrong rebels they will burst out
into actions; and works are infallible notes of the heart. I say not, that works
determine a man to damnation or bliss: the decree of God orders that: but
works distinguish of a good or bad man. The Saints have sinned, but the
greatest part of their converted life has been holy.

Indeed we are all subject to passions, because men: but let us order our
passions well, because Christian men. And as the skilful Apothecary makes
wholesome potions of noisome poisons, by a wise melling and allaying them: so
let us meet with the intended hurt of our corruptions, and turn it to our
good. It is not a sufficient commendation of a prince to govern peaceable and
loyal subjects: but to subdue or subvert rebels. It is the praise of a
Christian to order refractary and wild affections, more then to manage
yielding and pliable ones. As therefore it is a provident policy in Princes,
when they have some in too likely suspicion, for some plotted faction, to keep
them down, and to hold them bare: that though they retain the same minds,
they shall not have the same means to execute their mischiefs: so the
rebellious spirits impotency gives most security to his Sovereign: whiles He
sees afar off what he would do, but knows (near at hand, that is certainly)
he cannot. So let thy heart keep a straight and awful hand over thy passions
and affections: Vt si moueant, non remoueant: that if they move thee, they may
not remove thee from thy rest. A man then sleeps surely, securely; when he
knows (not that he will not, but) that his enemy cannot hurt him. Violent is
the force and fury of passions, ouerbearing a man to those courses, which in
his sober and collected sense he would abhor. They have this power, to make
him a fool, that otherwise is not; and him, that is a fool, to appear so. If
in strength thou can not keep out passion, yet in wisdom temper it: that if,
notwithstanding the former, it comes to whisper in thine ears thine own
weakness; yet it may be hindered by the latter from diuulging it to thy shame.

Thou see how excellent and principal a work it is to manage the heart,
which indeed manageth all the rest: and is powerful to the carrying away with
it self, the attendance of all the senses: who be as ready at call, and as
speedy to execution, as any servant the Centurion had: waiting only for a
come, go, do, from their leader the Heart. The ear will not hear, where the
heart minds not, nor the hand relieve, where the heart pitties not: nor the
tongue praise, where the heart loves not. All look, listen, attend, stay upon
the heart, as a Captain to give the onset. The Philosopher says; It is not
the eye that sees, but the heart: so it is not the ears that hear, but the
heart.

Indeed: it sometimes falls out, that a man hears not a great sound or
noise, though it be nigh him. The reason is, his heart is fixed, and busily
taken up in some object, serious in his imagination, though perhaps in it self
vain: and the ears like faithful servants attending their master the heart,
lose the act of that auditiue Organ, by some suspension, till the heart has
done with them, and given them leave. Curious and rare sights, able to ravish
some with admiration, affect not others, whiles they stand as open to their
view: because their eyes are following the heart, and doing him service about
an other matter. Hence our feet stumble in a plain path, because our eyes,
which should be their guides, are sent some other way on the hearts errand.
Be then all clean, if thou can: but if that happiness be denied on earth,
yet let thy heart be clean; there is then the more hope of the rest.

4. The measure of this vessels infection. Full.
It has not aspersion, nor imbution, but impletion. It is not a moderate
contamination, which admitted into comparison with other turpitudes, might be
exceeded, but a transcendent, egregious, superlatiue matter, to which there can
be no accession: the vessel is full; and more then full, what can be? One
vessel may hold more then another, but when all are filled, the least is as
full as the greatest. Now Solomon, that was no flatterer, because a King
himself; without awe of any mortal Superior, because Servant to the King of
Kings, and put in trust with the registring of his Oracles; tells man plainly,
that 1. his heart, not some less principal part, 2. is evil, not good, or
inclining to goodness. 3. nay, full of evil, to the utmost dram it
contains.

This describes Man in a degree further, then nature left him, if I may so
speak: for we were borne evil, but have made our selves full of evil. There
is time required to this perfecting of sin, and making up the reprobates
damnation. Judgment stays for the Genesis 15. 16.
Amorites, till their wickedness becomes full: and the Jews are forborne,
till they have Math 23. 32.
fulfilled the measure of their fathers. Sin loved, delighted, accustomed,
habituated, voluntarily, violently perpetrated, brings this impletion. Indeed,
man quickly fills this vessel of his own accord: let him alone, and he needs
no help to bring himself to hell. Whiles Gods preventing grace does not
fore-stall, nor his calling grace convert, man runs on to destruction, as the
fool laughing to the stocks. He sees evil, he likes it, he dares it, he
does it, he lives in it; and his heart, like an hydropicke stomach, is not
quiet till it be full.

Whiles the heart like a Cesterne, stands perpetually open, and the devil like
a Tankerd-bearer, never rests fetching water from the conduit of hell to fill
it; and there is no vent of repentance to empty it; how can it choose, but be
full of evil? The heart is but a little thing, one would therefore think it
might be soon full: but the heart holds much, therefore one would think, it
could not be soon full. It is a little morsel, not able to give a Kite her
breakefast; yet it contains as much in desires, as the world does in her
integrall parts. Neither if the whole world were given to the Pellaean Monarch,
would he yet say, My heart is full, my mind is satisfied.

There must then concur some co-working accidents to this repletion. Satan
suggests: concupiscence harkens, flatters the heart with some persuasion of
profit, pleasure, content: the heart assents; and sends forth the eye, hand,
foot, as instruments of practice: lastly, sin comes; and that not alone: one
is intertayned, many press in. Mala sunt contigua and continua inter se. Then
the more men act, the more they affect; and the exit of one sin, is another
hinte of entrance: that the stage of his heart is never empty, till the tragedy
of his soul be done.

This fullness argues a great height of impiety. Paul amply delivered the
wickedness of Elimas, Act. 13. Act. 13. 10.
O full of all subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy
of all righteousness, etc. a wretched impletion. So is the reprobate estate of
the Heathen described. Romans 1. Romans 1. 29.
to be filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, covetousness, etc. The
same Apostle in the same Epistle speaking of the wicked in the words of the
Psalm, says, Romans 3. 14.
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. Here, the heart is full of evil.
The commander being so filled with iniquity, every member as a Soldier in his
place, fills it self with the desired corruption. 2. Pet. 2. 14.
The eye is full of adultery and lust, says the Apostle. The Esa. 1. 15.
hand full of blood, says the Prophet. The foot full of auersenes, the tongue
full of curses, oaths, dissimulations. Every vessel will be full, as well as
the heart; full to the brimme, nay, running over, Ioh. 2.
as the vessels at the marriage in Cana, though with a contrary liquour. And
when all are replenished, the heart is ready to call, 2. Reg. 4. 2.
as the widow in the 2. of Kings, the 4. Bring me yet another vessel, that it
may be filled.

This is the precipitation of sin, if God does not prevent, as Satan does
provoke: it rests not, till it be full. Sinful man is evermore carrying a
stick to his pyle, a talent to his burden, more foul water to his cestern,
more torments to be laid up in his hell: he cease not, without a
supernatural interruption, and gracious reuocation, till his measure be full.

Thus I have run through these 4. circumstances of the Comma, or first Point
of man: observing, 1. from the Owners, their corruptible fragility. 2. from the
vessel, the Hearts excellency. 3. from the liquour contained in it, the
pollution of our natures. 4. and lastly, from the plenitude, the strength and
height of Sin. The sum is, 1. the heart. 2. of man. 3. is full. 4. of evil.

I should now conclude, leaving my discourse, and you to meditation of it; but
that you would then say, I had failed in one special part of a Physician; that
having described the malady, I prescribe no remedy. Since it is not only
expedient, to be made experient of our own estate, but to be taught to help
it: Give me leave therefore briefly to tell you, that some principal intentions,
to the repair of your Hearts ruins are these. 1. Seeing this vessel is full,
to empty it. 2. Seeing it is foul, to wash it. 3. Since it has caught an ill
tang, to sweeten it. 4. And when it is well, so to preserve it. with these
four uses, go in peace.

1. There is first a necessity, that the heart which is full of evil by
nature, must be emptied by conversion, and replenished with grace, or not saved
with glory. what scuppet have we then to free the heart of this muddy
pollution? Lo, how happily we fall upon Repentance; God grant Repentance fall
upon us. The proper engine ordained and blessed of God to this purpose, is
Repentance: a grace, without which man can never extricate himself from the
bondage of Satan: a grace whereat (when it lights on a sinful soul) the
devils murmr and vex themselves in hell, Luk 15.
and the good Angels rejoice in heaven. Reu. 6. 16.
This is that blessed engine, that lightens the hearts of such a burden, that
Rocks and Mountains, and the vast body of the earth laid on a distressed and
desperate sinner, are corkes and feathers to it.

This is that, which makes the eternal wisdom content to admit a
forgetfulness, and to remember our iniquities no more then if they had never
been. This speaks to Mercy, to separate our sins from the face of God, to
bind them up in heaps and bundels, and drown them in the sea of oblivion.
This makes Mary Magdalen of a sinner, a Saint: Zacheus of an extortioner,
charitable, and of a persecuting Saul, a professing Paul. This is that mourning
master, that is never without good attendants; tears of contrition, prayers
for remission, purpose of amended life. Behold the office of Repentance: she
stands at the door, and offers her loving service: entertain me and I will
unload, unlade thy heart of that evil poison, and were it full to the brim,
return it thee empty. If you welcome Repentance, knocking at your door from
God, it shall knock at Gods door of mercy for you. It asks of you amendment,
of God, forgiveness. Receive it.

2. The heart thus emptied of that inueterate corruption, should fitly be
washed, before it be replenished. The old poison sticks so fast in the
grain of it, that there is only one thing of validity to make it clean, the
blood of Jesus Christ. It is this, that has bathed all hearts, that ever were,
or shall be received into Gods house of glory. 1. Ioh. 1. 7.
This blood cleanses us from all sin. Paul seems to infer so much, in
joining to the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12. 23. 24.
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and the blood of sprinckling, that
speaks better things then the blood of Abel. As if he would prove, that it was
this blood, which made them just and perfect. In vain were all repentance
without this: no tears can wash the heart clean, but those bloody ones, which
the side of Christ, and other parts wept, when the spear and nails gave them
eyes: whiles the Son of eternal joy became a Mourner for his brethren. Could
we mourn like doves, bowl like Dragons, and lament beyond the waylings in the
valley of Hadradimmon, quid prosunt lacrimae, what boots it to weep, where
there is no mercy, and how can there be mercy without the blood of Christ?

This is that euer-running fountain, that sacred Poole of Bethesda, which
without the mediation of Angels, stands perpetually vnforbidden to al faithful
visitants. Were our Leprosy worse then Naamans, here is the true water of
Jordan, or Poole of Siloam, Wash and be clean; Bring your hearts to this Bath,
ye corrupted Sons of men; has God given you so precious a Lauer, and will
you be unclean still? Pray, entreat, beseech, send up to heaven the cries of
your tongues and hearts for this blood: call upon the preserver of men, not
only to distill some drops, but to wash, bathe, soake your hearts in this
blood. Behold, the Son of God himself, that shed this blood, does entreat
God for you: the whole Quire of all the Angels and Saints in heaven are not
wanting. Let the meditation of Christ's mediation for you, give you
encouragement and comfort. Happy Son of man, for whom the Son of God
supplicates, and intercedes. What can He request without speed?

He does not only pray for you, but even to you, ye sons of men. Behold
him with the eyes of a Christian, faith and hope; standing on the battlements
of heaven, having that for his pauement, which is our seeling, offering his
blood to wash your hearts, which he willingly lost for your hearts: denying it
to none, but Wolves, Bears, and Goats, and such reprobate, excommunicate,
apostate spirits, that tread it under their profane and luxurious feet,
esteeming that an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29.
wherewith they might have been sanctified. Come we then, come we, though
sinners, if believers, and have our hearts washed.

3. All is not done with this vessel, when washed. Shall we empty it, Math.
12. 44.
cleanse it, and so leave it? Did not Satan reenter to the house swept and
garnished, with seven worse spirits, whiles it was empty? Behold then, when it
is emptied, and washed, and sweetened, it must be filled again: a vacuity is
not allowable. It must be replenished with somewhat, either evil or good. If
God be not present, Satan will not be absent. When it is euacuated of the
works of the flesh, Gal. 5. 24.
it must be supplied with the fruits of the Spirit. Humility must take up the
room, which pride had in the heart. Charitablenesse must step into the seat
of avarice. Love extrude malice, mildness anger, patience murmuring. Sobriety
must dry up the floudes of drunkenesse. Continence cool the inflammations of
Lust. Peace must quite the head from dissentions. Honesty pull off Hypocrisies
vizour; and Religion put profaneness to an irreuocable exile.

Faith is the hand, that must take these Jewels out of Gods treasury, to
furnish the heart: the pipe to convey the waters of life into these vessels.
This infusion of goodness must follow the effusion of evil. God must be let
in, when Satan is locked out. If our former courses and customs, like
turn'd-away abiects, proffer us their old service, let us not know them, not
own them, not give them intertainement, not allow their acquaintance. But in a
holy pride, as now made Courtiers to the King of heaven, let us disdain the
company of our old play-fellowes, opera tenebrarum, the works of darkness.
Let us now only frequent the door of mercy, and the fountain of grace; and
let faith, and a good conscience be never out of our society. Here Is the supply.

4. We have now done, if when our hearts be thus emptied, cleansed, supplied,
we so keep them. Non minor est virtus, etc. Nay, let me say, non minor est
gratia. For it was Gods preventing grace, that cleansed our hearts, and it is
his subsequent grace that so preserues them: That we may truly sing; By grace,
and grace alone,
All these good works are done.
Yet have we not herein a Patent of security and negligence sealed us; as if
God would save us, whiles we only stood and looked on. But 1. Ioh. 3. 3.
he that has this hope, purges himself. And we are charged to 1. These. 4. 4.
keep and possess our vessel in sanctification and honor: and to Iam. 1. 27.
live unspotted of the world.

Return not to your former abominations, lest your Luke 11. 26.
latter end be worse then your beginning. Has God done so much to make your
hearts good, and will you frustrate his labors, annihilate his favors,
vilipend his mercies, and reele back to your former turpitudes? God forbid it,
and the serious deprecation of your own souls forbid it.

Yea, oh Lord, since thou have dealt so graciously with these frail vessels of
flesh, emptied them, washed them, seasoned them, supplied them; seal them up
with thy Spirit to the day of redemption, and preserve them, that the evil one
touch them not. Grant this, Oh Father almighty, for thy Christ, and our Jesus
his sake.

Amen.
Mystical Bedlam, OR, THE WORLD OF MADMEN. The second Sermon.
ECCLESIASTES, CAP. 9. VER. 3. The heart of the Sons of men is full of evil,
and madness is in their heart while they live: and after that, they go to the
dead.
MAN'S sentence is yet but begun; and you will say, a Comma does not make a
perfect Sense. We are now got to his Colon: having left his heart full of
evil, we come to his madness. No marvel if, when the stomach is full of
strong wines, the head grow drunken. The heart being so filled with that
pernicious liquor, evil, becomes drunk with it. Sobriety, a moral daughter,
nay, Reason the mother is lost; he runs mad, stark mad. This Frenzy
possessing, not some outroome, but the principal seat, the Heart.

Neither is it a short madness; that we may say of it, as the Poet of anger,
furor breuis est; but of long continuance; even during life, whiles they live.
Other drunkenness is yet after sleep sober; but this is a perpetual lunacie.

Considerable then is 1. the matter. 2. the men. 3. the time, Quid, in quo,
Quamdiu. What, in whom, and how long. Madness is the matter. 2. the place, the
heart. 3. The time, whiles they live. The Colon or medium of man's Sentence
spends it self in the description of A
Tenant. Madness. Tenement. The Heart. Tenure: Whiles they live.


1. Madness. 2. holds the heart. 3. during life. It is pity. 1. so bad a
Tenant. 2. has so long time. 3. in so good a house.

1. The Tenant. Madness.
There is a double madness, corporal and spiritual, The object of the former
is Reason: of the latter, Religion. That obsesseth the brain, this the Heart.
That expects the help of the natural Physician, this of the Mystical. The
difference is; this spiritual madness may insanire cum ratione, cum Religione
numquam. The morally- frantic may be mad with reason, never with Religion.

Physicians have put a difference betwixt Phrenzy, and Madness: imagining
madness to be only an infection and perturbation of the foremost Cell of the
head; whereby Imagination is hurt: but the Phrenzy to extend further, even to
offend the reason and memory; and is never without a fever. Galen calls it an
inflammation of the brains, or filmes thereof, mixed with a sharp fever. My
purpose needs me not to be curious of this distinction.

To understand the force of madness, we must conceive in the brain three
ventricles; as houses assigned by Physicians for three dwellers, Imagination,
Reason, and Memory. According to these three internal senses or faculties,
there be three kinds of Phrensies or Madnesses.

1. There are some mad, that can rightly judge of the things they see, as
touching imagination and fantasy: but for cogitation and reason, they swerve
from natural judgment.

2. Some being mad, are not deceived so much in common cogitation and reason;
but they err in Fantasy and Imagination.

3 There are some, that be hurt in both imagination and reason, and they
necessarily therewithal do lose their memories. That whereas in perfect,
sober, and well composed men, Imagination first conceiues the forms of things,
and presents them to the reason to judge; and reason discerning them, commits
them to Memory to retain: in madmen nothing is conceived aright, therefore
nothing derived, nothing retayn'd.

For spiritual relation, we may conceive in the soul; understanding, reason,
will. 1. The understanding apprehends things according to their right
natures. 2. The Reason discusseth them, arguing their fitness or
inconvenience, validity or vanity: and examines their desert of probation or
disallowance, their worthiness either to be received or rejected. 3. The Will
has her particular working, and embraces, or refuses the objects, which the
understanding has propounded, and the reason discoursed.

Spiritual madness is a deprauation, or almost deprivation of all these
faculties, quoad coelestia; so far as they extend to heavenly things. 1. For
understanding, the Apostle says. 1. Cor. 2. 14.
The natural man perceyues not spiritual things, because they are spiritually
discerned. And the very 2. Cor. 4. 4.
minds of unbelievers are blinded by the god of this world. 2. For Reason: it
judges vanities more worthy, of prosecution when they are absent, of embracing
when they salute us. Malac. 3. 14.
It is in vain to serve the Lord: and what profit is it, that we have kept
his ordinance, or walked mournefully before him? This is the voice of
distracted cogitation, and of reason out of the wits. Vet. 15.
We call the proud happy; and the workers of wickedness are set up: yea they
that tempt God are delivered. 3. For Will; it has lost the propensenesse to
good, and freedom of disposing it self to well doing: neither has it any
power of it own, to stop and retarde the precipitation to evil.

Now whereas they distinguish Soul. 1. in vegetabilem, that gives life. 2. in
sensibilem, that gives feeling. 3. in rationalem, that gives reason: the
first desiring esse, to be; the second, been, to be well; the third optime
esse, to be best; so not resting till it be with God: behold, this spiritual
madness eneruates this last action of the soul, as corporal endeavors to
extinguish the two former.

They attribute to the Soul 5. powers. 1. Feeling, whereby the Soul is moved
to desire convenient things, and to eschew hurtful. 2. Wit, whereby she
knows sensible and present things. 3. Imagination, whereby she beholds the
likeness of bodily things, though absent. And these three virtues, say
Philosophers, be common to men with beasts. 4. is Ratio, whereby she judges
between good and evil, truth and falsehood. 5. Intellectus, whereby she
comprehends things (not only visible, but) intelligible, as God, Angels, etc.
And these two last are peculiar to man, abiding with the soul, living in the
flesh, and after death. It beholds still the higher things per intellectum,
and the lower per rationem.

As corporal madness draws a thick obfuscation over these lights, so
spiritual corrupts and peruerts them: that as they are strangers to heaven,
quoad intellectum, so at last, they become fools in natural things, quoad
rationem. Romans 1. 28.
As the Apostle plainly. Even as they did not like to retain God in their
knowledge, so God gave them over to a reprobate mind, to do those things that
are not convenient. They that forget God, shall forget nature. Hence ensue both
these frenzies, and with them a dissimilitude to men, to Christian men. It is
reckoned up among the curses, that wait on the heels of disobedience. Deuteronomy.
28. Deuteronomy. 28. 28.
The Lord shall smite thee with madness, blindness, and astonishment of
heart. But it is a fearful accumulation of Gods judgments and our miseries,
when spiritual Frenzy shall possess the soul, and scatter the powers of
the inner man: euacuating not only imagination; but knowledge; not reason, but
faith; not sense, but conscience. When the opinion of the world shall repute
men sober and wise, and the scrutinie of God shall find them madmen.

To draw yet nearer to the point of our compass, and to discover this
spiritual madness; let us conceive in man's heart, (for therein this frenzy
consists) in answerable reference to those three faculties in the brain, and
powers of the soul before manifested, these three virtues, Knowledge, Faith,
Affections. The defect of grace, and destitution of integrity, to the
corrupting of these three, cause madness. We will not inquire further into the
causes of corporal frenzy: the madness which I would minister to, is thus
caused: a defective knowledge, a faith not well informed, affections not well
reformed. Ignorance, unfaithfulness, and refractary desires make a man mad.

1. Ignorance
Is a cause of this madness; nay, it is madness it self. Supplicij causa est,
suppliciumque sui. How mad are they then, that settling their corrupted souls
on the lees of an affected ignorance, imagine it an excusatory mitigation of
their sinnefulnesse! But so it befalls them, as it does the frantike: Hi
dementiam, illi ignorantiam suam ignorant: These are ignorant of their own
ignorance, as those of their madness., (...) and (...) are inseparable
companions. Wickedness is folly; and ignorance of celestial things is either
madness, or the efficient cause, (or rather deficient) whereupon madness
ensues. Psalm. 14. 4.
All the workers of iniquity have no knowledge. The wicked in the day of their
confusion, shall confess, that the madness of their exorbitant courses, and
their wildnes erring from the way of truth, arose from their ignorance of the
way of the Lord. Wisd. 5. 6.
Therefore have we erred from the way of truth, and the light of righteousnese
has not shined upon us, etc. Will you hear their acknowledged reason? For the
way of the Lord we have not known. So Wisd. 13. Wisd. 13. 1.
from the absent knowledge of the true God, and for want of understanding, and
confessing by the works the workemaster, the madness of Idolarry is hatched.
Ver. 18.
For health, he calls upon that which is weak: for life, he prays to
that which is dead: and for a good journey, he asks of that which cannot set
a foot forward. Through this error, they were so mad, as to ascribe, first to
stocks and stones, insensible creatures; secondly, to men, dust and ashes;
thirdly, to wicked men, the worst of those that had a reasonable soul;
fourthly, to Devils, the malicious enemies of God and men, Wisd. 14. 21.
that incomparable name of God.

Beyond exception, without question, the authority, patronage, and original
fatherhood of spiritual madness, Nescire Deum causa dementiae est.
is the nescience of God. No marvel, if the Psalm. 95. 10.
people do err in their very heart, says the Psalmist, the local seat of
this madness, when they have not known the ways of the Lord. The true object of
divine knowledge is God; and the Book wherein we learn him, is his Word. How
shall they escape the rocks, that sail without this Compass? when the Frenzy
has turned the edge of common sense, frustrated the power of reason, and
captiuated the regent-house of understanding, a man dreades not fire, mockes
the thunder, plays at the holes of Asps, and thrusts his hand into the mouths
of Lions: ignoti nec timor, nec amor; he knows not the danger.

So, whiles the supreme Justice is not known, nor the auenger of wickedness
understood, Prou. 14. 9.
the ungodly are so mad, as to mock at sin, to play at the brinks of the
infernal pit, and to dally with those Aspes and Crocodiles, the stinging and
tormenting spirits; to precipitate themselves into that unquenched fire, to
fillup the darts of thunder back again to the sender, and with a thirsty
voracity to swallow down the dregs of the wrathful vial. Quid in causa nisi
ignorantia? what has thus distempered the heart, and put it into this
wildness, that without fear or wit, men run into the evident danger of
vengeance, Prou. 22. 3.
if not ignorance? Aprudent man foreseeth the plague, and hides himself, but
the foolish run madly on, and are punished.

If the Romists were not mad-me^, or worse, they would never set up ignorance
as a Lamp to light men to heaven: assuring it for the damme to produce, and
nurse with her cherishing milk to batten devotion; when it is indeed an
original cause of madness, the mother of error and wildness; making man's
way to bliss more uncertain, then Hannibals on the Alps, or a Larkes in the
air: The truth is; know to know, and be wise; know to obey, and be happy. This
is eternal life, to know God, and his Son whom he has sent, Jesus Christ.
Labor to understand the Bible, lest thou undergo the curses in it. Lege
historiam, ne fias historia. Saint Paul after the recitation of many fearful
judgments, concludes: Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, 1.
Cor. 10. 11.
and are written for our admonition, etc. If we will not be admonished by
these ensamples, we may become ensamples our selves, histories of madness to
future generations. Let the Papists call Ignorance by never so tolerable and
gentle names, it is Ignorance still, still cause of madness. If madness may bring
to heaven, there is hope for these wilfully ignorant.

2. Unfaithfulness
Is a sufficient-efficient cause of madness. Faith is the Christian man's reason:
now on the privation of reason, must needs follow the position of madness. For
shall the Creator of heaven and earth, the eternal Justice, and infallible
Truth affirm? shall he swear? will you put him to his oath; and that by two
immutable things, the best in heaven, and the best on earth? will you have him
set his hand to it, and write it with his own finger? dare you not yet trust
him without a Seal? must he seal it with that bloody wax, in the impression
of death on his Son? must you have witnesses, three on earth, and as many in
heaven, when the King of Kings might well write Test meipso? and will you not
yet believe him? Is there no credit from your hearts to all these premises,
promises, attestations, protestations, signs, seals? Will not these, all
these signify, certify, satisfy your souls of that unchangeable truth?
Surely, you are mad, haplesly, hopelesly mad, vnmeasurably out of your
spiritual wits. Were you as deeply gone in a corporal frenzy, I would sigh
out your desperate case.

Hei mihi quod nullis ratio est medicabilis herbis! Shall the Lord threaten
judgments, woe to him that trembles not. Non sapient, sentient tamen. Hell was
not made for nothing. The vantguard of that accursed departing rabble, the
ringleaders of the crew that dance to hell, Revel. 21 8.
are unbelievers. Revel. 21. An unsettled heart accompanied incredulity. Esaias 7.
9.
If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established. Neither are they
that believe not, gathered within the pale and sold of the Church; but wander
like straggling goats, and wild beasts on the mountains and forests of this
world. Hereupon, through the improuident and incircumspect courses, that mad
Infidelity keeps, the soul stumbles at the Rock, 1. Pet. 2. 7. 8.
and is broken by that, which might have been her eternal safety. 1. Pet. 2.
They that wander from the mounds and bounds of Faith, madly inuit dangers to
salute them. Sub clypeo fidei, and subsidio virtutis vir tutus. But where faith
is not our Proctor, nor is providence our Protector: what shall shield us, in
the absence of faith? Not Solon, not Solomon, a Wise man among the Gentiles, a
wiser among the Christians; but grow mad in the deficiencie of faith.

Men see by unanswerable arguments, that the hand of God is too strong for
sinners; that the least touch of his finger staggers their lives, their souls:
that he sends his Executioner, Death, to call the wicked away; and that in a
more horrid shape, then to others; arming him with plague, murder, distraction,
destruction, and that often with suddenness: they behold that ( Cadit corpus,
inde cadauer; sepelitur, seponitur) the body dies, and turns to rottenness:
they know their own building to be made of the same loame and dust, and
therefore liable to that common and equal law. Frequent examples of Gods
immediate vengeance, are added to the ancient trophies and monumentall ruins
of his former desolations: spectacles set up in the vast Theater of this world,
whereof quocunque sub axe, whither soever thou turnest thine eyes, thou must
needs be a spectator. Shall we still think, that solummodo pereunt, vt
pereant; vel vt pereundo alios deterreant: they only perish to perish, and not
to terrify others, threatening the like wretchedness to the like wickedness?
Surely, the judgments of God should be like his Thunders; Poena ad paucos,
terror ad omnes: Whilst some fall, others should fear. They that will not
take example by others, shall give example to others.

But we see those that are as ripe in lewdness, draw long and peaceable
breathes: neither is it the disposition of a singular power, but the
contingencie of natural causes, that thus works. Take heed: it is not the
leuity, but the lenity of God; not the weakness of his arm, but the mercy of
his patience, that thus forbeareth thee. 2. Pet 3. 9.
The Lord is not slack, as some count slacknes, but is long-suffering to
usward, etc. If this gentle Physic make thee madder, he has a dark
chamber to put thee in, a dungeon is more lightsome and delightsome, the Grave;
bands of darkness to restrain thy outrages, and potions of brimstone to tame
and weaken thy perverseness. Then will he demonstrate actually; Nemo me
impune lacessit: No man shall provoke me unpunished.

Infidelity of Gods judgments is madness; unbelief of his mercies has never
been counted less. What is it else, to refuse the offer of that Lamb, which
takes away the sins of the world, Ioh. 1. 29.
and to cut off our selves from that universal promise? Moritur Christus pro
indigenis, pro indignis: and spreaders out his arms on the Cross, to embrace
both Jew and Gentile. Why does not God give faith? Aug.
I answer with that Father. Non ideo non habet fidem, quia Deus non dat; sed
quiatu non accipis. Thou do not therefore lack faith, because God does not
offer it; but because thou will not accept it.

The name of Jesus Christ is, says Saint August. Nomen, sub quo nemini
desperandum est: A name able to defend us from desperation. But there are many
implacable threatenings against out guiltiness: There are none implacable to
faith; none without reservation of mercy to repentance. Every conditional
proposition has two parts: the former suspendeth the sentence, and is called
the antecedent: the latter concludes the sentence, and is called the
consequent. The first, Nil ponit in esse. As a conditional promise infers
nothing, but deriueth all force and virtue from the connection, whereof it
depends. So in menaces, there is either some presupposed cause, or
after-concession, wherein it infers a consequence. If thou have sinned: if
thou do not repent. There is place for remission with God, if there be place
for repentance in thy own heart.

If then distrust of Gods mercy be not madness, what is? when it causes a
man to break that league of kindness which he owes to his own flesh; and
offers to his hand engines of his own destruction: evermore presenting his
mind with halters, swords, poisons, pistolls, ponds: disquieting the heart with
such turbulent and distracting cogitations; till it has adjured the hands to
imbrue themselves in their own blood, to the incurring of a sorer execution
from the justice of God. Is he not mad, that will give credit to the Father of
lies, rather then to the God of Truth? when God promises to Penitence, the
wiping away her tears, the binding up her wounds, and healing her sores: and
the devil denies it; giving it for impossible to have the justice of God
satisfied, and thy sins pardoned: behold, darkness is believed rather then
light, and falsehood is preferred to truth.

Be not thus Lyon-like in your houses, and frantic in your hearts, Ecclus. 4.
30.
mad in your desperate follies; to shut up heaven, when the Lord has opened
it; to renew that score which he has wiped; and when he has pulled you out
of the fire, to run into it again: like Tigers, to tear and devour your
own souls, which that blood of eternal merit has freed from the Dragon of
hell. It is not a light and inferior degree of madness, but a diffident and
desperate; when the Physician (even He of heaven) shall promise help to a
^ore, and apply playsters of his own blood to it, the Patient shall thrust his
nails into it, and answer, nay, It shall not be healed. Dan. 7. 7.
This sin is like that fourth Beast in the 7. of Daniel, without distinction
of name or kind. Dreadful, terrible, exceedingly strong; and it had great iron
teeth, etc. The Lion, Bear, Leopard are tame and gentle, in regard of this
Beast: it is desperate madness: That grinds the poor with his iron teeth, and
stampes his own heart under his malignant feet, and dasheth against God
himself with his horns of Blasphemy.

It is then clearer then the day, that the darkness of Infidelity is Phrenzie;
whether (as it has been in stanced) it be presumptuous against Gods Justice,
or desperate against his Mercy. For, who but a madman would hope for impunity
to his wilfully-continued sins, where he visibly perceiues, that peccatum
peccante^ necessitat morti: that iniquity gives soul and body liable to
condemnation, and objects them to the unappeasable wrath of God? And yet who
but a madman, having sinned, will despair of forgiveness, when the mercy of
God has allowed a place to repentance? Turn, Ezekiel. 18. 32.
and live, says the Lord: for I have no pleasure in the death of him that
dies.

3. Refractary and perverse Affections
Make the possessed frantic. This is a speeding cause, and fails not to
distemper the soul, whereof it has gotten mastery. There may be first, a
sober knowledge, that the Patient may say, Video meliora, I see better things:
and secondly, a faith, (but such as is incident to devils) proboque, I allow of
them: but thirdly, where the whole man is tyrannized over by the Regent-house
of irrefragable affects, deterior a sequor, he concludes his course with, I
follow the worse. Observe the Philistines crying, 1. Sam. 47.
1. Sam. 47. God is come into the Camp; woe unto us, etc. Yet they settle,
hearten, harden themselves to fight against him. Ver. 8. Woe unto us: who shall
deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? yet verse 9. Be strong and
quit your selves like men, O ye Philistines: quit your selves like men, and
fight. Twice they behold their Dagon fallen down before the Arc: Chap. 5.
yet Dagon must be their God still, and the Arc is only reuerenc'd for a ne
noceat.

How many run mad of this cause, inordinate and furious lusts! If men could
send their understandings, like Spies, down into the Well of their hearts, to
see what obstructions of sin have stopped their veins, those springs that
erst derived health and comfort to them; they should find, that male
afficiuntur, quia male afficiunt: their mad affects have bad effects: and the
evil disposednesse of their souls, arises from the want of composedness in
their affections. The Prophet Jeremy, Ier. 2. 24.
chap. 2. compares Israel to a swift Dromedary, traversing her ways, and to a
wild Ass used to the wilderness, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure.
Be ye not, Psalm. 329.
says the Psalmographer, as the horse and mule, which have no understanding:
whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle. Men have understanding, not
beasts: yet when the frenzy of lust ouerwhelmeth their senses, we may take up
the word of the Prophet, and power it on them. Every man is a beast by his own
knowledge. And therefore man that is in honor and understands not, Psalm. 49.
20.
is like unto beasts that perish. Did not the bridle of Gods ouer-ruling
providence, give cohibition to their madness, they would cast off the saddle of
reason, and kick nature it self in the face.

This is that which Solomon calls the wickedness of folly, Eccl. 7. 25.
foolishnes, and madness: an actual deuiation and deuitation of the way of
righteousness: a practical frenzy, a rouing, wandering, vagrant, extrauagant
course; which knows not which way to fly, nor where to light, except like a
Dorre in a dunghill: an opinion without ground, a going without a path, a
purpose to do it knows not what, a getting and losing, bending and breaking,
building up and pulling down: conceyuing a multitude of thoughts, with much
anxiety, and with a sudden neglect scattering them. As that woman, who being
long barren, by studying and practicing physic, became pregnant to the
bearing of many children: upon whom she afterward exercising the same skill,
brought them all to an untimely grave. So Per eandem redditur artem
Haec Medaea ferox, quae medicaea fuit.


So madly do these frantickes spend their time and strengthes, by doing and
undoing, tying hard knots, and untying them, affecting the issue of their own
brains not a day together; and destroying much seed in the birth of their
thoughts, because the conception now pleases them not. The Proverb says,
that the most wild are in least danger to be stark mad: but here, wildenes
is madness; an indefatigable frenzy; an erring star reserved for the black
darkness; a rolling stone that never gathers any moss to stay it; an
incessant and impetuous fury, that never cease rouing and rauing, till it
come to the Center, Hell.

Thus I have endeuour'd to demonstrate Madness, in the true definition, form
and colors. But as a man cannot so well judge of a Sum, whiles it lies in
the heap, as when it is told and numbered out: if this united and contracted
presentation of madness be not so palpable in your conceits, as you would
desire it; behold, to your further satisfaction, I come to particulars. The
whole denominates the parts; as all of water, is water; all of flesh, flesh: so
every wilful sin is madness. Doubtless, when we come to this precise
distribution, and narrow scrutiny, to the singling out of Frenzies, you will
bless your selves, that there are so few Bedlam-houses, and yet so many out of
their wits.

Stultorum plena sunt omnia. It were no hard matter to bring all the world into
the compass of a fools Cappe. I dare not go so far: only magna est
plenitudo hominum, magna solitudo sapientum: There is great plenty of men, and
no scarsity of madmen. Plurima pessima: The most are not the best. Pretiosa
non numerosa: Vile things breed as plentifully as mountaine-mise. Goodness,
like the Rail, flies alone: but Madmen, like Partridges by Coueys. Nay, we
may say, Magna solitudo hominum: if it be true that Lactantius says. Nemo
potest iure dici homo, nisi qui sapiens est: He is not a man, that is a
madman. The fool is but imago hominis, the shadow or resemblance of a man.
The world is full of madde-men, and the madder it is, the less it is sensible
of the own destruction. Semel insaniuimus omnes: We have been all once
mad, is too true a saying: some in youth, others in age. The first is more
obuious and common: wildness is incident to youth: the latter more perilous,
and of less hope to be reclaymed. If we must be mad, better young then
old: but better not be borne then be mad at all, if the mercy of God and
grace of Jesus Christ recollect us not. In the words of a Poet.

All are once mad; this holds for too strong truth:
Blessed man! whose madness comes and goes in youth.
I promised to particularize and set open the gates of Bedlam, to leave
madness as naked, as ever sin left the first propagators of it and mankind.
The Epicure shall lead the ring, as the foreman of this mad Morisco.

1. The Epicure.
I would feign speak (not only of him, but) with him. Can you tend it,
Belly-god? The first question of my Catechism shall be, What is your name?
Epicure. Epicure? What Is that? speak not so philosophically; but tell us in
plain dealing, what are you? A lover of pleasure, more then of God. 2. Tim 3.
4. (...).
One that makes much of my self; borne to live, and living loving to take mine
ease. One that would make my belly my executour, and bequeath all my goods to
consumption, for the consummation of my own delights. Hoh! a goodfellow, a
merry man, a madman. What is your summu^ bonum? Pleasure. Wherein consists it?
Rehearse the Articles of your belief. I believe that delicacies, iunkets,
quotidia^ feasts, suckets and marmulads are very delectable. I believe, that
sweet wines and strong drinks; the best blood of the grape, or sweat of the
corn is fittest for the belly. I believe that midnight revels, perfumed
chambers, soft beds, close curtains, and a Dalila in mine arms, are very
comfortable. I believe that glistering silks, and sparkling Jewels, a purse
full of golden charms, a house neately decked, gardens, orchards, fish ponds,
parkes, warrens, and whatsoever may yield pleasurable stuffing to the corpse,
is a very heaven upon earth. I believe, that to sleep till dinner, and play
till supper, and quaffe till midnight, and to dally till morning; except there
be some intermission to toss some painted papers, or to whirle about squared
bones; with as many oaths and curses, vomited out in an hour, as would serve
the devil himself for a Legacy or stock, to bequeath to any of his children:
this is the most absolute and perfect end of man's life.

Now a deft Creed, fit to stand in the devils Catechism. Is not this madness,
stark and staring madness? What is the Flesh which thou pamperst with such
indulgence; as thou feedest beasts to feed on them, do thou not fat thy
flesh, to fat the worms? Go Heliogabalus to thy prepared muniments, the
monuments of thy folly and madness: thy Tower is polished with precious stones
and gold, but to break thy neck from the top of it, if need be: thy
halters enwouen with pearl, but to hang thy self, if need be: thy sword
enameled, hatched with gold, and embost with Margarites, but to kill thy self,
if need be. Yet (for all this) deaths properation preuents thy preparation,
and thou must fall into thine enemies hands.

Thou imaginest felicity to consist in liberty, and liberty to be nothing
else, but potestas viuendi vt velis; a power to live as thou list. Alas, how
mad art thou? thou will not live as thou should, thou can not live as
thou would: thy life and death is a slavery to sin and hell. Tut, Post
mortem nulla voluptas; and here, verse 4. It is better to a living dog, then
a dead Lion. Thou art mad; for, for all these things thou must come unto
judgment.

How many of these madmen ramble about this City? that lavish out their short
times in this confused distribution, of playing, dicing, drinking, feasting,
beasting: a cupping-house, a vaulting-house, a gaming-house share their means,
lives, souls. They watch, but they pray not: they fast when they have no
money, and steal when they have no credit; and reuelling the whole week, day
and night, only the Sunday is reserved for sleep, and for no other cause
respected. Be not mad, Ephesians. 5. 6.
as the Apostle says: Be not deceived; for because of these things comes
the wrath of God on the children of disobedience. Are not these mad men: that
buy the merry madness of an hour, with the eternal agonies of a tormented
conscience?

2. The Proud
Is the next Madman, I would have you take view of in this Bedlam. The proud
man? or rather the proud woman: or rather hac aquila, both he and she. For if
they had no more evident distinction of sex, then they have of shape, they
would be all man, or rather all woman: for the Amazons bear away the Bell: as
one wittily, Hic mulier will shortly be good latin, if this transmigration
hold: For whether on horseback, or on foot, there is no great difference: but
not discernable out of a Coach. If you praise their beauty; you raise their
glory: if you commend them, command them. Admiration is a poison, that swelles
them till they burst. Laudatas extendit auis Iunonia pennas. Is not this
madness? Bern.
De ignorantia tui, venit in te superbia. Selfe-ignorance is the original of
pride. Is not he mad, that knows not himself? Quanto quis humilior, tanto
Christo similior. Humility is Christ's resemblance, Pride the Devils Physnomie.
Is he not mad, that had rather be like Satan then God? Humility is begun by
the information of Christ, wrought by the reformation of the Spirit, manifested
in conformation to obedience. But Pride, says Aug. Vbi mentem possederit,
erigendo deijcit, inflammando euacuat, and domum destruit, quam inhabitat.
Pride casts down by lifting up, by filling emptieth, Quod bonis operibus
insidiatur. August.
and destroys the house where it inhabiteth. If superbire be supraregulam ire,
then is pride extrauagancy and madness: a pernicious, perilous sin, that
intraps even good works.

Do you think, there is no pride, no madness in the land? Ask the Silke-men,
the Mercers, the Tyrewomen, the Complexion-sellers, the Coach-makers, the
Apothecaries, the Embroderers, the Featherers, the Perfumers; and above all as
witnesses beyond exception, the Tailors. If you cast up the debt-bookes of the
other, and the fearful bills of the last, you shall find the total sum,
Pride and madness. Powders, liquours, unguents, tinctures, odors, ornaments
derived from the living, from the dead, palpaple instances, and demonstratiue
indigitations of pride and madness. Such translations and borrowing of forms,
that a silly countryman walking the City, can scarce say, there goes a man, or
there a woman. Woman, as she was an humane creature, bore the image of God; as
she was woman, the image of man: now she bears the image of man indeed, but
in a cross and mad fashion; almost to the quite defacing of the image of God.
Howsoever; that sex will be the finer, the prouder, the madder. For pride and
madness are of the feminine gender. They have reason for it. Man was made but
of earth; Woman of refined earth; being taken out of man, who was taken out of
the earth: therefore she arrogates the costlier ornaments, as the purer dust.
Alas! how incongruous a connexio^ is fine dust, proud clay? the attribute is
too good for the subject.

A certain man desired to see Constantine the Great: whom intentiuely
beholding, he cried out: I thought Constantine had been some greater thing;
but now I see, he is nothing but a man. To whom Constantine answered with
thanks. Tu solus es, qui in me oculos, apertos habuisti. Thou only have looked
on me with open and true judging eyes. O nobiles magis qua^ foelices pannos;
may many great men say of their stately robes: nay, O honoranda, magis quam
honestavestimenta; may proud creatures say of theirs. What is a silken coat to
hide aches, fevers, impostumes, swellings; the merited poisons of lust? when
we may say of the body and the disease, as of man and wife, for their
incorporation of one to the other, Duo sunt in carne vna: they are two in one
flesh.

There is mortality in that flesh, thou so deckest: and that skin which is so
bepainted with artificial complexion, shall lose the beauty and it self.
Detrahetur nouissimum velamentum cutis. You that sail betwixt heaven and earth
in your foure-sail'd vessels, as if the ground were not good enough to be the
pauement to the soales of your feet: know that the earth shall one day set her
foot on your necks, and the slime of it shall defile your surphul'd beauties:
dust shall fill up the wrinckled furrows, which age makes, and paint supplies.
Your bodies were not made of the substance, whereof the Angels; not of the
nature of stars, nor of the water, whereof the fire, air, water, and
inferior creatures. Remember your Tribe, and your fathers poor house, and the
pitte^ whereout you were hewne: Hanibal is at the gates, death stand at your
doors: be not proud, be not mad: you must die.

3. The Lustful
Is not to be missed in this Catalogue. The Poet calls amantes, amentes; taking
(or rather mistaking) Love for Lust. Indeed it is insana libido, a blinding,
blending fascination; a Witch that with her powerful charms intoxicates the
brains. A Father contemplating in his meditations, how it came to pass, that
our forefathers in the infancy of the world, had so many wives at once,
answers himself. Certe enim fuit consuetudo, non fuit culpa: Whiles it was a
custom, it was scarce held a fault. We may say no less of our days:
Lasciviousness is so wonted a companion for our Gallants, that in their sense,
it has lost the name of being a sin. They call it Magnatum ludum; and
whether it be or no, thence derive to themselves authority and imitation.

But still, Quae te dementia cepit? Thou art mad, whiles incontinent, Is it not
malum sui diffusiuum? a saucy sin, a costly disease? yet were it cheap to
the purse, is it not the price of blood? Can al your prouocatiues, enliuenings,
trepidations, and fomenting preservatives, prevent the wasting of your marrows?
Chamberworke will dry the bones. Job. 31. 9. 12.
If my heart, says Job, has been deceived by a woman; it is a fire that
consumes to destruction, and would root out all mine increase. Luxuriam
sequitur dissipatio omnis: Luxury is attended on by a general consumption:
first, Pro. 6 26.
of Substance, Prou. 6. By means of an whorish woman, a man is brought to a
piece of bread. Sen.
Secondly, of Body. Tremores pedum, and articulorum generat depriuationem: It
weakens the limbs, and unties the joints, those knots whereby the body is
trussed together. 1. Cor. 6. 18.
Saint Paul calls it a sin against a man's owns body. Thirdly, of Name. A
wound and dishonor will he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away. Pro.
6. 33.
Even when he shall depart his place (the world) he leaves (an evil memorial)
a bad ^auour behind him.

I would mention the loss of his Soul too; but that he cares not for: the
other he would seem to love, then how mad is he to endanger them? If thou be
not mad, away with these fomenta luxuriae: feed nature, not appetite. Nature
nihil parum, appetitui nihil satis. Qui minus tradit corpori, quam debet
corpori, ciuem necat: Qui tradit plus corpori, quam debet corpori, hostem
nutrit: As he that allows less to his body, then he owes to his body, kills
his friend: so he that gives more to his body, then he owes to his body,
nourishes his enemy. Thou complaynest of original evil in thy flesh; yet
nourishest what thou complainest against. Caro non est mala, si malo careat.
But Christ was more favorable to the Adulteress, and sent her away with
impunity: yet not in allowance to the vice of the accused, but to convince the
wickedness of the accusers. Putauit lapidandam, Ioh. 8. 7. 11.
non a lapidandis. Noluit talem, noluit a talibus: He might think her worthy
to die, but not by them that were worthy to die. He would not have her
polluted, nor yet to perish by so polluted hands. I conclude the madness of
these men with the Poet. Ludit amor sensus, oculos perstringit, and aufert
Libertatem animi, and mira nos fascinat art.
Credo, aliquis Demon subiens praecordia, flammam
Con^itat, and raptam tollit de cardine mentem.
-- Amor est and amaror and error.
Lust blinds the senses, and with witching art,
Brings into fatal servitude the heart.
A subtle Fiend, the cause and plague of badnes,
Poisons the blood, and filles the brain with madness.
If they will not see this yet, (as what frantic man perceiues his own
madness?) they shall feel it under the hands of an ill Surgion on earth, or a
worse in hell.

4. The Hypocrite
Plays the madman under covert and concealment. He is proud under the shadow
of humility. But he cannot say with David, Psalm. 131. Mine heart is not
haughty, nor mine eyes lofty. Cor and oculi, fons and rivuli. The tongue that
brags of humility, deserves little credit. Frons, vultus, oculi saepe
mentiuntur; lingua vero saepissime: The forehead, eyes, and countenance do
often deceive, the tongue most commonly. The worst Inn has sometimes the
biggest Sign; and the baser metal the lowdest sound. Ie^on. ad Celant.
Turpiora sunt vitia, cum virtutum specie celantur: Vices are then more ugly,
when they have put on the robes of virtues. Hypocrita solus vult omnibus videri
melior, Hugo de vita Claustrali.
and solus est omnibus peior: The Hypocrite would seem better then any man,
and is indeed the worst of all men. His respect is not to the reward of virtue,
but regard of men; as if virtue were not sibimet pulcherrima merces, a
sufficient compensation to it self. Being the Son of a hand-maide, Iud. 9.
and a bramble indeed, as Iotham spoke of Abimelech; he bragges as much of his
shadow, as either Vine, Olive, Fig Tree, or the tallest Cedar in Lebanon.

He mournes for his sins, as a hasty Heir at the death of his Father.
Haeredis luctus sub Larua, risus est: He is at once a close mourner, and a
close reioycer. When the wicked man counterfeits himself good, he is then
worst of all. Dissembled sanctity is double iniquity: quia and iniquit as est,
and simulatio: because it is both sin and simulation. Hypocrites are like
Iugglers, that show tricks of Legerdumaine, seeming to do the feats they do
not, by casting a mist before men's eyes. Howsoever it was once said,
Stultitiam simulare loco, prudentia summa est: I think it not so intolerable
as the speech of Protagoras in Plat. somewhat agreeing to Machiauel: He is a
madde-man, that cannot counterseit Justice, and dissemble integrity. I am here
rather occasioned to say: He is a madman, that does counterfeit good things,
because he does but counterfeit. And in that great Epiphany, and manifestation
of the secrets of all hearts, he shall be found a madman. Mean time, he is a
frantic too: for he incurres the worlds displeasure, in making a show of
good lines; Gods double displeasure in making but a show. He that would
purchase the hatred both of God and man, is he less then mad?

5. The Auarous
Is a principal in this Bedlam. Soft: if it were granted, that the Covetous
were mad, the world it self would run of a garget: for who is not bitten
with this mad dog? It is the great Canon of the Devil, charged with
chaine-shot, that has killed charity in almost all hearts. A poison of three
sad ingredients; whereof, who has not (to speak sparingly) tasted?
Insatiability, rapacity, Ambr.
tenacity. In concupiscendo, acquirendo, retinendo. Covetousness has three
properties, says Ambrose, Concupiscere aliena, cupita inuadere, celare quod
ruadit: To covet not her own, to get what she couets, and to keep what she
gets. And yet, Oh Auarous, why art thou so mad after money? Non habentes
inficit, habentes non refecit: It hurts them that it possesses, and helps not
them that possess it. The brood, that covetousness hatcheth, is an offspring
intricated with cares terrestrial, infected with desires carnal, blinded with
passions, subjected to affections, infirmed by tentations, informed by lusts,
infolded in errors, in ambiguities difficult, obnoxious to suspicions. Is he
not mad, that will foster in his bosom a damme, with such a damned littour?

Tria retia habet Diabolus in mundum extensa: vt quicquid euaserit de retibus
gulae, Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Math.
incidat in retia inanis gloriae; and quicquid euaserit his, callidius capiatur
retibus auaritiae. De his nullus perfect euasit: The Devils three nets are
Riot, Vainglory, Covetousness: The second catches them that escape the
first; and the last misseth not to apprehend the delivered from both the
former. Amos. 5. 19.
He that flies from the Lion, the Bear meets him; and the escaping both these,
the Serpent (Covetousness) bites, not unlike the prediction of God to Elias,
concerning Hazael, Iehu, and Elisha; whom he was commanded to anoint. 1. Reg.
19. 17.
It shall come to pass, that he that escapes the sword of Hazael, shall Iehu
slay: and him, that escapes from the sword of Iehu, shall Elisha slay.

If this be madness, who are well in their wits? And yet madness it is,
and infatuate frenzy. What is it else, to forsake Paradise for Sodom, heaven
for earth, God for Mammon, when as (by most irreconcilable enmity) they cannot
be embraced at once? Howsoever you will say, those things you covet are good
creatures, and call them goods: yet nemo bonus bona bonum aestimat, male
vtenti: no good man will account those goods, good for him, that can not
command his affections to their sober usage. He that shall prefer profit
to virtue, his body to his soul, his purse to his body, his eye to his purse,
time to eternity, let him go for a madman.

The Epicure feeds on foul a hundred times, that it may feed him but once:
the Covetous feeds his purse a thousand times, and starues himself. He cares
not to destroy his soul, to please his lust; yet for the salvation of his
soul, will not hold his purse short of the smallest gain. To conclude, the
God whom he serves, cannot help him; the God, whom he should serve, will not
help him, because he has forsaken him. There is no other help or hope to
reclayme the auarous: but Lord have mercy on them, Math. 17. 15.
for they are lunatike and sore vexed; as that Father spoke of his possessed
son, Math. 17. Lunatike they are perpetually, and not at some fittes by the
Moon, as that word seems to intimate: Sore vexed, with the implacable,
insatiable, turbulent distraction of their own spirits; not without accession
of all those solicitations, which the infernal spirits can suggest; all for
gain. Oft-times they faell into the fire, and often into the water. Their
Epilepticke courses now drive them into the fire of malice and dissension; now
plunge and drown them in the floudes of oppression: till the inundation of
their cruelty have spoiled the whole Country; and themselves at last suffocated
in their own deluge. They may be brought to the Ver. 16.
Disciples, the Ministers of Christ, but they cannot cure them. Alas! this
frenzy is hard to heal. Though they be neither Ver. 17.
faithless, nor perverse, negatiuely: though they strive by Ver. 21.
fasting and prayer, affirmatively: avoid they evil impediments, or use they
good means; this kind of devil will not out, Covetousness will not be
expelled. Only Lord have mercy on them; convince them, convert them; for they
are madmen.

6. The Usurer
Would laugh, to hear himself brought into the number of madmen. He sits
close, and is quiet at home, whiles madness rambles abroad. He holds others
in bonds; is in no bonds himself: he stands so much upon law, you cannot
judge him lawless. He would not come near a Tavern door, where madness rores:
he keeps a succinct course, and walks in an even pace to Hell. Slander him
not for one of Bedlam: yet he is mad, rauing, roaring mad; and that by the
verdict of God in the pen of Solomon: Eccl. 7. Eccl. 7. 7.
Surely, oppression makes a man mad.

It is indeed a thriuing occupation. Usury is like that Persian Tree, that at
the same time buddes, blossoms, and bears fruit. The moneys of interest are
evermore, some ripe for the Trunk, others drawing to maturity, the rest in the
flower approaching, all in the bud of hope. But he is mad; for his sin at
once buds, blossoms, and brings forth the fruit of vengeance. Every bond he
takes of others, enters him into a new obligation to Satan: as he hopes, his
debtors will keep day with him, the Devil expects no less of himself. Every
forfet he takes, scores up a new debt to Lucifer; and every morgag'd land he
seazeth on, enlarges his dominions in hell.

But why do you call this benefit made of our money, usury and madness? It
is but vsance, and husbandring of our stock. So by a new name given to your
old sins, you will think to escape the censure of madmen. Thus I have read of
the people of Bengala, who are so much afraid of Tigers, that they dare not
call them Tigers, but give them other gentle names. As some Physicians; that
will not call their impatient Patients disease madness, but melancholy. But
let the Bengalans call them what they will, they are Tigers still: and give
usury what name you please, (for what Usurer is not ashamed to be called so?)
it is mere madness. He is mad, that calls evil good, and sour sweet: but
he is no slaunderer, Esa. 5. 20.
that calls Usury madness. It is no less; when the eternal God in his
word, shall condemn Usury to hell, still to prosecute it with hope of heaven.

But many learned men are patrons and patterns for it. They are as mad as
you; and learn you by their madness to become sober. Aliquid auxilij est,
aliena insania frui. There is some benefit usually to be made, by another
man's exemplary madness. Were it more questionable; yet he is no less mad,
that will ventrously do, what he is not sure is safe to be done; then he,
that having a whole field to walk in, will yet go on a deep rivers dangerous
bank. He is in more danger to topple in, and therefore a mad man. It were good
for the commonwealth, if all these madmen the Usurers were as safe and fast
bound in a local, as they are in spiritual Bedlam.

7. The Ambitious man
Must also be thrust into this Bedlam, though his port be high, and he thinks
himself inciuisible from the Court. Whiles he beholds the stars, with
Thales, he forgets the ditch; and yawning so wide for preferment, contempt is
easily thrown into his mouth. I have read of Menecrates a Physician, that
would needs be counted a god, and took no other fee of his Patients, but
their vow to worship him: Diony sius Syracusa hearing of this, invited him to
a banquet; and to honor him according to his desire, set before him nothing but
a Censor of Frankincense; with the smoke whereof he was feasted till he
starued, whiles others fed on good meat. This showed the great Naturalist, a
natural fool, a madman. Sapor a Persian King wrote himself, Rex Regum,
Frater Solis and Lunae, particeps Syderum, etc. King of Kings, brother to the
Sun and Moon, and partner with the Stars. Yet alas! he was a man,
therefore a madman, in the arrogation of this Style.

Let the Roman Canonists turn their Pope into a new nature; Nec Deus est, nec
homo, etc. Obad. 4.
which is neither God nor man: they are mad that give it him, and he is
mad to accept it. Let Edom exalt her self, as the Eagle, and set her nest
among the stars: yet says God, the pride of thine heart bath deceived thee.
Let the Prince of Tyrus imagine himself to sit in the seat of God: Will thou yet say before him that kills thee, Ezekiel. 28. 2. Ver 9.
I am God? but thou shall be a man, and no God before him that slays thee.
Let Senacherib think to dry up rivers with the soale of his foot; and
Antiochus to sail on the mountains: Quid sibi fert tanto dignum promissor
hiatu? What events have answered their grand intendments, but madness?

Eusebius reports of Simon Magus, that he would be honored as a God, and had
an Altar with this inscription, to Simon the holy God: which it seemed, his
harlot Helena did instigate. But when by the power of the Devil he presumed to
fly up to heaven, at the command of Saint Peter, the unclean spirit brake
his neck. He climbed high, but he came down with a vengeance. His miserable
end showed him an ambitious man, a madman. Soar not too high, ye sons of
Anak; strive not to attain heaven by multiplying of earth, like
Babel-builders: Feriunt summos fulgura montes. Though you aspire in glory, you
shall expire in ignominy. If you were not frantic, you would sistere gradum,
keep your stations, know when you are well, and give a fiat to His will, that
has placed you in a site happiest for you. You are mad to outrunne him.

8. The Drunkard
Will, sure, wrangle with me, that his name comes so late in this Catalogue;
that deserved to be in the front or vantguard of madmen. Demens Ebriet as is
an attribute given by an heathen. It is a voluntary madness, and makes a man
so like a beast, that whereas a beast has no reason, he has the use of no
reason: and the power or faculty of reason suspended, gives way to madness. Nay,
he is in some respect worse then a beast: for few beasts will drink more then
they need, whereas mad Drunkards drink when they have no need, till they
have need again. Quaeris, quis sit homo ebriosus? Bez. Epigr.
aetqui
Nullus est homo, Maeuole, ebriosus.
Show mce a drunken man, thou blessed. I can
not do it: for he that is drunken, is no man.
To prove himself a madman, he dares quarrel with every man, fight with any
man; nay, with posts and walls, Virg.
imagining them to be men. Bacchus ad arma vocat: In praelia trudit nermem.
Hor.
Wine makes them bold, without fear or wit: hazarding themselves into dangers,
which sober, they would tremble to think of. Nec enim haec faceret sobrius
vnquam. Are not these mad? If you should see them like so many superstitious
Idolaters, drinking healthes on their bare knees to their fair Mistress:
which (may be) is but a foul strumpet, swearing against him that will not
pledge it, or not pledge it off to a drop; would you in your right wits
take these for other, then madmen? no: let them go among the rest to Bedlam.

9. The Idle
Man, you will say, is not mad: for madmen can hardly be kept in, and he
can hardly be got out. You need not bind him to a post of patience, the
love of ease is strong fetters to him. Perhaps, he knows his own madness,
and keeps his Chamber; both that sleep may quiet his frenzy, and that the
light may not distract him. He lives by the sweat of other men's brows, and
will not disquiet the temples of his own head. If this be his wit, it is
madness: for by this means, his Field is covered with nettles and thorns, his
body ouergrowne with infirmities, his soul with vices; his conscience shall
want a good witness to it self: and his heart be destitute of that hope,
which in the time of calamity might have rejoiced it.

Seneca could say, Malo mihi male esse, quam molliter, I had rather be sick
then idle: and indeed to the slothful, ease is a disease: but these men had
rather be sick then work. These are mad: for they would not be poor, nor
want means to give allowance to their sluggishnesse; yet by their refusal of
pains, they call on themselves a voluntary, and inevitable want. Oh that the
want of grace thus procured, were not more heavy to their souls, then the
other to their carkases. Complain they of want? Justly may they, should they,
shall they: for the want of diligence has brought the^ to the want of
sustenance. Thus their quiet is frenzy, their idleness madness.

10. The Swearer
Is rauingly mad: his own lips so pronounce him; as if he would be
revenged on his. Maker; for giving him a tongue. It is so bilster'd with his
hot breath, that he spittes fire at every sentence. He swears away all part of
that blood, which was shed for his redemption: and esteems the wounds of his
Savior, but only a complement of his speech; wherein he does his best, to give
him new ones. He never mentions God, but in his oaths, and vilipends his
great Name, as if He heard him not.

What frenzy exceedes his? for he calls his bread, his drink, his clothes, the
Day, Sun, Stars, Plants, and stones to testify his truth: indeed he
calls them to testify against him. How shall the Name of that God do him
good, which he so either disallowes, or dishallowes? God is not mad to give
him that blessing, which he is so mad to vilefie. And for a full
exemplification of his madness; by oaths he thinks to get credit, and by
oaths he loses it.

11. The Liar
Is in the same predicament with the Srearer; let them go together for a
couple of madmen. As he finds now exclusion out of all humane faith; so he
shall at last out of Gods Kingdom, Reu. 21. 27.
Reu. 21. Lies have been often distinguished: the latest and shortest
reduction is into a merry Lie, and a very Lie: either is a Lie, though of
different degree: for the malicious lie exceedes the officious lie. The
Proverb gives the Liar, Erasm.
the inseparable society of another sin. Da mihi mendacem, and ego ostendam
tibi furem: Show me a Liar, and I will show thee a thief. W. sd. 1. 11.
He is mad: for the mouth that speaks lies, slays his own soul. This
is not all; he gives GOD just cause to destroy him more. Psalm. 5. 6.
Thou shall destroy them that speak lies. This is his madness: He kills at
least three at once. The Thief does only send one to the Devil: the
Adulterer two: the Slanderer hurts three: himself, the person of whom, the
person to whom he tells the lie. Lie not in earnest, Lie not in jest; if thou
do accustom it, get thee into Bedlam.

12. The Busie-Body
All will confess a madman: for he fiskes up and down, like a nettled
horse, and will stand on no ground. He has a charge of his own properly
distinguished: ye he must needs trouble his head, with alien and unnecessary
affairs. He admits all men's businesses into his brain, but his own: and
comes not home for his own, till he has set all his neighbors ploughes
a-going. He hurries up and down, like Iehu the son of Nimshi in his
Chariot, or as a Gallant in his new Caroch, driving as if he were mad.

He loves not to sleep in his own doors; and hinders the commonwealth with
frivolous questions. He is an universal solicitor for every man's suit; and
would talk a Lawyer himself mad. There is not a Boat, wherein he has not
an Oar; nor a Wheel, wherein he will not challenge a Spoake. He lives a
perpetual affliction to himself and others; and dies without pity; save that
they say, it is pity he died no sooner. He is his neighbors malus genius,
and a plague to melancholy. He is the common superuisor to all the wills made
in his parrish: and when he may not be a counselor, he will be an
intelligencer. If you let him not in to interrupt, he will stand without to
euesdroppe. He is a very madman; for he takes great pains without thanks,
without recompense, of God, or man, or his own conscience. He is luxurious of
business, that concerns him not: Lay hands on him, shackle him: there are
some less mad in Bedlam. I will be rid of him with this Distich.

He cleaues to those he meddles with, like pitch:
He Is quick silver, good only for men's itch.
13. The Flatterer
Is a madman, Pro. 26. 18. 19.
Prou. 26. As a madman, who caesteth firebrands, arrows, and death. So is the
man, that deceyueth his neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport? He
displeases his conscience, to please his concupiscence: and to curry a
temporary favor, he incurreth cuerlasting hatred. For his Great-one, once
awaked from his lethargicall slumber, will say of him, as Achish did of David,
1. Sam 21. 15.
counterfeyting himself distracted: Have I need of madmen, that you have
brought this fellow to play the madman in my presence? Shall this fellow come
into my house?

14. Ingratitude
Is madness: for the unthankful man both makes himself unworthy of received
favors, and preuents the hope of future. For every man can say, Quod facis
ingrato, perit: what you do to a madman, is lost. But if he be unthankful
to God, he turns his former blessings into curses, and shuts up heaven
against his own soul. Cessat cursus gratiarum, vbi non fuerit recursus: The
course of grace, where it has no recourse, is soon stopped. All waters come
secretly from the sea, but return openly thither: though favors have a secret
and invisible deriuation from God, they must return openly to him in praises,
and in a thankful acknowledgement. Thou art mad, O elate and puffed spirit,
that use, abusest, take, swallowest the blessings of heaven without
gratitude. Greg.
Nones dignus pane, quo vescer is: For, no^ est dignus dandis, qui non agit
gratias de datis: He is unworthy of more benefits, that is unthankful for
those he has. The Ungrateful man must needs be one of this number, and
salute Bedlam.

15. The Angryman
None will deny to be a madman, but they that are either mad or angry. The
Scripture has so condemned him; Nature so censured him: therefore he cannot
shift this Bedlam. Anger rests in the bosom of fools; It is all one; of
madmen. Ira furor, though but breuis: the longer it lasts, the madder it is.
Be angry, there is the reins: Ephesians. 4. 26.
but sin not, there is the bridle. Let not the sun go down on your wrath,
if you must needs be angry: neither give place to the Devil. If he suffer the
Sun to set on his wrath, the Sun of mercy may set on his soul: and when
he has given the Devil place, the Devil at last will give him place; Act.
1. 52.
even his own place, which his mad fury has voluntarily accepted. He is
stark mad; for he ^^^pares not to wound himself; and with a violent fire,
which himself kindles, he burns up his own blood.

16 The Envious man
Is more closely, but more dangerously mad. Envy is the consumption of the
bones, says Solomon: he does make much of that, which will make nothing of
him: he whets a knife to cut his own throat. The Glutton feeds beasts, to feed
on; and like a Witch, nourishes a devil with his own blood. He keeps a disease
fat, which will ever keep him lean: and is indulgent to a Serpent that gnawes
his entralles. He punishes and reuengeth the wrongs on himself, which his
adversary does him. Is not this a madman? Others strike him, and like a
strangely-penitentiall Monk, as if their blows were not sufficient, he
strikes himself. That Physicians may not beg him when he is dead, he makes
himself an Anatomy living. Sure, he gives cause to think, that all the old
fables of walking ghosts were meant of him, and but for a little starued flesh,
he demonstratiuely expounds them. If it were not for his soul, the Devil could
scarce tell, what to do with his body. He would do much mischief, if he
liue's to it: but there is great hope, that he will kill himself beforehand. If
you miss him in a Stationers shop geering at books, or at a Sermon cauilling
at doctrines, or amongst his neighbors cattle, grudging at their full vdders,
or in the Shambles plotting massacres; yet thou shall be sure to find him in
Bedlam.

17 The contentious man
Is as frantic as any. Hear him speak, his words are incendiary: observe
his feet, they run nimbly to broils, not knowing the way of peace. Look
upon his eyes, they sparkle fire: mark his hands, they are ever sowing debate:
he will strike a neighbor in the dark, and lay it on his enemy: all to make
work. Search his pockets, and they are stuffed with libels, inuectiues,
detractions. He hates all men, and the Lord him; Pro 6. 19.
being that seventh abomination, that his soul abhors, one that sows
discord among brethren. Pro. 26. 18.
There is a witness against him beyond exception. The debatefull man is
madder, etc. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly, 22.
etc. When he speaks fair, 25.
believe him not: for there are seven abominations in his heart. He comes to a
Mart or Market, to breed quarrels; as if he were hired by some Surgeon. He
neither sees, nor hears of a discord, but he must make one; but ever
covertly, cowardly, out of the reach of weapons. Pro. 26. 17.
He that passes by and medleth with strife belonging not to him, is like one
that takes a dog by the ears: he will be soon weary of holding him; and
if he let him go, he is sure to be bitten. He is utterly mad: for having
incensed, encouraged party against party, as one clappes on unwilling Mastiues;
when perceiving his villainy, they become friends, both shall fall upon him. So
he makes work for Lawyers, work for Cutlers, work for Surgeons, work for
the Devil, work for his own destruction. To Bedlam with him.

18 The Impatient
Is a madde-man: for when the ties of softer afflictions will not hold him, he
must be manacled with the chains of judgments. Patienter ferendu^, quod non
festinanter auferendu^: He makes his yoke more troublesome, then it would be:
and by his struggling, forces his gyues to make prints in his flesh. He is mad;
for he longs for ease, and denies it himself. It has been said among men,
Bear one wrong, and provoke greater: but I say, Bear one affliction from God
well, and prevent greater. He is mad, that is angry with God, that cares not
for his anger, that will plague his anger. How ill had it gone with God before
this, if such a man could have wrought his teene upon him? Mean time, God is
at peace, out of his reach, and he is plagued for his madness. Teach him
patience in Bedlam.

19 The Vainglorious
Is a mere madman, whether he boast of his good deeds, or his ill. If of
his virtues, they are generally more suspicable: if of his vices, he is the
more despicable: If of his wealth, his hearers the less trust him: this noise
preuents him from being a debtor: If of his valor, he is the more infallibly
held a coward. In what strain soever his Mountebanke- ostentation insults, he
loses that he would find, by seeking the wrong way. He is mad: for when
he would be accounted virtuous, honorable, tich, valiant, in favor with
greatness; and the world takes not ample notice of it, he sounds it with his
own Trumpet: then at once they hear it, and deride it. By seeking fame, he
loses it, and runs mad upon it. Put him into Bedlam.

20. Lastly,
To omit our Schismatickes, and Separatists, who are truly called, Protestants
out of their wits, liable to the imputation of Phrenzy: the Papists are
certainly madmen, dangerous madmen; mad in themselves, dangerous to us: and
would happily be confined to some local Bedlam, lest their spiritual lunacy
do us some hurt.

Mad in themselves: for who but madmen would forsake the fountain of living
waters, Ier. 2. 13.
the word of truth, and pin their faith and salvation on the Popes sleeue? a
Prelate, Luke 13. 1.
a Pilate, that mingles their own blood with their sacrifices. Think how that
enchanting cup of fornications preuailes over their besotted souls; and you
will say they are not less then mad. Come you into their Temples, and behold
their Pageants, and histrionicall gestures, bowings, mowings, windings, and
turnings; together with their service in an unknown language, and (like a
deaf man, that sees men dancing, when he hears no music) you would judge
them mad. Behold the Mass Priest with his baked god, towzing tossing, and
dandling it, to and fro, upward and downward, forward and backward, till at
last, the jest turning into earnest, he choppes it into his mouth at one bitte;
whiles all stand gaping with admiration; Spectatum admissi, risum tencatis
amici? would you not think them ridiculously mad? But no wonder if they
run mad; that have drunk that poison. Many volumes have been spent in the
discovery of their madness; I do but touch it, lest I seem to write Iliads
after our learned Homers.

Surely Madmen are dangerous without restraint. Papists are ready instruments
of commotion, peruersion, treason. Met.
These are a sickness, immedicabile vulnus Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera
trahatur.

Our land cannot be at ease, so long as these lie on her stomach. They prick
and wound her sides, not with praying against her, (for their imprecations we
hope, are irrita vota) but with preying upon her: and when all stratagems
fail, ready to fetch arguments from the shambles, Postil. D. Boys. vern. par.
page 118.
and conclude in ferio. Whose Religion is politic, learning bloody,
affections malicious, ambitious, devilish. The Inquisition is their Grammar,
fire and faggot their Rhetoric, fleet and fetters their Logic, the Cannons
rore their Music, and poisoning is their Physic. Whose Priests have such
almighty power, that they can make their Maker, that whereas in their Sacrament
of Order, (as they term it) God makes an impotent creature a Priest: now in
their Sacrament of the Aliar, the Priest shall make Almighty God. Yea, as he
made them with a word, and put them in their mothers womb: so they can make
him with a word, and put him in a box. They that thus blaspheme their Creator,
shall we trust them with their fellow creature?

It was an ingenuous answer of a Spanish Nobleman, commanded by Charles the 5.
to lodge the Duke of Bourbon at his house in Madrid: The state of the English
fugitives.
I will obey thee, but set my house on fire, so soon as the Duke is out of it.
My Predecessors never built it to harbor Traitors. Did he think that a
conspirator would poison his house; and shall we think that such are no
infection to our land? David did counterfeyt himself mad, when he was not,
for his own security: these are mad, and dissemble it; till by one frantic
act, they can bring us all to ruin. If they were foreign, public and professed
enemies, we would not blame, not fear them. While Kingdoms stand in
hostility, hostile actions are just. But these are domestical, intestine,
secret adversaries, bred and fed in the same Country; therefore the more
intolerable, as the more pernicious.

Tut, they can satisfy their consciences by distinguishing of Treasons.
Indeed, all their Religion is a religion of distinctions: such as that is, that
an excommunicate Prince may be dethroned; and being once uncrowned, may on his
penitent submission be restored to the Church: Quoad animam, non quoad regnum.
Thus they leave positive, textuall, schoole-duinity, and fall to
Crowne-diuinity. Antichrist pleades, their Religion is maintained by the
Fathers. Did ever any Father allow of Treason? Shame they not to auerre it? If
any abused, wrested, falsified writing of the Fathers did seem to consent to
their errors: yet we know, that Audiendi Patres, non vt Indices, sed vt
testes: The Fathers are to be heard as witnesses, not as Judges. It is Gods
scriptum est, not their traditum est, that must give decision of all doubts.

They object, that those are birds of our own hatching, that thus pollute
their nest. Perhaps, our country gave them breath and birth, but they drunk
this poison from the enchanting Cup of Rome. They are ever extrauagant
persons, that like rotten arms or legs have dropped from the body. Men sine
sede, sine fide, sinere, sine spe. They are desperate men, and destitute of
fidelity, that seek Rome, where their former learning, and the better learning
of their conscience, is perverted, perjured. That (forgetting to speak the
language of Canaan) enigmaticall, epicene, spurious, and abortiue equivocation,
is the main accent of their speeches: an ambiguous, ambagious, couzening
voice, which Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, never knew, never practiced to save
their bloods. A strange, stigmaticke, misshapen, halfe-borne, halfe-vnborne
child; I know not where bred, nor by what Pope, Cardinal, or Jesuit gotten:
but this I am sure, whosoever was the father, Rome keeps the bastard, and
nurseth it with her best indulgence. So that now, Jurat? creed minus: non
jurat? credere noli:
Jurat, non jurat? hostis ab host cave.
Their words are false; their oaths worse: neither just:
Swear they, or swear they not, give them no trust.
How else could it be; but to the sophisticating of true substances, must be an
access of false qualities?

Those are those critical, hypocritical Canibals, that make dainty at some
seasons to eat the flesh of beasts, but forbear at not time to drink the
blood of men. As the Pharisees, that stuck not to buy Christ's death, (and their
own withal) with money: yet would not admit that money into their Treasury:
fearing to pollute the material Temple, not the spiritual of their souls.
The Romans make conscience in their fasting seasons, to eat any flesh but Bulls
flesh; I mean, that which the Popes Bulls have made holy: (for that which
Saint Paul says, 1. Tim. 4. 5.
does sanctify it, is neglected) but to cut throtes, murder Kings, blow up
States, is not inter opera mala, no nor adiaphora, but inter meritoria: is not
evil, nor indifferent, but a work of merit.

They say, (and we forsooth must grant that improued, but never proved
assertion) that they derive their Chair from Peter: and what do they derive
this doctrine too? Saint Peter exhorts to patience, not to caruing their own
revenge. 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14. 17.
Neither are their murderous inventions and intentions of the lowest rank; but
of Kings, Princes, Senates, whole States: and that without any respect, as of
their own conscience, so of the persons goodness they strike at: Aiming at the
life of a King, a gracious King, under whom they enjoyed their lives, and that
in abundant wealth and peace. So the conspiracy of Parry is aggrauated.

Quod Regina scelus, scelus est quod virgo petatur,
Quod pia virgo scelus, quod tibi grata scelus.
Cum virgo, Regina, pia, et tibi grata petatur:
Proh scelus! est, superat quod scelus omne, scelus.
Which I have thus interpreted.

It Is treason, that a Queen should ruined be,
that a Maid; ill.
That she was good, yet worse: that good to thee;
more wicked still.
But when a Queen, a Maid, Good, and thy friend,
thou would dispatch:
The treason, that thy black heart does intend,
dare Hell to match?
Neither is it wonder, that they exercise thus upon us, who have no mercy to
their own bowels. The short lives of the Popes, (as it was once of the
Emperors in that Seat) manifest, that by treason the Chair is got, by
treason lost. It would then be a good degree toward our health, if these
dangerous madmen were shut up in some strong Bedlam.

There are many other madmen; whom, though I particularly name not in this
Catalogue, you shall find in Bedlam. I desire not to say all, but enough. All
are not taken into that taming-house in a day: it is filled at times. If this
muster can work any reformation on these frantic Patients, another discovery
will not be lost labor.

You conceive the nature of the Tenant: you may a little better understand his
vileness, if you consider, 1. That he is an usurper, intruding himself into
Gods freehold; which both by creation, and re-creation he may challenge for
his own inheritance. If God should ask madness, as he did that unbidden
Guest in the Gospel, Math. 22. 12.
that came to the marriage without his wedding Garment: Friend, how came thou
hither? Either like that wretch, he would be mute, or else answer: Man let me
into his heart. What a Traitor is man, to let into his Landlords house, his
Landlords enemy?

2 That he does not pay the rent of Gods house. God rich in mercies, lends and
(as it were) lets to farm diverse possessions; as the graces of the Spirit,
the virtues of the mind, gifts of the Body, goods of the world; and for all
these requires no rent, but thanksgiving: that we praise him in heart, tongue,
and conversation. But so long as Madness is in any of these Tenements, God
cannot have this little rent of his Farm. They are mad, that think they may
enjoy Gods blessings without rent, or the due payment of an accountant tribute.

3. That he does suffer Gods Tenement to decay: he does ruinate where he
dwells. For the outhouses of our bodies, madness does strive either to burn
them with lust, or to drown them with drunkenness, or to starve them with
covetousness. For the spiritual and inward building, the foundation of Gods
Tenement in our soul is faith, the walls hope, the roof charity. Now madness
continually endeavors to raze our foundation, to dig through our walls, to
uncover our roof: that having neither faith in God, nor love to men, our soul
may be without hope, exposed to the tempests of the devil. Shall not madness
account for these dilapidations?

4. That he does employ the house to base uses. It is ill done in a Tenant to a
fair house, to make the best rooms stables for his horses, stalls for his
oxen, or styes for his hogs. But madness makes the Memory a stable for malice
and revenge: the understanding a dungeon for blindness and ignorance: the will
a vault for hypocrisy and disobedience. So the Body, which is the Temple of
God, is made a den of thieves.

This is the Tenant, Madness: a sorry inhabitant, and unworthy of so good a
lodging, as the next point appears, which is

2. The Tenement, the heart.
The Heart is a mansion for God, not for madness. God made it, and meant to
reserve it to himself: he never placed such a Tenant in it, as the Frenzy of
sin. Christ is said to have a fourefold house, Anagogicall, Allegorical,
Corporal, Moral.

1. The first is the Church triumphant, that glorious, and everlasting
habitation of his Deity.

2. The second, is the Church militant, wherein he dwells sacramentally, by his
holy Ministry.

3. The third is Corporal, that consecrated womb of the Virgin, wherein he
dwell't 9. months.

4. The last is Man's Heart, wherein he has a mystical and spiritual abode.
Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith, 1. Ioh. 4. 16.
and by love. As he loves the gates of Sion, more then all the dwellings of
Jacob: so he delights in the heart of man, more then in all Palaces and
Pauilions of Princes. When an adversary Tyrant has taken the chief Forte in a
Country, and driven out their just and merciful Governor; fear, sorrow, and
expectation of ruin possesses the inhabitants. It can go no better with the
like Nation of Man, when Jesus Christ is expelled his habitation, the heart;
and so savage a Tyrant is admitted to Tenure, as madness: a strong man, that
will fortify the Castle, and scorns to lose it, except strength it self, the
irresistable grace of Christ lays battery to it. But this Theme is scarce
cold, since I last handled it. I must be forced to leave the Tenement awhile,
in the unmerciful hands of madness; and inquire, (if perhaps with any
comfort) how long this Tenure lasts.

3. The Tenure whiles they live.
Alas! what gain we by searching further into this evidence? the more we
look into it, the worse we like it. Whiles they live. The 1. Tenure of Madness.
2. in the Heart. 3. is for term of life. Too long a time for so bad a Tenant.
But you will say unto me, as the Disciples to Christ: Aug.
Who then can be saved? Nunquid daturus est Deus regnum coelorum stul^is? Will
God give the Kingdom of heaven to madmen? Fear not, all are not madmen that
have madness a Tenant in their hearts; but they that have it for their
Landlord. It is not my distinction, Romans 7. 16.
but Saint Paul's, Romans 7. Sin may dwell, nay, Romans 6. 12.
Sin will dwell in your hearts; let it not reign there, says the Apostle.
It must be a household servant, it must not be a King. Aliud est habere
insaniam, aliud haberi ab insania. It is one thing to have madness, another
thing for madness to have thee. Since it will dwell in thee, whiles thou
dwelest in the flesh, make it a servant, a slave, a drudge. Set the Gibeonites
to draw water; let it make thine eyes laue thy body with repentant tears: and
to cleave wood, let it rend thy heart with sorrow. Keep that subtle deceiuer,
with whom thou ignorantly struckst the hand of covenant, under bit and bridle:
velle, reuelle, turn, restrain, command, control it at thy pleasure. Let it
never be thy Captain, thy La^dlord, thy King.

Though Sin, the Devils mad dog has bitten thee, and thou at first
beginnest to run frantic: yet apply the plaster of the blood of Christ to
thy sores. This shall draw out the venom, and grace shall get the mastery of
madness. Be of good comfort, thou shall not die frantic. Encourage thy
self with a holy violence against thy fleshly lusts: intend, contend to
infeeble, and at length to extinguish the force of thy depraved nature. Kill
madness, lest madness kill thee. Be sensible of the bane, that lies in this
spiritual frenzy, and do not laughing die. Madness is at first, inimicus
blandus, a fleering enemy: in the midst, dulce venenum, sweet poison: at
last, the Epithets of blandum and dulce being lost, it is Scorpio pungens, a
stinging Serpent. Well, yet let it sting thee here, that it may not sting thee
hereafter. Happy is he, that learnes to be sober by his own madness; and
concludes from I have sinned, I will not sin. Madness may be in his heart,
like a Tenant; it shall never be like a Tyrant. Innocent Adam was naked, and
knew it not: sinful Adam was naked, and knew it. Then comes God, hearing his
excuse of concealing himself deduced from his nakedness: Who told thee that
thou wast naked? Genesis 3. 11.
Sure, his guilt told him. We have been mad, and are now come to our selves,
to know our own madness. If it be asked, who told us, that we were mad? I
answer, Even the same grace of Gods Spirit, that reclaymed us from madness.
For the wicked, since they love madness, be it unto them: and when they will
never be recollected, let them be mad still. But blessed be that God, that
helped us; praised be his holy Name, that has recalled us. He has in this
life freede us from madness, as a Tyrant, and shall hereafter free us from it
as a Tenant.

Thus have you the Mystery of this spiritual Bedlam detected, and a crew of
Madmen let out to your view: whose house is the world, whose bonds are
iniquities, whose delight is darkness, whose master is the Devil: for those
whom he keeps in this metaphorical Bedlam, without reclayming by the power of
the Gospel; he has ready provided another material, local, infernal
Bedlam, a dungeon, not shallower then Hell, wherein there is no light of Sun
or Star, no food but speckled Serpents, no liberty to straggle; but the
Patients are bound with everlasting chains; and himself (with his
same-suffering spirits) do eternally whip them with rods of burning steel
and iron. One hour in this Bedlam will tame the most savage madde-men, that
were ever nursed among wolves, or sucked the breasts of inhumanity.

I hear them talk of some irrefragable Rorers, creatures, (not men) whom no
limits of reason can teddar up: let them take heed, lest they become at that
day, Rorers indeed, and rore for the very anguish of their hearts: howling like
Dragons, that have lived like Tigers. Think of this Bedlam, ye madde-men,
Eccl. 11. Rejoice, (...)
O young man, in thy youth, etc. Rejoice, nay (it were somewhat well, if no
more then joy) be mad; in thy youth, tempus insaniendi, a time of illimited
desire; Let thy heart cheer thee, and do thou cheer thy heart; that, thee with
lusts; thou, that with wine and iunkets: and walk frantikely, inordinately; in
thy ways, by-ways, and wrywayes, for the way of truth thou will not know; and
in the sight of thine eyes, such tempting, and lust-prouoking objects, as those
two Sentinels of the body can light upon: or if thou can not yet be madder,
extend thy desires to find out experimental madness: but know thou, that for
all these things, God will bring thee into judgment: remember, that there is
an infernal Bedlam, whereunto they that live and die spiritually-mad-men, must
be eternally confined.

He that should now tell the Covetous, the Ambitious, the Voluptuous, etc. they
are madmen, should appear to them mad, in saying so. They rather think us
mad; as Festus, though mad himself, without learning, could tell Paul,
that Much learning had made him mad. Act. 26. 24.
But we may answer for our selves, as Augustine of David's madness: Insanire
videbatur, sed regi Achish insanire videbatur: David seemed mad, but to King
Achish: 1. Sam. 21, 13.
We are judged madmen, of none but madde-men, because we run not with them
to the same excess of riot, 1. Pet. 4. 4.
because we cut short our affections of their vain delights, and drown not
our selves in the whirlepoole of their luxuries; but girde repentance to our
loins with resolution; they imagine us frantic. They think us madmen, we
know them so. And they shall at last despairingly confess in this lower
Bedlam: Wisd. 54. 5.
We fools accounted the godly man's life madness, and his end to be without
honor: Now is he numbered among the children of God, and his lotte is among
the Saints. Be wise then in time, ye sons of men; trust not spiritual
madness, lest it bring you to eternal Bedlam. From whose jaws when you are
once entered, be you never so tame, you cannot be delivered.

3. The Period.
We have ended Man's Comma, and his Colon, but not his Sentence: the Period
continues and concludes it. We 1. found his heart full of evil. 2. We left
it full of madness. 3. Let us observe at the shutting up, what will become of
it. After that, they go to the dead. Here Is the end of man's progress: now he
betakes himself to his Standing-house, his Grave. The Period is delivered
Consequently. After that Discessiuely. they go Discensiuely. down to the dead.
The Sum is, Romans 6.
Death is the wages of sin. 1. After that, they have nourished evil and
madness in their hearts, this is the successiue (not successful) event and
consequence. 2. They go, they shall travel a new journey, take an unwilling
walk; not to their meadows, gardens, tauernes, banketting-houses; but, 3. To
the dead: a dismal place, the habitation of darkness and discontent: where
finesse shall be turned to filthiness: luster to obscurity, beauty and
strength to putrefaction and rottenness.

If a man looks into what life it self is, he cannot but find, both by
experience of the past, and proof of the present age, Wisd 5. 13.
that he must die. As soon as we are born, we begin to draw to our end.
Life it self is nothing, but a journey to death. There is no day, but has his
night: no sentence, but has his period: no life on earth, but has the death.
Examine the scope of thy desires, and thou shall perceive, how they hasten to
the grave: as if death were the jail, prize or principal end, which the
vanity of humane endeavors runs at. Be a man in honor, in wealth, in
government: he still ambitiously blind, languisheth for the time to come; the
one, in hope to enlarge his greatness; the other, his riches; the last, his
dominions. Thus they covet the running on of time and age, and rest not till
they have concluded their sentence, and attained their Period, gone to the dead.

All men, yea all inferior things must be freed by an end: and as the
Philosopher answered to the news of his sons death: Scio me gen^^sse
mortalem: so God the Father of all, may say of every man living, Scio me
creasse mortalem: I have made a man that has made himself mortal. Man is a
little world, the world a great man: if the great man must die, how shall the
little one escape? He is made of more brittle and fragile matter, then the
Sun and Stars: of a less substance then the earth, water, etc. Let him make
what show he can with his glorious adornations; let rich apparel disguise him
living; seare-cloths, spices, balmes enwrappe him, lead and stone immure him
dead: his original mother will at last own him again for her natural
child; and triumph over him with this insultation, he is in my bowels, Psalm.
146. Psalm. 146. 4.
He returns to his earth. His body returns not immediately to heaven, but
to earth, nor to earth, as a stranger to him, or an unknown place, but to his
earth; as one of his most familiar friends, and of oldest acquaintance. To
conclude:

If we be sinful, we must die; if we be full of evil, and cherish
madness in our hearts, we must to the dead. We have sins enough, to bring
us all to the grave: God grant they be not so violent, and full of ominous
precipitation, that they portend our more sudden ruin. Yea, they do portend
it; but Oh nullum sit in omne pondus.

But I have been so prolixe in the former parts of the Sentence, that I must
not dwell upon the Period. He needs not be tedious, that reads a Lecture of
mortality. How many in the world, since this Sermon begun, have undergone
experimental demonstration of this truth? This Sentence is but the moral of
those spectacles, and those spectacles, the justifying examples of this
Sentence. They are come to their Period before my speech: my speech, my self,
and all that hear me, all that breathe this air, must follow them. It has
been said, We live to die: let me a little inuert it: Let us live to live:
Live the Life of grace, that we may live the life of glory. Then though we
must go to the dead, we shall rise from the dead; and live with our God out of
the reach of death for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

