THE ANCIENT, True, and Admirable History Of Patient GRISEL, A Poor Man's
Daughter in France: Showing, How Maids, by her example, in their good
behavior may marry rich HVSBANDS; AND Likewise, Wives by their patience and
obedience may gain much Glory. Written first in French. AND Therefore to
French I speak and give direction.
For, English Dames will live in no subjection.
But, now Translated into English. AND Therefore say not so. For, English maids
and wives
Surpass the French, in goodness of their lives.


AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for William Lugger; and are to be sold at his shop
in Bedlem, near Moore-Fields. 1610.

THE History of patient GRISEL, made Marchioness of Saluss. In which is
exemplified the true obedience, and noble behavior of virtuous women toward
their Husbands.
CHAP. I. How the Marquess of Saluss passed the time of his youth without any
desire of marriage, till he was requested by the fair entreatie of a favorite,
and other Gentlemen, to affect a wife; both for the good of the Country, and
the honor of himself: with his answer to the same.
Between the Mountains of Italy and France, toward the South, lies the
territory of Salus, a Country flourishing with excellent Towns and Castles,
and peopled with the best sort of Gentles and Peasants: amongst whom there
lived not long since a Nobleman, of great hope and expectation, Lord of the
Cnuntry, by name, Gualter, Marquess of Saluss: to whom, as the government a
pertained by right of inheritance; so their obedience attended, by desert of
his worthiness. He was young in years, noble of lineage, and such attractiue
demeanor, that the best thought it a pleasure to be commanded by him, and the
worst grew more tractable by his good example: his delight was in hunting and
hawking, and the pleasure of the time present extinguished the care of the time
to come; for he thought not of marriage, nor to entangle himself with the
inconveniences of a wife, till at last the people and Noblemen of his Country
proiected the contrary, as discontented to see him indisposed that way, and
presaging a kind of prosperity to themselves, if by his marriage posterity
might arise to assure them the better, how they might bestow their obedience
hereafter. Whereupon, they assembled together, and made one day amongst the
rest a determiner of their resolutions, choosing out for their speaker a Noble
Knight, of great authority, fair demeanor, eloquent speech, and more inward
with the Marquess then any of the rest: who, thus acquainted with all their
minds, and prepared to utter his own mind, took an opportunity to acquaint
the renowned Marquess with the matter.

Most Honorable Sir, the great humanity extended toward us, and of which I
most especially have participated, has thus emboldened me above others, to
make a further trial of your patience, and forbearing my rudenes; not that
there is any sufficiency or singularity in me above others: but in that
heretofore I have found you so generous toward all, I make no question to
find you as gracious toward my self; and in that it has pleased you to
accept of our love, we are proud again to be under your obedience: wherein we
shall rejoice the more, if you now accord to our request the sooner, which is,
to marry without delay. The time passes, and will not be recalled: your youth
entreats it, and must not be demed: your country importunes it, and would not
be opposed: your neighbors desire it, and hope to be satisfied: and all
sorts request it, and wish it for your honor. For when age approaches, death
attends it at the heels, and no man can tell when, or how it will fall upon
him. Therefore we humbly request you to accept our supplications, and accord
to this importunity, that we may provide by your appointment, a lady worthy of
your honor and our subjection. In this we are the more suppliant, because it
will rebound so much to the good of your country, and the enlarging your
renown: for if it should so fall out (which God forbid) that you die without
issue, we may lament the loss of our lord, but not redress the complaints of
the people: we shall want you that was al our comfort, but are sure of
distress to our everlasting trouble. If then you either love your self, or
pity us, frame a heart to this impression, and leave not us to further fear
and disquiet.

When the noble lord had thus apprehended the petition of his loving subjects,
he resolved to answer them as graciously as they had propounded the business
with regard of duty, and so replied: My dearest friends, you have urged me to
a matter, in which as yet I have been a mere stranger: for by nature I delight
in liberty, and by custom continued my pleasures; both which must needs be
curbed by marriage, and restrained by taking a wife: notwithstanding, I cast
away all doubts, to pleasure you; and will think of no incombrances so you be
satisfied. For though marriage has many difficulties attending; especially, the
fear of legitimation in our children, and suspicion of that honor which lies
on our wives honesty, yet all shall be ouercomne with this resolution, that I
shall please you in the same: for I am resolved, if any good come for man's
contentment by marriage, it is from God; to whom I submit this cause, and pray
for the good success of your wishes, that I may live to maintain your peace,
as well as my own pleasure: and look wherein my contentment shall enlarge mine
honor, your welfare shall be respected above my life; so that (believe it) I
will satisfy your demands, and apply my self to the purpose. Only one thing I
request at your hands, to take in worth my choice, and neither insult if she be
a princess of greatness, nor repine if she be of mean estate: but love her
because I have loved you, and regard her howsoever, in that she is my wife;
neither being curious nor inquisitiue whom I will choose, nor disaffected when
it is past remedy.

When the company had heard him out, and found him so willing to their
satisfaction, they gave him thanks with one heart for his kind admission, and
answered with one tongue, he should not find them repugnant, but they would
honor his wife as the princess of the world, and be morigerous to him as the
Commander of their souls. Thus did this new report (like a messenger of glad
tidings) fill all the Marquisate with joy, and the palace with delight, when
they understood their lord would marry, and in a manner heard the time
appointed: for presently it was proclaimed through the Country, and a day
assigned for all comers to come to the Court. The Nobles prepared themselves
in the best manner: the Ladies spared no cost, either for ornaments of their
bodies, or setting out their beauties: the Gentles flocked to please their
lord, and were brave to set out their own greatness: the Citizens were rich in
their neatnes, and handsome in their attire: the Officers were formal in their
shows, and sumptuous in their attendants: the Countryman had his variety, and
the very Pesant his bravery; in a word, al sorts gloried in the hope of that
festival, and every man's expectation attended the day of the triumph. For
never was such a preparation in Saluss before, nor such a confluence of people
seen in that country: for besides the nouelty, many foreign Princes came to
celebrate this marriage, and to show their own greatness. Sauoy was near, and
sent some from her snowie hills: France as near, and sent others from her
fruitful vines: Italy not far off, and sent many from her pleasant fields: and
the Islands round about kept none at home that would come. Thus were his kindred
invited, strangers admitted, his own people entertained, and all sorts
welcomed: but as yet no bride was seen, no woman named, no lady designed, no
maid published, no wife known: only the preparation was much, and the
expectation greater.

All this while the Marquess continued his hunting; and as he had accustomed,
resorted much to a poor country village not far from Salusse; where there
dwelt as poor a countriman, named Ianicole, ouerworne in years, and ouercomne
with distress. But as it happens many times, that inward graces do moderate
outward discommodities, and that God seasoneth poverty with contentment and
their sufficient supportation: so had this poor man all his deserts supplied
in the admirable comfort of one only daughter; so composed, as if Nature
determined a work of ostentation. For such was her beauty in appearance, and
virtue in operation, that it put judicious men to an ecstasy in the choice by
comparison: but both united did here grace each other; and when they pretended
an action, it was all to go forward to perfection. And whereas in others this
temporary blessing gave wings to desire, to be seen and known abroad; in her
those innated virtues allaied the heat of all manner of passion, and breakings
out of frailty. The viands they had were but mean, and the diet they kept was
to satisfy nature: the time was ouer-ruled by their stomachs, and the
ceremonies they used were thanks to God, and moderation in their repasts. The
vtensiles of the house were homely, yet handsome in regard of their
cleanliness: that bed which they had the old man lay in, and the sweet
daug^^^^ made shift with the ground. No day passed without pr^^^^^ and praises
to God (for was it not praiseworthy to ha^^ such grace in this disgrace?) nor
any night, without taking account of the day passed. Her exercise was to help
her father in the morning, and drive forth her sheep in the day time: he was
at home making of nets, and she abroad looking to her lambs: she was never
heard to wish for any better, but to thank God it was no worse. No word of
repining ever came from her mouth, or the least grudge from her heart: at night
she folded her sheep, and dressed her fathers supper: then lay they down to
rest, and rested as well as in a bed of Down indeed. This was the glory of
their poverty, and memory of their contentment.

But as fire will not be hid where there is matter comhustible: so virtue will
not be obscured where there be tongues and ears: nor could the Marquess so
hallow after his hawks and hounds, but report hallowed in his ear, as fast,
this wonderment; insomuch that when it was confirmed by judicious relation, he
made it not dainty to be behoulding to his own experience. Which when he saw
concurring with fame, the miracle brought a kind of astonishment: which
continuing the properties of such novelties, increased to meditation: and so
comparing the rest with this rarity, he thought her a fit woman to make his
wife; supposing that if she were virtuous by nature, she could not prove
vicious by education: but rather as a diamond is a stone of the same value,
whether set in lead or horn, it must needs be of more excellency embellished
with gold and enamell. In which resolution he prepared his heart, and went
forward with his business.

In the mean time the Court was daintily furnished, the plate prepared, the
apparel magnificent, the coronet rich, the jewels precious, the ornaments
exceeding, and all things befitting the magnificence of a prince, and the
dignity of a queen: only the Nobles wondered, the ladies were amazed, the
damsels marvelled, the Gentles disputed, the people flocked, and all sorts
attended to see who should possess this wealth, and be adorned with these
robes. Till at last the nuptial day came indeed: honor prepared the
sumptuousnes: fame diuulged the glory: Hymen invited the guests: magnificence
adorned the rooms: the Officers marshald the State: and all looked for a
Bride: but who she was, the next Chapter must discover.

CHAP. II. How after all this great preparation, the Marquess of Saluss
demanded Grisell of her poor father Ianicola; and espousing her, made her
Marchioness of Saluss.
WHen all things were extended to this glorious show, the Marquess (as if he
went to fetch his wife indeed) took with him a great company of Earls, Lords,
Knights, Squires and Gentlemen, Ladies and attendants; and went from the Palace
into the Country toward Ianicolas house; where the fair maid Grisel knowing
nothing of that which happened, nor once dreaming of that which was to come, had
made her house and self somewhat handsome, determining (with the rest of her
neighbor Virgins) to see this solemnity: at which instant arrived the Marquess
with all his gracious company, meeting with Grisel, as she was carrying two
pitchers of water to her poor fathers house. Of whom (calling her by her name)
he asked, where her father was: she humbly answered, in the house. Go then
said he, and tell him I would speak with him. So the poor old man (made the
poorer by this astonishment) came forth to the Lord somewhat appauled: till the
Marquess, taking him by the hand, with an extraordinary cheerfulness, said,
that he had a secret to impart unto him; and so sequestring him from the
company, spoke these words: Ianicola, I know, that you always loved me, and am
resolved, that you do not now hate me: you have been glad when I have been
pleased; and will not now be sorrowful, if I be satisfied: nay, I am sure,
if it lie in your power, you will further my delight, and not be a contrary to
my request. For I intend to beg your daughter for my wife, and be your son
in law for your advancement. What say thou man? will thou accept me for a
friend, as I have appointed thee for a father? The poor old man was so
astonished, that he could not look up for tears, nor speak a word for joy:
but when the ecstasy had end, he thus faintly replied; My gracious Sovereign,
you are my lord, and therefore I must accord to your will; but you are
generous, and therefore I presume on your virtue: take her a Gods name, and
make me a glad father; and let that God, which raises the humble and meek,
make her a befitting wife, and fruitful mother. Why then, replied the
Marquess, let us enter your house: for I must ask her a question before you.
So he went in, the company tarrying without in great astonishment: the fair
maid was busied to make it as handsome as she could; and proud again, to have
such a guest under her roof; amazed at nothing, but why he should come so
accompanied, and little coniecturing of so great a blessing approaching. But at
last, the Marquess took her by the hand, and used these speeches: To tell you
this blush becomes you, it were but a folly; and that your modesty has graced
your comelines, may prove the deceit of words, and unbefitting my greatness: but
in a word, your father and I have agreed to make you my wife, and I hope you
will not disagree to take me to your husband. For delay shall not entangle you
with suspicion, nor two days longer protract the kindness: only I must be
satisfied in this, if your heart afford a willing entertainment to the
motion; and your virtue a constancy to this resolution, Not to repine at my
pleasure in any thing, nor presume on contradiction, when I determine to
command. For as amongst good soldiers, they must simply obey without disputing
the business: so must virtuous wives dutifully consent without reproof, or
the least contraction of a brow. Therefore be advised how you answer, and I
charge you take heed, that the tongue utter no more then the heart conceits.
All this while was Grisel wondering at the miracle, had not religion told her,
that nothing was impossible to the Commander of all things; which reduced her
to a better consideration, and thus brought forth an answer:

My gracious lord, I am not ignorant of your greatness, and know mine own
baseness; there is no worth in me to be your servant, therefore there can be
no desert to be your wife: notwithstanding, because God will be the Author of
miraculous accidents, I yield to your pleasure, and praise him for the fortune,
only this I will be bold to say, That your will shall shall be my delight, and
death shall be more welcome unto me, then a word of displeasure against you.

This is sufficient, answered the great lord, and so most lovingly he took her
by the hand, and brought her to the company, even before all his peers and
great ladies; and told them, she should be his wife: so that wherein they
extended their love, reverence, and obedience toward her, he would exemplify
his regard, care, and diligence toward them. And because outward shows do
sometimes grace befitting actions (lest her poverty and baseness might too much
daunt their expectation, and seem disgratious to their noblenes) he commanded
them with a moral liveliness to adorn her with the richest robes they had:
so that it was a pleasure to see, how the ladies bestire themselves; a delight,
to behold the several services performed; the many hands about her; the
jewels and pendants, the robes and mantles; the ornaments and coronets; the
collanaes and chains; with all other particulars and accouterements: but when
she was apparelled indeed, it was a rauishment exceeding report, and they which
stomached her preferment, were now delighted with her glory. Such a benefit
has beauty by nature, and gratiousnesse by nurture.

CHAP. III. How the Marquess and Grisel were married together.
AFter the ladies had thus adorned poor Grisel with robes befitting her
estate, the Marquess and all the noble company returned to Saluss, and in the
Cathedral Church in sight of the people, according to the fullness of
religious ceremonies, they were espoused together, and with great solemnity
returned to the palace. Herein yet consisted the admiration, that no word of
reproach was murmured, nor eye looked unpleasantly upon her: for by her
wonderful demeanor she had gained so much of opinion, that the baseness of
her birth was not thought upon, and all her graces concurring made them verily
believe, she was extracted of princely lineage: no man once supposed, that
she could be Grisel, daughter to poor Ianicola; but rather some creature
metamorphosed by the powers of heaven: for besides the outward stateliness and
maiesticall carriage of herself, the wonderful modesty and exact symmetry of
her countenance, the admirable beauty and extraordinary favor of her visage,
her fair demeanor had a kind of attraction, and her gracious words, a sweet
delivery; so that all that came to her were glad of their access, and they
which went from her, triumphed for their good speed: yea, report extended so
far, that she was not only visited by her own lords and ladies with
reverence; but attended on with strangers, who came from all quarters to see
her, and to be behoulding to their own judgments: so that if the Marquess
loved her before for her own worth, he now reverenced her for others respect;
the rather, because he found a blessing attending her presence, and all people
pleased in the contract. For when any controversy happened between himself and
his Nobles, she was so nobly minded, that what she could not obtain by fair
entreaty, she yet mitigated by sweet persuasion. When any unkindness happened of
foreign Princes, she urged those blessings of peace, and reasoned the matter
with delightsom enforcement and when the people were either complained of, or
against, he marvelled from whence she had those pretty reasons to assuage his
anger, and they verily believed she was sent from heaven for their relief.
Thus was she amiable to her lord, acceptable to her people, profitable to her
Country, a mirror of her Sex, a person privileged by nature, and a wonder of
the time, in which she did nothing out of time; so that the Marquess was
rather ravished then loving, and all his subjects resolved to obedience from
her good example.

CHAP. IIII. How the Lady Grisel was proved by her Husband, who thus made
trial of her patience.
TO other blessings, in process of time, there was added the birth of a sweet
Infant, a Daughter, that reioiced the mother, and gladded the father; the
Country triumphed, and the people clapped their hands for joy. For the
Marquess still loved her more and more, and they thought their lives not dear
for her, if occasion served. Notwithstanding all this, Fortune has still a
trick to check the pride of life, and prosperity must be seasoned with some
crosses, or else it would taint and corrupt us too much. Whereupon, the
Marquess determined now to prove his wife, and make trial of her virtues
indeed: and so taking a convenient season, after the child was fully meaned,
he one day repaired secretly to her chamber, and (seeming half angry) thus
imparted his mind:

Although, Grisel, this your present Fortune has made you forget your former
estate, and that the iollity of your life ouerswayeth the remembrance of your
birth; yet, neither is it so with me, nor my Nobles: For I have some occasion
of distasting, and they great cause of repining, in that they must be subject
to one so base, and have still before their eyes our children of such low
degree; so that though (for my sake) they make good semblance of the present,
yet are they resolved never to suffer any of our posterity to rule over them;
of which, as they have disputed with me, I cannot choose but forewarne you:
Therefore, to prevent this coffeehouse between us, and to maintain that
peace which must corroborate my estate, I must needs yield to their
judgments, and take away your Daughter from you, to preserve their amity: the
thing I know must be displeasing to Nature, and a Mother cannot well endure
such a loss: but there is now no remedy, only make use of your first
resolutions, and remember what you promised me at the beginning of our Contract.

The Lady hearing this sorrowful preamble, and apprehending the Marquess
resolution, to her grief (although every word might have been as arrows in
her sides) yet admitting of the temptation, and disputing with her self to
what end the virtues of Patience, Modesty, Forbearance, Fortitude and
Magnanimity were ordained, if they had not subjects to work upon, and objects
to look after; thus replied:

My lord, you are my Sovereign, and all earthly pleasures and contentments of
my life come from you, as the fountain of my happiness; and therefore please
your self, and (believe it) it is my pleasure that you are pleased: as for the
child, it is the gift of God and yours. Now he that gives may take away, and as
we receive blessings from heaven, so must we not dote on them on earth; lest
by setting our minds too much upon them, we cannot set off our hearts when
they are taken from us: only one thing I desire, that you remember I am a
mother, and if I burst not out into passion for her loss, it is for your sake
I am no more perplexed, and so you shall ever find me a wife befitting your
desires.

When the Marquess saw her constancy, and was in a manner pleased with her
modest answer, he replied not at all at that time. For his heart was full,
and what between joy and fear he departed: joy that so great virtue had the
increase of goodness: fear that he had presumed too far on such a trial:
but resolved in his business, he went to put it to the adventure.

CHAP. V. The Marquess sent a Varlet for his daughter; but privately disposed
of her with his sister, the Duchess of Bologna de grace, who brought her up
in all things befitting the child of so great a person.
NOt long after this sad conference between the Marquess and his lady, he
called a faithful servant unto him; such a one as the poet talks of, propter
fidem and taciturnitatem dilectum, to whom he imparts this secrecy; and with
several instructions, what he truly meant to do with the child, sent him to
his wife with an unsavory message; which yet he delivered in this manner:

I had not now come to you, most noble lady, though that power commanded me,
which has my life in subjection, if I had not more relied upon your wisdom
and virtue, than feared death it self. Therefore I crave pardon if I am
displeasing in my message, and seem cruel (as it were) in tearing your flesh
from your sides, by bereauing you of this your daughter: for he has appointed
it that must not be gainsaid, and I am a messenger that cannot be denied: but
yet with what unwillingness (God knows my soul.) in regard that you are so
respected amongst us, that we think of nothing but what may delight you, and
talk not a word, but of your merit and worthiness!

When she had heard him out; remembering the conference the Marquess had with
her, and apprehending there was no disputing in a matter remediless,
especially with a messenger, she resolved it was ordained to die: and although
she must now (as it were) commit it to a slaughterhouse, whereby any woman in
the world might with good becoming have burst out into some passion, and well
enough showed a distracted ecstasy; yet recollecting her spirits, and
reclaiming those motives of nature already striving in her bowels, she took
the child in her arms, and with a mothers blessing, and sweetened kisses, the
countenance somewhat sad, and the gesture without any violent excruciation,
delivered it unto the fellow, not once amazed nor distempred, because her lord
would have it so, and she knew not how to have it otherwise: only she said, I
must, my friend, entreat one thing at your hands, that out of humanity and
Christian observation, you leave not the body to be devoured of beasts or
birds: for it is worthy of a grave in her innocence: and Christian burial,
though she were but my daughter alone.

The fellow having received the child, durst not tarry for fear of discovery
(such impression had her words make already) but returned with it to his
Master; not leaving out the least circumstance of her answer, nor any thing
might enlarge her renown and constancy.

The Marquess considering the great virtue of his wife, and looking on the
beauty of his daughter, began to enter into a kind of compassion, and to
retract his wilfulness: but at last, resolution won the field of pity and
having (as he thought) so well begun, would not so soon give over: but with
the same secrecy he had taken her from his wife, he sent it away to his
sister, the Duchess of Bologna, with presents of worth, and letters of
gratification, containing in them the nature of the business, and the manner
of her bringing up; which she accordingly put in practice, receiving her niece
with joy, and instructing her with diligence: so that it soon appeared, under
what a tutelage she was, and whose daughter she might be. For her pregnancy
learned whatsoever they taught her: and the grace she added, quickly
discovered, that honor had confederated with nature to make her the offspring
of such a mother.

CHAP. VI. The Marquess, not contented with this proof, took away also her
son, in which adversity (with other additions) she showed an extraordinary
patience.
AFter this tempest was ouerpast, the rage whereof might easily have broken the
tender sides of poor Grisels Bark (For, she verily believed that her
Daughter was slain) the Marquess still lay in wait for the trial of his
wife, watching every opportunity which might acquaint him with her
discontentments; especially, if he might understand whether she complained of
his rigorousnesse and unkindness, or no: but when he not only was advertised
of her constancy, and fair demeanor, but saw (by experience) that she was
neither elated in prosperity, nor dejected in adversity: when he perceived so
great a temperature between the joy of her advancement and the sorrow for her
trouble, he wondered at her constancy; and the rather, because her love and
observation toward him continued with that sweetness, and had such delectable
passages, that his heart was set on fire again, and he knew not how to allay
the extreamities of his joy. In this manner passed four years, wherein she
ouerpassed all of her kind; and he thought it a donatiue from heaven to have
such a wife. At last, nature bestird herself again, and made her a happy
mother of a fair son; the joy whereof led the whole Country into the house
of prayer and thanksgiving, and brought them home again by cresset-light and
bonfires: so that she well perceived how acceptable she was to her people,
and beloved of her husband. Notwithstanding, with the same water that drove the
mill, he drowned it; and made her still believe the contrary: for after two
years, that the child was past the danger of a cradle, and the trouble of
infancy, he took occasion once again to inflict upon the virtuous Grisel a
new punishment; erecting his building upon the old foundation. You know, says
he, what former contentions I have had with my Nobility about our marriage,
not that they can lay any imputation on you or your worthy behauior, but on my
fortune and disasterous affection to match my self so meanly: wherein yet their
forward exprobration was rebated, all the while we either had no children, or
that they supposed, that which we had to be taken from us: all which arises
out of the error of ambition (which, in a manner, is careless of virtue)
respecting nothing but a high Progeny: so that ever since this child was borne,
there has passed many secret grudgings, and unkind speeches against it, as if
it were a disparagement to their greatness, to have a lord of so mean
Parentage, and the Country to be subject to the grand child of Ianicola, whom
you see, never since our marriage, they would admit to place of honor, or to
ouertop them by way of association; nor will suffer this my Gualter, though it
carry the fathers name to rule over them. Therefore, to allay the heat of these
present fires, and to preserve the peace of my estate (by preue^ting the
mischief of future troubles) I am resolved to settle my contentment, and to
deal with your son, as I have dealt with your daughter. And of this I
thought good to advertise you, as a preparatiue for patience, lest sorrow
should distract with ouersuddennesse.

Now you Ladies and Dames of these times, that stand upon terms of spirit and
greatness of heart (some will have it courage and magnanimity of mind) that
are affrighted at the Character of a fool: and silly poor soul, I speak not
of Strumpets, or of such as are willing to brand themselves with the impurity
of uncleanness, and dare out of impudency or running, tell their Husbands to
their faces, they will go where they list, and do what they please; but of
such that under that impregnable target of honesty are yet so impatient at
every distemperature, that they dare answer taunt for taunt: yea like Viragos
indeed offer the first blow, though a horrible confusion follow; what would you
have answered this lord? or with what fireworks would you have made your
approches unto him? I will not tarry for your answer, lest I pull the old
house in pieces, and so though I escape the timber I may be crushed with the
rubbish: but I will now (...) all objections. In telling you what fair GRISEL
said: and if there be hope of reformation, insert it as a caution, to divert
you from your natural fiercenes.

When she had heard him out: though to the grief of her soul, she conceived
the murder of her child, and that the apprehension renewed the sorrow of her
daughters loss: yet would she give no way to such distemperature, that either
he should have cause to suspect her patience, or she herself the temptation
of disquiet; and therefore thus replied: My lord, I have many times told you,
that my soul reioiceth in nothing but in your reposednes: for you are the lord
of me and this infant: and though I could be contented to show my self a
mother in his education, and bring him now and then unto you as the pledge of
our loves, yet are you the commander of my vows, and I will rectify all
disordered appetites by the rule of your pleasure. Take him then a Gods name,
and if he be marked for death, it is but the common brand of all creatures;
nay, if the mother may be a sacrifice of propitiation to appease your
disquiet, never was lamb so meek, nor holocaust so willing to be offered. For,
what may be comprehended under the titles of father, kindred, children,
friends, life, pleasure, honor and contentment, are all comprised under your
love, and the society of a husband. Do with me then what you please: the body
shall serve your turn while it lives, and the soul attend you after death.

Here was an answer to pacify the tyrants of Sicilie, and put a man quite out
of his tract of proving such a wife: yet the Marquess only made use of it to
rejoice in the assurance of her goodness; and went the rather forward in his
dangerous course of temptation.

CHAP. VII. The Marquess, resolute to prove his wife further, sends for his
son, and disposes of him as he had done of his daughter.
AS this patient and wonderful lady was one day sporting with her infant; like
an untimely tempest (spoiling the beauty of some new rooted plants) did this
messenger of death interpose himself between her recreation, making the
hollow demand of her son worse than the noise of aschrich-owle over a sick
man's bed: yet (as if there were a conscience in disquieting her greatness, or if
you will, her goodness) he came forward with preambles and apologies,
insinuating with craving pardon the authority of a lord, the duty of a servant,
the terror of death, the circumstance of obedience, and all other enforcements
which might either excuse a messenger, or make the message it self without
blame. What should I enlarge a discourse of terror? it is a courtesy to
conclude a mischief with quicknes: he was not so sudden in his demand, as
she was ready in her dispatch: for she presently blessed the child, kissed it,
crossed it, adorned it, and delivered it to the executioner: only with the
same enforcement she pleaded, as she had spoken of in the behalf of her
daughter; not to see it perish for lack of a burial, or devoured for want of a
grave.

In this manner, and with this report he returned to his lord, who had still
more cause of amazement, and less reason to trouble such a creature, had not
his wilfulnes put him forward to make an end of his business, and taught him
still variety of trying this gold in the fire. But for the time, he sent
likewise this child to his sister, the Duchess of Bologna (yet some will have
her but Countess of Paniche) who, understanding her brothers mind, brought up
both these children in such a fashion, that though no man knew whose children
they were, yet they imagined whose they might be; that is, the son and
daughter of some prince, or other potentate, willing to have his children
brought up to the best purpose, and befitting their birth and honor.

The ordering of this business in this sort, made the Marquess once again
settle himself in Saluss, where he kept open house to all comers; and was
proud of nothing so much, as the honor of his wife, and the love of his
people: for although he had thus tried her patience and constancy, giving her
more then sufficient cause of anguish and perturbation, yet could he not find
fault, or had the least demonstration of offense, but still she loved him more
and more, and was so obseruingly dutiful, and cautelous of displeasure, that
many times he grew enamored of that he might command, and seemed passionate in
the distractions of ouer-ioy. Nor could the length of time make this love
wearisome, for all they had lived thus a dosen years together: only she got
the hand of him in the opinion of the people, who by this time began to
whisper against his unkindness, that had married so virtuous a woman, and
bereaved her of two children, so that if they were slain, it was a murder, if
otherwise, it was unkindness. For though she were poor Ianicolas daughter by
birth, yet she might come from heaven for her virtue, and was sure to go
thither for her piety. Notwithstanding these breakings out, which came often to
the ears of his honor, such was her moderation and his government, that they
only whisperd the same in her behalf, and contented themselves with the
expectation of future good, as they had the fruition of present happiness; not
meddling with the same further, then in the commiseration of her, and still
acknowledging their duty to him: so that although he knew she might this way
understand his former reasons of taking away her children, that it was but a
device, and that there were some other motives, which procured this unkindness:
yet was he still obstinate to exercise her patience, and conceit beat out
another plot of offense on the anuill of a loving, yet most hardened heart.

CHAP. IX. The Marquess, to try his Lady further, made her believe he would
marry another wife.
SOme dosen years were passed, since the Marquess of Saluss had sent his
daughter to Bologna to his sister (as you have heard) who was by this time
grown to that beauty, comeliness and perfection, that her fame busied all
Europe; and the lady Grisel, her Mother, was made acquainted with her
excellency; whereupon, he very strangely sent to Rome, by a Messenger of trust,
for counterfeit letters to marry his Paragon, and to be dispensed from his
first wife. Which was so effectually dispatched, that the Messenger soon
returned with the approbation of his request, and he himself had many
allegations in readiness to excuse the matter, intimating the good of the
Country, and the continual desire of his people for the alteration; which
although it was far from probability, because they pitied their ladies
distress, and rather repined against their lords inconstancy: yet it served
his turn for the time, and he thereupon erected the frame of this second
marriage. By this time is the fair Grisel acquainted with the business, and
troubled at the misfortune; but having many times played the wanton with
affliction, she resettled herself to endure whatsoever should be imposed: so
that when she came to the proof indeed, nothing affronted her constancy, nor
humbled her lower, then her own virtue had taught her the way.

In the mean while the Marquess had under hand sent to the Count of Paniche,
and his sister, to bring him his children with all the pomp and glory they
could prepare; with caution, not to discover their names and to be at a day
appointed at Saluss: so that it passed for current all over the Country, that a
lady, a young, brave, and gallant lady, of great lineage, and greater worth, of
high renown and mighty affinity, was coming into Saluss to be espoused to the
Marquess, and that they were already come out of Bologna de Grace, a whole
days journey forward, with such a troop and company, that it was a show of
magnificence, and a spectacle of delight. For amongst the rest, there was a
young lord, not fully eight year old, whose bravery and gallantnesse drew all
men's eyes with admiration toward him, had not the lady divided the gazing, and
shared with their opinion. For, besides her riches and outward ornaments, her
youth (as not fully thirteen) and upright comeliness, her bewty and gracious
behavior, she was of extraordinary stature and maiestike presence.

These things thus disposed and handsomely carried, the Marquess took an
opportunity thus to speak to the disconsolate Grisel before all his people: In
times past I confess you deserved my love, and notwithstanding the disparity
between us, I thought it well bestowed upon you; nay, I cannot now impute any
ill desert unto you: notwithstanding, for some reasons to my self best known,
of which I have made the holy Father acquainted, I am resolved to take another
wife; who, as you hear, is on the way hitherward already: therefore I would
advise you to retire to your fathers cotage, till you hear further from me.

Alas my lord, replied the sweet soul, I ever disputed the matter with reason,
that there was no equality between so great magnificence and my humiliation,
and in the greatest assurance of my prosperity, replaced my self a vassaile
and handmaid; proud of nothing but my own readiness to be at your command,
and your willingness to employ me in your affairs; so that I take God to my
witness, I scarce trusted my self with the name of a wife, when I was in the
best assurance. Therefore I must acknowledge, what you have heretofore
vouchsafed, as a part of great bounty, and the very fruits of your generousnes.
As for returning to my poor Fathers house, I am most willing; and there as you
please, like a forlorn widow will spend the rest of my days: yet remember I
was your wife, espoused orderly, and you have had children by me, so that if I
there dye, I must yet dye the widow of such a lord, and for honors sake be so
reputed. As for your new Spouse, God grant her many days of comfort, and you
many years of joy, that you may live in reciprocal delight one with another,
and intertaine no worse contentment, then poor Grisel accustomed. As for my
Dowry I brought, I brought only my self, and will have no more back again,
which was, faith, love, reverence, poverty and virginity: For, as I came naked
from my fathers house, I am contented to return so again. Your jewels are in
the wardrobe, and even the ring you married me withal, in the Chambex: of this
I wear I shall quickly be disrobed, and if there be any further misery
appointed, my patience can endure it, if your pleasure impose it; only in
recompense of my Virginity, I request a poor smock to hide that womb from
public ouerlooking, that was once so private to so great a Prince: and
because it was the bed of your Infants, let it not be the storne of your
people, but give me leave thus to go out of the Palace, that hereafter times
may wonder, how quietly a woman yielded to so great a change. Nay, let no man
shed a tear, I must be more naked then so: for though the wife of a Marquess
while I lived, and the widow when I died, yet am I not too good for a grave,
but in despite of pride must return to dust and ashes.

Did I say before, they began to weep? I can assure you, when she had done,
they roared outright; yea, the Marquess himself shed so many tears, that he
was feign to retire; and commanded the smock she had begged to be sent unto
her, that she might prosecute the enterprise, and he determine his business,
as he had constantly proiected.

CHAP. VIII. How the patient Grisel was disrobed of her apparel, and restored
all that she had (except one poor smock) to the Marquess.
BEfore I proceed any further in this wonderful discovery, I am sure two
things will be objected against me: first, the impossibility of the story;
secondly, the absurdity of the example. (...) the story I answer, that
therefore it was thus published and connected together, for the rarity of the
business, and the sweetness of the success; nor is it any way stranger than
many Roman passages, and Gretian discourses. For the application, it is both
necessary and befitting: for whereas in the condition of women, amongst many
other there be two especial errors against the modesty of their sex, and
quietness of their husbands, videlicet, superiority, and desire of liberty (I
name not irregular behavior, household inconveniences, and domestics strife)
this one example (as Hercules did the serpents) strangles them both in the
cradle: and though it cannot prevent, yet will it exprobrate the fault. First
concerning superiority, I hope the instances of Scripture are not made
Canonical to no purpose: and out of reason and natural inforcement, what a
filthiness is it to a generous spirit, to have a woman so presumptuous as to
take an account of her husbands actions and business? wherein many times they
are so peremptory, that I have seen them enter into the room of priuacy,
where secret businesses of strangers have been imparted, and were to be
discussed, nor has this been done with a lovely insinuation, or cunning excuse
of longing, or willingness to be instructed, or other pretty inducements to
permission, but with a high commanding voice, and impudent assurances of their
own worth: yea, I have known them break open letters before they came to
their husbands ouerlooking, and have wondered even at soldiers themselves, that
would give way to such indecency. Again, to be counterchecked in this
wilfulnes, what clamours have been raised? what tumults and discomforts
occasioned? that instead of awful obedience and delightsome affability, they
have burst out into outragiousnes, commanded tears of mischief, and threatened
suspicions reuenges: but let them soil themselves in the filthiness of this
humor never so much, I say plainly, that though their husbands were fools by
nature, yet is it not befitting for a wife to discover the same, or overrule
in foreign affairs, I mean matters which concern them not: for there is no
great man so weak, but has council and supportation of inferior Officers;
nor mean man so sottish, but has friends or servants in the dispatch of his
business. Secondly, concerning the desire of liberty; oh hellish device of the
devil, and fearful custom both of France and England! I hope he that knows
the fashions of the East, of Muscouy, Spain, Italy, and the Mores,
understands, that no married wife goes abroad but to honorable purposes; and it
is an introduction to death, to salute any stranger, or be seen in private
conference. For, in true understanding, what business should any man have with
my wife three hours together in private? or why, without my leave, and that
upon good grounds, should she wander in public. I speak not to overthrow
noble societies, generous intertainment, familiar inuitations, courteous
behavior, charitable welcomes, honest recreations, or peradventure, the
imparting of private business: but merely against foppish wantonness, idle
talk, suspicions meetings, damnable play-hunting, disorderly gaming,
unbefitting exercises; and in a word, all such things as tend to obscenity and
wickedness; in which (say what women can) if there be not a moderation, by
nature, there must be an inforcement by judgment: and that woman that will
not be ruled by good council, must be ouerruled by better example. Of which,
this now in hand (of lady Grisel) is a mirror, and transparent Crystal to
manifest true virtue, and wifely duty indeed, and so I come to the wonder of
her obedience.

After the Marquess was resolved to the last Act of her trial, and had sent
her the smock she demanded, amongst all the Lords, Knights, Ladies and other
company, she presently disrobed her self, and went so accompanied, from the
Palace, to her fathers Cottage, who as you have heard (for diverse reasons) was
only kept from want, but never advanced out of the same.

The company could not choose but weep and deplore the alteration of Fortune:
she could not choose but smile, that her virtue was predominant over passion:
they exclaimed against the cruelty of her lord, she disclaimed the least
inuentiue against him: they wondered at so great virtue and patience, she
resolved them they were exercises befitting a modest woman; they followed her
with true love and desires to do her good, she thanked them with a true
heart, and request to desist from any further deploring of her estate.

By this time they approached the house, and the poor old man Ianicola
acquainted with the hurliburly, came out to see what the matter was. And
finding it was his daughter in her smock, and in so honorable a company,
bemoaning het distress, she quickly left them all vnspoke unto, and ran in for
those poor robes, which were formerly left in the house: with which he
quickly arrayed her, and told her before them all, that now she was in her
right element; and kissing her, bad her welcome. The company was as much
astonished at his moderation, as at her constancy, wondering how nature could
be so restrained from passion, and that any woman had such grace to be so
gracious; in which amaze, not without some reprehension of fortune, and their
Lords cruelty, they left her to the poverty of the Cell, and returnrd
themselves to the glory of the Palace: where they recounted to the Marquess,
the strangeness of the business, and the manner of the accidents, and she
continued in her first moderation and indefatigable patience; the poor Father
only laughing to scorn the miseries and sudden mutabilitie of humane
condition, and comforting his daughter in her well-begun courses of modesty and
reposednesse.

Not long after, approached the Countess of Paniche, or if you will Duchess of
Bologna, with her glorious company and beautiful lady, sending word before
hand, that she would be at Saluss such a day; whereupon the Marquess sent a
troop to welcome her, and prepared the Court for her intertainment: the bruit
of which yet had not so equal a passage, but diverse contrarious opinions thus
bandied themselves; some absolutely condemned the inconstancy of the lord,
others deplored the misfortune of the lady; some repined to see a man so cruel
against so great worthiness, others exemplified her praises to all eternity;
some were transported with the gallant youth and comeliness of this now
bewtifull Virgin, others presumed to parallel the fair Grisel, but that she
had stepped a little before her in years: some harped upon her great Nobility
and high Lineage, others compared the former wifes virtue and true wisdom;
some excused their lord, by the love to his Country, others excused the lady,
by the nature of the adversity, until the approach of the fair Virgin and
the young Noble man in her company, extinguished all former conceits, and set
them to a new work, concerning this spectacle, wherein the young lady, and her
brave brother had such preeminence: nor knew the Earl of Paniche himself or
any of the company on either side, that they were his own children by Grisel,
but merely strangers, and designed for this new marriage. So the great
Marquess made good semblance, and with his accustomed courtlinesse welcomed
them all to the Palace.

The very next morning (or, if you will, the day before) he sent a Messenger
for Grisel to come unto him in the very same manner as she was, who protracted
no time, but presently attended her lord: at her approach he was somewhat
appalled: but yet setting (as we say) the best foot forward, he thus
proceeded.

The lady (Grisel) with whom I must marry, will be here to morrow by this
time, and the feast is prepared accordingly; now because there is none so well
acquainted with the secrets of my Palace, and disposition of my self as you, I
would have you, for all this base attire, address your wisdom to the
ordering of the business, appointing such officers as is befitting, and
disposing the rooms, according to the degrees and estate of the persons: let
the lady have the privilege of the marriage chamber, and the young lord the
pleasure of the gallery, let the rest be lodged in the Courts, and the better
sort upon the sides of the garden: let the viands be plentiful, and the
ceremonies maintained; let the shows be sumptuous, and the pastimes as it
becomes: in a word, let nothing be wanting, which may set forth my honor,
and delight the people.

My Lord, says she, I ever told you, I took pleasure in nothing but your
contentment, and whatsoever might confort to your delight, therein consisted my
joy and happiness: therefore make no question of my diligence and duty in
this, or any other thing which it shall please you to impose upon me: and so
like a poor servant she presently addressed herself to the business of the
house; performing ell things with such a quicknes and grace, that each one
wondered at her goodness and fair demeanor, and many murmured to see her put
to such a trial. But the day of entertainment is now comne: and when the
fair lady approached, her very presence had almost extinguished the impression
of Grisels worthiness: for some unconstant humourists gave way to the
alteration, not blaming the Marquess for such a change. But when the strangers
were made acquainted with the Fortune of Grisel; and saw her fair demeanor,
they could not but esteem her a woman of great virtue and honor; being more
amassed at her patience, then at the mutability of man's condition; till at last
she approached the lady, and taking her by the hand, used this speech.

Lady, if it were not his pleasure that may command to bid you welcome, yet me
thinks there is a kind of ouer-ruling grace from nature in you, that must
exact a respect unto you. And as for you, young lord, I can say no more, but if
I might have my desires satisfied in this world, they should be employed to
wish you well, and to endeavor all things for your entertainment indeed. To
the rest I afford what is befitting; desiring them, that if any deficiency
amate their expectation, they would impute it either to my ignorance, or
negligence: for it is the pleasure of him, in whose will is all my pleasure,
that in all sufficiency you should have have regard and suppliment. And so she
conducted them to their several chambers, where they reposed themselves
awhile, till the time of dinner invited them to repast. When all things were
prepared, and the solemnity of placing the guests finished, the Marquess sent
for Grisel; and rising on his feet, took her by the hand before them all,
erecting his body, and elating his vo^^^ in this manner: You see the lady is
here I mean to marry: and the company gloriously prepared to witness the same:
are you therefore contented that I shall thus dispose of my self, and do
quietly yield to the alteration?

My lord, replied she before them all, wherein as a woman I might be faulty, I
will not now dispute: but because I am your wife, and have devoted my self to
obedience, I am resolved to delight in nothing but your pleasure: so that if
this match be designed for your good, and determined by your appointment, I am
much satisfied, and more then much contented. And for you lady, I wish you the
delights of your marriage, and the honor of your husband, many years of
happiness, and the fruits of a chaste wedlock: only gracious lord, take heed
of one thing, that you try not this new bride as you have done your old wife:
for she is young, and peradventure of another strain, and so may want of that
patience and government, which I, poor I, have endured.

Till this, he held out bravely: but nature ouercomming resolution, and
considering with what strange variety his unkindness had passed, he could not
answer a word for tears, and all the company stood confounded at the matter,
wondering what would be the end of the business, and the success of the
ecstasy: But to draw them out of their doubts, the next Chapter shall determine
the controversy.

CHAP. X. The Oration of the Marquess to his wife, and the discovery of her
children, to her great joy, and the contentment of all the company.
AFter a little reducement of his passion, and that time, and further
meditation had disposed his senses to their perfect estate, the Marquess
graciously answered:

Thou wonder of women, and Champion of true virtue; I am ashamed of my
imperfections, and tired with abusing thee, I have tried thee beyond reason,
and thou have forborne me beyond modesty: believe it therefore, I will have no
wife but thy self, and when God has thought thee too good for the earth, I
will (if it be not too much superstition) pray to thee in heaven. Oh, it is a
pleasure to be acquainted with thy worth, and to come near thy goodness makes
a man better then himself. For without controversy, except thou had been
sent from above, then could never have acted a goddesses part below: and
therefore seeing I have used thee so unkindly heertofore, I protest never to
disquiet thee hereafter: and wherein my cruelty extended against thee in
bereauing thee of thy children, my love shall now make amends in restoring thy
daughter. For this my new bride is she; and this wanton, her brother: thank
this great lady (my sister) for their bringing up, and this man (you know him
well enough) for his secrecy. Be not amassed at the matter, I have related a
truth, and will confirm it on my honor: only sit down till the dinner is
done, and bid the company welcome in this poor ^^tire: for the sun will break
through slender clouds, and virtue shine in base array. I could much dilate the
matter, but it is time to end, lest the circumstances will never end. This
device of the Marquesses, of kissing her so lovingly, and setting her down by
him so discreetly, did much good. For the company had time to dispute of the
miracle, and the young lady reason to prepare her obedience; which, no sooner
was the dinner finished, but she as soon performed, nothing thought upon but
joy at the matter, and wonder at the accident: every one pleased to see such a
unity of goodness, and all delighted to have a business so well concluded. But
seeing time had unclasped a book of such iollity, there was now no further
disputing: For the ladies flocked about her to attend her into the chamber;
where the young Princess her daughter was as ready as the best to apparel her:
so that when she came amongst them again, she shined like the Sun after a
tempest, and seemed more glorious, because her continued modesty kept her from
all insulting and vain glorious bravery.

Thus was the Marquess invested as it were with a new blessedness (...) she
continued in her old con^^^^^^ (...) admired and reverenced for her worth, as
he was esteemed and regarded for his wisdom: the Nobles applying themselves to
renown his estate, and the People proud they had such (...) to obey, especially
satisfied when the poor Ianicola (...) advanced to his Council, and made
Governor of his Palace; wherein he behaved himself so well, that for ten
years he still lived as he had been bred a Courtier; and died w^^^ (...)
memory of a good report. Grisel lasted thirty yeare^ after him: and all went to
their graves in good times the Country renowned over the world for their
admirable government, and famosed for this extraordinary wonder.

Non nulla difficilis (vt ita dicam) neque passio, neque (...) d^^^^uius non
sufferre queat pondus hominis natura.

Euripides Orestei. FINIS.

