Bellum Grammaticale.

A discourse of great war and dissension between two worthy Princes, the Noune
and the Verb, contending for the chief place or dignity in Oration.

Very pleasant and profitable.

Turned into english by W. H.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider street, at the
sign of the Mermayde.

ANNO 1569.

GASPAR AVIATVS Cremonensis.
LEctor candide, quid legis Thyesten?
Saeuas Colchidas? auribus placebunt
Quae doctus cecinit magis Salernus
Andreas: dubios mouet tumultus
Verbi and Nominis, hinc and hinc furentum:
Hunc (Lector) lege, fabulae facessant:
Hic prompti Ciceronis est facultas:
Hic sunt ridiculi sales, iocique:
Quid stas? hunc rigidi legunt Catones.
HIERONYMVS FONDVLVS etiam Cremonensis.
Nominis et verbi Lector) stipe sumito bellu^,
Quo pax nulla quidem dulcior esse potest.
Bella recognosces, quoru^ sine partibus, hoc est
Eloquia, omnis homo cederet vsque feris.
Hic iocus Andreae defluxit ab ore Salerni,
Fluxerunt lepidi cum grauitate sales.
IDEM.
Ranaru^ et muru^ ta^ belle haud ponit Homerus,
Bella gigantaeas non ita Naso manus,
Andraeas quanta cum maiestate Salernus
Ingenij, Bellum Grammaticale canit.
CHRISTOPHORVS Simonetus.
Haec legate, and memori teneat certamina me^t^
Grammaticus, terso qui volet ore loqui.
Ad Lectorem.
Disce Puer, quando tempus permittit, and ipsa
Recte discendi causa parata datur.
Ordine tunc tua res poterit procedere recto,
Si been cunctorum singula facta notes.
Adsis ergo (Lector) si sit tibicura Latini
Fac properes dulceis imbibiturus aquas:
Aurea fluctifero sunt mersa monilia ponto,
Virtus ast nunquam mergier vlla potest.
Lectori.
Sith Time permits, refuse not, nor disdain
to learn a right such things as here be found:
For why? this Author first herein did take the pain,
hereby to show of Grammar rules the ground.
In order good thy works will then appear,
and from right rule not seem to swerve a jot.
If all the acts of these archieued here
accordingly thou well thou do weigh and note.
Come nigh therefore (I say) and take a taste
of pleasant liquours here detected plain,
If that thou covet speedily in haste,
of Latin style to choose the fruitful grain:
For all things fade, as brouches, gold and stone,
when virtue swimmes, and scapes to shore alone.
To the right worshipful Master Thomas Povvle esquier, Clerk of the Crown in
the Queens Majesty's honorable Court of Chauncerie, and one of the Six
Clerks of the same, William Hayward wishes health, with long life and
prosperity.
AS Seneca shamed not to recite the worthy saying of the Poet Hesiodus, so I
doubt not, but I may also (from so susscient authority, as by Seneca him self
in a certain Epistle by him alleged) partly seem to overthrow that most
horrible monster Ingratitude, and thoroughly to displace so unnatural
affection before he shall by entertainment in so simple an one as I, (not able
to be thankful) cause any part of oblivion for the benefits that have been
toward me in any part extended: For (as I remember) he says: Nullum efficium
magis quam referenda gratia, necessarium, that no duty is more necessary than
re^dred thanks to those yt have ministered such ample benefits as some have
bestowed: and to render thanks (says he) with greater mesure than they used
to receive commodities. For as Cicero says Lib. 1. de officijs, If rendered
thanks be due to such of whom we hope to be benefited, how much more then
is due to those by whom we have had already profit? Which albeit that I of my
self in every point am most unable to do, yet good will of ouermeasuring (if
possibility were in me) shall not seem utterly to be absent, neither thinking
that I can or am able to make any show of remuneration, and for that my
insufficiency is such as it is, it might seem on my part but presumption to
attribute any such worthiness unto him, that is altogether void of desiring
any such preeminence. Yet among diverse and sundry practices that by my poor
industry I have attempted, considering that commodity and friendly aid that
your worship has procured by your laborous travail toward that company, of
which I am a member: and then waying my great inability to requite in any way
the least part of your manyfold courtesies, I was dismayed to represent in this
place any part of them, least I should seem of the wise too greede of
commendation. But being imboldened with your favorable benevolence, and
accustomed courteous lenity employed toward al men: and making bold of your
woonted good will, that is, (and ever has been) ready to accept a simple
thing proffered and freely given, rather than to reject and cast off that which
is merely grounded of poor simplicity, after I had perused the rabble of my
poor labors, found among them this one, which then I was encoraged to
dedicate unto your gentleness, not for the worthiness thereof as concerning my
labor, but considering your worships mind often times with serious matters to
be encombred both in carfulness toward the weal public according to your
office, as also for the benefits of such poor men as I. Some thing therefore
after your earnest business, to revive and recreate your wearied mind with
honest learned and profitable mirth, I have presumed to offer this my little
labor unto your learned ears, it being the first fruits of an vnproined
orcharde, in readyng whereof, notwithstanding the unsavory sap of sundry
water boughs) may appear both learned and fruitful matter. And therefore I
chiefly took upon me to translate the same out of the french tongue, as erst
it was, for the like pleasure and pithinesse cause turned from out of Latin
into French, in which tongue it was first (by a right learned and famous man)
written and invented. In which devise is contained a most perfect show of
horrible and bitter contentions in the most fertile region and country of
Grammar, by variance that grew betwixt two high and mighty Princes,
possessors of the same, the Noune and the Verb. Nomen, with his Substantives,
and Adjectives, Commons and Propers: with also the nobles of the house of
masculines, with the worthiness of the Genealogy of Feminines, Neutres,
doubtfulles, and Epicines, the Heteroclites, with their noble Capitaines, and
Gentlemen, the Defectiues, and Redundantes, with his most mighty brother the
Pronoune, and his sworn stout warriors the Gentiles. Again Verbum with his
nobles, with the Participles, Modes and Tenses, with Gerundes and Supins, in
the great field of Conjunctions contending where they met for superiority in
government. Wherein although but spoke Allegorice, or rather written by the
figure Hypothesis, shows in part the troubles of a fained Common weal by
intestine and Civil contention sprung up in the same. With such pleasant
Metamorphosis and arde^t Allegories the ancient Poets used to beautify their
works, as Demosthenes, who used such covert fable against Philip, that
required ten of the Athenienses Orators) saying how the Wolf persuaded and
besought the Shephierdes to tie up their Dogs, and so to joined with them in
friendship. Which when the Shephierds had granted, the Wolf then as it were
with a covered and licensed crafty cruelty spoiled their flocks. So wrote
Esope, Horace, and diverse other, which although but in part as Fables, (as this
after a sort is) is yet in some respect duly to be noted, as Saint Ambrose
affirms, saying: Ei si fabula vim veritatis non habeat, tamenratione^ habet,
vt iuxta eam veritas manifestari possit: that is: Allthough a fable have not
the strength of the truth, yet has it a reason, that by it the truth may be
uttered. Such was the manner of philosophers, as Aulus Gellius says, to allure
men's minds to the understanding of the truth, which thing now as it is but
fained, yet knowing it to be devised of so learned a man at the first, thought
with my self, that those which had capacity might reap some fruit of his
trauellous toils. And again, supposing that if the same were englished, some
might the easlier gather the sense of the first author. Therefore as the
Tra^slater thereof out of Latin did for the recreation of a noble personage
labor in the same, so I for the pleasant profit of sundry of my country men,
so duly as I could after my president, turned it into English. And therefore
as first and chiefest (it being also the first of my labors) I exhibit it to
your worship, not as a gift (for any part of my deserving) worthy to be
received: but by way of duty offered, of mere good will, making you the
patron of this my first enterprised attempt: choosing rather to suffer the
reproach of the wise and the curious carping check of Momus and his mates,
with the pernicious taunt of privy parasites, than to seem altogether
obliuious of my duty, and so be accounted ungrateful. Which poor and slender
thing if it please your worship to receive with a friendly aspect at my simple
hands: your favorable encouragement shall hereafter procure me to finishe some
greater effect to the benefit of my Countrymen (I mean such as are desirous
to employe their labor in reading:) And in especially to manifest Gods doing
in me, who^ in the mean season I beseech to conduct and guide your goodness
forth in that well doing that he has already begone in you (in the suppression
of godless games, the very nourice of noughtinesse: the sufferance of which
are the decay of Common wealths, the corruption of youth, the breach of
brotherhead and all true dealyng.) I cease to speak of such singularity as
all men shall see ensue of your daily endeavors, and of that due commendation
that may be said of your Princely practice, that maynteyner of honest exercise:
whereof right worthily your worship is master, being a most perfect president
in that practice (I mean of that laudable ancient and noble science of
Shooting in the Long bow) for every one to follow in effect. The necessary use
whereof, how needful it is to be looked to, how beneficial the use thereof
has been to this our country, how dangerous the neglecting thereof is, and
how hurtful the lack of vsyng the same of our youth in England has been,
is too apparaunt. The almighty ease us, whom I beseech so to endue you with
present consolation hoped for in Christ, in this life your days may be long:
And that after this life, your lotte (as David says) may fall in a good
ground that is, in Life everlasting. Amen.

Your worships daily welwisher. William Haywarde.

The Preface upon the historical discourse of the Grammar war, first made in
Latin by the learned Lord Andrew Guarna of Salerne, and after translated into
French, and now for the worthiness of the history turned into English.
THe first and ancient Philosophers that wrote their Poesies covertly hidden
under subtle and wily matter, did constitute Pallas the daughter of Jupiter,
borne in her Sovereign head to be goddess of wisdom said Minerue, and of
war, called Enyo or Bellona. Gyuing hereby to understand that of one and the
same beginning, in one time altogether and in one substance are two principal
things inseparately joined together: which two properties are so knitte, that
the one without the other is of no force, and the other without his fellow, of
small or no account: Yea, they are the principles whereby men attain to the top
of honor, and famous felicity, aduauncing mean men to honor in their life
time, and immortal fame after death. They are learning and martial prowess.
Of these two together Noble Greece made separation in his two metropolitanes
when the City of Athens flourished in learning, and the city of Sparta or
Lacedemonia glorious in feats of arms. The noble fame of the Romans grew by
the one, and by the other they did always defend them, so that they did
successively greatly set store by them. The worthy, valiant, and myghtie
Eloquent Caesar was decored with them both, and by them did eternise his
Renoune. Behold (gentle Reader) now these two so worthy things, which are
no less principals to the government of Empires, Realms, Reipublikes, and
for all estates of the world to be aptely understood, which did so much ennoble
Greece, so greatly honor the Romans, and eternise the fame of the great
Caesar, are in this present small volume comprised, compact together by the
industrious and pleasant Artifice of the first Author, under an angry
Argument, and Historical narration of the Grammar war, of this pleasant and
figured history, no less profitable than delectable. Lucian an eloquent Greek
Aucthor made the first draughtes in the battle of the Alphabet letters: but
this Author has waded further even unto verbes and Nounes, being principal
heads of Oration, and to the adherents of speech, as well to the congruate
word, (being the opener and the declaratiue of the sense) as otherwise, wherein
rests al art and knowledge, wherein also all the wisdom of man is
comprised: shaping and fourming these two heads, and the auxiliate ayding
parties with such feigned personages and pretty properties so apt and to them so
quick in quality, that he gives life, body, weapon and armor to dead
words, yea, and sounding voice, to substances inanimate and without soul: so
that the Reader in the lecture of this (though feigned) narration and dreadful
discovery, shall deem them no more to be vocal words, but by a strong
judgment shall think them dapperlye disguised, being transfourmed into
lively person, going, speaking, and sharply resoning with continual terrors
of martial expedicion and exploites, with allegorical conflictes of bloody
battle, not only in hostile contention abroad, but also in civil, yea,
and intestine Wars at home: so that in the discovery hereof he is nothing
obliuious of any thing that appertains to the deduction and safe guiding of
so great affairs, even from the first causes and entermixed medlies of their
adventures, unto the last end of all their attemptes and endeavors, with all
their circumstances, all their tumults and vproares, with their doubtfulnesse
of victory among many martialistes, how of bloody battle diverse loss and
dangers do follow, and how in the end final peace ensues. All which
matters be so properly penned, and so cunningly compact in this tragedy, that
the wars of the Peloponnenses, and the civil wars of the Affricanes in
Thucide, in Salust, and Lucan, are peradventure more high and diffusedlye
described: But with more art or more compendiouslye, I am sure they are not.
So that it is sothly to be said, that our Author through the excellency of
his learned wisdom, does as the good Geometricians do, which the invincible
greatness of the heavens and the earth do reduce in a simple circuit,
describing the same in a small sphere or manuel compass. So he has placed
the mighty, huge, and fearful factes of arms under the figure of so small a
thing as of the congruitie or discordaunce of words in oracion, joining letters
with weapons, teaching the art militaire with the art litteraire, so well,
and so exactlye, that the reader beside the delyght and pleasure that he shall
have in the reading of so pleasant an Allegory, shall receive further
benefit: for herein is represented in one conteipt two understandings knit
together, the one proper and natural, the other tropique and figured. Beside
this, he shall comprehend in this same very substance and by the only labor
of one reading, those two so worthy things above remembered, that do eternise
the fame of their fellows, that is lovers of learning, and prudent
martialistes. The science litteraire, and militaire, that is to say, the art
of Grammar, yea the graundmother of al arts and sciences, and the art
militaire of deduced wars, under pleasant Metaphorical figures, transported
and turned, bereauing the mind of the litterall understanding of small things
verbal, to the consideration of greater, more royal and real, does
manifestly show by example the ambicious mouings, the imperiate desire of
princes to have government, the tumultes and parcialities of peoples, the
profitable and perverse counsel of sundry counsailers, the seemly
sentences, and modest messages of the artificial erraundes on both parts,
their enterprised attemptes and martial orders, the somoning of soldiers, the
chartes of defiaunce, the denouncing of Heraldes, the high and stately
stomachs of the adverse parties ready to join Battle, the seeking of
alliance in extremity, the compact confederated of cuntrimen, the flights,
treasons, espies, embushements their sudden entrappes and skirmishes, the
ordinances of arms, the placing of the camp, the pitching of their arrayes,
the noble chering of the captains to their soldiers, the taking of towns,
the marching of their men, the cruel conflicts and worthy feats of arms on
all sides, the lamentable loss of Capitaynes, the cruel combat of the
fighters, the great slaughter on both parts, the fearful flying on all
sides, the doubtful meetinges of many, the indifferency of their victory, and
the final pernicious accidents that ensue through the wars to both sides, the
robbing, the reauing, the rapme and disorder that is then in ure, the
depopuling of inhabitate cuntries, the desolate destruction that diverse are
damnified by the commodities and advantages that one realm enjoys through
the detriment of an other: and contrarily the infinite vtilities that ensue,
through peace and concord, to all realms and reipublikes. All which things
are by wonderful cunning, and pleasant fygures, by most exquisite rule and
perfect method, treated summarily in this book, first written in his own and
pure Latin tongue, and after (for the pleasure and profit that therein may be
gathered) was translated into our english tongue, through the commandment of
a learned personage, one who is no less a lover of learning, than virtuous in
condition, who for the worthiness of his example is to be followed as a meet
patron of human courtesy.

Wherefore (gentle reader) when thou art delighted with the profitable lecture
of this historical discourse, attribute the thankfulness of thy good will to
be the causer of this english translation, wherein albeit that there be not the
same sweetness in our phrase that it has in his own tongue, yet I doubt not
but it shall seem that I digress but easily from mine Aucthor: For as the
learned know, it is an absurd and hard matter in this treatise properly to
english the greatest part of those words that touch the argument in apt phrase
correspondent to the Latin, since the same could not be done by a learned
translator into the french, which tongue does nearer appropriate it than ours:
Therefore whereas of some I may be thought little to alter in translation from
the latin Aucthor, therein may the Reader judge me to follow the French
phrase who is my patron partly in most of my translation, and when I shall
seem in any point to digress from the french translator, I do it the nearer
to follow the first Aucthor, so that the Reader I hope will judge
indifferently of my doings. Wherefore in my translation I thought it requisite
(yea, and also no less necessary) to leave the most part of the words of
this argument in their own tongue, especially for that this discourse of the
Grammar war was made upon the Grammar of the latin tongue first, and not of
the french. What will it then avail (will some say) to have translated it
into english? whereto in the first place it may thus be answered, that for
that it was the free good will of the translator, that in his labor on this
behalf thought not to offend, neither to do wrong or displeasure to any, but
that through his mean the simple and unlearned english readers, as well as the
learned latinists, might enjoy part of the pleasure that is had in the lecture
of this delectable discourse of this figured war, and bloudlesse battle,
without mortal shot, sweat or Cannon poulder. And furthermore that his
meaning was, for the utility of our english children beginning to study the
latin tongue, who reading this pleasant fight in their own tongue (as the
French in theirs) might learn by way of mirth and merry pastime, the
principal points of the Romayne Grammar: Finally the same might serve for an
exempler as well historical for the instruction and guide of martial affairs,
as moral, therein to consider the harms that ensue through the dissension of
Princes and great Lords, parents, kinsmen or neighbors, how the communalties of
realms and cu^tries can not easelye profit in any wealth and abundance,
without trafike and quiet passages one to another, and how dissension
procures diverse dangerous damages to them and theirs: Showing also on the
other side the singular benefits that peace procures, what commodities are
enjoyed by the uniformity of kings and Princes reigning in one regiment or
country lovingly together in one faith, law, and tongue, friendly as one:
which things (as I suppose) are the principal causes why this book was first
compiled by mine aucthor, which by chance happening into my hands, and by me
over read, to my singular delight in both tongues, determined with my self to
participate part of my understanding to the youth of my nation, through the
request of a friend, who might have commanded me. Wherefore if I epsy the
friendly receipt hereof, in no less grateful part, than it was friendly
favored of some, I shall be the readier encouraged to bid thee hereafter to
some better banquet, in the mean while let the courteous reader use a friendly
guestes part, not mislyking any thing that is set freely before him. And
albeit that this my translation be not so exquisitly englished on my part as
many better learned can do, yet in consideration of my painful good will, I
doubt not your friendly receipt of the same. And though that the french tongue
(whereout I extracted this work) in adages and breef terms have an easier
conclusion of speech than our english tongue, yet let the Reader be assured
what soever terms be altered (if any be) the matter is perfect, pleasant and
profitable to the reader, and much matter contained in this small Book, both
of delight and delicate lyking, such as the gentle reader may gather great
fruit, wisdom, and worthiness by, if he apply his dilygence thereunto.
And for my part I bestowed my labors in this behalf, not to win fame or
favor, but to bestow my leysures well and to fruitful exercise, to the
benefit of my country men, and to encorage those that can do better to the
like exercise. And if any unfit words happen to be espied of better and more
eloquent heads, yet I trust that such will not condemn a good work, for an
ill wrighter, neither a good word for an ill speaker. What or how effectual
matter is contained in this Book, in the sequel is manifest.

Farewell.
The discourse of the Grammar war: between two Kings, the Noune, and the
Verb, contending for the chief place in Oration, wherein thou shall see the
Verb to prevail.
THere is none so simple in judgment, that doubts the soil of the Grammar
to be the fairest and happiest of all the renoumed parts and provinces of the
world, as well for the pleasantness of the place wherein it is situate, being
in good and holsesome air, and aboundaunt in all fruits and other good
things, without which this mortal life may not easilye be passed: As also for
that she has always and ever, been the Nourse and bringer up of all people
of renoune. For even as in this age, even so long time heretofore, the custom
and manner ever was in all lands and countries (except among the rude and
barbarous nations) where any were espied of prone and ready nature, bent
toward forward wit, they were sent thither to be taught and instructed, and
perfitly to learn the most holy and learned sciences: For by this only way
and passage is the entry and access to the highest countries, and noble
houses, as Dialectice (that is Rethorike) Philosophy, that is learned wisdom,
and Theology, that is the most high and excellent knowledge in divinity. In
so much that unless they enter through the Province of Grammar, no soul were
able to attain to the worthy secreats of the other provinces. And albeit that
the same Regions abound in all pleasure, yet not withstanding, it is so
environed about with high mountains, and such sharp rocks, right difficile
and hard to be got up upon, that hardlye without a good guide, any may ever
attain to the plain and pleasant path of them. And therefore because mankind
should not be restrained from so necessary a benefit, the good and laudable
custom ever was, and yet reasteth to the kings of the said land, to send
abroad through every part of the universal world, some of their expert
knights and worthy Capitaines of old bands, properly called Pedagoges and
Schole masters, that they might aid others, and surely conducte them of
tender age to the princelye palaces of the said kings, (as for the mighty,
and such as now draw toward age, hardely suffer to be taught of any,) to
the end that the youth there being taught in the sciences of the Greek and
Latin Minerue, might the easlier and more lightly ascend and go over the
foresaid countries. There have all learned Greeks and Latins made their
apprentishode, who by their worthy writings, or by the act of others, are
immortalised with renoumed fame. Being there thus well taught and learned, they
have afterward so florishinglye lived through the high praise of their
illustrious and splendant acts, that they living, were unto all men in their
time great setters forth of virtuous examples and after they were dead (yet as
alive) showed to those that suruiued the as it were by poynting with their
finger, the right path and ready way to attained honorable life, and immortal
fame*

But although that this land of Grammar be none other but indeuidate and
without partiality, yet nevertheless there are two mighty kings, that there
reign and govern, that is to weete, the Verb and the Noune. The Verb has
to name Amo, and the Noune Poeta. Who a very long time reigned together in
such concord and quietness, that to form Oration perfect, wherein the beauty
of them both (the highest place of the one, and the chiefest seat of the
other) depends no dissension, displeasure or contencion was ever heard
between them: For in all their territory there grew nothing more esteemed,
more worthy, or more sound, than Oration, which being beautified with the
most coulors of sundry flowers, and decked with the most fair and fine
figures, and with the most sweet and perfumed Buds of set Roses, was of such
singular comeliness and authority, that she not only drew unto her all
mankind (when the same is right and aptly applied) but may also withdraw any
of the Gods which way she will wind them. By reason whereof Euripides
says. That which force could not gain, that fair speech did soon attain:
Pirrhus also used sometime to say, that Cyneas did win more towns with his
tongue and comely speech, than he with his wars. These two kings then being
in such concord, as all the affairs of Grammar were in good appearance and
better estate, it happened that for a small thing dissension sprang between
them, whereby upon a very sudden, all was bewrapped in uproar and martial
dyspleasures: For what harm is that that wine and insaciate eating cause not?
That and so great amity and union between these two Princes was so
overthrown at one only banquet, wherein they were both droncken: and ebrietie
set them in so great ennimities one against another, that either of them,
pricked forward with ambitious desire of regiment (as wild Bulls slong of
gadde flies) almost utterly ever turned their own realms, and the noble empire
of Grammar.

But now let us show how their debate happened, to the end that every one
may know, that there is no band or knot of amity so strong, that desire of
superiority may not break. And therefore the old Dennis used not causeless
to say, that even he that has the Lordshippe in his lap, has cause himself
to fear, and to beware of friends: seeing that it is certain, that every man
loves rather to be served, than to serve other.

As these two Kings on a time were at a banquet, in the midst of the hoate
Summer, near to a pleasant and clear spring, having the water bancke on the
one side, and the other most pleasant and singulerly shadowed with the
branches of green Willowes and high Plane trees, after they had sufficiently
banquetted, warmed with wine, and lightened with drincking, a question arose
between the^, to weete, whether of the^ two were greatest in authority and of
most importance to perform Oration? Then the Verb minding to hold the
worthiest place, was sharpelye withstoode of the Noune, affirming, that without
him, Oration and speech might not be, and that through him altogether, the same
is understood and of better grace. And what do thou (said he) without me in
Oration? if I withholde me a part never so little, the hearers understand thee
no more than one that were dombe and spoke not. Gather awhile a small part of
speech without me, and do that the hearers may understand that which thou
speak. Doubtless if I be not there for an Interpreter, none may so much as
guess the least thing of thy meaning, Moreover thou should note, that in so
much as I am elder than thou, so much more am I approved worthiest. Who is he
that knows not the Noune, before the Verb: Or who is he that is ignorant,
how the beginning of the Noune is more ancient than the Verb? It is
infallible, that God made all things, who if he made all, made also the Verb.
Now God is a Noune and not a Verb: wherefore now of consequence, by the Noune
were all things made, yea, Oration it self was made of God, and so the Noune.
As for thee, O thou Verb (that art so proud) thou have thy calling of me:
have thou never red, that among the Sons of Women, is not a greater than John
Baptist? this is Gods sentence, it is not lawful to go against it. Wherefore
if none be greater than John, for that it is written that his name is John, and
again that his name was John, it is apparaunt to be seen, that there is not,
neither may any thing else, be greater than the Noune. I could allege to this
matter six hundredth places, whereby it is proved clearer than the day, that
as in worthiness and antiquity, even so in autthoritie and chief place the
Noune is preferred before the Verb. Al which things I set and leave a part,
to the end that men think me not to precede the Verb more through much
babbling, than of just cause. O Poeta (answered the Verb) I maruayled before
now, why that Divine Plato had expulsed thee out of his common Weal: But now
knowing how shameless and light thou art, so to intermixe the holy scripture
among thy follies: I know well that the learned and wise Plato judged rightlye
of thee. For had not he exiled thee with many other, forth of the reipublike
that he ordained, thou had by thy false ceremonies, fearful Gods, and
other things corrupted the civil manners of his citizens. For what pernicious
thing durst not thy great pride and arrogance, enterprise and attempt? Yea
seeing that by thy devised deceiptes, and false writhed witnesses, through force
writhed from holy scripture, thou laborest to cast me down from the dignity of
the chiefest place, which I have long time in this land possessed.

But certainly, for that it shall not seem to thee, that thou alone art
learned, I will easlye allege more manifest and plain testimonies of ye same
holy scripture that maintain mine authority, I will set here for most the
very beginning of that evangelical Scripture, where it is thus said. In the
beginning was the word, and the word was with GOD, and God was the word.
Open thine ears now, wherefore hidest thou thy face so? God (said he) was
the word, and moreover, all things are made by him: And without him nothing
was made. It is not therefore the Noune then that made all things, but the
Verb. Again, god was a Verb and not a Noune. Moreover, by the Word the
Heavens were made firm and sure, and all their powers.

What will thou now say? There is no mean to defend thee by holy allegations,
but you may perceive them to make for me, and not for thee. But let us bend to
those points that aptliest tend to our cause: Tell me I pray thee, whence
comes to thee this folly and madness? And whence have thou so suddenly taken
such stomach and heart of grace, that thou dare usurp upon thee the
worthiest place in Oration? Know thou not that all comeliness, beauty and
sweetness comes of me alone? and that the Noune is always ruled of the
Verb, and not that the Verb is ruled of the Noune. The comelye featnesse of
the Verb is that, that beautifieth and enricheth Oration: and if I govern
thee not therein, thou shall be half handed and of no force. Know thou how
to make a construction, wherein forthwith the chief place is not given me?
Behold all men know, that I only that hold the seigniorie over the Verbes,
can without the aid of any other make perfect Oration. Wherefore then speak
thou so impertinentlye? And (as Horace says) why throwest thou so thy proud
and disdainful six cornered words? who art thou? what art thou? of what
force? or how great? not of such authority as thou boastest of I am sure,
that so go puffed and swollen, that it is marvel thou burstest not in the
midst. I am (thou will say) the King of the Nounes. But what is thy name?
thou will answer Poeta. And what is Poeta other then a pratler, a seller of
gaudes, a deviser of fables, a master of mischief, a brabler, a Liar, a
dronckerd, and a foolish dolte, that coloreth that which is truth, and puts
forth falshoode, and such a one as by thy prattling, fillest and perturbest all
the world. Which also by thy chat vsurpest so much authority among the
common and simple sort, that thou dare strive for the dignity against the
renoumed stock of the Verbes. Folishly do those fathers that give thee their
children to be taught of: for what is in thee whereby the youth may be encited
to grace and virtuous encorageme^t, but the Stews of ye adulterous Jupiter,
the ielosie of Juno, and the Whoordom of Venus, and of the Ruffian Mars, and
such goodlye devises imagined of thine own brain, that having droncke a
little more than well, thou, as filled with a divine ghost, and ouerladen with
wine, madlike or diuelishly, dare mix heaven with earth, and earth with
heaven.

At these words Poeta the King, all fiered in Ire, not able to suffer the
shame nor the injury that was said of him, answered thus: O thou most
mischeuous head of man, dare thou speak so boldly such contentious things
of us? And there withal caught a Cup in his hand, which had violentlye hit
him on the face, had not one of the standers by, (holding him by the arm)
turned the stroke a part. It is not to be doubted now, that in ye rage wherein
both parts were then, but that words were no blows: but certain of the
elder sort and wisest came upon the same, and they bare away the said kings
all droncken into their Palaces: and on the morrow after yt the friends of
the parties were assembled, there was great inquiry and disputation of the
contention happened the day before. Then of the part of the Nounes was
sharpelye blamed, the open throat and unbeseeming talk of the king of Verbes,
and the most part of the Nounes, especially the younger of them, maruellously
muttered, saying that the tongue of King Amo ought to be tamed, and to give him
to understand, that the mighty majesty of the Nounes was never subject to
such reproach and contumely.

But although the Elders that were the^ there present, especially Terence,
admonished them that nothing might be unadvisedly done, but that it was
requisite rather first to take counsel than weapon in that point, following
the wiser sort: yet not withstanding, all the Nounes with their King, were so
fleshed to fight, that it was forthwith fully determined and accorded to offer
battle to the Verbes: And thereupon was sent forth a Trumpet to the King Amo,
assuredly to denounce and indict open war against him. On the Verbes part
was no wiser counsels held, for when all their nobility were come together,
there was nothing else treated of among the^, than to defend the dignity of the
Verbes in the land of Grammar, and to depresse and throw down the pride of
the Nounes. And behold, hereupon came the Harolde of the King Poeta, who
diligently declared the charge of his errande. They answered, that with good
will they received the defiaunce, and from thence forward all their minds
were bent wholly toward martial affairs. Afterward the King of Verbes sent
trumpets and messengers to all nations and lands that were under his
seigniorie, commanding that all such as were able to bear weapon, should be
found ready in good order at the day assigned.

First before all other came Quando the Duke of Aduerbes, with six of his
Capitaines, Vbi Quo Vnde Qua Quorsum and Quousque. Quorsum and Quousque were
companied with their bands, and under the first Ensign were these renoumed
Champions. Hic Illic Isthic Intus Fores Ibi Ibidem Sicubi Alicubi Alias Alibi
Vsque and Nusquam. Under the second, Huc Illuc Istuc Intro For As Alio Nequo
Aliquo Siquo Illo Eo and Eodem. Under the third, Hac Illac Istac Alia Nequa
Illa and Eadem. Under the fourth, Horsum Illorsum Istorsum Introrsum Extrorsum
Dextrorsum Sinistrorsum Aliorsum Aliquorsum and Deorsum. Under the fifth,
Hactenus, Hucusque, Eousque Vsquemodo and Vsque nunc. To the sixth band the
Captain himself bare ye Ensign, marching in the midst of his men, so that
two of the said bands were in the forewarde, and the other three at the tail.

Many other Aduerbes served for forerunners, and these discovered the ways and
served for Partisans, the rest covered the wings and kept that the bands
marched not out of array. The names of them are Peregre Pone Super Supra Inter
Infra Extra Citra and Vltra, with many other. After them came other Aduerbes
great of quality, quantity and number, among whom were those hideous swering
Aduerbes: as Aedipol Enimuero Ecastor Mediussidius and Profecto. Also the
calling Aduerbes as Heus etc. ye answerers as Hem. The laughers as, Ha Ha He.
The denying Aduerbes, Minime and Nequaquam: which Nequaquam, albeit he were
valiant and greatly trained up in the wars, was yet notwithstanding the most
untrue and deceiptfullest of them all, and would never say truth but through
constraynt: The Greeks called him Holophant, which is as much as altogether a
denier, or deceitful interpreter: Many mo things could I report of this
Ruffler Nequaquam, that most dangerous and hurtful beast, but because that ye
words at these days are not in common term I willingly cease of the^,
believing doubtless that it is lost labor to warn the Sheep how he ought to
keep him out of ye wolfes danger. Now these Aduerbes were armed with three
kind of armure, for they had kind for a buckler, signification for an
headpiece, and figure for a sword. Many other Aduerbes came to ye aid of their
King as Indicatiues, Freque^tatiues, Meditatiues, Diminutiues and
Denominatiues, with their bands, which were not to be co^tempned. The mighty lord
of Nounes animales (being Nounes out of rule, yt bear great sway and
lordshippe in the borders of Grammar) were not last and hindmost: doubtless
worthy men of War, but yet not able to hold their array: they are called,
Sum Volo Fero and Edo. By reason whereof it was permitted the^ to pitch their
tents in any part of the Camp where they would, least they might raise
uproar among the soldiers. The nation of the Verbes defectiues came also
thither very brave, and in goodly order, Memini, Noui, Cepi and Odi: Also Vale
Salve Aio Inquit Faxo Cedo, being all armed point device ready to join
battle. After them followed all the Verbes actiues, clothed in bone and
bravery, with also the Neuters, with the Deponents, Commons and Impersonals: Al
of them of sundry fourms and strange languages, and were armed with Genders
Tenses Moodes Kinds Persons and Numbers.

The King Amo after he had thus assembled his host, pitched his camp in the
wide playnes of Conjunctions, in a place called Copula, and encamped his host
there, near to the host of Disiunctiues called Sine: And divided his Host
into four coniugations, giving to every of them a meet place (except to
certain familiar Verbes who were encharged to bear the Baggage of the
Infinitiues: Their names are, Incipit, Desinit, Debet, Vult, Potest, Iubet,
Audet, Nititur, Tentat and Dignatur, with such like: this office was assigned
them, for that they were willing thereto, and had sturdie strength and ability.
Last of all came certain Verbes extract from high place, and of great
dignity, as Pluit Ningit Fulgurat Tonat Fulminat and Aducsperascit: bringing
with them certain bands of their most worthy Champions: But the Gerundes with
the Supines, forsaking the Nounes, came and yielded to the Verbes.

When Poeta King of Nounes heard ye great preparation of his adversary,
fearing to be surprised with some sudden alarm, if he abode the fury and
force of his enemies without purueyaunce to defend him, commanded all the
Subjects of his Realm, that in the spediest manner they might, they should
make themselves ready to be in the field armed, and so aptly equipped, as in
best wise were possible for them. Then to the aid of the king of Nounes, first
came the Dukes of the Pronounes, as the nearest kinsemen, who for the most
part were often times Princes Ego, Tu, Tui, being of the Blood royal, and of
the stock of the Arsacides, with whom were, Meus Tuus Suus Noster and Vester,
Nostras and Vestras, Ille Ipse Iste Hic and Haec. All the Pronounes were parted
in many fourmes, and under sundry Ensigns. Some were Primatiues, other
Deriuatiues, some possessiues, and some gentiles. After them came the right
worthy Articles, who had a long time haunted the wars, of which the first was
Hic Haec Hoc: The second Hic et Haec: the third Hic et hac et hoc, armed with
Genders, Numbers, Figures, Persons, and Cases. After them came the graunde
Capitaynes of Interrogatiues, Infinitiues, and Relatiues, Quia qui que quod vel
quid: and these joined to the host. These were the general referenders of all
the land of the king of Nounes, with whom were all the Relatiues and
demonstratiues, divided into two bands: that is to weete, in Idenditie, and
diversity. In the first were, Is Suus Ipse Ille Idem. In the second, Caeter
Alius Reliquus and Alter. The Prince of the accidental relatiues was Qualis,
under whom fought Quantus quot quotuplex quatenus quotenus quotisuriam cuias
and cuigena. The Queen of the Prepositions called Ad, came thither also with
Ab and In, the husbands of Nounes Casuals, and they brought with them three
Ensigns of worthy Amazones. Under the first were A ab abs cum coram clam de e
ex pro prae palam sine absque tenus, which served to the Ablative Cases. Under
the second were Ad apud ante aduersum aduersus cis citra circum circa contra
erga extra inter intra infra iuxta ob pone per propter prope secundum post
trans vltra praeter supra circiter vsque secus penes, all serving to the
accusative cases: But In sub supra and subter served to both cases, to weete,
to the Ablatiues, as well as to the Accusatiues. Under the third were, Di dis re
se an con, whose office was to puruey potatio^ for the soldiers, for it was
then Lent. Who albeit they were by composition inseparable, least they should
at any time be void of that was enjoined them, were yet so inconstant, that
sundry times they claue to the Nounes, and some while to the Verbes: and
therefore they were accounted the common roges of the camp.

Now the Nounes thus divided by bands, marched in goodlye array, that is to
weete, the Substantives, likewise the Adjectives, Nounes proper, appellatiues,
and participles: After whom were the brave and rich comparatiues,
superlatiues, possessiues, patronymiques, gentiles, (which were noble) numerals,
and multiplying, which governed the outward borders. Every of them were
divided by five declinations, to weete, by the first, the second, the third,
ye fourth and fifth, and they were all armed with kinds, genders, number,
figures and cases. All the said bands reduced in one, Poeta the King of the
Nounes, carried his host into the same plain of conjunctions, and pitched his
camp on the other side of the said river Sine: So that between both the
hosts was nothing but the River: By reason whereof, sundry times there
happened sharp skirmishes, between those that went there to the water,
notwithstanding yet without open battle, for that had both the Kings
forbidden, because all needful necessaries for the wars, were not yet very
ready.

Now either of these Kings coueted to induce to his part the Participle: a
man doubtless of very great authority through all the land of Grammar, yea,
in puissance and dignity, altogether next and nearest the King: who without
doubt was able also to cause victory to whether side he would wind him. By
reason of this, as well the Verb as ye Noune, left nothing unassayed, either of
them hoping to have him on their side. Poeta ye king of Nounes putting forth
foremost, wrote to him in this manner. I doubt not (O my brother) but that thou
know with what pride and puffed stomach Amo the King of the Verbes is risen
against me, and against the dignity of Nounes, and by what law I mind to
occupy the chiefest seats to construe oration: For which thing, seeing that
the same does so much move and displease me, I am forced to take arms and set
soldiers in the field, that his pride being beaten down, we may keep our
seigniorie in his right, uncorrupted. And since thou know how much thou
art bounden to the nation of the Nouns, and what great benefit thou have
received of us, as genders and cases, numbers and figures: Thou shall therefore
do a work worthy of thy faithfulness and friendship, if with thy men of
war and thy soldiers, thou come to join with us to defend our common
Titles, our common riches, and common hope. For if the dignity and lordship
of Nounes be destroyed, think not thou to find any sure place in all the
land of Grammar, and so fare well: Beseching thee to set forward thy coming in
the spediest wise thou may.

On the other side, Amo the King of Verbes wrote to the said Participle in
this wise. I know very well (O dear brother) how thou art by our enemies
very instantly solicited to be on their part, to war against us: And albeit
that we have hope, that by thy singular wisdom thou will not do any thing so
rash or unadvisedly, yet nevertheless it seems good unto us, to admonish and
advertise thee, that thou consider in thy self, what commodities thou have
received of us, and what increase of dignity the Verbes have made thee, in
making thee partaker of their Tenses and significations, Numbers and figures.
And if thou have any small benefit of ye Nouns, those that thou receiuest of us
are much more, yea and also greater. Thou shall therefore do best if thou
repair to our happy fold, not alone to keep and defend us, and the
lordship of the Verbes, but also thou thy self, and thine. For thus think
with thy self, that if I have the worst, mine enemies will not withholde them
from running upon thy lordshippe and turn their victorious arms (which God
forbid) against thee: that they all alone may with their mad will run in and
spoil all the land of Grammar. Farewell.

The Participle after that he had red ye said letters of the two kings,
thought now of the one, then of the other, and had sundry thoughts in his
head, considering with him self that he could hold part with neither of
them, without great and evident loss of his own goods. Contrarily if he
should seem to minister, he might not only enjoy the favor of them both,
but also that he rather wished, to see them low brought through the hazard of
the wars, that they being destroyed, he might afterward alone without
resistaunce, possess the said land of Grammar: and therefore thought good to
dissemble, feeding them with fair words, until he knew who should have the
better, therefore he wrote to them in this manner. I have most puissant kings,
received your letters, and I have red them with great sorrow and trouble of
mind, knowing that between two such princes so knit, is fallen such discord,
that you can not withholde you from overthrowing through cruel war, your own
lordships, and that renoumed empire. But wherewith are ye vexed? or what harm
holds you? and whence comes this madness? I beseech you for god his sake
consider a little whither you go. How will our common enemies (those beasty
citizens of ignorance, and that slouenlike people of Barbary) rejoice,
understanding the strength of their enemies to be so wasted through their own
contentious quarelling? I adjure by the high Gods above and beneath, that ye
withholde you, and forbear such deadly, mortal, and abominable battayles,
least that through a damnable desire of superiority, you bewray in vprores and
slanders the goodliest province of all the world. But if destiny will have it
so, and that you be so fully purposed to debate your quarrel by the sword, I
purpose to take part with neither of you, seeing my lordship depends in part
of the Verb and in part of the Noune. And for that I am greatly bound to you
both, with what I can I will aid you both with vitayles, munitions, and other
necessary things: But as touching facts of arms, I will withholde me, and I
will cause my Soldiers to be assembled in arms, to keep in at home, that
through incourses no injury be done by any, on the frountiers of mine own
land: I pray God give you better counsel. Fare ye well.

And albeit that he had thus written to them, this subtle and wily for
nevertheless, through all possible means he might, maintained the quarrel,
and by his privy letters incited the minds of both nations egerly to ytche
against other, hoping thereby (as I have said) that he should easily attain
to the seigniorie of the whole Grammar after their total destruction. Then
having assigned a day for his subjects to be assembled in, was in a most trim
and brave company. First the Terminat in Ans ens dus rus tus sus xus, were
there with the Nounes verbal in Tor trix and such like, which were neighbors
of the Verbes and Nounes, and joined with the Participles. Likewise the
Gerundes and Supines, to avoid these civil wars, withdrew them also from the
Verbes, and fled to the participles. These things thus appointed, the
Participle sent great gifts to both sides, to be always and still in their
favor, and first he sent to the Verb these under named neuter passiues. To
weete Gaudeo soleo audeo sio prandeo Coeno iuro titubo placeo nubo careo moereo
poto taceo and quiesco. To ye King of Nouns he gave the ending in Tor and trix.
He sent also for wagis to the host of Verbes an hundredth wagons of preter
Tenses, of Present and future tenses. Item a thousand Camels laden with
figures, simples, composites, and decomposites: And to the Noune he sent by the
river Sieve, Ten ships laden with nominative and genitive cases, with as many
singular and plural numbers, and a great number of other, masculine genders,
feminines, neuters commons and all. This done, he held him in his country with
his men of war, awayting to whether side fortune would turn her. In the
mean while, these two warlike kings having very well made provision of all
things necessary to give battle, awayted nothing else than some trim
occasion to commence the war. But it chanced that two of ye worthiest towns
of Grammar, (to weete) A and V were taken vnappointed by the king of Verbes,
albeit that then all towns were indifferently subject, and paid equal
tribute to both the said kings, as much to the one, as to the other, being
moreover in nothing more in service to the one King, than to the other.

When Poeta the king heard this, he took by the like policy three other touns
EIO: The other hearing this, kept the^ to their strongest watch, and keeping
their liberty, were common to both parts, whose names are, BCDFGLMNPQRS TXZ, and
of them doubtless comes all the force of Grammar. To either of the Kings
were given two dipthongs to be their trumpets, for they were taught by sound
of trump, to move the spirit of all the soldiers for to fight. Ae and oe
served to the King of Nounes, Au and eu to the Verbes. Beside this, certain
jesting or gibing women followed both the hosts, that moved the minds of ye
soldiers in sundry affections: for some wept and bewailed the slaughter that
should be among them of Grammar, yea and that they felt the same near them
already, as Oh ah he heu and hei, other were dyspleased, and reproved the
contention of these kings, as Vah vae and atat. Other woundered of such
dissension fallen between so great friends, as Papae vahu and vha: other as
fools incited and encouraged the soldiers to fight, as Eia and Euax.
Moreover, all the men of war and soldiers being well appointed and ready to
enter into the battle, it seemed good to the king of Verbes that on his part
gladly withal his heart he would withdraw to commence civil wars, and to
cloak his doing in or with some honest manner, wrote a letter to the king of
Nounes, in this tenor. O Poeta thou have well understood in what appointment
and ready strength I am come down to show my self in the field to give
thee battle: and again thou may know that there are not in thee
sufficient forces able to abide and withstand the violent rushing in of the
legions of my men of war: Therefore thou shall do wisely, if in leaving me
in my estate thou withdraw into thy territories. But if thou be so senseless,
that it must be had by the edge of the sword, then know thou that three days
hence I will be ready with mine host in the plain field to fight, there to
receive thee. When the Trumpets Au and Eu had given their letters to the king
of Nouns, he answered them according to his counsel in this wise. O Amo,
thou ever have to many words, but it is not now a time to amase the ears of
the hearers with thy much babbling: thou boastest thy valiant host, and thy
fearful prepared ordinance, as if on our side we had not but dwarfes and
Grasshoppers. Thy possession has ever been very little in Oration: But yet thy
follye leads thee thither from whence thou may not fly, until with that
part of lordeship (by thee wrongfully won, worse governed, and naughtely
retained) thou be by just war chased out. And for that thou shall know how
little, not I only, but mine, do way thee, and how smally we fear thy
threatenings, our Heraldes Ae and oe shall show thee their bare buttockes if
thou will: farewell, such as I wish thee: adewe to the Devil for ever and aye.

By these letters the hearts of them poisoned one against another, did all
awayte with fiery stomachs the last assigned day of battle. In the mean
while, by occasion of such troubleous time, there arose (as commonly does in
such business) a license of most mischeuous deeds, and there went forth a
company of privy pilferers through ye whole province of Grammar, seking their
pray, and especially in wooddie places, and from the hills espied the
passe^gers, and spoiled the vittailers that went to the Camps: Whereby great
dearth and scarsitie of victuales daily increased in both the hosts. By
reason whereof, certain worthy capitaines, with sufficient number of soldiers
were by the consent and decree of both kings sent out to flea these robbers or
else to drive them far out of the lands of Grammar. They being come thither,
the soldiers did enclose a very thick wood, where they had understood that
there were a great number hidden: so they beset them, that one escaped not
untaken. Among whom was a certain fellow called Catholicon that drove a
great Ass laden with Greek and latin words bound up together, and carried
them into Italy. Item an old Duns called Hugution, with a young yonker
surnamed Garlandia which also with a great one eyed Mule drove a wagon laden
with false and broken rules, and foul fourmes not only of old phrases, but
also of latin terms, wherewyth he hoped to be enritched in the borroughes and
towns, selling them as precious things set in glass, to make laten of glass
which might have day seen through it. Moreover this yoncker of Garlandia was
found stuffed full of false pieces of money and counterfeit coin, being base
bullion, which he caused to be taken for good, being of an untrue stamp which
he had forged, and of the said money he had filled all the land of Grammar.
Likewise there was taken a great and greasy lasie lourden, that made himself
be called Grecismus, that had made lean all the victayls that went to the
camp, to stuff a great foul rank stinking and rotten calves paunch with.
There was also taken one Pylades, that had robbed all the ways he went in, and
was become ritche. All these were there bodily punished as they had merited,
some quartered and made in pieces, some brent in the fire, other cast into the
dongeons of perpetual and stinking prisons. He that took and punished
Grecismus was a right worthy Captain called Toussan or Tusan. The robberies
of Pylades was discovered and debarred by a noble captain very well
acquainted in the wars, which was called John of Cuuella that so swelled that
he was in peril to be dropsy, but one gave him a short clister, that did
yield him in slender form, and more leave and easy to be borne than he was.
All the rest of this robberous rabble were destroyed, slain and buried in a
great and dark dungeon. Catholicon that among them was called the great, was
brought to the camp with his Ass, who confessed on the rack (albeit it were
a thing manifest) that he had stolen all these words in the land of Grammar.
Then when he was asked ought in Greek, he answered that he understood not the
Greek, and of the Latin but a very little. Then said the Judges, wherefore
cariest thou with thee Greek words, seeing thou then understand not? Then he
answered, there is so great ignorance of learning with us (says he) that
albeit I speak grossly, yet can I easily make them believe that I am through
lined in every corner with all the eloquence of Attica. All they which were
there, hearing this, fell in a great laughter, and said: by saint George, seeing
that thou have such hearers as thou have, that which we know not the due owners
of, thou shalt carrye with saulfconducte to thy people and nation: but that
which we shall know to belong to any, that we think good to be rendered to the
due owners. Then after they had made diligent search, all the Greek words
almost were given to Isydore, whose they were, and the remnaunt to the Latins:
to which business was appointed the master of the trenchmen, called Calepin
with the courteous captain Anthony of Nebrisse. The intermixed, rotten, and
secret hidden words were given him, and so they permitted him to go his way
with his Ass lighter laden than before: nevertheless they forbad him at any
time ever after, to be so hardy as to call himself a Gramarian, except among
the rude and barbarous people. In these busy business, one Priscian a very
renoumed man, and of great honor in the land of Grammar, for that he could
not suffer the said land to run in total ruin through civil war and
contention, hasted toward the camp in post to make an agreement, and being
taken, was spoiled and sore beaten of the felonish fellowship of Catholicon and
was so wounded on the head, that there was no salve able to heal him. Shortly
after, among these fellows was taken one who falsely and shamefully said that
he was an historiographer, and had gathered together a great bundell of Jesting
solishe gaudes in a great volume, called Supplementum Chronicharum, who forced
through question, confessed that all they were stolen things: and so he was
exiled for ever into the land of ignorance. As these things were doing,
certain of the Verbes anomales, as Sum volo fero, with three companies of
their handmaides, made an assault and took away a prisoner of the capitaines of
the Nounes named Caeter, which was of the race of Relatiues, and they took him
hidden with his fellows in an embush, in what cave I know not, near to the
by path way of the conjunctions Quod and Quam, and him they slew with all his
singulers, his plurals seeing the danger they were in, made a vow to Jupiter,
to sacrifice him the remnant of their goods, and so they escaped hole and
sound miraculously. When tidings hereof were told to King Poeta, he was
maruellously moved, and it greatly grieved him to lose such a Captain: for
this Caeter was very stout and full of stomach even to the uttermost, and in
feats of war he had no peer. The king of Nounes therefore feeling him self
greatly endomaged with ye loss of Caeter and his singulars, diligently awayted
occasion whereby he might render double the like to his enemies. But fortune,
who can in all things do very much, and chiefly in war, gave him shortly
after the way to revenge him of the wrong. For in those days many legions of
Verbes of no small authority were taken prisoners by certain light horsemen of
the Nounes. Among who^ was dice, face, fere and duce, of the band of the
imperatiues and commanders. From whom thorough great ignomie was cut away by
the kings commandment, the hinder skirtes of their garments, so that they
showed their buttockes, and so sent them away again, so that ever since they
were called only dic, duc, fac and fer. Afterward he commanded that the
prisoners should be slain, namely, fuo, specio, leo and pleo: whose goods
were by the king of Verbes given to their lawful children, discending of them
in right line, as fui, fuera^, fuissem, fuisse and futurus. And to the children
of specio, who were a great number, as aspicio conspicio and such like: and
also to them of leo and pleo, as doleo impleo co^pleo suppleo repleo expleo
oppleo. At the very same season was bewraied a great treason to the host of
the Verbes, how certain horribe hooresons of the stock of preterperfectes,
being soldiers, to cloak their treason, and not to be known, were disguised
after the manner of the Greeks, though they were of the Latin tongue, and being
taken, had two heads. These had co^spired and laid watch for the king of
Verbes: but being taken and convict of the fact, were declared traitors, and
condemned of trespass against the king, they were called momordi cecidi
cucurri pepe^di spopondi pepigi didici pop^s^ tetuli cecini peperi tutudi
pepuli fefelli memini pupugi and tetigi, from whom was cut of one head at
that present: so that whereas they were before time called, momordeo cecido
cucurro, they be now called mordeo cedo curro, and so of the rest. From tetuli
were cut of both heads, as well of the preter, as of the present tense:
albeit that Terence through pity thought to simon on the same again of the
preter tense with Baulme, but it held not. Now as the time of fighting drew
near, the said kings set up in the highest place of their host, a red cloak,
to advertise the soldiers that they should shortly join together in fight,
that they might prepare and propose them selves thereto, taking their repast,
and whetting their weapons, might sharpe^ their munitions ready, with all other
things pertaynyng to such affairs. In the morning, after the soldiers had
dined, on both sids without anynoyse making, the whole host assembled to the
said place. Then when they had all raunged in battle array with displayed
aucientes, the said kings besought and required their soldiers earnestly to
behave them selves well and worthily: but it was no need, seeing that they of
them selves were already fired enough. For all as mad men shook their pikes
with so great and stout a stomach, that they tarried for nothing but to strike,
and awayted naught but ye sign of the onset and alarm: and hervpon, behold,
the trumpettes blewe the onset on both sides. On the other part the earth
resounded and rang again, and in both hoastes were made great shoutes and
cries, the heads or both hosts made great vows to God, and every of them
stomacked and cheered up their soldiers. Then every one did what he could and
knew to be done, they struck together with great handy strokes of swords,
brake their pikes, that the air rang again of the cry of the fighters. In the
air was nothing seen but clouds of smoke and brymstone: on both sides were
great store wounded and of dead corpses plenty. O there was a goodly sight to
see the Verbes defectiues (among the rest (fighting against the Nounes
Heteroclites. These Nounes accompanied with their nominative cases, with their
genders, also with their genitiues and plural numbers, did fiercely lay upon
their enemies. The Verbes defectiues did stoutly and courageously withstand
and put apart these Nounes Heteroclites, with their indicatiues, accompanied
with their preter perfect tenses, so that by their coniugations they brake
through force, the numbres and genders of the other.

Of these Verbes there was one called aio, who using singular hardiness, did
for a long space resist two Nounes Heteroclites, so long that in the end being
no more able to withstand their furiouse forces, lost diverse of his persons,
modes, tenses, and numbres, and then rested only unto him, ais, ait, aiunt,
aiebam, aiebas, aiebat and aiebant: the rest passed thorough the sword.

As the hoastes were thus in fight there was such a mixture, that one knew not
an other, and they were al so fiered and fleshed to fight, that none of them al
once perceived the fearful earthquake yt was at that present, and in the same
country there: yea such a one, and so great, that it destroyed the towns nere
thereto, turned the streams of mighty rivers the other way vpside down, and
thrust the sea into the floudes, and with his hideouse roaring, ouerthrewe the
high mountains with a mighty fall. But let such be still, that account that
for a tale: the accident that happened in that same sharp and hard war,
where the Romans were so trounsed by the Penoys, near unto the lake Trasimene,
the city of Croton yeldeth sufficient testimony, which (as Lucan says in ye
book of true narratio^s) was before situate on the brynks of the shore of
Trasimene, at ye very present, thorough a tempest of a whirle wind was
transported into the mountain, where it is at this day. Doubtless of this and
such like examples lately befallen, Titus Liuius may well glory in, for that he
has so great a testimony to have said truth: for that it is sufficient to
confirm the things that he has written. The air was obscured and made dark
with the arrows that the numbers singulars and plurals shot. The shot of the
figurs composite and decomposite flew whistelyng so round and rightely into
the ears of every one, that they were all as deaf. A great number were hurt
by the darts of the kinds of primatiues, and deriuatiues. The trumpettes
likewise that went on every side sounded a fearful and terrible Taratantara,
so that the sound thereof encouraged the fighters marvelous full of stomach
and hardy, to bear the blows and sturdie strypes of their enemies. And these
troublous railing women, the interiections that went about the arayes, vexed
and sore troubled them all, through their moved and fickle affections: Among
whom for the most part ware often heard these pitiful and dolorous cries, heu
and hei oh ah eh. Notwithstanding this war was more fierce and cruel than
long in fighting, and had it not been for great abundance of rain, that
thorough a sudden storm and tempest which fell from the clouds even at that
present, made the medley to depart and break off. Then doubtless had there
been an end of all the forces of Grammar. Such and so great was the furious
rage that they had every one of them, one against another, yea until that
point, that albeit the trumpettes sounded the retraict on both sides, and they
all greatly encombred with the water, might nevertheless be unmingled and
separate asunder one from another, to return them under their ensigns.

The victory aboade doubtful and incertayne, neither was it known of any,
whether had the better or ye worse, for on both sides there was a marvelous
many, as well of sore wounded as of slain, not only of common soldiers, but
also of the hie and chief captains. It is not possible for any to tell the
great losses that were thereon both sides. Notwithstanding I will assay to show
plain and manyfestly, and in the openliest manner I may, that which some did
win or lose there, (though I can not say of every one in particular) this
will I do, to this end, that they that come after, may thereto take heed. First
the part of the Verbes defectiues, in fight lost all them that were descendent
from him, all his genders, tenses, modes, persons and numbers that were of the
fourth conjugation, of figure composite, and of the singular number. He him
self (as God would) escaped safe, for seeing him self in peril, he made a
vow, that of no coniugatio^ of marriage, he would after any more bear the
livery: and therefore he was at that brunt so sore feared, that since he has
been very seldom seen publicly in the land of Grammar. Fore was bereft and
robbed of al his goods, except fores foret and fore, which are of the optatiue
mode, of the third conjugation, vale, aue, salve, of ye kindred and stock of
the imperatiues (lost a great many of their fellows) which are yet living, the
rest were lost. Faxo of the same stock of actiues escaped only with three of
his, al ye rest of his band after him were slain, except faxis faxit and
faxint, who saved them selves with him by flighty footing. Inquio of the stock
of the neuters, kept inquis inquit inquiunt inquam inquies inquiet inquient
inque and inquam. The rest perished in the wars. Inquiens at that time was
with the participles whereof he happened well. Apage and apagite when they had
lost all their fellows, escaped alone. Diet lost also all his fellows except
diescit. Facio was put from his son facior, who notwithstanding before he
dyed, did constitute by knightly testament an heir fio. Posco disco metuo
timeo renuo respuo compesco vrgeo linquo, and all they of the race of the
actiues, lost their supins. Some Verbes lost their preter tenses of the third
conjugation, and in place of them, they after recovered the pretertenses of the
fourth coniugatio^: among whom was, cupio peto quaero arcesso facesso and sero.
Some Verbes having lost their future in am, to the end that they would not
thencefoorth wholly lose the hope that was to come, bought other futures in
(...) at the faires of racana, as eo queo and v^neo (but Horace by his
authority gave to lenio lenibo,) al Verbes belonging to beauty lost all
their supins, among whom was lucco fulgeo splendeo polleo and such like. Fulcio
using a singular hardiness escaped out of peril, and held his fultum, but
seeing we have recounted and told of the^ that received loss, it is not mete to
hold of no account these Verbes, that behauing them selves well and worthily
had both spoils and dignities, which they received of their king, beside
these others that they first had and enjoyed: among other were eleuate and set
up in great honor, caeno iuro careo ma reo nubo and pra^deo: for beside their
own preter tenses, they received also the preter tenses of the passive voice.
Redimo was enriched in his five senses of nature, and at that present obtained
four significatitions, as to deliver, to lead and govern, to deck and
ornate, and to take to ferme. Solor wan three significatio^s, as to be alone,
and to comfort and exhort, explicat, beside his own sense which is to explicate
and show forth plainly, received, that he might declare, show, that he might
draw, that he might represent and deliver. Valeo beside his own sense, which
is to be in health and whole, wan so much, that when he said vale, that he
might salute also, and sometime curse too. Presto had four significations as,
to lend, and to be aloft, to do good, and hold promise, with diverse other
significations. Haurio was as much enritched, for he had four significations,
as to draw out, to wound, to hear and see and diverse other such like, and
all they when need is are reduced in one. Pasco received two understandings,
to feed, and bring up. Vaco albeit he meddled not much among the fighters (for
as Socia says in Plautus, the fiercer they fought the faster he fled)
nevertheless fortune that oftentimes gives reward to the slothful, would
enriche his cowardice with the best of the spoils: for as he espied certain
of his enemies that were fled and gone away, he crept out of his cabin and
cloked them in his fist: who after bought them again with a great sum of
silver, and he wan beside his own former sense seven other, to wete, to
understand, to leave of, to serve, to be superfluouse, to be lawful, not to
have, and to be empty. Studeo wan three significations, as to solicit, to
desire earnestly, and to be very paynfully busied. Pango received three senses,
as to sing, and has given to panxi in his pretertense to make truces, and has
given to pepigi to fasten and join together. Sapio from that day had two
senses, to wete, to give knowledge, and to be wise. Fero one of the four
anomales gained three senses, as to uphold, to desire, and to bear. Confiteor
had three senses, to praise, to purge, and to make manifest. Supero received
seven senses by reason of the great authority that he had among the Verbes:
as to remain in part, to overcome, to be near, to go further, to escape, to
ouerliue and exceed. Some Verbes there were, which having lost their own
preter tenses, had of their king the goods of other Verbes passiues which
were slain at the battle: as audeo fido gaudeo soleo and fio. These
pestiferous and perilous lying Verbes, which always have in their heart and
mind other than in the mouth, albeit they had no part of the pray, ye tought
not they and their names to be left in oblivion, but spoken of, to the end
that every one might know them, and so beware: seeing that always under the
color and cloak of doing, they bear the passive voice: they are called exulo
veneo nubo liceo and vapulo. This last of all is the most wily and subtillest:
and therefore so much wyser as the boy is, so much the more heed will he have
to decline his wily ambushes, if he have good care to keep his buttocks. Now
seeing we have already showed as well as we are able, that which happened to the
Verbes, it seems good in our account that we speak also of the Nounes.
Oversight was made in and through the host of the Nounes, and it was found
how fortune had been as much diverse to one part as to an other. And to the
end that we begin by the positiues, there was certain of them, that being hurt
in their comparatiues, received dressing and cure through the diligence of
certain expert physicians, as melior minor dexterior ^^^sterior plus
magnifice^tior, and munis^^tior al irregulate, and descending of the second
declension. But pius arduus egregius tenus and such like, lost their own
comparatiues. The Nounes ending in er, lost ruus, in their superlatiues: and
for the same they had rimus, as tener, and saluber. To others for that they had
lost simus was given limus, as humilis facilis gracilis similis agilis, and to
vetus was given veterrimus. Among trees were certain Nounes, that quiting the^
selves manfully, by a sudden miracle changed altogether at once their kinds,
beco^ming of females, males, every one astonished at the sudden case, demanded
whence came such transformation to them: of them were rubus and oleaster,
which Titus says were evil and unlucky tokens, and therefore affirmed he that
they ought to be cast into the bottom of the sea, or else to be exiled out of
the land of Grammar. But the king Poeta iestyng at the fend superstition that
they had in the miracles, did prohibit all and every of them, to harm, or any
way to hurt them: saying that it was not an evil sign, or unhappy accident to
be changed from women into men: sayng that out of anoughty and crooked kind,
they were turned into a good and better. From certain Nounes heteroclites,
fighting against the Verbes defectiues, were cut away both coddes and cullion
in the plural number (from which peril God save us) so that afterward there
was in that number found neither man nor woman but chaste neuters: which
doubtless is a thing greatly to be pitied. Their names were sibilus auernus
infernus menalus supparus baltheus tartarus dindimus, other had better chance:
for when in the same number they were neuters, were glad forth with to see them
become males: as porrum rastrifr^num and coelum, But these said po^mum and
rastrum, as they went through Rome, found in the markets of Agona their neuter
plurals, and there they bought the^ again with a great sum of money, and
gyuing leave to the mules, loved better to hold them to them there. Balsamum
among all Nounes and trees above only a neuter: by reason whereof seeing that he
could not beget nor bring forth young, is in so great scarsitie that he is no
where seen but in the land of Judah, which is the cause (as sorowefull) he
yeldeth his fruict all in tears: as for other Nounes that were bereft of their
plural neuter, received the feminine for amends, as epulum ostreum vesper and
cepe. But truth is, of all creatures the oysters only were neuters: but above
al aucthors Pliny, and the poets hold them for neuters, wherefore Ouide
says thus: Ostreaque in conchis, tuta fuere suis, so that afterward they
gained so, that they became as much feminine as neuters: others that were of
the doubtful gendre, received the masculine in their plural number, as Cardo,
bubo, and such like, other that were spoiled of all their cases plural, abode
ever since dismembered and maimed: among whom, were sumus limus funus puluis
sanguis mundus pontus sol sal and vuus, all of the masculine gendre. Hardly is
seen any time more than one Sun in the firmament, but when it happens so,
it is not natural, but rather wonderful, likewise also certain feminines lost
their plural cases, as lux sitis labes mors vita fames tabes gloria fama salus
pax humus lues tellus senecta soboles iuuenta indoles proles.

These fought so febly in the host,

That all their plurals there they lost. Other feminines lost at the said
conflicte their singular number, as argutiae habenaebigae blanditiae cunae
delitiae exequiae excubiae exuuiae phalerae facetiae genae gades insidiae
indi^ciae caleridae lachrymae latebrae minae, and many others. Other neuters
were spoiled of all their plurals, as coenum foenu^ auus solu^ pus and virus.
Furthermore other were put from al their singular friends: as arma castra exta
cunabula co^chilia crepundia pas^^a moenia mapalia magnalia ilia seria
precordia and sponsalia, yea and almost all the names of feasts, as Naturnalia
Dionisia Aphrodisiae B^^cha^lia, Floralia and Neptunalia, and all the names of
metals, especially aurum and argentum, which every one labored to take
prisoner, and likewise aes s^ta and era in three cases. In like manner for the
great heat and alteration of the combat, the measures were spoiled of the
plurality of their liquors, except of wines, and honies, which to the plural
cases were spared, to the end that they might do king Poeta service with new
wines: for that he loved them well. Oleum and frum^^tum, by like misfortune
were so gluttonnous, that through the great scarsitie that was in the host,
they were not found in plurality. Other abode shortened in ye end of their
geyltines and d^tines plural, as ^hrathura (...) and sera. Yet nevertheless
all Nounes had not the worse part: for diverse of (...) of the spoil of their
enemies: (...) ^herof they were of greater authority (...) before, so that
some received other nominative cases beside their former (...) w^tch also has
arbos: honor which has ho^os: od^r which has odos: cucumer which has
cucumis: cin^^ which has einis, and pulue^ which has puluis. Notwithstanding
they occupy these not always, but keep this share for hie feasts, as for trim
and nice decking for honor sake. Plaga albeit through hurring he bled, yet
wanne he four other senses without account of the first, (that signifies a
wou^d, or hurt:) as when he would say the arming cord of a net, also a great
space of the heaven and earth (called clima,) also a great kind of linen, such
as the old matrones of Rome ware when they went in the city, and also for a
bed, or any part of a bed, Opus the same day wan there three senses: for opus
signifies earth: under opus he gives aid, under opibus riches. The gerundes
and supins, because they were so often fled to the enemy, were amerced to fine
after the treaty of peace was made between both the said kings, through the
earnest complainct and supplication of Demosthenes who alleged the laws of
Solon, by which it was commanded, that such were to be put a part from all
honor and offices, that in any sedition had not hold the part of the one nor
the other: for that such a one thinks altogether of his own business, and
re^keth not of the common wealth: the greatest part then in the land of
Grammar lived after the laws of Athens. Afterward therefore the king of the
Verbes left to the gerundes no more but only three cases, taking away from them
for the trespass of their default al their other cases. To the supins only
were reserved but two: which greatly grieved all them of Grammar, sharply
blaming such a sort of foolish precepts of Solons laws, as much as the fond
reasons of Demosthenes, whom they iested at, saying, that he had left (his
cunnyng at home) his distaffs bands and woull, and that he had not fained
squint eied disease in vain, to have yearly revenues and preferment: because
he hop^d not to have so much money of the gerundes and supins, as he sometime
had had of Harpalus. Surely if I would describe forth all the losses and
misfo^tunes orderly as they ought to be, and also all the conquestes of the
worthiness of every one that changed in that day, my matter would be to long.
And therefore I will here make an end, and this may suffice, that what so ever
is found lost, wasted, or joined to, and grown up through all the land of
Grammar, and his borders and utter limits, is wholly proceeded thorough the
same hard, hideous, and mortal fight among them. In the same time of the
wars sprang up many new words, and sundry old were put apart and rejected.
And had not three honest persons ben chosen for arbitrers (of whom we will
speak hereafter) which by their power and ability withstoode the
naughtiness of certain Grammatistes or slender gra^maria^s, so great
barbarousnesse had then ben mired thorough the Latin tongue, and the same then
ben so myngled with foolish words, that all hope had been lost ever to
restore the same again in his honor, and comely beauty. Therefore after that
the retraict was blown of both the hoastes, and that they had numbered as well
the wounded as the slain, and had known the great loss that was of the
hoastes, they all began and fell to sighing: and the sight of such a slaughter
of their people greatly grieved them, through desire of superiority. Wherefore
every of the^ repentyng, sought now nothing else than to make peace. And first
of all Poeta seeing of Nounes after he has called his soldiers (but (...)
without tears) said these words. I think well that you know (O my
Fellows) how dolefully, and against my will, I have taken araies to defend and
uphold the honor (as ever (...) I thought) and the authority of the Nounes
against our brethren the soldiers of the Verbes: and in ho^ many kinds I have
^sayed to de^r^^ and put of ^ong from between us the wars, and they to leave
us s^^^ct in our (...). But when I think not only at ou^ (...) loss, but also
of theirs, again when I behold the dead corpses on both sides. I have greater
desire to lament than to speak. Therefore it behooves us to remember that,
which some of our good old citizens and Burgeses wrote of the discord and
civil wars, as well of the Romans as the Greeks, and how with great
reproaches they blame and detest the ambition of them. In good faith if we had
thought of this at the first, we never had gone to so great folly, neither had
we also as blinded with anger and rage frantikely and as void of reason, torn
our proper flesh so with our own hands as we have. But (as an other faith)
that which is done and past, is easier to be reproved than amended:
nevertheless it is better to stay thus than to follow on a noughty beginning:
for if we will be so mad as to fight with our selves thoroughly to the end,
doubtless then is the principality of Grammar utterly come to confusion, and
then shall be given so great an ouerture and entry into the same to the
Barbarous and ignorant people, that as they will they shall rule all: seeing
none shall resist them, and go before to prevent them. By reason whereof (O my
fellows) for the comoditie of both realms I am willingly determined to ask
peace with the king of Verbes, and of mine own free will, will go toward him
and give him my hand. Notwithstanding, think not here by that I speak it for
that I have lost stomach, or for that I am timorous: but because there is
nothing more sure that the affairs of the Nounes and Verbes can continue,
unless they be friends together knit and quiet in one: of my self I (...)
mine office, not doubting but that I teach you that, which serves to the
continuing benefit and commodity of every one in general, being ready
willingly to do what your will is. God grant you aid in all your enterprises.
The profitable oration, and no less necessary s^ying of the king, greatly
pleased all the assembly, and all the (...) of the soldiers cried aloude, that
that which the king had so wisely spoken might be right diligently done. So
there was four from the camp of ye Verbes for Ambassadors certain of the
wysest of them: and so likewise of the chief of the Nounes: who having first
made without much difficulty a truce, finally came in such agreement with the
king of Verbes, and his greatest lords, that three personages should be
chosen which should be exactly seen, and well understanding in all customs,
rules and terms of Grammar: and that at their award and arbiterment, (after a
solemn oath sworn thereon) both parties should hold them and their rest
without any contradiction. Great was the difficulty, and much more was the
disputation, to whom the charge should be given to make the treaty of ye
peace. Many procured means to have the same office on them, and to diverse was
the voice given, and other again took it from them: In the end it was agreed
by Priscian, Seruius and Donalt, and also by all the others co^senting, that
those vndernamed, should have the charge and authority to knitte and make sure
the articies of the peace: that is to wet, Phedra, Volatteran chanon of S.
Peter's church, a man of great eloquence, and better knowledge. Item Peter
Marse chanon of saint Laurence in Damascon, a right learned man, and Raphael
Lip Florentine, and a great Orator, who being sent for, came to the camp,
and having there heard the reasons on both sides, and diligently waying the
business of the matter, in the end pronounced this sentence. To the kings of
Grammar to their gentlemen, to their citezens, and to all students to their
good hap and commodities be that which now is discussed. We three me^ deputed
to take away the contencious discords, put a part from us all the slanders,
wrongs and domages that heretofore have come upon the kings of Grammar, and
their soldiers, all which we revoke, take away, and blot out: which if they
may not be forgotten, at the least our decree is that they be never hereafter
more spoken of. Item that henceforth when a solemn oration comes to be
made, that then both the kings of Grammar in good agreement with their subjects
come together, as Verb, Noune, Pronoune, Participle, Aduerbe, Conjunction,
Preposition and Interiection. Item we appointe that in common and familiar
speech, the Noune, and the Verb only do bear the burden, taking for their
help whether of them they will, but to leave the other by, so the end that
being put to often in work they be not molested. Item we (...) yt the Noune
serve to the verb, and when he goes foremost as touching the case, ought also
to be governed of the verb, but in speech, that the Noune be before the verb,
and the same being after ought therefore to govern the Noune touching his case:
but con^erning his persons and numbres, the verb ought to give place to the
Noune, Pronoune, or Participle. Ite^ we appoint that the Participle bear
reverence to the Noune and the verb, and have the government of the verb
before him first, and that of the Noune after him last. Furthermore we permit
ye verb to make oration him self alone in the second and third person, and
to put out a part certain verbes of action if need require, for that he
represe^ted not the Noune, but that he represented him self only. This
sentence was given and published in the presence of both parties, and it
pleased very well all the assemble, and has since ever been observed of all
the inhabitants of Gra^mer. Also the study of Italy have approved it: and in
especial the learned university of Boloigne the most loving mother of good
and forward minds: which has given to the court of Rome not only so many
other great personages, but also even in this time that same right learned
Alexander Zambecco, which never fletes from the right point, through hope or
fear. The university of Paris observing the rest, craved then for her
stude^tes, that they might pronounce Nounes and Verbes at these pleasure, and
that without any regard of the quantity of sillab^es. But bicase between the
relatiues and antecedentes, between the adjectives and the substan^^ues,
between the word rege^ and the governed, between the (...), and determined, and
also between perfect speech and imperfect was an old quarrel, striuyng whether
of them were chief and greatest: it was also concluded to join them in
unity, that the relative of substance identitale, should agree in gend^e,
number, and person, with his accid^t. Item that the adjective should obey to
his substantive in case, gendre, and number: and that the governed word
should follow the nature of the governing: and that the relative of the
accident should only represent the antecedent in such accident or property,
in what manner the referred, and the referrent agreed by rule of diversity with
the antecedent: and that the speech imperfect should depend upon the perfect,
and the specified word, of the specifieng, and between two adjectives, two
substantives, two verbes of the infinitive mode two perfect speeches, and
between two imperfects to be no bond of service. Furthermore the said Peter
Marse would, that between sayings and doings might be made a peace and
agreement: but the advice of Phedrus was, yt if that discordwer once taken
away, the Barbor surgions and tavern kepers, should not have whereon to be
occupied, wherefore they left that thing even as they found it. All students
of ignorance, with these Bassards of Barbary were by commandment exiled for
ever out of all Grammar. The Barbarouse were chased beyond the Alps into
their cities and borough towns: but the ignorant thorough the favor of some
princes are bred not only in and through Italy, but also in Rome that mother
of good letters: and there whether she will or no, do they continue: among whom
there are some being pourueyed of fat livings so dull headed and do^tish and so
ignorant in good letters, that if ye ask them Amo qu^ par^^ they w^s^y,
partat^ (...) chio vi intenda, so much a^ssery they surpass in ignorance the
great mules whereon they are so highly got up. Moreover there was given
irreuoca^le power to the deputed by the strong and same counsel of them al to
search out, to punish, and exile (as things of nature counterfa^ct) (...)
^sauored wastere of Grammar, as (...) Latins, half Greeks, and they (...) ^es
that they thought to be pres^ to the honor and aduau^cement of al (...)
letters. And to the end that they (...) the easier and more lightly execute
their (...), were commanded forthwith to (...) the Romayne court whereas more
filthynesse and or^ure, and more mischeuous noughty pranckes are displayed,
their (...) and honest people spring on those parts, which power is known and
^righthed by great priueledges of Emperors, and learned bishops, and especialy
by Julius that reverent father, the su^ours of whom God vouchsafe to make his
beloved children.

FINIS.


Imprinted at London by Henry Binneman, dwelling in Knight Rider streat, at the
sign of the Marmayde. Anno. 1569.


