M. Some laid open in his colors: WHEREIN THE INDIFFErent Reader may easily
see, how vvretchedly and loosely he has handeled the cause against M. PENRI.

Done by an OXFORD man, to his friend in Cambridge.

PROVERB. 30. 32. If thou have been foolish in lifting up thy self, and have
thought maliciously, lay now thy band upon thy mouth.

For Proud, haughty and scornful is his name, that works wrath in his
arrogancy. PROVE. 21. 24.

To the Reader.
Having this lying by me, without any purpose to publish it as yet, I was
aduertized of the taking away of M. Penries book by the Pursiuant. VVhereupon
I resolved (though it should be some offense to my friend) not to closet it up
any longer, lest th'aduersary should too much triumph and insult. Even as it
came unto my hands, so have I given it his pasport, without any addition or
alteration of mine: only the Title I confess is mine own, the rest is my
Oxford friends, who if he be thought in his pleasant vein any thing too
snappish, the reader is to vvey with what kind of ad uersary he deals:
namely, with the snappishest gentleman, and most bitter mouths, that ever put
pen to paper. For the rest, it may be I am partial, and therefore I leave the
judgment to others. The man (it should seem) had no purpose to stand upon
every particular, but rather in a kind of cursorie delivery to his friend, but
to touch (as it were) the general defects and lamenes of M. Somes distempered
discourse: which yet the reader shall see he has not done it so slightly
neither, but that the nakedness and poverty of most of the adversaries
grounds, may easily be discried by this, if there were no more. Nevertheless,
for the better satisfiing of all men, I hope he that has hitherto undertaken
the cause with so happy a hand, will not so leave it if God assist him. I
hope I say, not with standing the violent and injurious wresting of his
labors out of his hands, the Lord in his good time will bring them forth to
the fuller clearing and decyding of the whole at large. In the mean while M.
Some may do well, having gotten his adversaries book (as it is like he has,
if his pen be not stricken with a desperate fear) to publishe it vnmangled as
he received it, and so to confute it if he can. His adversary being so vveake
as he takes him to be, he need not to sweat much about it, it will be done
he knovves, with the turning of a hand. And while he is in travel about such
a miracle, there be of his friends, that will be so bold to pray for him for
good-vvill, that God vvoulde vouchsafe him an humble spirit in a thorovve
feeling of his own wants, that howsoever he be puffed up otherwise, he may
tremble and stoop at the scepter of Judah, and bevvare he spurn not against
the truth.

M. Some laid open in his colors.
Be it so, sithence you will needs have it so, provided that you be not
ouerhastie to communicate it, for that may breed danger to me, and no great
good to your self. If it be the same M. Some, that read sometime a Lecture in
my L. of Leicesters house, then is he quite new founded since I saw him, and
his spirit it should seem, strangely vapored upward into some loftier climate
the^ was usual with him in those days, you can remember I am sure, when he was
taken for an other manner of man of a soft constitution, and a simple hearted
man, as most of his coat within the land. Albeit that even then when he gave
this glamse of sincerity and mildnes, there were some you know that stood in
contention with us about him, in that he made no bones (as they then said) to
be adaylie nonresident from his charge, and withal closely and slily to glut
down a pretty prebend or 2. to help his disgestion, which as you and I were
then hardly drawn to believe, thinking all this to be but injuriously fathered
upon him, so yet if that should be true as the knight gives out, that my L.
of Leycester should use any such speeches of him, That he feared be would prove
but an ambitious fool when al was don. Remembering what has fallen out since,
I promise you it was shrewdly aimed of my Lord, and we must needs yield he had a
notable eye, that could in so smoth a countenance, and so close a carriage of a
man, spy out nevertheless the cloud of ambition afar of: it was not for
naught it should seem, that he was so long emplojed by her majesty in affairs
of State.

But it is no reason you would say, that every thing should be measured after
the partial and passionate judgment of men how great soever they be: very
true, and therefore to clear the suspicion, and to wipe away all that might
seem through prejudice in any sort to bleamish the man, let your D. hardly
speak for himself, for index animi sermo, or as he him self says, ex
vnguibus leonem, of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and these (if
I be not deceived,) you shall find to be his own words, which some think had
bin fitter forfytie works against the landing of the Spaniards, then for
grounded reasons and arguments to decide a controversy by. But I will not brand
them with any cole of mine, let them weigh as they will in the judgment of the
wise, I will neither peize down the balance at the one end, nor lighten it at
the other: only because you press me to tell you what I think, I will first
take some pains to draw you a callender of his own speeches as I find them
scattered in his book, and so leave the judgment to your self: nay as master
Doct. tells the ignorant welchman, I will not in this case refuse the judgment
of his own disciples, if they have any dram of equity in them, so that they
remember to follow their masters rule, and bring with them iudicium non
preiudicium, harken then I pray you a while, to the sound of this learned
trumpet, and tell me your opinion when we meet.

First in the very title of his book, he begins thus. If the bare outside
be so glittered, what may we think of the pearls within? A refutation of many
anabaptisticall, blasphemous, and popish absurdities touching Magistracy,
Ministry, Church, Scripture, and Baptism: And then he goes on very sweetly
thus.

M. Penri (says he) is very ignorant, and his treatise very silly and
corrupt stuff: His book is a fardle of gross errors: none account of it but
such as are of the fantastical crew, men extremely both proud and ignorant:
his inconstancy proceeds of a vain humor, which as a whirlwinde does
strangely carye and ouercarie him: his gross errors: his absurd,
anabaptisticall and blasphemous fancies. I dare be bold to say, that is the
spiders webb be good cloth, and the cockatrice eggs wholesome meat, then such
points as I resute in this treatise, are very excelent divinity. His speech is
very gross: his reasons are most absurd and childish. This is intolerable
sawcines: Inscitia audax: None so bold as blind bayard. This is a gross and
popish error, a popish collection, a most absurd heresy: your arreast is like
Goliabs curse. M. PENRI has troubled heaven, church, commonwelth and himself.
Heaven, for he is saucy with God himself: Church, for in stead of treasure,
he has offered it very dangerous poison. Common wealth, for he has undermined
the chair of the Magistrate, I hope such conies will be looked unto. Himself,
for he has broached many proud, blasphemous, and anabaptisticall fancies. The
mark that M. PENRI leuels at, is I fear me, to shake hands with the
anabaptisticall recusants, some part of his writings look shrewdly that way. I
make very mean account as yet of your judgment: you have broached gross
errors: thank yourself for sowing such giddie fancies: you are too imperial.
If my reasons were suitable to your answers, they were very woeful: your tongue
cannot disgrace me, your tongue is no sclander. Sus Mineruam: your dealing with
me, is neither honest nor schoolelike: if you see not this, you are stark
blind. The wrangling spirits are the more for your absurd writings: They which
are so forward in iangling of these points, are either of your humor, which is
very bad, or Anabaptisticall recusants which is somewhat worse.

Will you any more of this? It is you see but a myrie tracke that I tread in,
and yet the farther one wades, the more quick sands and quauemires he is like
to find: for thus your doctor goes on.

I am sorry for your heaviness: I detest your anabaptisticall fancies: your
gift in answering is very rare: you make wash way of the weightiest arguments:
you bewray intolerable both pride and ignorance: you are one of the strangest
divines that ever I heard of, very ignorant, very bold, very absurd: your
judgment is not worth a rush: your dealing with me is most absurd: you have
grossly abused me: you are near driven when you use such beggarly shifts to
bumbaste your treatise: Honest matrons use no paintings, but harlots do:
gross errors have need of such vermiliom: the veil of malice did hinder
your sight: This odious instance does best become your spirit: It is suitable to
the rest of your writings, most absurd and childish: your absurdities are many
and gross: if you recant not your anabaptisticall errors, I will account very
basely of you. The name of Majesty is to costly a garment for so lepprous a
body as your treatise is: It is the manner of all sectaries to use lofly and
maiestical words, that their ignorant followers may commend them above the
skies. My answer is, that you are a wicked slanderer: such dealing is an
argument of a vile nature, and a wrangling spiryt: if I were of your humor, I
could chase and pursue you hotely for your inconstancy and error. In your
treatise you have sown gross errors thick and threfold. Are not your
disciples most unhappy that depend one you as one an other Pope? This bewraieth
your gross ignorance: if my reasons were as weak as your sensles answers,
they were strange stuff: what mean Scholar, what russet coat in the country
would shape such an answer? your wits I think were a woolgathering: this
answeere I think came out of Barbary, I hope you are ashamed of it by this
time: did ever any student deal so childishly? I see by his answers what a
deep clark he is, your weighty objections have neither succum nor sanguine^:
they have no pith in them, they are lighter then any feather, and bewray your
ignorance: your lusty speches cannot daunt me: it is but a visor. I have bin
long acquainted with the boisterous speches of such ignorant and bold
companions as you are. salis pro imperio, you are by your leave a little to
Lordly: had I nothing to think of but your absurd fancies: you imagine very
basely of me: I do but touch this gross and blasphemous paradox of yours:
what base ware you commend unto us for excellent divinity?

How think you? Will you any more yet? Or are you not half weary of reading?
Well I hope now if my hands do happen to smell any thing vnsauorly, you will
of courtesy bear with me, because you see I have bin all this while gathering
of weeds. But alas is this all think you? No assure your self, there is
yet a vile deal of such behind, for these (I take it) are of the same forge:

He that would sail after your compass for divinity matters, should prove as
giddy as a goose (says your doctor:) you have evil luck: you are an
unpleasant musition: you have kept strange coiles: you lay on load, but it is
fulmen non tonitru, black clouds but no rain: I pray God to keep the people
of the land, from such blind guides as the ignorant sort are, and from such
shameless and fantastical guides as you master Penry are: if you will deal
plainly never piddle any longer, go through stitch with all. Seeing you are over
shoes, adventure over boots to confute Calvin, give th'onset, if you fail,
you shall loose no credit of learning, for you never had any as yet. Qui semel
vericundiae limits, etc. you know the rest etc. M. Peurye is in his ruff.
His pride and ignorance appear in their colors: if you be not void of grace
be sorry and ashamed of your blasphemous lewdnes: you have used the Apostle as
Cacus did Hercules oxen. Did any student ever broth such sluffe as this? Many
Carrmen in London can make better arguments: your writing have nether grace nor
salt: your absurd collections are evidences of your spirit: unskillful preachers
are your bulwarks and blockhouses to support your fancies: you have shot but
many scores wide: you are one of the strangest turners that ever I knew: you
have turned out such a deal of gross diuiuitie upon me and others, that we
are weary and you may be ashamed of it: you would never I think have vented
such motley stuff as this, if you had thought it would have been looked on.
Many learned condemn your treatise for a foolish and santastical babble: you
are so sawey with the principal of the religion, in this noble land. I make
more accoumpt I tell you of one Calvin then of a thousand Penries: you have a
special guist in varying a phrase, for that you shall bear the bell and the
claper to: it is a blind and beggarly shist: your arguments are Scopae
dissolutae, very loose ware and slenderly trussed together: more he tells master
Penry, that there is no reason he should have such liberty of printing as he,
for says he, you broach and Print gross errors and anabaptisticall fancies:
so do not I: you refused to offer and submit your writings, to the view and
alowance of the Magistrate: so do not I: you would have me procure your
judicial hearing, etc. your request is not equal. Nec te noui nec vbi sis.
Speak for your self in Gods name: so will I. If you will revoke your error
and heresies, otherwise I will not open my lips for any such as you are.
Likewise in the same place, Master Penty having showed that he did reverence
him for his guifes, is thus cut short, and discourteously rewarded for his
pains. Be sorry says he for your self. Detest your fancies, your reverence I
make very mean account of: Gods truth is as dear to me as to you. I hope it
has had and shall have more defense by me then by you, there is some reason it
should. And afterward he comes upon him thus: you are not (says he) Master
of the sentences as Peter Lambarde was: if you were, the sound divinity that
is taught in Cambridge and Oxforde should be cried down: and your strange
fancies should be ruled cases. The refutation of your blasphemus,
Anabaptistical, popish, and proud errors by me, is I am sure a performance of a
special duty to almighty God, my Prince, and this Church. Great words shall
not fraie me: if your ignorant disciples will still magnify you, it shall not be
strange to me, they do but their kind: you use goodly words sometimes, but
your proud malice will appear, it cannot be hidden: your heretical absurdities
in your treatise, and your shameless dealing with our Magistrates do cry
aloud, etc. I pray God with all my heart, to keep me and all such as love
religion from such as you and the fantastical sort are: you are strange
cattle: you hope that I will grant you the cause, a vain hope, for I think
scorn to be one of ignorant Penries disciples, that is a proud and ignorant
Anababtist. If you will have any thing at my hands you must get it by force of
argument. If you think I will come of otherwise, you are in a wrong box, for I
entend not to be at your whystle: yea I require and charge you in the name of
God, (if you be not void of grace) that you consesse your ignorance and detest
your errors, etc. Thus have you my resolution, and yet you are no conqueror as
Coesar was, nor I overthrown as Pompei was: if your arguments were as tidie,
as your speeches are consident, there were no dealing with you: I perceive the
greatest barkers are not the forest byters: Blind Bartimeus could have espied
this: you may command and controlle, and deal with others as Strato did, that
was king over beasts, etc.

How now if a man may ask you, are you not near cloyed by this? What think
you now of my L. of Leycester his prophecy? Was not the figure well set that
hit so right of the man's constitution? Yet is this the man you see, that can
for all this tell his adversary and that full solemly, that the best conqueast he
can have is, to overcome his pride by humility, yea and more, tell him plainly
that he likes better Humile peccatum, quam superbam innocentiam: he that will
so often and so peremptorily lay haughtines and pride to an other man, had he
not need think you to be a little clearer from that infection himself, then
your doctor shows him self to be? But it may be he will mend the matter in
some other places of his book, and it is odds he will not always be in this
key: like enough, and therefore let him speak once again for himself. About
his. 77. page as I take it, where M. Penri does seem to say, that we can
hardly have any sealed assurance in our hearts, that we receive any sacrament at
the dumb ministers hands, because we have no such promise of the Lord, and
our assurance must always be grounded upon the promises of God, mark I pray
you how M. Some refuteth this:

You are at war (says he) with your self: you words agree like harp and
harrow: your disciples are sit vessels to receive any liquor of you, but men
of learning and wisdom are otherwise affected: your dealing is absurd and
dangerous, absurd for it is void of truth, dangerous for it would breed
confusion. The Magistrates thanks be to god, neither do nor will suffer this
bad course of yours: if they should, sancies would as weeds grow too fast, and
this noble land should receive more hurt the^ your head is worth: I doubt not
of their godly wisdom: The miserable estate of Germany heretofore by reason
of sectaries, may and will awaken them: If you be restrained from your gross
errors, as some are very iustlye, you must not cry, persecution persecution,
your note must be, Poena persidiae, that is, that you are justly met with,
otherwise you sing out of tune. And not long after this, he pays him again
with a syllogism or two in the same figure. I am persuaded, that if you be not
well conjured by the magistrate, you will prove a strange body: you are far
gone already, strange fancies have almost consumed you: The Magistrates
discipline is the fittest medicine for you: if that will not recover you, your
disease is desperate. Yea and now he has said it, he will stand to it, he
means not you shall see him blush at the matter: For page 155. he adds: If
either M. Penrie, or any of his santasticall crew, shall think much of my
speech, I do not pass: I confess freely, that sharp words are not
sufficient plasters for such proud sores: I hope the magistrate will consider
further of him and such as he is. Duro nodo, durus cuneus, etc. that is, a
wedge of iron is fittest for knottie wood. Besides all this, he is up with
blasphemous against him, I think above a dozen times, and in that good
Christian mood of his, it pleases him full sweetly, to call M. Penri, an
heretical Catabaptist: and of his charity, to liken and compare him to
Demetrius the silver Smith: to Alexander the Copper smith: to the wicked women
in the 13. of Ezekiel: to the graceless people in the time of Esai, Jeremy
and Micheas: To wicked Amaziah in Ieroboams court: To Athalia that wicked
trayteresse: To harlots that paint themselves: To Neuius the clamorous
companion: To Thrasilaus the frantike man: To the monstrous son, that
cudgelled his father: To Nestorias the heretik: To Photinus a gross heretic:
To Aetius a pestilent heretik: To the Donatists, the Papists, the Pelagians,
and the Anabaptists: To Campion: To Goliab: To Simon Magus: To Julian the
Apostata: To murdering Ioab: To that bloody beast Ismael, that shedd tears,
but they were Crocodiles tears: and last of all, to make up the mouth of all,
to that honest man Judas that betrayed Christ. And like enough, if he could
have found out any viler image, to have drawn us his portraiture by, it
should not have been left out of this wor^hy roll: The best is, himself tells
us, that the greatest barkers, are not the sorest byters. Therefore our hope is,
M. Some will do little hurt with his teeth, he is so unreasonable a barker.

Of al which, what other confutation should a wise man make the^ vah quam
sordide: quis suror que rabia? Sure if your doctor had conceiled his name, and
set only these 3. letters R. S. D. in the forehead of his book, his friends
would rather have taken it for Roger Salter Drouer: then for Robert Some
Doctor: for they would never have suspected that any such rags as these should
have fallen from a man of that gravity, so rich in gifts and graces as they
take M. Some to be: why, is this your manner of canuasing of Controversies in
CAMBRIDGE? or is it your custom now a days, to draw the most of your
arguments a sustibus and sascibus, a vinculis and carceribus Do you remember
how you were wont to be girding at me for our Oxforde Doctors, as D. Kennall,
D. Barnard etc. and to tell me that Barnardus non videt omnia, with many such
like glicks? In requital whereof, if I should now lay D. Bridges, and D. Some
in your dish, I think your advantage would not be great, Well howsoever you
may out go us in other respects, I hope in one regard, you will not be
ouerhasty to compare with us: that is, in Modesty and Mildness of spirit. For
to go no farther, show me if you can, a Cambridge man that is a match to M.
Reynolds, I mean not in learning but in mildness: or show me an Oxforde man
that is a match to M. Some, I mean not in learning but in bitterness. Surely
I am persuaded (I speak it not I protest of any partial affection) that that
one work alone of D. Reinolds against Heart, that wretched Jesuit, may
therein be as a pattern and glass to your whole university while the world
stands. I doubt not but you have read it, and then you cannot but know,
against what kind of person he deals in that conference, namely against one
already atteinted and convicted of treason, in him against al such as were
sworn en^mies to our religion and state, such as had long thirsted for the
destruction of her majesty, and th'ouerthrowe of God his church, and viler men
you know, there could not lightly be under the sun. If any people in the
world should move a man to glaunce out into passion, or his pen to
impacience, it were like enough to these. And yet I believe (pry as narrowly
as you can,) you shall hardly pike out any one bitter, evenimed or dispiteful
sentence brought in of purpose, only to wound and disgrace his aduetsarie in
the whole book. See then the difference of spirits: your doctor deals not
with any such manner of man I trow: for M. Penri, how unlearned soever he be,
(as M. Some makes him worse then a drudge and a turnespit in all manner of
knowledge) or howsoever he may vary from others in judgment, is thought yet of
those that know him to be very honest and godly of life, and I have heard that
he is one that usually haunteth the holy excersises of religion, walking in all
peaceable obedience to God and her majesty, and that he has bin a means to
reclaim and call back some that for want of a preaching minnistery, were even
at the brinke to decline to Brownisme: this I have heard, howsoever it be, if
you have read his writings, I appeal to your own heart, whether you think
him the child of God or no, being in the judgment of some, a thing impossible
that any man should write as he writes, unless he were endewed with some
good measure of Gods spirit, if it be so, then that he be the child of God,
and that he be wide in this point, (as for mine own part I will not trust him
that never held error,) how happy had it been for him, if he had had M.
Reinolds his adversary in liew of M, Some, of whom he might happen have
learned more and been disgraced less. For he that deals so mildely with an
ennemie, how christianly think you would he have entreated a brother: why
alas, the question being, Whether we may be assured to receive a sacrament at
the dumb ministers hands, is it not possible for a christian in humbleness to
handle this question, unless he run to Vulcan the blacksmith for weapons, or
bring Hercules furens upon the stage, as M. Some does, setting out his
adversary in the vilest and most deformed features that he can devise? and yet
he knows him not neither. Now where it pleases him to say, that M. PENRI
has just as many learned of his side, as H. N. the prince of the Family of
Love: as I would not wish M. D. to be therein over hasty to swear, so yet if
it were so, he knows that that ouer-worne argument drawn only from the
multitude, can be no stronger for him, then it has been heretofore for the
papists. But it should fall out now (this being a point that has not been
heretofore greatly looked into) that there should be any more of M. PENRIES
mind hereafter, I do not see but that M. Some may in a sort thank himself
for it, and that among many other reasons, this may very well be one, that your
Doctor has carried himself so loosely and distemperedly in the cause, seeking
rather to plague the man, then to clear the matter. For when men (desirous
even in simplicity of heart to learn the truth) shall sensiblye perceive
that so famous and learned aman as M. Some reputeth him self to be, little
inferior in aunciencie, (as some think) M. Whitguist, can none otherwise
assail or defend the cause, then by houlding (as it were) a naked dagger in
hand, striving by all means to draw blood of his adversary, and crying out
aloude on the Magestrate, the Magestrate, as if he had sold his logic to
become a jorney man in the shambles: will not this think you bring many into a
mammering, and make them doubt of that they never doubted of? And yet what will
you say if after all this rage and choler, he be so kind hearted to grant M.
Penri the cause? Surely I am deceived else, and therefore I pray you tell me
your judgment. This among others is one of of M. Penries arguments.

1 Every ministry of the New Testament, is a preaching ministry: 2 But the
ministry of our Readers, is not a preaching ministry: Ergo.
To the mayor or first proposition M. D. says thus: If you mean (as I think
you do,) every ministry of the word in the new Testament I dissent not from
you: So that he graunts the mayor you see. To the minor or second proposition
he says flatly thus. No man doubts 185
of this unless he be void of common sense: And yet there are as learned as
M. Some, that dissenting from M. Penri in the point have denied the minor,
aleaging that though the persons them selves could not preach, yet their
ministry and Function whereunto they were called, might justly he said to be
a preaching ministry. But I hope these men (how learned soever) will
henceforth reuerse their judgment, in that M. Some has branded them al with
this mark, that they are void of common sense. Thus you see how easily a
wise man may overshut him self when he is in his ruff, and therefore it is
most rrue as one said once. That a pacient mind discerns aright, but a
passionate heart seldom sees the truth: here you see your learned doctor has
granted the poor ignorant Welchman, both the mayor and the minor, so that I
see no shift in the world, but only M. Bridgis his shift, that is to deny the
conclusion.

Well (howsoever in discretion or otherwise, in a kind of conceitednesse, he
may happily overshut him self) you tell me that questionless he is learned: It
may be so, neither will I say against it: I know there may be wine enough in
the seller, when there is non in the cup, and it may be that M. Some in this
encoumpter against M. Penri, did choose rather to look up his learning against
the rising of some billowe or tempest, then to stand pouring it out against so
weak an adversary, whom his conceit might casely ennough be overthrown with
a blast of words: But the thing we stand upon is this, that how learned soever
he be, he has showed little of it in this treatise. And that if those worthy
men (whom in heart I reverence, and whose guises I admire) M. Fulke and M.
Whitaker I mean, had acquitted them selves noe better against their several
adversaries, then M. Some has done against his, your famous university that
you boast of, had been like enough to have received a scarre in the face long
ere this, and therefore let your D. ruffle it never so much in big words and
countenances, yet I can tell you, if he relieve us not better in his next supply
then he has done hithertoe, (be he as learned as he will) we Oxforde men shall
think that M. Penri has a great dealo more cause to fear th'Archb. his
purseuant, then your D. pen. For what call you lerning in this age? I would
you would your self take some pains to draw an Analisis of your Doct. book
and then tell me whether we judge amiss. For mine own part I confess to you
I have viewed it and reuiewed it, and I find very little in it, but that which
may easily be drawn to one of these 4: heads.

The 4. principal heads or common places of M. Somes book 1 Bitter and
spightful speeches, to bring his adversary into danger. 2 Bare and naked
assertions, as if it were sufficient that himself does say so. 3 Needless
positions that few or none ever doubted of. 4 The bare authority and Judgment
of men without ground.


In these, with the begging of the question, and the praising of himself,
lies the sum of his whole book, I believe, I say, you cannot bring me many
things out of his treatise, but it may easily be referred to on of these. And
these you know be noe such fortresses but that they may easily be battered and
laid flatt to the earth by a weker Cannon then ever M. Penri shote in his life.
By the way I pray you remember, that I do not in any sort take exceptions to
M. Somes learning in general, that is, to that knowledge which he fansieth to
be in him self, I meddle not with that: only to the learning which it has
pleased him to give us a taste of in this book, this is the thing that I think
a very mean Scholar may justly complain of without danger. And I am verily
persuaded, (I bear so much reverence to the man) that if it were his doing,
he wrote it altogether without study, as it were upon a spleen, or in have as
he was riding to Lambeth. Now for the first point which is his bitter and
overpassionate speeches, I think you have heard enough already, for no longer
a treatise then that is, I dare say you think it was enough euea of
conscience. For the second, vz. his autos ephe, that is his bare and peremptory
assertions, if you find that in any eight penny book of some 40. leaves or
there abouts, (for I think of it self it be not much bigger) your D. has
cloyed our ears with above 400. of those speches, without Master Some has in
his book, above 400. naked assertions.
either sap or salt in them, will you not think it strange? To tell you the
very truth, I have taken some pains to reckon them lease by leaf, and I find
them as I tell you above 400. much after the nature and complexion of these:
you are not ready: you are to seek in the principles of divinity: you know
not your ignorance: your speeches are very idle: it is noe great matter what
you say: your bolt is soon shot, your water is very shallowe: your eyes are
not matches, such trisles are toe base for your great spirits: your conclusion
is nothing else but an. Anabaptistical flourish: your argument is very naught
and fancy: your argument is as weak as a staff of reed: your argument is as
strong as a roppe of sand, every child may see the weakness of it, but I
must be content to put it up, it is such ware as you have. He that wants
wood must burn turse: your writings are like the wind. This beat of yours
is like a blaze of thorns, it will last but a while: your cause is naught:
your armor is not of proof: your divinity is as a low ebb: your arguments
are pitiful: your answers are sily, etc. And if I should go one I think I
should tire you: I hope you will witness with me, though there may be some
little eloquence, yet there is noe great learning, Logic, or divinity in
this. It is sure, but the good luck that some men have over others, for if
poor M. Penri had written thus, he should have been chronicled I warrant you,
for a cobling welchman while he had lived.

For the third Pillar of M. Doctors book, that is needelesse positions
whereof there is small controversy, I think I shall not need to wander far
to find your presidents, for M. Some himself in the beginning of both his
books, does lay them down to us in a role: it were to no use and a mere
spending of time to runn through them all, and therefore I will only record
some few of them for a taste of the rest.

A godly prince (says he) may and ought to compel his subjects (if any
refuse) to th'externall service of God.

This being a matter so notably and thoroughly handeled already by M. Fulke,
and M. Wyborne against Howlet, that almost there cannot any thing be added to
that which they have set down, I muse your D. would be at cost to print us a
new Almanacke of the last year, I do not know of any that profess the holy
religion of God in soundenesse, and sincerity, that will deny this. And
therefore I dare say for M. Penri, that he will willingly with heart and hand
subscribe to it, yea and I think he will if need be, add one clauze more to
it for the farther strengthening, and confirmation of the princes authority,
vz. That the same Prince that has power de jure to do this, ought also to
compel every preaching minister to be ordinarily resident on his charge: And if
that were put in execution, I think M. Some and some others, should not be
suffered to roue and range up and down as they do, neglecting their charges,
and breathinge after chaplainship, promotions, and I know not what well, after
this he tells us forsooth: That able teachers ought to be provided for the
Churches, so much as can be: for the furtherance whereof (if we may believe his
word) him self has been a very earnest and humble suppliant both by writing
and speech, yea and he has received very comfortable answer of very great 54.
and honorable personages, etc. and is not that well? Therefore ye hotspirited
men wheresoever you be, ye may now sit down and surcease your suites and
supplications to her majesty, and the parliament, for you see M. Some has
dealt in it, and has receued a comfortable and honorable answer. Nay farther
he is not afraid to tell us. That the teachers of religion must have
maintenance. That God blesses those kingdoms with peace which promote the
Gospel. That the church of England is the visible Church of Christ. That
magistracy is M. Somes Book cases
Gods ordinance. That the reading of the holy Scriptures does edify. That the
scripture is of credit it self. That a sermon is not of th'essence of a
sacrament. That they which are once baptized, must not be rebaptized, etc.
Theseyou see be good sure points all, but I dare say you think there be non of
them very weighty Schole points for all that. For mine own part I would be
loath I tell you, to be opponent in any one of them, for I fear my brain could
scarce devise any probable Sylogisme to shake or batter them with. Nay though I
confess my self to be one of the porest haglers that ever our university
bread, yet I durst by Gods assistance defend any on of these against a 100. D.
Somes, if it were possible to have so many in a land. And I tell you true, when
I first ran over these your D. deep mysteries, I thought certainly I had
been at one of M. Deane of Westminster his sermons, because he good soul,
seldom handeleth any controversies, but tells the people in good sound english:
That virtue is good, and vice is evil. And that me thinks I durst defend my
self (if need were,) as well as any of the rest of M. Somes authentical
principles.

But you shall see he will go deeper then thus. For as he has taken pains
(we thank him,) to set us down a proper short Catechisine in the end of
his book, to prove to M Penries face, That the regenerate cannot fulfill the
law of god: so you shall perceive that when occasion serves, he will not spare
him no more then another man, were he better then he is, and therefore he
fears not to tell him, and that roundly to: If you deny (says he) that the
scriptures read by unpreaching ministers do edify in any sort, you speak
blasphemously: yea and to the same effect in another place, he boldly lays
before us, certain uncontrollable oracles, but yet such as we have heard talk
of before: He that disliketh (says he) the reading of holy scriptures is a
Swink fieldian heretic: He that mistiketh the administration of the sacraments
is a Massalian heretic: He 184. Mast. Sines book cases.
that misliketh th'invocation of our gracious god, is a filthy Athiest.
Cocksure, your Dan^y lay his life on it, and twenty to one, that th'ignorant
Welshman, with all the fantastical crew, will subscribe to this without
racking or imprisonment. For these be called questions without controversy.
Alas, that reading does aedifie, considering what a great ancient M. Some
is, might very well, for any thing we see, have been left to one of his Junior
pupils to have declaimed in, because it was never yet, our happs to meet with
that man (if he were a scholar) that doubted of it. In deed if he had laid
down the question thus, Whether bare and simple reading be any part of the
ministers office, this peradventure might have bred a demur even among the
learned: otherwise, that a minister may read, and by that his reading, some
aedification may arise, as also that he may sing, or do some other good
things jointly with the congregation, we make no question: But when he has
read or song, and done all this, then the question is: whether he have done any
thing that is peculiarly annexed, or appropriate to his office, more then to
another man: For we suppose that the office of a minister, stands only in
these 3, Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments. I speak not here of discipline, but
only of doctrine. I know very well, that there are many lawful and
commendable preparations or circumstances, before a man come to the execution of
his office, which cannot for all that, rightly be called any part of the
office it self. As for example, a Judge may ride, may walk, may hear a sermon,
may confer with the gentlemen and Justices, may sit down on the bench, yea and
he ought in wisdom (as occasion serves) to do al these, yet nevertheless the
very knot and execution of his office consists in non of al these, but only
in hearing and determining, for all the rest he might as well have done before he
was a judge. Even so we doubt not, but that a minister may walk, may sit, may
confer with his parishioners, may distribute to the poor, may sing, may
read the Scriptures, either privately or publicly (yea and al these in their
time and place with a good conscience, but yet all this while (say we) he is not
come to the very marowe and execution of his office, til he come, To divide the
word aright: etc. because all the rest, he might well enough have done before
he was a minister. For if you should ask me now, by what thing a christian man
is singled out from a mere natural man, I cannot well answer you by his
speech, because that you know, is incident to al men by nature, therefore I
must answer you, by the holy profession of his religion. Eue^ so, if you ask
me what is the thing that singles out a minister in his o^^ce from other
christians, if I should answer you, bare reading, you would laugh at me, for it
sounds to harsshe in the ears of the learned: explosa est sentencia, it is
hissed out of the Schools, that unless poor M. Deane of Satum take it up
again, I believe it will lie in the chanel these 20. years before any man be
so mad to touch it. Therefore I answer you, it is not his reading but his
sound preaching in a lawefull function that seuereth him from other men:
Neither if you mark it, does our Savior himself in that special charge of
his to his Apostles, couple reading with Baptizing but preaching, bidding them
go preach and baptize: And put case her majesty, should command a mere lay
man to read the Scriptures publicly in the Church, should this man sin in
refusing or no? I would gladly know. I take it he should, because there is no
warraunt to the contrary in the word: on the other side, if she should
enjoine a mere lay man to take unto him the pastoral office, by dividing the
word and dealing with the sacraments, this man I suppose should sin
grievously in obeying, because he ought rather to die, then to vsurp that
office without the lawful calling of the church, so that the bare and sole
authority of the Magistrate, is sufficient for the one but not for the other.
But this by the way, is but my poor judgment, whereby it may appear to you,
that simple reading, in what account so ever it be amongst men, yet is it not
as I conceive, the thing that does single out a minister from another
christian. It must be only (as I told you before,) the sound preaching of the
word in a laweful function. etc. Bear witness I pray you, that I speak here
of sound preaching, that is, of dividing the word aright which the Apostle
calls orthotomein, I speak not of babbling or of handeling a text with a
Curricombe, in that I join with M. Some with all my heart, and therefore I wish
he had been with me the 10. of November last, at a certain Church by the
exchange, I think they call it Bartholmewe church, where it may be his ears
would have glowed, and (if he durst have been so bold,) I do not think but
he would have condemnned the preacher and that worthily for his babbling. For
there he might have heard him fetch many vagaries, and spend the most of his
time in invectiues against good men, telling th'audience to this effect. That
for the papists thanks be to God, we need not so greatly fear them, for they
were through the vigilans and wisdom of the magistrate reasonably hampered,
god be blessed for it: but now the magistrate was only to cast his eye on the
fantastical crew, such as troubled the peace of the Church, otherwise there
might fall out many mischiefs: For so was it done to the Donatists in S.
Augustines time, and so to other heretics in other times. And naming another
D. of the Church, either Basil or Chrysostom I take it, I know not well
whether: he told them greatly to their comforts, That he would first tell them
his words in greek, and afterward in English, and so he did, belike because
they should know that he was a grecian: what a sweet receipt was that trow ye,
to such of the people as were either sick, or troubled in mind? I hear that
This preacher (as I understood since, was M. Some himself.
M. Some uses to come to that Church himself sometime: I pray you when you see
him, be in hand with him to shake up that snuffing preacher for his babbling

Farther I pray you bear witness with me, that in singling out his minister
from other men, I do ad to, The sound preaching of the word, A lawful function.
For as I know that gifts alone cannot make a minister without a calling, so
on the other side do I think, that the bare calling of the Church alone, is not
sufficient neither to make a minister, for so might a woman be a minister,
which M. Some himself denies: But both these meeting in one man, that is,
gifts and calling together, these I take it, do make a full minister to us
ward, though there be a Nullitie in regard of some inward manne that we know
not of. Now whereas some do tell us, that Admissio indignorum ab Ecclesia non
tollit naturam and essentiam Ministerij: that is, The admission of unworthy
ones by the Church, does not altogether destroy the nature of the ministry:
As we were much to blame if we would strive against this, so it seems they
say little or nothing to the matter in question, for th'ambiguitie is in this
word Indignorum, unworthiness. I know that a practizing papist is an
unworthy subject, but yet a subject: So may a man of vicious life be a
minister, though an unworthy minister: But on the other side, what say you to
these? A dumb man from his cradle is an unworthy orator: A blind man from his
cradle is an unworthy painter. These be good sense and good English both, and
yet it is impossible that any of these should be at all, such as they are named
to be: either the first an Orator, or the Intter a Paynter: And therefore I
take it (by their favor) that this word unworthiness, is something too
general, and thereby something too weak, to express sufficiently, Questiones
and controuersiae energiam: because it may as well be applied to that which is,
as to that which is not, and as M. Penri says, by a mangled body, that some
be so mangled that they have no life in them at all. So say we by these
unworthy ones: some be so unworthy, as they are not at all that thing whereof
they have their name. And therefore where M. Some says, That the Sacraments
are not the better for the worthiness, nor the worse for th'vnworthinesse of
the man: we yield he says true, and yet nothing to the matter: yet me thinks
it had been a great deal nearer the point, if in liew of these unworthy ones,
they had incerted these words, Little qui non sunt omnino ministerij capaces,
that is, Which are not at all capable of the ministry: and then we suppose the
assertion had been sound and to the purpose: For not th'admission of every
unworthy one (in that in deed they say true) but th'admission of such an
unworthy one, as is altogether incapable of the ministry (as infants, women
fools, mad men, dumb men, etc) those we say, do wholly overthrow the
nature and essence of the ministry, and is (as the lawyers call it) a none est
factum or as a lease that is void as soon as it is made. Whereupon if they
reply, that Sola Ecclesia vocat, The Church only calls in this age, and that
God does not now (as in times past by Paul and others) call extraordinarily,
or miraculously from heaven, but has resigned that power solely and wholly to
his Church, we grant it is true: But then the question is, what kind of
power this is, whether it be a power without exception, or a limited power? We
say it is a limited power and has his bounds, that it cannot pass (I speak
not here de iure, but de posse) And indeed it must needs be so in dispight of
our hearts, though we should burst our selves in wrangling about it. For first I
am sure they will not deny, that the Church in this her admission, is limited
only to living creatures, for if she should make an image a minister, there
were presently a nullitie. Secondly she is limited only to the seed of Adam,
for if she should make an Ape a minister, there were presently a nullitie.
Thirdly out of the seed of Adam she is limited only to the sex of man, if she
should make a woman a minister, there were presently a nullitie. Out of the
sex of man she is limited only (say we) to those that can speak, and have the
use of reason: for if she should make a natural, a madd man, or a dumb man
a minister, there were presently (as we think) a nullitie. Now M. Penri goes
an ase further, and says, that of those men that can speak, and have the use
of reason, she is limited only to such as have gifts, and are in some
measure Thithacticoi, or else (as he holds) there is also a nullitie. And
here is that so heinous and blasphemous error of his, that has so distempered
M. Some, and for the which he would so feign have the magistrate to conjure
him. Which, whether it be an error or no, as for mine own part, I am not able
to defyne it, so yet do I see, that when men have run themselves windlesse
in wanderinge, yet must they of force in the end come to this, to enquire,
Qualis est potestas Ecclesiae in admissione ministro rum, and quibus
circumscripta finibus, that is, what kind of power the Church has, and within
what bounds to be limited, for therein consists the very marowe and sinews
of the whole controversy, to know how far the Church may stretch her arm in
this case. Yet by the way I cannot but muze at one thing, that the popish
churches should find more grace and fauout in this our Metropolitan State,
then the reformed churches of other nations. For it is granted you see, that
the popish shauelings and their priests of Baal have forsooth a calling though
afaultie one, but do you think that this will be granted to those of our
ministers that were only ordained by the reformed churches beyond sea? Nay
soft, Be judge by M. Whittingham, whom it is known th'Archb. of York called
in question for his calling, in that he was made minister at Geneua: I have
heard also, that M. Trauers when he was thrust out of the Temple, was bidden by
my Lord of Cant. to prove his calling, alleging that he was no minister, (for
what authority says he in his choler, has M. Cart. to make a minister?)
Therefore you may see the luck of it, popish wretches and Apostates, breathed
upon only by such as themselves are, have a calling, but other worthy men
(caled to the ministry by worthy churches) must sine a new for their letters
of orders, is not this good stuff think you? Well sithence it is known that
M. Trauers was in deed ordained a minister by a reformed church beyond the
sea, I would your D. durst in his next discourse, be as kind to that poor
ministry of his, as he has been hithertoe to the popish priesthood, that is
of courtesy, (in respect of the credit of the Reformed churches,) to give it
some allowance of a calling, yea albeit his grace of Cant. should stand against
it. For he knows it can be no more blasphemy in M. Penri, to say that the
popish church can not make a minister, then it is in an other greter man to say
that the reformed churches cannot make a minister. But I fear me M. Some is
not at leisure, he will pleasure us in an other matter, for such a dash with a
pen as this might happily breed a scabbe, why is it not well that he takes
our parts in the Nullitie of women's ministry: but still men will be regrating
more at his hands? Therefore because we will hold him where we have him, I will
be so bold in that point to record his words, lest in time he give us the
slip men grow so giddy headed now a days: They that have heard my sermons
says he, or read my writings do know very well that I allow of non to preach
the word, 81
or administer the sacraments, without a calling, therefore neither woman nor
private man: plainly implying that it is impossible for a woman to have any
calling: I promise you, I was glad when I read it with all my heart, for I was
half a fraide before, I tell you that we should have some learned paradoxe, or
some godly treatise in the defense of the ministry of weomen, with this or the
like pretty gloze, Quoad substantiam, but not quoad qualitatem: or else with
this. That they should have had a calling though a faltie one, which had been
but peccatum ecclesiae: or else with this, that the sex had been but of
th'essence of a lawful and good minister, but not of a minister simply, and
that for us it should suffice only to muffie our faces, with a settled persuasion
that Ministerium is datum, and acceptum, and so hang wholly upon th'ordination
of the church without farther questioning or inquirye. All this I tell you, I was
a fraide of, but now sithence we are sure of M. Some one our side, we shall
fear the less the assaults of others, as having on string more to our bow
then we looked for. For he is as learned in his conceit as the best of them,
and if he take a pitch, I believe he will be as hot as the best of them toe for
need. And thus by occasion of your D. worthy position, that reading does
edisie, have I fallen as you see cursorie into the question of the ministers
office, and so of the calling of the ministry: It is but my poor verdicte
you see, and therefore you need not make a record of it, unless you list,
for you know what a deep clarke I am, if you desire farther to be satisfied in
the point, I referr you over to him, to whom the matter especially
appertains, who I hope will either answer his adversary with less ven^me
and more modesty then he finds at his hands, or else give over the cause in
silence: For mine own part, as my skill is not great, so do I not hold any
thing, but I am apt enough to recall it, if you or a meaner man then you, can
bring me the word to refute it, but hithertoe I confess I see noe farther.

Well your D. has yet an other wipe at th'ignorant Welchman, which I had like
to have forgotten, the best is, it is with an if as well as the rest: If you
thynk 176
says he, that all the popish sort, that died in the popish Church are damned,
you think absurdly: most true they that think so, think absurdly in deed,
and I promise you, therein I must hold with M. Some, that if M. Penri think
so, he is much to blame. But I pray you ask your D. when you see him, upon
what wall, or with what cole M. Penri did record this thinking of his, for as
yet I believe this monster is unborn, and unheard of. And how if M. Penri or
some of the fantastical crewe should now in riquitall say thus. If you think
M. Some that the calling of a B. or an Archb. is agreeable to the word, you
think absurdly: or thus, if you hold that a man may be anonrestdent from his
charge at his pleasure, you err grossly: or thus, if you say that the
Discipline and government of the Church, is not prescribed in the word, and
that Moses was amore faithful lawgiuer then Christ our Savior, you speak
blaspemously? Why what is all this to M. Some? For he is not sure so gross to
maintain any of these, and therefore we doubt not but he may wipe his mouth,
and wash his hands, and wonder to whom they speak. Even so may M. Penri I
dare warrant for the other, who though he be shrewdly threatened by many of
these rigorous and thundering Statutes of M. Somes, yet so long as every one
of them have their gentle desaisans, there is no danger in any of them, for
Threatened men (they say) live long, if M. Penri do so or so, then says M.
Some he speaks blasphemously, he ers grossly, and thinks absurdly, and I know
not what. But if he do not so, then belike he has his supersedeas, and
discharge from errors, absurdities, and blasphemies and al. This is some
comfort yet, and may happen fall out well in the issue, for these isfs,
imaginations and supposalls of men, do weigh so light in the balance of the
wise, that they may as easily with one and the same breath be defaced, as ever
they were coined at the first, for who can let a man to batter in pieces that
pretty Image which he made himself. Therefore for a full answer to all these
isss, if I were as M. Penri, I would no more, but fair lap up this sentence
in some letter, and send it M. Some of a toaken, to see whether he know it or not: I deal plainly with you. If my answers please you not, confute them
directly, and not with iffes, ands, and whyes: In which kind of answering (if
I may call 174
it answering) you have a special grace. And again man other place: When you
prove this if of yours. I will accept 91
your answer, etc. Me thinks when M. Some looks in this glass, he should never
trouble the reader more with any of those conjecturall syllogismes, made only
of iffes and ands. As concerning this last if of h^s, I hope there is no man
so far gone, to pronounce any definitive sentence upon all those that
departed this life in popery. That being the only office of God him self, it
must needs be too much presumption, and beyond the reach and commission of any
mortal man, so to define: But if it had pleased M. Some to have added but one
word more to his sentence, and set it down thus: All the popish sort that dye
papists in the popish Church. If I say, he had added but this word papist,
the^ do I not see (by his favor) hat there had been any absurdity in it at al:
For we hold, that to him that dies a papist (let him do never so many good
works, and bu^lde if it were possible, ten thousand Colleges or Churches)
the very gates and porteculleses of Gods mercy are quite shutt up, and all
those his glorious work, how sweet soever they may be to others, shall be but
wrack and misery to himself. And in this point if either M. Hooker, M. Some, or
all the reverend Bb. of the land do stand against us, it shall little dismaie
us, we say with your own D. (but yet not altogether as he) I^s^er mill, he
says Platonis, but we say veritatis calculus. Now if you tell me, that a man
may return at the last gasp, and so renouncing all other means, cast him
self wholly upon the merits and bloodsheading of Chr^ste Jesus, (as M. Some
says in one place, That many of them have died Gods servants) then say I, this
man dies not a papiste, whatsoever he were before: Nay M. Fox says flatly,
he dies a Lutheran, for Justification by merit and works, is the very heart,
life and soul of papistrie.

By these and the rest, it may easily appear to you, that your D. might very
well have spared the better half of his pains, and have done full as much
good as he has. They say it is an evil bargain that no body thriues by.
Therefore if it should fall out so now, that for all these sweet lessons,
drawn with such advisement into several chapters, neither M. Some himself
should be the more reverenced, nor M. Penri and his disciples the better
instructed: what should a man say to this world? but that Satione belike had a
frowning aspect when the books were sent to the press. Now if you ask me
what should be the reason why so many things out of question, should be thus
jumbled and enterlaced as it were, in one roll, with things of question and
controversy indeed, let this suffize you, that there is a mystery in it, yea
and such a mystery, as peradventure every one sees not, and I believe I
could go near to guess where M. D. learned it, I pray you what call you him,
that gives in his coat. An ass with a tippet about his neck, and writes
underneath, Come and see? He should sure be some ancient gentleman by his
coat: I mean that proper scholar that could speak English before I was
borne: he that has given Calvine and Beza such a blow, as they could never
speak word of good Irish since: I mean him that sucked so long, till he could
carry his mother a stool, and that physicians say, is a shrewde thing for the
brain. That pretty pigeon that wrote the 16. great volumes in defense of the
Hierarchy of Bb. but as he has handled it, it may serve as well for the foul
cawsey betwixt Gloucester and Bristow: I do not mean Tarleton man, Tushe no, I
mean that musical Poet, that can so ingeniously translate rhyme into prose,
and prose into rhyme again: That patch of S. Mary's pulpit, what should I call
him? Bridges, Bridges, a shame on him, I shall hit on his name anon: This is he
I fear me, that taught M. Some this trick, and yet when it is looked into, it
will be found but a sluttish trick neither I believe. This Bridges you must
understand, is bound in a recognisance. The condition is this, That if ever he
hurt puritan by any learning, reason, logic, divinity, The recognisance
that M. Bridges stands bound in.
or good gramaticall sense, then he sorsaits all that ever he has to her
Majesty, and is utterly undone for ever. Now because he has a pretty good
will to hurt them, and yet this Recognisance stands so full in his way, that
he cannot well do it without his loss, see what a fetch that ioule of his has
co^triued: he brings me in after his patched manner, certain assertions
(which himself does not well understand neither) Some of the Frenchmen against
the government of women, some of th'anabaptists against the lawfulnes of
magistracy, some of the Brownistes that say we have no Church. And these
forsooth, he mingleth as well as his reach will serve him (like darnell among
wheat) with such other sound doctrines and grounded truethes as his brethren
have set down in defense of Discipline, and every hand while he bids them,
Beware least they fall into any of those soul errors, for their speeches and
writings tend shrewdly that way: which he for his part, good man, is sorry for:
And why does the patch do this, but only to draw the state to believe (if he
could) that his puritan brethren whom he writes against, are in one and the
same predicament with these? As if the state were as bleare eyed as himself,
and could not discern both of the soundnes of the one, and of the
wretchedness of the other, unless they borrowed his glass to look in. And
were not that state in an woeful taking think you, that should fetch their
pattern of direction from such an Astrologer as he? By the way, now I think
on it, I would you could get M. Some (marry it must be in his good mood,
when his choler is past) to tell you betwixt you two, whether he thinks the
better scholar in good earnest, the poor ignorant Welshman or the deane of
Sarum: I know he has already past his sentence of condemnation very far
upon one of them, making him in all good knowledge, no better then a very
abject of the earth: but what then? yet me think* on the other side, he should
never look advisedly upon his brother Bridges, but he should blush for joye.
And this offer I dare be bold to make him, on the behalf of that worthy
deane, that let him take into his hands, not only M. Penries works, but the
writings of all those that they call puritanes for the space of these twenty
years or better: if I do not find more gross, proud, popish, treasonable and
blasphemous absordities, more impudent reuilings, and slanderous untruths,
more apparent contradictions, more Skoggins jeasts, more ryming in prose, more
childish foolerie., more sottish shameless, and senseless periods in that one
book alone, then can justly be collected out of all the other, I will loose my
head for it.

And yet would you think that in this learned and lightsome age of the Gospel,
any man's eyes should be so beglazed, or his forehead so beseared as to bestow
a laudate upon such a companion as this? Now sure we shall come to a pretty
pass shortly, what trow you will be the next piece of work, that that good
fellow will venture to commend unto us? Belike the virtuous attempts of the
Spanish Inquisitors, provided that they will not disturb th'ierarchie of L. Bb.
Some sweet Admonition to the people of England, in praise of such honest men as
these, would sure marvelous well, with that savage comendation of Parson Bridges
his bo^ke They say it was my L. of Winchesters work: If it were, then has his
L. woone his spurrs for ever, if in nothing else, yet in this, that he ha^h so
l^berally bestowed a cold piece of pasty crust upon that packsadle of Sarum:
well whosoever it were, if it were an Oxford man, I must needs be sorry for him,
because his honestest shift must be now to plead ignorance. That he by his
troth took it to be a profound piece of work, in his poor conceit, otherwise
if he be learned, and of judgment in deed, what need the puritans write
against him, when his own very hand has been the instrument, to give himself
such an open brandmarke of impudency, as if he should live the age of
Methuselah he should hardly be able to wipe it out: being a thing impossible,
that any man of sound judgment, should ever commend that book in earnest, but
that the very light of his own heart, must straight flashe him in the face with
the lie. And I would they durst put their Lordly jurisdictions upon the jumpe
of this trial, I would I say they durst hazard their whole title upon this
issue, whether that be an ignorant or a learned book or not. They have had
heretofore many a round offer of disputation, touching the unlawfulness of their
callings, which I will never blame them if they brook not, for if they would
accept of it, (their case being with them as it is) they were worse then
mad, but this is some thing a less offer then that, and of less prejudice
and disgrace unto them, because it touches them but a latare as it were, only
in this, that they have not blushed to commend this book unto us for the
sufficiency, and we one the other side, hold the slat contrary, that it was
one of the reproaches of our Land, that ever it was suffered to pass the
press. Now in this case who must be judge? If I should name Oxforde men
unto you, it may be you would think me partial. Therefore seeing M. Bridges
himself is a Cambridge man, let him hardly be tried by his peers of the same
university, and let the grandfathers (if they dare,) put it to the censure of
D. Fulke D. Whitaker, M. Cartwright and M. Chaterton, men I hope as well able to
judge as all the L. Bb. in Christendom. And if by the veredict of these it be
not found as I have said, one of the poorest, grossest, and rawest piece of
woorks of that bigness, that came out in English since her Majesty's reign, let
the conquest hardly be theirs, and let them possess their seats in peace, and
the reproach light one the puritans for ever: if otherwise, then let them yield
themselves guilty and resign. But I believe as well as they love M. Bridges,
they had rather see him over the ears in purgatory, or fast bound in the
house of Inquisition, then to hazard the least of their Bishopptickes, upon
any such trial.

With what reason then can M. Some so distemper himself against M. Penri for
one poor error, if it be an error, crying out so loud, and so often,
blasphemy blasphemy, and I know not what, and in the mean time, suffer that
clotheade of Sarum to go away with a whole fardle of errors and absurdities,
and not to say Black was his eye? Or what measure call you this, not to give M.
Penri leave to dissent from Calvin for once no not even there, where he
supposes he has the word one his side, and to ride by M. Bridges as if he
saw him not, when he takes upon him to tread both Calvin and Beza under his
feet, yea and to throw dust, as it were, one their faces, even in those points
where all the learned know they have both the Scriptures, the counsels and
fathers with them? Surely there can be noe indifferency in this at all. M.
Bridges says that his good and learued discoursing brethren, (for those I take
it be his words,) do err fowly, and fall into a number of monstrous and
impossible absurdities, and why? Forsooth through th'ouermuch credit of these
famous men, Calvin, Beza, Daneus and the rest. But how shall we do now? M.
Some coms in the neck of this with his appeal, and remoues this matter with a
Sursurare to a higher court, and there he puts in a quite contraty plea to M.
Bridges, telling us more then once, that he for his part, rests wholly in
the judgment of these excellent men, and that if M. Penri had done so, he had
sailed a sure compass, and not swarued from Gods book, etc. Yea and he adds
moreover, and that in good earnest I warrant you, that he more estemeth of one
Calvin, then of a thousand Penries. And will he give his poor brethren leave,
to answer Father Bridges in that plain matter toe. That they more esteemed of
one Calvin or Beza, then of a thousand Bridges? Why alas then the poor man,
is undone, his whole book may go to the washhouse. But in this foul rent of
judgment betwixt your 2. D. what will M. Some say to this? He that was last B.
of Norwitch and is now (if I be not deceived,) either of Peterborough or of
Worcester, calling once before him a godly minister of Suffolk, one M. Swette,
about some small breach of the book in the administration of baptism when the
said M. Swette for his just defense, had brought forth the judgment of M.
Beza, the good B. in his angrye mood replied thus, what tellest thou me of
Beza? Beza I tell thee is but a brabler. In like manner my L. of Cant. having
once before him one Thomas Settle a preacher, about some doctrine that he had
taught of Christ's descending into Hell, when the said M. Settle alleged for
himself, that the doctrine taught by him, had not only the warrant of the holy
scriptures, but also the approbation and testimony of the best writers of our
age, as namely, of M. Calvin and others: What tellest thou us of Calvin? (Quoth
the B. in very disdainful sort,) I tell thee there are here that can teach
Calvin. At which time, there satte in commission, th'Archb. him self, the
Deane of Westminster, D. Pearne and Cousins, a proper band of musicians to
teach Calvin. But belike he meant it only by his old Patron and benefactor, D.
Pearne, for who but he could teach Calvin to fetch a turn, and a return? As
for any other kind of good learning, whereby a man's knowledge might be bettered,
or his conscience comforted, he that had Caluins guistes, and would make any
pilgrimage to Lambeth for a supply, were worthy to be muffled in M. Bridges h^s
hoode. By this you may see that if M. Penri should set light by Calvin or Beza,
(as I dare say it is far from his very heart) being men that I doubt not he
does many ways reverence as notable instruments of God, yet I say, if he
should do so, he has you see his warrant and protection under seal, and
that from M. Somes betters, even of the highest and grauest prelates of our
Land, wherein I observe one pretty trick, that ye Cambridge men have above
others, that is, that ye can m^ke of the new writers, as Merchants do of
their Counters even what ye list, sometime a 100. pounds, and sometimes 6.
pence against M. Penri, Calvin shall be instarmontis, ask M Some else. But
against M. Bridges, or against the hierarch^e of L. Bb. or any thing that they
hold in their consistory, both Calvin, Beza, and Danaeus, yea and there were
an hundredth mere of them, they shall be all put to silence for want of
subscr^ption.

Therefore for that point of relying so wholly and absolutely upon the
authority of men, (which as I have said, is an other great pillar of your
doctors book,) I do not see but that M. Some (consideringe how feign he
would be thought somebody in the eye of the learned,) has by this means
rather disaduantaged him self, by bringing the credit of his own judgment
into baser account, the^ it may be, his srends would have w^shed him, who might
otherwise peradventure in some things, have conceived as reverently of him as
of Calvin himself. I remember I heard once a notable divine say in pulpit. That
he was not worthy to be a minister of the Gospel, that could not in some
measure wring sorth the sense of the holy ghost, even by the Scripture it
self without an interpretor: So far was he, from resting in any man's
judgment, that he did altogether condemn those that brought nothing else with
them into the pulpit, but what they had gathered out of Augustine, Cyprian,
Aretius, Calvin, or some such old or new writer. And I put case Calvin and Beza
had never written, how would M. Some have done? would his breasts trow ye,
have been so dried up, that he should never have given milk of his own? that
had been pity. I confess to you I reverence D. Fulke, and no disparagement to
any, I think him universally as well learned as ever Calvin or Beza was: But
what then? yet were it you know, but a poor judgment in matter of
controversy, barely to say thus, I rest wholly in his judgment. I had
thought that where Calvin and Beza had been wide, as no question but they are
wide sometimes (for I dare not trust him I tell you that never held error)
there a man might have had some resolution at M. Somes hands, with reasons
alleged of their several slips and ouersights, but now I perceive he that had
made such a journey to master Some, should have but lost his labor, and have
been frustrate of his hope, for it seems he would never have made him other
answer then this: Irest in their judgments. In which regard, there is some
reason yet, that M. Bridges should be privileged above others, though the good
soul do not rest in any of their judgmentes, because he does not lightly rest
in his own, for if he chance to set down any thing in one book, he is
commonly so kind hearted, to pull it back again in another, and what reason
were it, he should be more tied to them then to himself? Well, for all this
jesting, I would you would take some pains to reconcile me your two Cambridge
doctors. I know peradventure what you will say, that you are sure M. Some is
nothing so bleare-eyed as M. Bridges, and therefore to a wise man the choice is
soon made which way to incline: wherein as I have small reason to dissent from
you; (because I do not think I tell you, that for that disease, which they
call Th'opolexie of the brain, the Deane of Sarum has many fellows of his
standing in Christendom) so do I the rather think it strange, that so grave a
man as M. Some would be reputed to be, should be so bewitched, to follow in
any sort the sleps and traces of him, whom (in regard of all sound knowledge
and judgment) his own very heart must needs condemn for a drudge. And why
then should your D. so egerly pursue his poor adversary, by endeavoring to
make him hateful to the state, as if there were no way to clear the matter,
then by crying out on the Magistrate to conjure the man, sithence Master
Bridges uses it? Why should he so peremptorily condemn him he knows not,
with all the bitter and evenimed speeches he can devise, sithence M. Bridges
uses it? Why should he huddle in a number of isses, and strange opinions, that
all the world knows his adversary disavoweth, sithence M. Bridges uses it?
In sum, why should he not hate and detest al those bad sleights, that savor
neither of learning nor honesty, sithence so brazen a face as Bridges does
both use them, practice them, and can scarce make a good flylogisme without
them.

Now for that point of Begging the question, though it please him never so much
to flourish it over with the name of Beza and others, telling M. Penri that His
8^
answer is beggarly, etc. Yet by his favor, he cannot so wipe it away, but
that it may justly be charged and recharged upon his head with a witness. As
to begin wi^hal, what call you this I pray you? my reason is (says he) The
popish Church is a Church, though an unsound 163 175
Church: Twice or thrice at the least, he is at cost to bestow this upon us as
a reason, and what is this else, but a begging of the question. For how if a
man will not be so kind hearted, to grant him that it is not any visible
Church of God at al, where is he then? The^ you know he must about again, with
a new voyage into Portingall for more great reasings, for this reason will not
serve his turn. And that we have small reason to yield him this, shall appear
by Gods grace hereafter, because all the reasons that ever we could see
hitherto, have been in our judgments too weak to prove it to be any Church
of God at all. In the mean season, that it is doubtful and questionable at
the least: me thinks a man that so vanteth himself of reading and knowledge,
as M. Some does, should not be ignorant. We see Anthony Tyrrell, one of the
Seminary priesies that lately recanted at Paul's, makes a doubt of it in these
words, If that may be called (says he) a Church, that is infested with so
great a contagion, 4^
which being advisedly perused, seen and allowed, and so suffered to pass the
press without a razure, implies that (howsoever M. Some would over rule the
case, as he does many others with his Censociall rod) there is neither danger
nor heresy to hold the contrary, sithence our Church does allow men to make
an if at it. What means your D. then to plead it in evidence, as an unsuspected
testimony, when the thing is either disputable, or clean against him. Wherein
if he falted but once yet, as it were a crashe and away to recreat himself, he
were to be borne with: But it seems he has some delight in it, in that he
plods upon it in a manner in every lease, so that if his last treatise be well
examined, it will be found, that he has proved the question, by the thing in
question, and brought in one razed record to prove another, no less then 30.
or 40. times at the least. As in this 192. page where he gathers, that M.
Penri should say that the dispensation of our readers ministry does feed
none, therein he charge him To err grossly: And what is his reason, for it is
like you know, to be some reason of weight, that should so apparently convince
a man of so gross an error: My reason is (says he) that the Sacraments
administered by them, do comfort and feed the souls of 192
the godly communicantes: for the virtue of the Sacraments, depends not upon
any minister whatsoever, etc. Here mark I pray you, he takes it for granted,
that both the things delivered be sacraments, and that the men delivering them
be ministers, which as I conceive is the very maine point in controversy,
betwixt his adversary and him, vz. Whether our readers be ministers or no, and
thereby whether we can be assured to receive any Sacrament at their hands.
Notwithstanding all which, your learned D. as if he were strongly betaken with
M. Bridges his swimming in the head, will needs pawn us this for reason,
thinking belike, to go smooth away withal, That they are ministers forsooth,
and that the Sacraments from their hands, do both feed and comfort, etc. As if
I to prove unto you, that our Bb. should have no superiority over other
ministers, should bring in this for a reason, That their callings are
unlawful: Though this were true (as heaven and earth knows it to be most
true, howsoever like miserable men they strive to avoid it) yet you might
justly take exceptio^s to my proof, as a flat begging of the question. Euenso
look how often it shall please M. Some to warble upon any of these notes,
either That the popish Church is a church, though an unsound Church, or that
bare readers be ministers, or that the Sacraments from their hands do both
feed and comfort. etc. So often are we not afraid to tell him and tell him
again, that it is ameere childish begging of the question, unworthy of any
man that bears the face of lerning. And yet in this vein, does he very nere
spend and consume himself through our his whole book: Talk of a sacrament, why
he proves they deliver it thus, they have a calling: Speak of a Calling, he
proves it thus, they deliver a sacrament. And thus backward and foreward, up
and down, from one end to another, he werieth both him self and the reader,
so cloying us with A sacrament by a calling, and A calling by a sacrament, as
it is able to make a horse to break his halter, and me thinks ye Cambridge
men should blushe to think that ever any man's pen should be driven to that
penury: neither do I think that you can bring me the like pattern in any
treatise of that bigness written since Iur majesty's reign. And yet this is
the man that will have us know forsooth, that there is nothing to be had at his
hands in divinity matters, but by force of argument, if you think (says he)
that I will come of otherwise you 119
are in a wrong box: for I intend not to be at your whisle etc. The best is if
you mark it, he speaks here only of divinity matters, and nothing else, so
that if a man should happen to deal with him in Law, Physic, or
Philosophy, there is some hope yet we should find him more tractable. But in
divinity matters there is noe mercy with him, he has told us what we shall
trust unto, either arguments or nothing, yet I would you would ask him in his
ear, whether a Deanrye or a Bishopric, would not prevail as much with him
in mat^er of Divinity, as the best argument in Christendom? For if nothing
will do good of him but arguments, how shall poor M. Bridges and I do with
him, that have scarce a good argument betwixt us to throw at a dogs head? We
had best keep us out of his way, til the edge of these arguments be something
overworne, and that we hope will not be long, especially if he light once in
one of these sweet Deanries or Bishoprics. Then I trust a man may speak with
him under a couple of Capons, then I hope he will not be so hasty to fright us
with these forcible arguments. For it may be he will not be at leisure, he will
have somewhat else to do: his Chapel and his Organes, with other such
implements and impediments more, will keep him I trust from doing us any great
hurt, either in Lodgicke or Divinity while he lives. Then we look rather he
should do as the rest of his comperes are wont to do, that is, live of the
stock, and waste of the stoare, till they be within a little of bankerour: as
for arguments and matter of controversy, because they grow old themselves,
alas, they may leave that to Watson or Walton, Haslop or Monday, or some such
sweet Chapleine of theirs, who have excelent wits at whipcoard conclusions,
to manicle these puritans with.

Well as it is clear you see, that M. Some can beg the question as well as his
betters. So you shall well perceue, that he can speak for himself, if his
neighbors will not. And in deed for that good gift of sounding forth the
trumpet of his own praises, he shall have it of all, and of al. To begin
withal, what say you to this? If you will know (says he) what I think of
sound preaching before th'administration of the holy Sacrament, my 97
answer is, that I do greatly both like and commend it. etc. This mind was I
ever of since I knew what gods Religion and good Diuiuitie meant: how say
you? Is not sound preaching much beholden to M. Some, that will of his curcesie
vouchsafe it both his liking and commendation? Belike it had bin in some danger
to have lost his credit, if M. Some had not reached forth his hand to give it
some alowance: well for all that he had best look to it, that he do not only
affoard it his good lik^ng in words, but that he reverence it in deed from his
heart, and that to some measure of practice, if he love his own soul:
otherwise we can tell him it will bruize him into powder in the end, were he 10.
times better then he is, being (as he may e^silie learn by The Apostle) either A
Savor of life unto life, or A Savor of death unto death: and therefore not to
be dallied withal, as if it were as our pleasures to entertain it or reject
when we think good, but he that does it not, that is, he that does not
embrace the word preached, as the message of salvation with trembling and
fear, may be sure (without repentance) he very curse of God will overtake him
and his seed, what means your D. then to tell us so solemly of his good liking
of sound preaching, when in pain of Gods vengeance he is bound to like it?
But he tells us farther, that it has pleased many of excellent learning 66
and wisdom to like of his treatise. Sure if they did so, then is the old
proverb verified, that Blessing goes by savor. Some B. belike or Bishopl^ke
man, for I do not think that any man else would abuse him so much And you may
tell your Doct. from, me that certainly if they were Courtiers they did but
flout him, if they were learned and of judgment in deed, they did but flatter
him And therefore for mine own part I cannot so much condemn him in this
case, if in the want of Heralds and some other good friends, he be forced as
it were, to make an emblazure of his own coat armor himself, who can blame
him then: if in speaking of the ignorant ministers he tell us himself, when no
man else will tell us for him, That his writings and sermons are not Ajax shield
to cover them, 150
but the Lords sword to cut them? So that if any man be desirons new to find
out the swoorde of the Lord, where shall he redilier come by it, then about the
exchange or those places where M. Some uses to prech, there he may happen
hear news of it. But by the way can you show me any writer old or new, that
ever gave that name of the Lords sword to his own writings and sermons with
his own mouth, but only M. Some? I know right well, that the true preaching of
the word, is both the fire of God to burn, the water of God to quench, and
the sword of God to cut betwixt the marrow and the bones: but what of that?
Yet it may be doubted whether M. Some may justly brag of any such apparent
success of his labors: and if he could, yet me thinks modesty might have
taught him rather to have left the publishing and emblazinge thereof to others,
then thus out of season to be the proclaimer of it himself, indeed if a man
mark it, there is much a do through out his whole book with his writings, his
words, his reasons, his answers, his sermons, etc. which it seems he would
feign fasten upon posterity for laws and statutes, as if the ground of al
good knowledge were graven in the very wrinkles of his forehead: in one place
he tells M. Penri, that he may as easily fetch oil out of a flint, as any such
consequents out of his writings. etc. And again, They 81
which have heard my sermons, or read my writings, etc. And yet more, my own
words in this present Chapter, are as clear as the Sunn. etc. what should a
man talk of it then, when al things that M. Some does are so clear, so
direct, and in so good proportion? There be men in the world, that write out of
jointe sometimes, speak darkely and intricately, and make many evil
consequents, but they be not belike of that college that M. Some was of, where
a man shall as soon fetch oil out of a flint. etc. as any thing that has not
his weight and measure, and therefore no marvel if he call his own writings
and Sermons, The Lords sword to cut these ignorant ministers, for he that does
never any thing out of square, must needs cut deeply I trow. In deed if he
could so cut them, that they might be quite cut of the ministry, it were a
happy cuttinge both for them and our church. But that he is not the man that is
like to work this cure, we see by his looks. For as our Savior Christ says
to his disciples, This kind of Matthew. 17.
Devil is not cast out but by prayer and fasting. So we say to M. Some, that
this kind of Devil or deadly sore of our dombe ministry, (which may rightly
be called Vlous Matricis, that so feastereth and wrankeleth inwardly, even to
the very bowels of our Church, and State) can never be cured but with an humble
spirit, and a heart that bleedeth for the ruins of Sion, which because it is a
lesson, that it seems M. Some had never yet any leisure to take out, we cannot
look for any great thing from those cutting sermons and writings of his,
though he should blaze them to us a thousand times over: well may they help a
little to the lapping and shreading of the tree, but to hew it down by the
root (because the high minded heart is commonly by Gods just judgment plagued
with a bluntedged pen) we never look for at the hands of any such as M. Some
is, til he be come of a better spirit then hitherto he has showed himself.

Now that you may witness with me that I do him noe wrong in all this, I
pray you ask him when you see him, whose sweet sentences these be. Content 66
71
your self I have made no fault: The fault is in your eye, and not in your
pen: if that you mean that my reasons 70 69
are faulty in the eyes of the learned, you mistake the matter: if my reasons
were suitable to your senseless answers, 87 96
they were strange stuff: I swerve not one jotte from the cause I dealt in: My
answer to your objection is very direct: 132 102 103
My reason was a very sure one. For the clear proof of this point I have set
down sound reasons: I mislike the popish Priesthood and sacrafice as much as
he, and if 179 147
occasion serve, will set down sure reasons to shake them both in pieces. Sure
it is odds, your Doct. never looked down on his legs, but al one his
feathers, when he perfumed us with this sweet powder. But how say you, have
I done him any wrong? The places you see I have quoted, be you your self the
judge, here is neither swaruing nor falting, but al sound, sure and direct
therefore you may see what a treasure your university has bred up to our
Church, such a sure card as we may be bold to trust unto, if there do chance to
fall a dearth of learned men in this age. And in this glass it was belike,
that he beheld himself, when he told us so confidently, That there is some
reason that Gods truth should have more defense by him, then by his adversary.
144
Wherein I dare say you think, that the life blood of his own conceit did
tickle him a little too much. In deed if he be so sure a man as he supposes
himself to be, there must needs be more looked for at his hands then of other
poor men that are not half so sure: and it is like he speaks this
altogether in the ouerweening of his own sufficiency, to make us know what
ods there is betwixt his poor adversary and him, otherwise we see no reason
why the defense of Gods truth (according to the measure of his talentes and
place) should not every way be as dear and precious unto another as to M.
Some. I perceive it would distemper him unreasonably, if one should tell him
that Mast. Penri has discharged a better duty to Gods Church in one six
leaves, then ever M. Some did in all that ever he wrote, and yet I think he
that should say so, might have hands enough to subscribe to it, even of the
godliest and best affected subjects in the land: but I purpose not to enter
into that comparison, let each man speak as his heart has felt comfort, and
God give M. Some an humbler spirit. Only this much I think one may safely and
truly say, that in all that ever M. Penri has written (though M. Some have
beprouded him I know not how many times) no man shall be able justly to find
any one dashe with a pen, savoring so palpably the corruption of the heart,
through the good liking of himself, as is in a hundred places of M. Somes book.
Too long and loathsome it were to run through all, and therefore I will only
ad some few more to suit with the rest: Your fear (says he) that posterity
will not rest in my reasons, is a vain fear: My arguments for baptism by
unpreaching ministers are 94 73
such as you are not able to stir: if I have any learning, you do toto caelo
errare. For the knowledge that God has given me, I thank his majesty very
humblye: I can receive 66 139
no disgrace by any such as you are, etc. How say you, is not this a medicine
to give a modest man a vomit? or is not this able to make a man draw his mouth
to his elbowe, to hear a man professing learning, lay about him on this
fashion beyond the bonds of shamfastnes: Why did your D. never read Laus
propria sordescit in ore? Tush he is at a point you see, and goes on like a
censurer in his impious vain, telling master Penri, That as yet he makes very
mean account of his 66
judgment: And again in another place to the same effect, he presses him
shrewdly: You desire pardone of 82 83
me, if you recant (says he) you shall have an easy suit, otherwise I do and
will account very basely of you: Was not the man in a golden dream think you,
when he persuaded himself, that the whole poize of the matter lay upon his
account? Take heed therefore my masters of the fantastical crew, if you go on
your course, you see what will come of it, certainly M. Some will account very
basely of you, and where be you then? I know peradventure what you will say,
that this base account of his, is but as a man stuffed with draw, that fraieth
the birds but for a day or two, and afterward they fear not to pecke on his
head: And if you say so, then comes M. Some upon you again, full as
powerfully as before, and tells you plainly, That he will speak for you, if
you revoke your errors and heresies, otherwise 143
he will not once open his lip for you, or any such as you are, etc. And then
ye are dressed, if M. Some give you over once, therefore it is good to be wise,
and to look before you leap. Thus I hope you see that your Doct. is none of
these nice and shamefast divines that in the sense and feeling of his own good
gifts, is afraid to make known to you what he can do. But where abouts dwelt
he trow you, or what discourteous neighbors had he, that would thus suffer him
for want of help, to sing all the 4. parts himself? Fie, fie, that an ancient
D. of divinity should be thus used. It is sure long of these puritanes that are
dispisers of degrees of Schools, and thereby force men to fall a praising of
themselves, whether they will or no. But in good earnest speak your mind, do
you not think M. Some to be unmatchable in this Thrasonicall vein? When you
show me the like of any learned protestant of our time, I will then yield my
self faltie, and say I did him wrong. Till then you must give me leave to
think that he is among divines, the only prince of conceyted writers in this
age: unto al which unbridled Rhetorike of his, if I were as M. Penri, I would
never make any other answer then this, for thus it pleases Mast. Some to play
with him. It is easy to say so, and you might worst have said it. A party is
unfit to be a judge, I hope we shall not have a P^thagoras of you. Would you
have 67
your boystrous speech go for an oracle, and carry all as a stream before it?
It were a hard case, I trust you desire it not, if you do, you are not like to
have it: your writings are not as the laws of the Medes and Persians. After
all 92
his vanting of himself, if M. Penri should happen to send him this nosgaie in
a letter, being as he knows, eadem mensura, and very justly returned upon his
head (because of all men in the world, he might worst have song us this note in
his own praise) me thinks this should make him look downward a little, and
humble himself.

Now if one should ask your D. what was the reason why in both his tretises he
had such a special flying at this point, namely that the Church of England is
the vizible Church of Christ, which I hope M. Penri will not be so mad to
gainsay, I persuade my self he would answer, that he discharged the shot
only at the Brownists, and that M. Penri and his disciples must give some
other men leave, both to make fond arguments and to hold dangerous opinions,
as well as themselves nevertheless, that this should not be wholly M. Somes drift,
may sufficiently appear by these glaunces that follow.

The mark I fear that M. penri leuels at, is simyly to condemn, the outward
calling of the Ministry of out 35
Church, and so to shake hands with the Anabaptisticall recusantes. etc. Some
part of his writings look shrewdely that way.

And again, if you mean (says he) that the best calling in our Church, is
simyly corrupt, that is non at all, I 130
detest your Anabaptistical fancy. For then the worthiest divines in this land
are no Ministers. And yet more, if you do simply condemn th'externall calling
of the ministers of our Church, then in your judgment, we have 114
no ministry, no Sacrament, noe visitble Church in England I looked I confess
unto you, that in the neck of this should have followed these words, and then
belike her Majesty, is noe visible member of the Church, for that would have
suited well with the rest of these pretty ifs. And how think you now, was this
great ordinance laid only to batter the Brownists? I am sure you do not think
it: But why be al these ifs brought in, when the man that he writes against,
did not so much aa dream of any such matter? Forsooth because the Stae should
think (for what should we else conjecture,) that M. Penri is in some sort a
Brownist, and then let D. Some alone with him: in like sort, what should
mean al those worthy book cases of S. Bartholmews hospital? That reading does
edisie. That the Scripture is of credit in it self: That he that does thus,
etc. is a Massalian heretic, and he that does thus. etc. is a filthy Atheist
etc. what should al these I say, and a number of the like mean, but only to
draw the state to think that M. Penri is either in part an Atheist, or in
part an heretic, or else that he houlds the contrary to some of these
principles, I pray you recommend me to your D. when you see him, and tell him
from me, that there is little divinity or humanity in this, let him use it as
much as he will, it will be found as I said, (when all is done) but a sluttish
trick of M. Bridges, liker a great deal, to begrease his fingers, then to
bring any grace or credit to his pen.

And not only herein by your leave, has your D. offered his poor adversary
more injury, then some think a man of his profession might well do with a
good conscience, but also in sundry other respects he offers him in my
judgmente as foul play as I have seen, used of any man professing learning in
my life. And will you to begin withal see a pattern of it? Then mark first what
M. Penri setts down to be the question, for these I take it be his own words.
The question therefore is not (says he) whether the one or the other of them
have deliured a Sacrament in respect of th'action 10
don, but whether a christian going unto them for these holy seals, may be
assured that he can receive the same at their hands. etc. This you see is
plain enough: yet M. Some in his preface tells us far otherwise, that the
question is, whether such as were and are baptized by popish priests and
ignorant ministers have and do receive a Sacrament. etc. his adversary lays
down in flat terms that it is not the question, and yet your D. blusheth not
to say, that it is the question: were it not good then that they were both
bound hand and foot till they were agreed to the Question? Nay soft you will
say, that promotion will do better with one of them then with both, like
enoughe. But is not this foul play think you, that M. Some will enforce a
question upon his adueasarie whether he will or not, M. Penri utterly rejecting
it in so express terms calling it an odious and impertinent controversy, and
telling M. Some, that he has therein quickened a dead controversy, not unlike
to breed stirs through the wrangling spirits of this age. etc. And why may not
he I pray you take the same liberty in this question as M. Some does in an
other or the like? For in this point, whether infants ought rather to be kept
unbaptized, then to be presented to popish Baptysme, hatken I pray you to M.
Somes resolution: After he has told us Caluins judgment, he shuts up the
whole with this good loose: I confess freely that this is a very weighty
question, (but in this our time 181
a needelesse question, and that men of great excellency for learning have
their several judgments: and speak your conscience: If M. Penri should answer
even so to the other question, vz. Whether that which is delivered by popish and
unpreaching ministers, be a sacrament or no, were it any great blasphemy; If
he should chance to say in effect as M. Some does, that this in our time is
but a needelesse and fruitless question, and eccellente men have their several
judgments, were it not pity to make him an anabaptist, a catabaptist, or a
Pelagian for this.

O but you will say, that though M. Penri do deny it to be the question, yet
of consequence it must needs be the question whether he will or no: for if the
popish and dumb ministers have no ministry at all, then that which either
they have delivered, or do deliver can be no sacrament, and so her majesty and
a number of excellent men mo, must be unbaptized at this day. This believe me
is a shrewd blow, and may well be called a Silogisme in Bocardo, and yet if
her majesty's name were left out, it might peradventure be avoided with more
ease: But I pray you what think you of the second point of M. Somes first
treatize, That a godly prince may not suffer any religion but the true
religion, either publicly or privately in his dominions, is not that a sound
point agreeable to the word? I am sure you will not deny it, and yet by that
which I have learned of M. Some I can teach you a Cambridg trick to overthrowe
it: namely thus, Her Majesty all Christendom knows to be a godly Prince, and
in that regard, through the great mercy of God few princes under the Heaven to
be compared unto her, yet has she nevertheless suffered the Ambassadors of
sorrain nations to have their Mass, (which she must needs know to be
Idolatry) within her dominions. Therefore either that proposition of M. Somes
is false, or else he must be forced to yield that her majesty is in that regard
ungodly: And if he do so, then I have him where I would have him, and mark I
pray you, how I can fetch him about for need with a proper short declamation
(but truly it is a sweet on) of the learned Bridges, Secundum ordine Sarum in
this manner: Yea my learned masters are ye good at that? Is the wind in that
door? Are ye come after so many miraculous blessings, and such an
extraordinary hand of God upon her majesty, after all that great care and
endeavor she has had to advance the Gospel, and to succor the afflicted
members thereof, (So many thousand of christian souls having bin saved under
her government) are ye become I say, now after all this, openly to charge and
accuse her of ungodliness? I know brethren, that the best Princes under the
Heaven, have their several infirmities: But openly to tolerate so gross and
grievous a sin against the honor of God, and the light of his truth, this is
more brethren then may well be shadowed by infirmity: Therefore what shall I
say? With grief I speak it and yet I must needs speak it, O wicked and
ungrateful wretches to their dread sovereign the Queens highness, that thus
bash not to require her with repining and slanders: Fie, Fie Brethren,
beware, what you write an other time, ask pardon of her Majesty, for she is
merciful and most godly: whom ye have thus openly slaundered to be ungodly:
Therefore away with that false proposition and burn the record for shame. For
you see plainly that a godly Prince may suffer some other religion beside the
true religion, within her Dominions: how say you now? Have I not acquitted my
self worthily in confuting M. Some? For I trow he will be better advised,
then openly to accuse her Majesty of ungodliness.

And even thus for all the world, and no better then thus does it seem to me,
that M. Some and his assistance do consute the Nullitie of our dumb
ministers: For they have not in the world any other arguments to fright us
with, but only that of her Majesty, her Majesty, which they think to be a
byter: And it puts me in mind of a little pretty story, that we have of a
scholar of Oxford, and a Clumperton of the Cuntry: The scholar having got a
little smattering of Lodgeicke, would needs threat down the poor man that he
could by Lodgicke prove any thing against him: Namely, though he had a cudgel
in his hand, yet he would prove he had non: whereunto the Country man made
answer, by my faieth if you do so, I Will make your shoulders feel that I have
one: By the way, you must not think that this Country man was a B. for all he
began with his Faith, for I would you should know it, there be others that can
swear besides Bb. But thus you see the poor scholars logic was something
too weak to serve him against a cudgel. Even so now, if one chance to deny
popish ministers to be ministers: Is it not a good round ready way to refute
them thus: I Will make you feel they be ministers? For what else should this
fearful thunderclap of M. Somes mean? You dare not for your ears say in flat
terms, that it was no baptism 172
which was beretosore delivered in the popish Church etc. Yet for all this
daring, D. Fulke against Stapleton, has dared to write thus much: unlearned
priests (says he) were forbidden to serve in the church, Bed. lib. 1. cap 6.
In so much that S. John of Beuerley baptized again a Page 21
young man, which was baptized of an unlearned priest. Yea and because it
seems he feared no daring of any man that should com after, he has recorded
it twice unto us in less then 6. leaves: For in the 11. page going before, he
setts it down more at large to this effect: That this John of Beuerley told
the young man, that doubtless he was not well baptized, if that dulheaded dogbolt
11
priest baptized him: And therefore after he had deprived that ignorant wretch
of his ministry, he caused the young man to be baptized a new, as not rightly
baptized before, etc. Thus much D. Fulke: and I hope for all this daring, he
will not revoke it in have, for what need he, when his book is seen and
allowed? And that which is allowed by our state to confute a papist, I do not
see but it has the very same vigor and efficacy against M. Some or any man
else that jumpeth with them in judgment. And therefore if a man should venture
to say: That an ignorant popish priest cannot truly baptize, so long as such a
speech has the warrant and allowance of our Church and state, what need he
fear the threat of his ears? In deed this daring of your Doctors, (when I
consider of it well) me thinks it looks like a good well favored cudgel: And
if you can tell me what figure it is in, I Will put you out of doubt what Mood it
is in, so you and I betwixt us, shall I hope, find out the Mood and Figure,
whence this stingging syllogism is drawn. But I muze whether ever M. Some
knew D. Bourcot or no, if he did not, let him learn one of his receiptes of me
for the lengthening of his life: Thou'fret and kill thy self, be patient, be
patient. Entreat your D. the next time you see him, to favor himself that way
more then he does, for sure these arguments that are drawn from the passionat
Mood, and the threatening Figure, do nothing so well with a man of his
constitution, as to be continually resident upon his charge: And if he look
not to it, I can tell him this choler and freting of his, with an ambitious
desire to rise, will go near in time to be the shortening of his days. Alas
how should the poor ignorant Welshman, or any of the santasticall crew, be
able to answer such an unmerciful syllogism as this? You dare not for your
cares say, etc. The Only way that I see is to couch under the board, and keep
close for the time, till that same perilous pillorie, which so frighteth and
threatens men with their cares be shifted or removed out of his place. In
deed it is not unlike that some of their wretched and fawning soliciters, do
but too often warble upon that string in her Majesty's cares, thereby to make
way to the rest of their odious and malicious complaints: And me think I should
see some reverent B. or other one his knees before her majesty as one loath to
speak good man, but only that the heinousnes of the case does thereunto force
him, as it were against his will, and therefore he begins I warrant you with a
sigh or 2. fetched from the very depth of his bowels in this sort: O Madame,
you may see now what your puritans are come to: As men always rising from one
error to another, and never at rest they are now grown to this, that your
Majesty is not christened, are you not greatly beholden to them? By this your
highness may measure the fruit of the rest of their desires: Therefore you may
yield to their new platform if you please, but I fear Madame, (my heart
trembles to speak it) you shall not enjoy many good days after: Sure if we
may know of any such venomous complainte to her majesty, we will fly to M.
Some to prove them liers all, for he has set down in print, that M. Penri is
in the case of H. N. that is in manner a lone in this judgment of the Nulltie,
and therefore if they use us thus, to make a number of us, when the sault (if
it be a falt) lies but in one alone, though we dare not tell them, yet we
will get M. Some to tell them, that by their leave they lie, and they lie
loudely toe.

But for the point wherein M. Some thinks he has his adversary on the hippe,
first we say for the clearing of our selves, and we speak it even in
singleness of heart, (be thou O God witness and revenge if we lie) that we
do account her majesty the dear child of God, so marked from her Cradle,
and so chosen from the very foundations of the earth, whereof we doubt not but
she has had assured seals and testimonies to her own soul, not only by her
outward and miraculous desiuerances, but by an inward sense and seeling of
Gods mercies, she has been from her infancy through Gods great mercy
delivered from the dregs of popery, and thereby from one of the gates that
leads unto hell: She has since that time made noe doubt, some fruteful
increase in the knowledge of the truth: She has bin kept from those soul and
enormious sins, which other great States and princes have fallen into: She
has not feared to profess and publicly to a vow the cause, notwithstanding
the frowning threats, and practices of many other mighty potentates round
about her: yea though her blood have been many ways unjustly sought for, and
only for the gospel sake, yet has she not for any such earthly respect
abandoned the cause, but has boldly from time to time, even with joye of heart
succored the afflicted, both at home and abroad, yea and more, it is manifest
that under that happy and peaceable soveraigntie of hers, many a thousand have
come to the sound knowledge of the truth, which were before in palpable
darkness. And these be to us ward, sussicient reasons and motions to put us out
of doubt, that (whatsoever other wants, weaknesses and infirmities she may have
incident to flesh and blood) yet that she is the dear child of God and right
precious in his eyes: and if that be so, then I hope I shall not need to stand
loug about any pretty catechism (as M. Some has done about the inabillitie of
the regenerate) to prove That whom God loves, he loves for ever: for I do
assure my self, meaner me the M. Some are resolved in that. Well that then being
set down for granted, That whom God loves he loves sor ever, and that it is
impossible for all the power of hell and darkness, to wipe her Majesty out of
the book of life, wherein she is written: let us com to that wound that M.
Some and others do think to be so incurable, namely, That her Majesty should
be unbaptized.

First though it be very clear, that M. Penri does not say so, altogether
disclaiming the point, as an odious and fruitless controversy, yet because M.
Some will still be hagling at that biting consequent, as a man half starued and
hungerbit for want of other sustenance, let us allow for once that M. Penri did
say so in deed: what then? What will your learned D. assume upon that: I
trust if it were granted him for a mayor, a man might soon guess what would
be his minor, namely this, I am persuaded if you be not well coniured by the
magistrate, you will prove a strange body, and then what should be the
conclusion, but Hue and Cry? So that if the cutlers shop do not better
befriende your D. in this case then th'vniuersity, he is at a stand But let us
presuppose that her majesty were unbaptized, (though I know of none that say
so) yet so long as she has the inward baptism, that is so long as she is
baptized of the holy Ghost and with fire, having joyfully embraced the holy
faith of the son of God, and withal having the seal and assurance of that
which shall never be taken from her, that is of remission of sins in the death
and righteousness of Christ and that more is, having also many times bin
comfortably fed and refreshed at the Lords table by those holy seals of her
redemption, as a farther pledge of the favor and mercy of God, I see no reason,
nor I know no use, why after all this, that she should be brought back again
to the sacrament of her entrance and ingrasting into the body, if it were so
that she were not baptized, if there be any other mystery in the matter, I
franckly confess it is more then I see as yet. As for that inevitable and
remediless necessity of the Sacrament, which the bewitched papists do so
sottishly dream of, I hope all the children of God have long a go turned that
strange beast a grazing, as having bin safficiently taught: That it is not the
want of the sacrament, but the contempt and neglect of the sacrament that is
damnable: Now her majesty being already persuaded in her heart that she is
baptized, cannot thereby justly be said either to contemn or neglect the
sacrament, because she rests in that persuasion, howsoever it be, whether she
be baptized or no, (be ing clear from these 2. sins of contempt and neglect)
we are assured it shall noe kind of way redound to her heart, because she is
the child of God, and we doubt not but she finds and feels daily those
inward comforts and tokens of Gods love toward her, as neither the adding or
iterating of the outward sacrament can by any means better or increase. And if
that be so, then do I not see why M. Penri or any man else should so greatly
fear that blody consequent of M. Somes, vz. If popish ministers, be no
ministers, then her Majesty is not christened. For you see when this bugbeare
is vnuizarded once, then alas it has but the face of a sheep as it were, and
his visnomy appears nothing so terrible as it seemed before.

O but you will ask me peradventure what I say to this: None unbaptized may be
admitted to the holy supper: I answer, that it is most true in a sort with M.
92
Somes distinction, vz. which are known to be unbaptized, for those be his
very words: In deed if the case be so cleared, without al question and
contradiction, that both the minister and the man himself that is to
communicate, does assuredly know himself to pe unbaptized, then I dare not
deny but there is a salt both in the minister that admits, and in the
person that so presents himself. But one the other side, where the man verily
persuades him self that he is baptized, and the minister has no knowledge of
the contrary, (though reuera and in truth, there were noe baptism at all) then
the question is how these do sin, for this I take it cannot be that sinful
ignorance that M. Some mentions in these words, ignorantia excusat non a
toto sed a tanto. And I hope he will not deny 90
that it is a sacrament, and may be a comfortable sacrament to him that in this
persuasion does present himself at the Lords table, though in truth he had not
the outward seal of baptism besore. For where the Apostle bids a man to
examine himself. etc. I suppose it is not to be understood as is he would say
thus: I charge thee that among other things thou search and enquire diligintly
what was done to thee, 50. 90. years ago, when thou wast an infant, whether
that were true baptism that thou did then receue, and whether that person
that did then baptize thee, had a calling or no: And is thou can by no
means bolt out the truth thereof to assure thy heart that thou wast baptized in
deed then I charge thee keep thy self from the holy communion, I take it I
say this was noe part of The Apostles 92
meaning, and M. Somes own words do seem in a sort to cross it: This
examination (says he) consists in says and repentance, which are not in
them, that either 92
weetingly omit, or wilfully contemn the holy Sacrament of baptism: So that
M. Some himself restraining it only to one of these 2. omission of knowledge,
or contempt of wilfulness, we think we may safely say that where these 2. be
not, there the man, (whether he be baptized or not) may be a worthy and
fruitful receyuer. And in this case it seems that a man's own very heart and
conscience may be a notable light and direction to him, against all the
wrangling spirits in the world. For if in communicating at the Lords table,
thou did ever in thy life feel any growth in thy self with a desire to rise
from the wretchedness of the first Adam, to the righteousness of the second
Adam, if I say thou did ever feel any inward sweetness and comfort in thy
gracious God to a thorough peace of thy conscience, and a quieting of thy
soul, then assure thy self (against all that man or Angel can bring against
it) that where thou have been once so banketed, there thou have thy warrant
from the holy Ghost without scruple to go seast again, and that either thou
art baptized, or else that certainly thou have noe need of it. For as we say
to the papists touching there traditions, that seeing we have life everlasting
which is all in all by the word written, let them draw us never so many embo
slements, and tell us never so many miracles of their traditions, we valewe them
al as old conceiled records, wherein there is neither strength nor power, and
the reason is, because we have sufficient without them: Even so in this case,
so long as we are assured of the principal, I mean that excellent fruit of a
justif^ing faith, which is a perpetual peace of conscience in the son of God,
if any man shall the take in hand to bring us into a quandare or perplexity
about our christening as they call it, we need not greatly fear what he can
say therein, because we are at peace with God, and therefore if he tell us
never so much, That the popish priests must needs have a calling, otherwise we
cannot be baptized, and if we be not baptized, then we must keep our selves
from the communion, and so consequently be deprived of the holy seals of our
redemption, unless we will acknowledge popish Idolators to have a calling.
etc. Because these and such like, have neither sap nor edg, neither life nor
quickening in them, nor can no whit better our estate touching our peace of
conscience (our own very hearts by the comforts that we have already receued,
being able infinitely to control them) who can blame us, if so long as we are
clear from all contempt, and neglect of the holy sacraments, we hang all
these by among other our canceled records, as a needles and frutlesse jangling
to no use?

But in the mean season, what say you to him that dare be so saucy to
controlle a whole Church and state? may not that man for once suit with proud
Penrie, or any of the fantastical crew? I would be sorry that M. Some should
be taken in such a tripp, but if he be, I must needs say it is Gods just
judgment upon him, because he does so embitter his pen against his poor
adversary, laying pride and blasphemy to his charge, I know not how often.
Which when I look upon, me thinks I should hear Eliab speaking in his high
voice to his younger brother David, in this or the like manner: I know thy pride
and malice of thy heart, etc. Well let M. Penri look to that himself, he knows
how grievously God has visited that sin in others, and therefore at his
peril be it. But to make it appear to you, that your D. in this his hott and
eger desire to strike M. Penri on the legs, has not seared withal to gash our
whole Church and state in the face, let that last Cannon of his (which I spoke
of before) vz. That non unbaptized must be admitted to the supper, be compared
with the practice of our Church, and then tell me your judgment: For if it be
clear, that of all those that are and have been baptized by women (which of
all the learned, excepting only the papists, is confessed to be no baptism at
all) our Church does neither rebaptize any, nor yet in that regard, repel them
from the supper: whom the^ I pray you does M. Some more cross and control in
this case, then our very Church and state it self, whose doctrine and practice
is flat contrary to this maxima and rule of his? And that you may see into what
distress your doctor has brought himself by this means: mark how
syllogisticasly I can come upon him for need, and yet you know my Atithmaticke
has been as good as my Logic in my days.

1 The Church of England maintains nothing in her doctrine or regiment,
whereof she cannot reader a sound reason and a sufficient proof from the
foundation of Gods word, to maintain it with a good conscience:

2 But the Church of England allows of those (whom she knows and
confesses to be unbaptized) to come ordinarily to the Lords table.

3 Ergo, it is agreeable to Gods word and to conscience, and so falls to the
ground that assertion of M. Somes, vz. That none unbaptized must be admitted
to the supper.

How say you now? have not I cut the throat of this gear? if you urge me now
to prove my mayor, I know I shall no sooner name the man unto you from whom I
had it, but you will put of your cappe straight, and I presume so much of his
courtesy, that if you and I had him in a corner to spur him the question, he
would answer us as he does elsewhere full sweetly, Forsooth brethren that did
even I: for it is the kindest gentleman if you were acquainted with him that
ever: well I will not say now what I know, but if you will needs have my mayor
proved, do but turn I pray you to the 5. page of the learned preface of
that greek Lexicon in 40. which was printed by Charde, to his cost I fear, I
befoole his fingers that was the cause of it: if you ask me what time it was
published, though I should miss of the month, yet me thinks I should not
miss much of the year, because it came forth just at the same time that many
proper fooleries came out without privilege: Even there I say, and in the very
same page shall you find my mayor, proved sufficiently, and I hope M. Some
will not be so hard hearted to deny the authority of M. Bridges, for then
there is no deiling with him. My minor you see is manifest by the daily
practice of our Church, in admitting such to the Lords table, as have none
other baptism then that of women, and that I am sure M. Some will confess to
be none: Neither is there, nor never was since her majesty's reign, any
trial or examination had of the matter, nor any article, injunction, or
commandment so to enquire, no nor any Homily, or other private or public
admonition that ever I heard of, to charge men to examine themselves in that
point, whether they have true baptism or no, but as if it were a thing nothing
material, they are (as we see) without further scruple received to the Lords
table in peace. And the like is of those that are our ministers and preachers
of the gospel, as well Bb. as others. For among all the Bb. articles, and
vrgings to subscription, was there ever any stay made I pray you, in the
admission of any to that public function of the ministry only upon that
point, whether they were baptized by women or no? I think not, and yet it may
be that many of them have had none other baptism then that: O but you will
say that was not known, and at the time of their admission, it was supposed
they were sufficiently baptized: But I say again, if the matter be so
material, as M. Some would have it, that ought especially to have been known,
and no hand given to their allowance, before it had been perfectly known. And
if we should stay till then, I think it would go near to craze the license of
some of the graundfathers, and make a foul scour amongst th'oldest of our
preachers: And so peradventure, father John Elmar should kiss Cate no more in
the pulpit while he lived, and what a shrewd loss were that? Well I conclude
therefore, sithence The Church of England maintains nothing in doctrine or
regiment, but she may well do with a good conscience, as from the foundation of
godsword (For I tell you, we poor parishioners hang much on that mayor of M.
Bridges his) and that all this while she never called this matter in question,
but admits both to the Communion, and to the publik teaching in the Church,
such as have bin only baptized by women, and never stops nor stays at it,
nor makes any inquiry after it. I conclude I say (for so it must needs fall
out) that M. Some was greatly ouerseene, thus in a kind of singularity to
controlle his betters without cause: What? I believe we shall have one of these
puritanes of him shortly, for they are always taking exceptions to something
or other in Church or state. No more of that I would advise him if he love
his health or his wealth either, for those fellows be so elvish, that they had
rather beg then have two benefices.

Now for farther confirmation and authorizing of this practice of our Church,
because M. Some seems to carry so reverent a mind to his superiors, that he
will submit himself and all his writings to their censure, I will here, to cut
of al cauils, set down the judgment of one of the grauest Prelates of the land,
concerning that point of women's baptism: For these (as I am informed) are my
L. of Winchesters own words with his grave preamble and all, and I think
himself will not deny them.

Although I be persuaded that the most obiestions made by some persons against
the book of commen prayer are in truth of no weight, but rather captious and
unprofitable as concerning the Church of England, in public prayer and the use
of the Sacraments to maintain those things that be directly against the word
of God, yet for the quieting and better directing of some moderate minds which
by occasion have bin drawn into some scruple about these things, I have laid
down mine opinion about the true interpretation of the same in this wise:
First as touching the baptism by Midwiues, I can assure you that the Church of
England, or any that I know in place of government therein, does not maintain
either the baptism of midwiues as a thing tolerable in the Church, or else
the condemnation of those children that depart this world unbaptized, but does
accounte them both eronius and not according to the word of God. For in the
Convocation the matter was debated amongst us wherein some of those persons were
present, to whom the drawing of the book was committed, who protested that
neither the order of the book did allow any such thing, neither that it was
any part of their meaning to approve the same: But for so much as baptizing by
women, has bin a sore time commonly used and now also of rashness by some is
done, the book only takes order and provides, that if the child be baptized
by the midwife rebaptizing be not admitted. For when it is done according to
the form of the questions set down in the book, if it should be condemned
as My Lord of vvinchesters judgment touching those that are baptized by
Midvviues.
no baptism, it would in the opinion of many learned draw some error of
doctrine, and infer greater inconvenience then in any Church may be borne,
that is an infinite number which never had other baptism, should now be
rebaptized, and all those of years of discretion that were dead and were only
so baptized, depart without the seal of Gods promise in the Sacrament. The
learned do right well know, how the primitive Church and the learned fathers
that lived therein, shunned rebaptization, though the former baptism were
ministered either by lay persons or children: Therefore the book providing only
for the remedy thereof ought not to be condemned. Thus far my good L. of
Winchester: The sum whereof is this: That the book of common prayer
condemns the baptism of midwiues, and yet admits no other baptism for
fear of rebaptization: And why then should her Majesty be brought back again
to baptism, when such as in our own judgments, were never baptized in deed,
are notwithstanding let alone, without any farther addition, or supply of the
sacrament, and yet (as I said before) not barred from the communion for all
that?

Therefore presuppose now a man should tell M. Some plainly, that in the
popish Church there is noe true baptism, what would he infer upon that?
marry that many thousands are at this day unbaptized, and what then? Why then
they ought to be brought back again to baptism: Nay soft, by his favor I deny
that, for that you see is flatly ouerthrown by the judgment and practice of the
Church of England, and therefore it becomes both M. Some and me, to sit down
by it with reverence. So that if my L. of Cant. should now be baptized by a
woman, (as being so long ago who dare take his oath to the contary; And my L.
of Winchester by a popish shaueling, what reason is it that my L. of Winchester
should be washed a new, seeing it is a ruled case that my L. of Cant. must
not? And yet it may be for the true substance of Baptism, they may well go
together in one balance, and never a barrel better hearring.

But it may be you will altogether condemn this poor judgment of the Bishops,
as manifestly bewraiing very gross and palpable ignorance, wherein though I
should not dissent from you, yet in as much as he is in place of on of the
grave Patriarchs of our church, there is noe reason, but that his very credit
and countenance (if there were nothing else) should in this case be sufficient
to crushe in pieces a better man's judgment then M. Somes: Beside that he is
one of our ordinaries you know, and the statute says (as I take it) that in
matter of doubt or scruple, we must always rely upon the sense and
interpretation of our ordinary, howsoever it be, I hope you will bear me
witness, that by this means both my propositions are as substantially proved
as a man would wish, the deane of Sarum being author of the one, and my L. of
Winchester in a sort confirming the other. And this I tell you before hand,
(therefore look to it and say you had warning) that if I catch M. Some once
in that vein, that he will make no boanes to reject, and set light by such men
as these, (the one a deane, the other a Bishop and both pillars of our Church) I
will certainly in my next letter give M. Penri leave to deny Calvin, if he have
but the bare truth on his side, and you cannot say now, but you have had
warning, wherein yet by your favor, your D. case must needs be the harder, in
that he cannot well deny any of these reverent men, but he must withal be
forced inclusiue to give a foul check to our Church and State: Which rather
then Gosser Bridges would do: I know him so well, that I presume he would
rather in reverence deny S. Paul or any of the 12. Apostles: and what a sound
hearted subject is that? In deed I must needs say thus much for him, (if he
would wish me in my grave) that when he does confute S. Paul, he does it
lightly with as much reverence as ever I heard or read of in my life. well here
again is offered me occasion, to borrowe an other piece of copia rimarum out
of M. Deane of Salisburies buttery book, and to come upon M. Some once more
with a dutch figure or two, in this extrauagant manner: Yea my learned brother,
are you good at that? Is the wind in that door? Are you now come to that
height of conceit in your self, as not to fear openly to control a whole
Church or state? Fie, Fie, brother either unsay that again, or farewell all
brotherhood. etc. But I will not blot any more paper, with such ware as this,
there is enough of it to be had in the west Country, if a man could light on
it, only you may imagine, if M. Penri should have thus crossed and encountered
the doings of our Church and State, what a heavy sentence should have passed
upon him, then I warrant you the streets would have rong, of that Proud
scismatical Anabaptist, which had so troubled heaven, church, and common wealth.
etc. And thus you see the ginnes that are so purposely set for an other, may
sometimes ensnare the fouler himself.

As to that great scule roll of errors and absurdities charged with such an
imperial Majesty upon the poor Welsh man's head, I know (...) well what to
say, only if I had been of Council withal at the beginning, th'enrollement
should have been made in parchment and not in paper: For now being but bare
paper, see the ill luck of it, the Mice have so mangled the record, that the
absurdities were never worth talking of since, therefore the only shift for
your D. is, to get them pass by parliament if he can, for otherwise to take
them to be such upon his bare word, he must pardon us for that, for if he
were Archb. of Cant. I tell you, we would be loath to take his word in this
case, we hear in deed many times a great noise and a rusteling, and we see
before us as it were a swelling sea of big words, telling us many wonders of
certain strange blasphemies, absurdities, and I know not what: but when we
come to examine them by the touchston, and look to be satisfied by some plain
demonstration or silogistical proof, then behold in liew of this, there
appears before us a man new come out of the clouds (as it were) with his mace
in his hand, and his sandalles on his feet (as it should seem) rather to make
laws then to handle controversies, pointing with his finger, at this and at
that, telling us what he thinks, as if all the world were to gape upon him: For
what else should all these pretty flowers mean, wherein for the most part lies
the wholle power of your D. book; I am not of your judgment: This is a gross
error: Herein I dissent from you: This is a blasphemous absurdity: My
arguments are such as you are not able to stir: This is a most absurd
heresy: I detest your Anabaptistical fancy. etc. with a number of the like
whereof you have seen the record already, yea and sometimes he refers us we
thank him, very friendly to his chapter bidding us read his answer, which
when we come to vewe, either it serves us for a pretty dictionary to Caluius
institutions, or else we are just as wise as we were before: For this you shall
find to be true (if you vewe it attentively) that he has for the most part
as much substance in his very table of direction as he has in the whole
chapter whereunto we are directed, and peradventure more toe, by the reason of
some distemperature that makes him forget himself, yea and for our better
satisfaction, he tells us and that very often, that he does rest in that which
he has written, dreaming belike, that because himself has some good liking
of his own Image, therefore others must needs have so to. But how if this test
be a broken rest? or how if D. Bridges and D. Bancroft should also tell us,
that they likewise for their parts, do rest in that which they have written?
Yet M. Some knows that he 183
must needs be a very restie Jade, that for all this resting of theirs, would
rest or rely upon any such fripperie ware as they have cumbred the Church
with. But is it not a shrewd wipe to fearful and ignorant men, when a man of
that aunciencie as M. Some is, shall reach at us with a weapon drawn from the
experience of his own learning and judgment? in this manner: If I have any
learning, you do toto caelo errare: It is something I confess, and yet if our
brother Bridges had 73
so come upon us, we should have done well enough with him, we could quickly
have added this Minor to his Mayor: But Heaven and earth knows brother
Bridges, that you have no learning, and are but a sol* ergo, mary to M. Some
the case goes harder with us, and therefore he that would now be resolved in
the point, whether dumb ministers be ministers or no, need noe more but ride
to Cambridge, to know whether M. Some be learned, and if he find him to be so,
then to make no question but that they be ministers in deed, quod substantiam
but not quoad qualitatem. Nevertheless because learned men have their slipps
sometimes, and are not so privileged, but that in their heat or height of
spirit, they may now and then let fall absurdities as well as others, therefore
we are in noe great fear of this neither, the rather because your D. leaves
us certain pretty outrules (I dare not say absurdities) vncanceled of purpose
as I think, to try whether his adversary be spu^blinde or not: For what else
should this mean? If you deny not that it is a Sacrament you affirm it: For
not to deny is to affirm: Every child (says M. D.) can teach you that
lesson: And I promise you then it is a proper lesson, but if a child can so
redily 140
teach it, I trust an elder man may as readily learn it. See then what a wit I
have, that can at the first dash upon the sight of one bare pattern, thwite you
out an other straight, full as good as that: M. Some denies not that I am a
bastard, Ergo he affirms it. For not to deny is to affirm. Every child can
teach him that. Ye how now? What occasion did I give M. Some to call me
bastard? Trust me if he use me so, i will have an action of the case against him:
For I would he should know it, my mother is an honest gentlewoman, and nobly
borne: And thus you see, of words may grow blows. Well for all that, if I wist
your D. were in good earnest, I would certainly get M. Penri to wright on his
head as an absurdity, and a childish absurdity to by his leave, with out
either reason or sense: for what co^seque^ce is there I pray you in these, M.
Some denies not that his brother Bridges is a patch, Ergo he affirms it: M.
Some denies not that the calling of an Archb. is unlawful, Ergo he affirms
it: For not to deny is to affirm? He that had a good commission to reason
thus at his pleasure, might peradventure move your D. patience unreasonably,
and make the color come in his face: For so a man might be convinced to affirm
a thousand things that he never so much as dreamed of, because it cannot be
proved that ever he denied them.

O but you will say peradventure, that M. Some means this only of those
things that are in question and debate, and not of every thing at random: As
if there be a controversy about Predestination, he that in handling of this
denies it not, may truly in a sort, be said to affirm it: And so now the
controversy being about the Sacrament from popish priests, and M. Penri not
denying it, may truly in like sort be said to affirm it. And then by that
reckoning there is no douting of any thing. For if a man doubt of a thing, and
deny it not, he affirms it straight. And is this trow you th'evidence that
M. Some will plead for himself in this case? Now sure then has he firmed
fair: And what may the good Deane of Sarum say to this, but that he was borne
in an unfortunate hour, to be by this proper distinction manifestly convinced
as a traitor, even by the mouth of my L. of Winchester himself, if it were he
that fumbled us up that sodden Admonition to the people of England? For Martin
(whom he calls the libeller) charge D. Bridges with flat treason, and I take
it, he names both the place and the page: Now comes father Admonitor, and he
worthily defends, but what? marie forsooth, for want of other matter. That
ministers livings should not be taken from them, and be employed he knows not
how. But the principal thing in controversy, namely the treason charged so
justly upon D. Bridges his head, he had no leisure to peruse, though he could
find leisure to speak of him twice or thrice and that purposely in his
praise. The issue therefore is, that seeing the thing was in controversy, yea
and the principal and most material thing of all the controversy: and my L.
of Winchester having the matter in hand, does not nor dare not (it seems)
deny it. Then out of M. Somes Logic or divinity (choose you whether) I
conclude vn^oydablie, that he must needs affirm it: For not to deny, is to
affirm, Every child can teach him that. Ergo M. Bridges (I am sorry for him
good soul) must needs be a traitor by my L. of Winchesters verdict. And I
would I might live to see him, either to fall out with M. Some for this kind
of reasoning, or else to try his action of the case against the Bishop.

Likewise where M. Penri says, that those that receive the Communion at the
hands of dumb and unpreaching ministers, do in a sort approve their sin.
will you see how pretily your D. refutes it with an inflance of Judas in this
sort. The Apostles (says he) received the Lords supper with Judas, but did
not approve the 120
theft and treason of Judas, etc. How say you? would you not think he were in
jest? and speak your conscience, was not this right from the corner of the
staff and to very good purpose, the controversy being of receiving the
Sacraments at the hands of dumb ministers? Why alas, we suppose that Christ
our Savior was no dumb minister, at whose hands the Apostles received it: What
have we then to do with Judas in this case, unless he had been minister of
it? In deed if the question had been Whether one may without pollution,
communicate in the company of the wicked, then this example of Judas, had bin
a just last for that foot: the speech being of the minister that should
deliver it, we may truly use M. Somes own words against himself, and tell
him by his patience, that it was even as near as York and London.

An other of his pretty outrules is this: It is consessed (says he) of all
famous and learned men, that Gods Church is not necessarily tied in all places
and times to one sorme in th'external calling of the ministers, wherein I con
him thank yet, that he has learned so much discretion as to name non though
he speak of all. And therefore if a man should give them all the lie, it were
not a point matter, for the disgrace can light one noe man where noe man is
named. But for the matter it self (if he speak it of an established church,
we fear not to tell him that th'assertion is manifestly false and vnttue, we
grant in deed that at the first plantinge of a Church, when men are newly
transformed (as it were) from paganism to christianity the Lord works
extraordinarily, and that in those cases there cannot well be traced out any
certain prescript rules of direction: But in a settled and established Church
it is far otherwise: There we say that the Church is necessarily tied in all
places to one essential form in the external calling of the ministers: I say
essential form, to cut of al cauels and wranglings about any circumstance or
ceremontal custom: As if in one Church the calling and election should go by
lifting up the hand. In an other by throwing up of capps, in an other by
Scrutiny or voices, in an other by one custom, in an other by an other: This
several guise and fashion of several Churches in their elections hinders noe
whit, but that the essential form remains still one, and the same in them
al. And if you ask me what that essential form should be, I answer, The
godly and christian fore deliberation, trial, and allowance of the Church and
elders, with the assent and approbation of the people: This I say is that
essential form, whereunto al churches in all ages (speking of an established
church) are so necessarily tied in regard of Gods ordinance, as it is utterly
unlawful by any means to violate or infringe the same. And this we suppose a
meaner man then M. Penri need not be afraid to defend against 10. D. Somes,
or any nonresident in Christendom, nether can we be persuaded that among al
those famous learned men he speaks of, there was ever any godly sinceare
professor of the Gospel that did deny it: And even much after this manner, and
full as learnedly as this does he handle himself within 2. pages of the same
place, where after he has gathered his adversaries argument thus. All may be
capable of the outward allowaunce: Ergo. th'outwarde calling of the Church
maks not a minister to us unless he have the inward, he tells him that his
Antecedent is a special one. And what is his reason? Mark I pray you, and
give care for your learning, and then tell me whether an old D. may not
forgett as fast in London, as ever he learned in Cambridge: I trust (says he)
you do not condemn a prescript Liturgy in the Church of God. If you do all the reformed Churches dissent from you. How think you was not his head
smitten with a Lethargy that spied now a time to speak of a Liturgy, when
in a manner he had as just occasion to speak of the Moon. In like sort it is
worth marking, what a proper construction he makes of this word Ministry, By
Ministry (says he) I understand the reading of the holy scriptures, the
delivering of the public prayers, th'administration of the sacraments: That is
even as much to say in good english, as by the horse I understand the saddle,
or rather by the tree, I understand the apple of the tree, or by Ministry I
understand that which is not indeed the Ministry, but the execution of the
Ministry. And cannot M. Some see a sensible difference betwixt these 2.? Or
is he now to learn, that there may be a tree that never had apple, and that a
man may have a lawful ministry committed unto him, and yet never come to any
of these, because he may either dye or by occasion be recalled or deprived by
the Church before.

Yet among al his outrules I do not think that his pen has more squared in
any one thing, then in this, that he charge his adversary to say flatlye,
and yet it is but a Flat lie Neither: that the want of a Sermon makes
th'action frustrate, that is, the sacrament to be no sacrrment, and that a
Sermon is simply of th'essence 97
of a sacrament. etc. upon which Imagination or rather dream of his own
brain, he keeps great a do after his manner, making it one of his solemn
chapters to prove unto us forsooth, that midnight is not high none, but if the
words (as he has set them down) be not to be found in all that ever M. Penri
has published, me thinks M. Some should be stricken with some remorse,
especially when he remembers that A lying tongue slaieth the soul, and a
false witness pulls shame and confusion upon himself. But it may be you will
say that though the very words be not there, yet the same very sense must of
necessity be gathered out of that which M. Penri has written: For does he not
say I pray you, that the substantial form of consecration, is contained in the
exposition of the holy institution, and th'inuocation of the name of God, all
which are necessarily required in th'administration of the sacrrmente? Most
true he says so in deed: I se noe danger why he may not say so again: for
what is there here (if it be rightly examined) that is either blasphemous or
injurious to the holy says that we profess? First he says not here (if you
mark it) that, that the substantial form or essence of the Sacrament
consists in th'exposition or invocation, etc. but that the substa^tiall form
of Consecration, as if he should say, there is no true consecration, no
substantial form of blessing and hallowing of the Sacrament, without
exposition of the word, and invocation of the name of God: Which I take to be
very sound and inviolable, and therein I refer me to the learned. Now
whether the elements delivered be a sacrament without this Consecration, that
is, without the opening of the word, and calling on the name of God, that is
another question: Albeit I do not read in the whole Scripture, that there was
ever any sacrament administered without one of these. And if a man should tell
M. Some, that Where there is neither of these, that is, that where there is
neither breaking of the word, nor invocation of the name of God, there is no
Sacrament at all: I think this might well enough be just^fied. And I would
feign know of M. Some for my lerning, if a minister lawfully called, should
rudely and abruptly come into the congregation, and stepping straight to the
Communion table, should without more ado, deliver the elements to the people,
only with these bare words: Take, eat, this is my body, etc. If he should I
say, so far forget himself, as neither to use prayer nor exposition of the
word at al in that action: Whether this were a sacrament or no, I suppose nor.
For what is the thing that does sanctify the elements, consecrate and
separate them to that holy use, but only The word and prayer. Take away that,
and then are they you know, but in the case of our common and ordinary
sustenaunce. And M. Some himself says in one place, that The very life of the
sacraments depends upon Gods promises expressed in his 119
holy word. Now if there be no promise, but where the invocation of Gods name
is, the^ it is clear, that without it, the things delivered, are but bare and
dead elements, because they are not consecrated according to th'institution.
But well you see how M. Some does herein bring his Ergo about, to prove out of
his adversaties own words, That the want of a sermon, does make the action
frustrate. Then thus it must be whether he will or no, if he will make any
thing of it.

The exposition of the holy institution, and th'invocation of the name of God,
is necessarily required in th'administration of Baptism.

Ergo, without a sermon, there can be no sacrament. Which (as I conceive) is a
co^sequent much like to this:

The examination and ripping up of a man's own heart, with the arraignement of
his conscience, is necessarily required of every one that will present himself
at the Lords table:

Ergo without this examination, he receiuce no Sacrament

The lame leg of both the consequents, lies in these words, necessarily
required: Which if it be taken of that inevitable necessity, that the want
thereof should utterly destroy the very nature and essence of the thing in
question, then indeed it were a good consequent: But understanding necessary in
regard of our obedience to the holy ordinance and institution of Christ (the
breach whereof, is only a sin in the doer, and no overthrow to the thing
done) In this sense I think M. Some will yield, that his brave Ergo limpeth
and shrinketh in the sinowes unreasonably. But what will you say, if the man
that you reverence so, be taken now and then with a trick of a false singer?
you would be sorry for that I am sure: you do not hear me say, that he can
iuggle or help a die, I would not have you to take me so. My meaning is only,
that he can for need if he be not watched, slily wipe out a word or two out of
the text for his advantage: and another time peradventure, glide me in a word
or two more then he should, to make th'evidence a little more pleadable. This
you know is a falt, but yet such a falt, as you shall perceive by M. Some, that
a learned man may falt in sometimes if he be not locked unto: For where M.
Penri says thus: We are already received into the bosom of the Church, and
acknowledged to have the seal of the Covenant, in as much as we were once
offered and received, etc. See how your D. controlleth this, in his third page
of his roll of errors. If: his be true which M. Penri says, the outward and
bare element delivered by him, which in his own judgment is no minister, is
the seal of Gods covenant: which is a most absurd heresy. Mark here I say a
false finger, for how else could the poor Welshman have been an absurd
heretic? The pithe of the whole matter lying in this word Acknowledged, M.
Doctor has quite left it out: For M. Penri does not say absolutely, That we
have the seal of the covenant, but we are acknowledged to have it And is there
not a sensible difference betwixt these two? For it is certain, that Baptism
of women, neither is not can be in truth, the seal of Gods covenant: but yet
you see (as I have proved to you before) both by the practice of our Church,
and by the interpretation of my L. of Winchester, that it is plainly
acknowledged amongst us for the seal of Gods covenant, otherwise it should
never pass as it does amongst us without any interruption, questioning,
controllment, or inquiry. If then there be a plam difference betwixt having,
and acknowledged to have, then I pray you do you so much as devise some honest
means to salve this false finger, for I promise you I cannot.

Furthermore in that point of the magistracy (which M. Penri is so charged to
have handled with very foul and bepitched hands) the very words which M.
Doctor would seem most to make vantage of. vz. devise of man. I cannot find
in all M. Penries book, sure I am, they be not to the places quoted, betwixt
the pages. 47. and 51. And if they be not in the book at all (as I believe they
be not) the^ by your leave we charge him once more with a trick of a false
singer, in that he has thrust in more then was in the text. Now if you tell
me that though the words be not there, yet they are necessarily gathered out of
the sense, then I choke him again with M. D. own sentence, Non scriptura sed
sensus scripturae est heresis, it is not M. penries words but M. Somes gloss
and collection upon the words, that makes this absurd heresy: But your D.
granting that S. Peter does indeed call magistracy A bnmane ordinance, does
withal assure us that The Apostle did not thereby mean that Magistracy was
ordained and devised by man: It may be he looks for thanks for this, which
though of courtesy we may yield him, yet you may tell him that our ignorance is
noe more relieved by this, then it is by a hundred things more in his book,
which we knew before, marry he tells us withal: That it is not The Apostles
words but the sense that M. Penry gives them, that is Anabaptistical, in deed
we thank him for this, it is some more good manner 137
yet, then is in old Lockwoode of Sarum, for if he had the matter in
handeling, there had been some danger that The Apostle would have proved an
Anabaptist: Well now The Apostle has obtained that favor to be cleared, how
shall we do to clear M. Penri, whose sense upon the words M. Some will needs
have to be Anabaptistical? First in that he does never say so, but rather the
contrary as M. Some himself acknoledgeth in these words, you confess in this
place that Magistracy 136
is th'ordinance of God, me thinks in equitye this should be a reasonable
clearing to him: Nay I say farther that as he he has noe such words, so there
can be no such sense gathered out of his words without violence: In deed if
your D. had put but one. A. before, then I would have taken his part that such
a sense might very well have been gathered of that which M. Penri sets down:
As when he speaks of Cincinatus, Tarquinius, Opinius, Candaules, Gracchus and
the rest: A man with half an eye may easily see that he speaks not
indefinitely of Magistracy, but of a Magistracy in such an age, and such a
time, which his own very words do so clear, as thereby malice it self may
blush and be silent: There may (says he) be 47 48
a lawful Magistracy according to the word, whose name and office was never
heard of before in the world, so can there not be a Ministry. etc. here you
see plainly he speaks not of Magistracy indefinitely, but of A Magistracy:
As for example, if her Majesty should erecte now a new kind of government
either at Windesore or at Kingston upon Thames, (as by her pretogatiue she
may do if she list,) and call the one of them, The Tribunes of Windesore, and
the other The Consulls of Kingston: This k^nde of magistracy in that it was
never known nor heard of before, may truly without any blemish to the honor
of God, be called A devise of man, and yet Magistracy in general and
indefinitely understood, the very immediate ordinance of God prescribed in the
word: and this me thinks is so plain as I cannot believe that old D. Stumbler
himself, I mean the Prince of all the Stumblers in the world, vz. Sir John
of Sarum would ever stumble at it. Therefore if in wringing this sense out of
his adversaries words flat contrary to the drift and intent of the writer, he
did willingly and of purpose leave out A setting down Magistracy
indefinitely, in lieu of A Mastracie, we must be so bold by his leave, to
charge it upon his head with the rest, as a trick of a false finger
wheresoever he learned it.

An other thing there is in this chapter of M. Somes that for mine own part I
can conceive noe sense of, namely this: That Magistracy is an ecclesiastical
constitution: this I confess is a mystery to me, and soundes more harsh in
mine ears a great deal, then that which M. Penri is charged with, vz. Devise
of man, which may in a sort you see be justified, and therefore I would ride a
good way I tell you, to hear this matter soundly and substantially proved: I
hear indeed a heavy sentence, pronounced on all those that shall dare to
deny it to be an Ecclesiastical constitution, vz. That is a very gross and
Anbaptistical error, but this does neither fright us nor satisfy us: For
having seen a number of the like thunderclapps before, and little rain falling
after them, but only a bare rattling in the air, we have certainly determined
with our selves that they shall never fright us more if there come a hundredth
of them, in the mean time if you ask me what I think of Magistracy, I
answer freely: That it is the holy ordinance of God prescribed in the word,
for the use and comfort of man, and is therefore called of the Apostle, a humane
ordinance, in that his proper object and office is to deal in humane things:
And will not all this serve to clear a man from Anabaptistrie, but he must
confess withal, that it is an Ecclesiastical constitution? This goes hard,
to bind us to entertain a stranger upon so small acquaintance: Good entreat
your D. to resolve us and instruct us first, and then upon our contumacie if
need be, to proceed to sentence, and so to pronounce us Anabaptists. In other
needles points I remember your D. is but to unreasonable full of his
authorities, Calvin, Beza, P. Martyr, Famous Churches, and I know not who, in
so much that sometimes he leaves no room almost either for grounded reason, or
scripture, there is such a press of them: yea, and in one place he tells M.
Penri and that aloude, All the learned agree with me, and dissent from you: And
will all these his learned friends forsake him now trow ye, when he has most
need of them? Surely I believe they will if they be well examined: For I do not
think that he can for his life bring out that man, if he be worth whisteling,
I mean any good, sound, and learned author, either old or new, that he may
honestly muster with himself in this point, to call Magistracy (as he does)
by the name of Ecclesiastical constitution: Therefore as he says by M. Penri,
so we think we may justly say by him, that in this case he may worthily walk
iole by iole with H. N. indeed. But his proofs if you mark them, are even as
pregnant as the matter it self. I must needs say they be sure onsal, for they
are fetched out of the scripture the most of them, as you may see by these: By
me kings reign (says he) Proverb. 8. Thou could have no power at al
against me, unless it were given thee from above, says Christ our Savior to
Pilate, John. 19. There is no power but of God, whosoever therefore resists
power, resists the ordinance of God, Romans 13. more he lays down an other
reason drawn from the reverence that is imprinted by almightye God in the hearts
of subjects, At quorsum haec? matty to prove unto us (as I conjecture that
Dover Castle stands where it did the last year,) or else as M. Some says, that
midnight is not high noone: By this you may 187
see that when a nail is knocked fast in a wheel, turn the wheel never so
many times about, the nail will be still where it was: Even so it is in this
case with M. Some, he turns and turns, and it may be sweates in turning, and
yet when he has don, he leaves the nail sticking where it was: For what has
he won I pray you by all this? Forsooth That Magistracy is the ordinance of
God: And where is that Muscouite that does donie it? Proud Penri you see does
grant it, The Scismatical Catabaptist does grant it, he that has breched so
mary popish, blasphemous, and Anabaptisticall fancies, this man does grant it
by M. Somes own confession: And could he then be so jellous to suspect any man
else? Now sure your D. has a marvelous suspicious head, well for his farther
satisfaction, and to ease him of some pains hereafter, I will here give him my
fre warrant under my hand to cry Crusisige against him that should deny it,
and therefore let him never draw weapon more in the defense of that assertion.
that Magistracy is the ordinance of God prescribed in the word, for it
yielded him without blows: But in the mean season, what is become of
Ecclesiastical constitution? I hear nothing of that gentlewoman all this while:
Is she fled over with the Jesuits? If she be, it were good to fetch her
again by proclamation, lest she die in exile: For I can tell you this proper
Enthimem will never fetch her again while the world stands: It is an
ordinance of God prescribed in the word, Ergo. it is an ecclesiastical
constitution. This I say will be found to weak though all the Doct. of
Sorbona should set their hands to it: For is there not a flat opposition
betwixt Civil and Ecclesiastical; I take it there is, and I am sure I have
heard learned men say so. And is not Civil jurisdiction an ordinance of God
prescribed in the word? me thinks it should, why then by this new found
consequent, we shall have short lie a new university nosgay, vz. that civil
jurisdiction is an Ecclesiastical constitution, and that were good time but
small reason: Even so War, Physic, The inheritance of men, and a number of
things more would be found to be Ecclesiastical constitutions, because they
are all the ordinance of God prescribed in the word. And if this will not hold
water, then I dare avow your D. has not any thing else, in that his 13. chapter
more then his bare word (which we are now glutted with) to warrant that
outlandish assertion of his: That Magistracy is an Ecclesiastical
constitution, etc. Moreover, if in speaking of the ministry of the New
Testament, that be a true proposition, that Sola ecclesia vocat, The Church
only calls, as I have heard it aveared by learned men, that the Lord does
not now call any more extraordinarily from heaven as in times past, but has
left that to be done Per suffragia ecclesiae tantum, only by the voice and
allowance of the Church: if I say this be sound, and will abide the fire (as I
verily think it will) then mark what I say to you: if your D. with all his
lerning, be not taken in as foul, gross, and more palpable absurdity then
ever th'ignoraunt Welshman was, i will loose my credit, and that were pity you
know, that so proper a man as I should loose his credit. But will you see
how irresistably I can bring this gear about? then lay down your book a
while and give ear.

Vbi non est Ecclesia, ibi non est vocatio:
vbi non est vocatio, ibi non est ministerium:
vbi non est ministerium, ibi non est Sacramentum.
Ergo.
Will you have it in English now? For i will never dissemble you, I do by my
Latin, as that sweet babe of Sarum does by his greek and Hebrew, beg and
borrow here a patch, and there a patch, as the Dictionaries that come in my way
do yield me sustenance. And if any thing hapen to be false, then it was either
Chard my printers fault, or else my Dictionarie was not of the last edition, or
else my candle wanted snuffing. But let me not forget my argument I pray you,
for it may be I take a pride in it: Then I say,

Where there is no Church, there there is no calling, for Sola Ecclesia vocat:
Otherwise, the Churches prerogative in this case, should not be above the
heathen and unbelievers, if it were in them to call both alike: (take me I pray
you, that I speak still of the ministry of the New Testament or else you offer
me wrong) In that case I say, it is the Churches only to call. And therein I
appeal to the flower of your own vniuersitier I do not mean D. Copquot, for we
count him but of the middle sort, as we set D. Bridges and D. Pearne in the
seventeenth form behind him: No I mean the very ornaments of your
University in deed, whose very names and lives do carry with them an
estimation to be reverenced: D. Fulke, D. Goad, D. Whytaker, and M. Chaterton:
To these men I say I appeal, to speak their consciences herein, even Coram
tribunali, whether it be not a firm truth, That there is no calling out of
the Church: Speaking of the ministry of the New Testament. That then being
set down as a brazen wall, I go on in the face of the enemy with my target in
my hand in this manner.

Where there is no calling, there there can be no ministry, I Will never stand
to prove that for shame: For he is worthier of a censurer (as M. Some says)
then a refuter that will deny that. And last of all

Where there is no ministry, there there can be no Sacrament. For Nullum
sacramentum sine Ministro. This M. Some himself confesses either twice or
thrice, and calls it a rule in divinity.

The conclusion therefore is: That there can be no Sacrament out of the Church,
and then say I M. Some is beraied, who houlds that true baptism is and may be
out of the Church, wherein it is no more possible for him to escape an
absurdity, then it was for Campion to escape hanging. And how say you now?
Had it not bin pretty that my Logic should have died in a ditch? Well in good
sadness for all that, allow me but my first proposition to be true (as I hope
you will) that there is noe calling into the Ministry but only of the Church,
and then good leave have you to bring upon me a thousand Augustines, Calvines,
or Bozaes, or all the famous churches in the world, I say in reverence to them
all, Instar mill veritatis calculus, yet M. Some yields that Cyprian was of
that judgment, and then we dare be bold to say that he was in that point of a
true judgment against them all: For I have heard baptism defined to be an
action of the whole Church, that the whole congregation has an interest in
that Sacrament: And if it be so, if it be th'action of the church, how can it
be where there is noe Church? Furthermore M. Some himself calls it an entrance
into the visible Church, an engrasting into the true Christ, al which how it
may stand, and yet be out of the Church, (I confess mine own ignorannce) I
see neither sequel nor possibility: As to that which is inferred in this case
of Heretics, of Caiphas, of Judas, and such like, I take it under correction
to be quite beside the cushen, for as I know that the wretchedness and
treachery of Judas, could not overthrowe his caling and Ministry, being the
very same that Peter's was: So do I also know, that no holiness or godliness
of any man whatsoever, (if he be blind or dumb) can approve his caling into
the ministry: And therevppon I report me to you, whether this conclusion have
not a wry mouth.

Judas, Cayphas, heretics and such vile wretches, may have (for all their
lewdnes) a lawful ministry, and so deliver a sacrament:

Ergo popish priests and dumb ministers (for all their ignorance and
inabillitie to teach) may have and do the like.

Me thinks this argument smells as if it were shaped at Salisbury, I cannot
tell, but I am greatly deceived if I have not seen M. D. Bridges ride on such a
lame Jade in my days. Therefore advise your D. to beware of these curtailes
and hacknies of Sarum, that will stu^ble unreasonably and tire at every to.
miles ryding, we know it right well and we knew it before M. Some wrote
that the case may be so, that an heretic may deliuet true Baptism: And if
Ciprian were absolutely of a coutrary judgment to this, we hold with M. Some
he was wide. But what is this to those on whom it is not possible to fasten
any such calling into the ministry, because they are as I may say, of an
incapable nature, as Infants, dumb men, blind men, etc And (as Mast. Penri
will needs have it) men without gifts? For what a kind of refuting call you
this? you hold that men without gifts can have no calling of the Church: I
prove yes, and how? Marry forsooth, because that Heretics sometimes may
deliver true baptism, would you not smile at me? And yet this way you shall
find many of your D. mighrie conclusions to look, that is full side West,
when the wind would serve him a great deal better into Flaunders. Therefore
whereas it pleases M. Some, very peremptorily to tell his adversary, that He
has prooved already, 175
that true baptism has been and may be out of the Church: We fear not to
tell him as resolutely again, and that upon good assurance, That neither he,
nor all the Doctors of Sarbona (if they should sweat their hearts out) can ever
prove it while the world stands. And thereupon we conclude against him,
that To say or write, that true baptism has been or may be out of 176
the Church, is a flat false proposition in divinity, which by Gods
assistance, and her Majesty's good favor shall (if he dare procure the
encounter) be openly mayntained against him or any man of his complexio^ within
the land.

For that which is said to be among th'Ismaelites and Edomites, I think by M.
Somes favor, that a man may truly say it was no sacrament: Circumcison might
well be amongst them, that is, the bare cutting of the foreskinne: but not the
sacrament of Circumcision, as laying on of water may be amongst Midwiues, but
the sacrament of baptism can never come from their hands: no more was it
possible, that in that place where there was no ministry, there could be any
sacrament, whatsoever man or Angel shall mutter against it. But M. Some will
prove it you shall see, by M. Penries own confession. For M. Penri says thus:
Neither could any of the godly assure themselves, that an Edomitish priest
administered true circumcision according to the substance: Whereupon M. Some
courseth him thus: If circumcision were among the Ismaelites and Edomites (as
you write and I affirm) then a 162
sacrament was amongst them, I pray you remember this. In deed he had need of
a good remembrance that should remember this, for either I do not understand
English, or else M. Penri says no such thing: For how if a man should venture to
say thus: He is not living that can assure himself, to find either wit or
learning in M. Bridges? Would your D. thereupon face us down, that we
confess there is either wit or learning in such a buzzard as he? Nay, he
should write 36. volumes more first, and every one shall be as big as his
other book, and then peradventure he may win our hearts. And here by the way,
your D. is once more laid open to the charge of a false finger, which he
cannot avoid: For where M. Penri speaking of th'Edomitish circumcision, calls
it barely a Cutting of the foreskin and a profanation of circumcision, etc.
thereby sufficiently expressing his meaning, M. Some the better to writhe in
something to his advantage, and to make the matter a little more saleable, has
twice at the least, foysted me in this word true, which his adversatie has
not at all. As for example, these be M. Somes words: Circumcision in Idumea
(as you write) was true circumcision, 114
and a seal of Gods covenant. And again to the same effect, If th'Edomitish
circumcision were true circumcision, and th'Edomitish church no church, then a
sacrament 166
was out of the church. How like you this M. Penri? Whereunto I do not see,
but that M. Penri might justly reply thus: If in all my writings you cannot
find that ever I gave that name of true circumcision to th'Edomitish
circumcision, then are you taken tardie M. Doctor, and manifestly convinced of
legerdimain, How like you this M. Some.

Now if M. Some could abide to be reverenced, and would not return it again
upon us as he does to M. Penri with discourteous and reprochful words, we could
here tell him, that we are sorry, that a man of his estimation and gravity,
should cumber the ears of the learned with such wind shaken stuff, as is
fitter a great deal, for that sorry chaplain of Sarum, then for him. The best
is he tells us, That excellent men have 144
their second thoughts wiser then their first, and that puts us in some
comfort, that he being (if he deceive not himself) an excellent man, we shall
(if it please God) for all his choler, see some printed record of a Second
thought of his, that shall indeed be wiser, and of more pawzed and grounded
judgment then the first, or else I promise you we are half shamed. And I tell
you true, I like not this jeasting: Therefore me thinks it were good in this
case, that your D. did set before his eyes his noble Auncestor of Sarum, who
by a foolish custom of reasoning thus loosely, and shuffeling in desperately he
cares not what, is so far gone as he sees with a Fleuer Lourdaine, that his
brain was never in good temper since. And certainly let him look to it, for
if he do not better bethink himself hereafter, to answer in other sort then
hitherto he has done, It will sure increase the Jealousy and suspicion of
many, who begin to distrust some privy maime in M. Somes manhood, that he is
not the man he is taken for and that all that great knowledge which he so
boasts of, will without some speedy redres, fall ere it be long into some
fearful consumption of the reyns, because the veins that swel so, are
commonly fuller of wind then of blood, yet for mine own part, I had rather a
great deal attribute all these defects, byships and out rules of his, to that
extreme passion and unruly affection that quite overswareth his judgment, and
is able both to mate and to amaze a man, yea and so to blindefolde and bewitch
him, that he may soon break his face against a wall, if he look not to it:
And this sure was the cause (as I judge) that the very maine point betwixt
his aduersatie and him, he had not (it should seem) any leisure to pervse:
Eor the question being whether we may be assured to receive a Sacrament at the
Dumb Ministers hands, the very marrow and life of the whole controversy lying
in this word. Assured, your D. has faier given it the slipp, and has not as
far as I see in any on line, clauze or sentence thorough out his whole book,
so much as looked that way: Nay it seems to me, he is halse afraied of it
when he sees it. For in the last place that I before mentioned of th'Edomites,
where M. Pemi says that the godly cannot assure themselves, etc. what says M.
Some to this? Not a word I warrant you, tush he is among the organs at Paul's,
or else looking out of his window toward Lambeth, what should he meddle with
the thing in question? Can not an old, university man find his pen play
enough without that? And therefore he threatens kindness on his adversary
and will needs wring from him whether he will or no. An acknowledgment of a
Sacrament among the Edomites, and prays him to remember it: yet some me^
think this matter of Assurance had bin the most need full thing of al other for
your D. to have dealt in, for the cutting of of al seruple, and the satisfing
of men's minds. For though a man should make no question of the baptism
delivered in times past by popish shauelings, but satisfiing himself with
those other comforts that he finds in the holy excercises of Religion, should
never trouble himself to look back so far, though I say a man should make
no question of that which is past, yet I se no hurt to desire to be assured in
that which is to come, which Assurance (as M. Penri says) can never be had but
by says, in the promises of God, and that is the point he stands most upon in all his writings, vz. that in the whole scripture of God there is no promise to
bare readers, and men without gifts to deliver, and therefore no warrant for us
to receive any sacrament at their hands. All which if M. Some could overthrowe
any otherwise then with some such stale jeasts as this, why then my
grandefather was not christened, he might happen work more miracles then he is
like to do. For he must think, that it is neither these consequences nor
inconveniences, that smell so much of the flesh, nor yet the authority of
Calvin or Beza (though we should admire their gifts and reverence them as
Angels) that can settle a man's heart in this case, it must be only the word of
the living God and nothing else, out of which, whenever we see any sufficient
record to warrant this promise whereupon our faith must be grounded, it shall
by Gods grace draw presently from us a willnig and reverent subscription to
the truth, with an open revocation of all that ever has bin written in that
point to to the contrary: But that there is no such Scripture to be had for
money, we gather as by others, so specialy by this late treatise of M. Somes,
wherein I dare be bold to say, and I speak it advisedly, for I think I have
vewed it meetly well, there is not to be found any on text of holy scripture to
prove this Assurance, which is the maine point in question, and then say we
whatsoever he proves else, there is some reason he should have his labor for
his travel, because he has been at so vnreasonnable charges to wound his
own shadow, and do his adversary no hurt.

Touching that point, That the popish Church is in a sort the Church of God,
though an unsound Church: More then that, he croppeth out of Calvin, Phillip
de Mornay and others (which was not written in such strange characters
neither, but that it might be easily understood before M. Some revealed it unto
us) there is little I dare warrant you of his own worth taking up as they say:
and that is the thing that we expect in a learned man, especially in this
flourishing age of the Gospel, to yield us some sapp and joyce of his own,
that thereby our judgments might be bettered, and we also occasioned to praise
the gifts and graces of Gods spirit as well in him as in others. Otherwise thus
to cloy us still, and ouercloye us with other men's sayings: why alas, you see
Th'alabaster man of Sarum can do that for need, and that I warrant you so
thick and in so good order, that if he could but handsomely turn to them
without help, it were even learning enough for a man of his mediocrity,
neither might we well require more at his hands with modesty: as in one of
his books (the 5. as I remember) you shall find that the good soul has
fumbled together, little less then 60. pages of other men's writings, and
scarce 4. or 5. whole ones of his own: and is not that a sweet kind of
bookemaking for a mirror to posterity? Now for the reasons that your D.
seems to bring of his own, I am sorry to think they should be so over
traveled or troubled with a Sciatica, that they should not be able to look a
man in the face without limping. Will you consider of them a little, and tell
me whether they come not toward you for all the world like Cripplegate men,
as if they had need poor creatures of some Hospital to relieve them?

The very name (says he) of reformed Churches, does 176
manifestly import, that the churches of England, Germany, Denmark, etc.
(though popish and unsound) were yet churches in a sort before: or why else
should they be called reformed churches.

What good luck was it then, that the protestant churches should light on the
name of reformed churches at the first? For if in liew of this, they had
happened to have been called Christian Churches, you may see M. Some had been
in some distress for one of his brave arguments, and so peradventure his book
would have proved less then it is, by one 7. or 8. lines at the least: For
christian Churches could never have done him half that pleasure, as to have
employed any necessity, that the church of Rome must needs be in a sort, the
Church of God before: But it is only this word reformed, that has stricken it
dead. Has not M. Some then good cause to bidd A blessing go with him
whosoever he were, that in traveling over the mountains of Arabia, first
found out this name Reformed, by means whereof, he has as you see, so
daunted his adversary, that he dare scarce peep out of doors? But I pray you
tell me, Is it not a misery, that such unlearned stuff as this, should drop
from the pen of any man that bears the face of learning? who would stand
then to blot paper in refuting that which faleih (as you see) to shievers of it
self? For when this worthy collection is at the strongest, it will be found
but a mere childish Fallax, from the bare name of a thing to a thing in esse,
as if it were a good consequent, that this and this must needs be so, because
it is so commonly called, and runs so corrant in the account of men: And yet
upon the like sandy foundation as this, would he feign enforce upon his
adversary, an acknowledgement of a Ministry whether he will or no, and that
by his own confession forsooth: For does not M. Penri I pray you, call the
ministry of unpreaching ministers, An evil and prosane ministry? why then
have at you says M: Some, a conjugatis, and if that be a Ministry, then the
persons that exercise that function 183
must needs be Ministers. Will you do so much for me when you pass that way,
as to call at D. Peraes window, to see if he can dissolve you of this doubt?
and if he cannot, then let him never trouble the University more for shame,
but fair bundle up his books, and get him to Waltham to some other trade: For
if it be manifest, that M. Penri do speak here of such a Ministry as has
only the name of a ministry and nothing else, then must M. Somes reason, a
coniugatis, (if he will not have it to look quite Collyweston) point just
likewise upon such a minister as has only the name of a minister and nothing
else: as if one by occasion should say thus: This woman's baptism is a very
wretched and miserable baptism: or thus, This wild Irishe ministry is a
very vile and abominable ministry: had he not need trow ye, to have his wits
new ground, that upon these or such like speeches, would headely infer any
consequent, either of a sacrament or ministry indeed, because they are so
called? or that the popish Church was reuere and in truth the church of God,
because the bell so sounded in his ear? This being (as you know) one of pore
M. Bristowes reasons in his Motives, to prove the papists to be Catholics
only in regard of the name, in that they be called Catholics: who would have
thought that M. Some would ever have bestowed new varnishing of an old rustie
and cankred blade, which was so behackled before, For may not I pray you, the
papists by as good a proportion prove themselves Catholics by the very name,
or the Midwife of Cheapstow prove her baptism to be a sacrament by the very
name, as M. Some proves the popish Church to be a Church, or the dumb
ministry to be a ministry only for the name? Surely I cannot think that
his very Carmen, whom he likeneth M. Penri unto, will ever be dismayed 102
with such poor papershort conclusions as these. Well to make some amends,
you shall see now if you please, the reason of all reasons, even such a one, as
if you look not to it, will go near to clatter the glass windows in pieces.

Antichrist must sit in the Temple of God.

Ergo (says he) The popish Church must needs be the 147 166
Church of God.

This M. Some thinks to be a sure one, and it seems in deed he has a special
good liking of it above the rest, in that he will needs (after it has been all
to be battered and defaced by M. Penri, that it knows not well which way to
look) arm it nevertheless into the field a new, as if a gilded coat armor
could any whit relieve a drooping and crazed carkisse: But now I have learned
the way, let me a loan with him, let him bring it into the field a thousand
times, and that a horsekacke if he will, you shall see, that I am a man good
enough for a dozen as brave Silogisines as this: For I faier and flat deny the
argument. It may be you wonder at me, but I tell you again I deny the argument,
yea were it openly at the Commencement at Cambridge, I would deny the argument
and never blush at it, nay I am a shrewde fellow I tell you, why do you not
see what a lame leg it has? There lacks a certain thing the call Ever, and
then it were a good consequent in deed, Antichrist must ever sit in the temple
of god, Ergo. The popish Church must needs be the Church of God. And then by M.
D. favor, if he reason so, I deny the Antecedent: for it was sufficient say
I, that Antichrist first planted his seat in that place, which was once the
Church of God, and no necessity that it shoude be so still.

Nay if your D. have noe better reasons then these, as mean a Clarke as I am,
I durst me thinks dispute with him in the point my self, and I believe if a man
were disposed to enter into the question, it were noe hard matter to bring
other manner of profes against it, then M. Some has brought with it for any
thing I see: For what say you to this I pray you? And tell me whether I have
forgot my Logic.

1 If the popish Church continuing Popish, be in any sort the visible Church of
God, then there must needs be some one member of it, so continuing a visible
member of the Church of God.

2. But it is not possible that any one Member of it so continuing, should be a
vizible member of the Church of God, Ergo.

How say you? Have not I as good cause to make my cracks of this argument, as
M. Some has of that brave one of his, of Antichrists sitting in the temple of
God? By the way I pray you remember, that I speak not here of Gods eternal
council, or secreet election, but of a vizible Church and vizible members, and
not of every vizible Church nether: For I know there is Ecclesia Malignantium
the church of the malignant but of the vizible Church of God by profession:
also when I speak of the popish Church, you must take me that I speak
altogether of such a church and such members as by profession continewe popish,
even in the main grounds of popery, otherwise if we agree not of this, we shall
but swerve from the question and contend in vain: This being set down then
for the first, I would feign know which of my propositions you can deny, for
I am persuaded I tell you, that unless they meet with a very unreasonable
wrangler, they are both sound and of musket proof: As for the Mayor, I will
never for shame loose time to prove that, It shall lie as it does for me open
to all the world, to give him the blush that shall deny it: For the Minor, if
you shall tell me that on may be a papist in this point, as in Crossing,
kneeling, oyling, sasling, Pilgrimages, prayer for the dead. etc. and so
continewe, and yet be a member of Gods Church, you answer nothing: For these
and such like slight instances (though they may be otherwise offensive to god)
be not yet the things a quibus dennoiantur tales, though I confess that these
be in deed of the dregs and ossales of popery, (and a very shrewd sign that
they that are wholly drenched herein are scarce sound at the heart) yet can
they not rightly be called papists only for these: As an Arrian, what other
errors soever he hold, yet is he called an Arrian, and has his name only for
the denial of the Godhead of Christ and nothing else, which detestable heresy
whenever he renounceth, (though he be wide in some other smaller points) he
is no more an Arrian but may well be reckoned as a member of the Church: In like
sort Papistry consisting of these 3. Pillars. 1. The denial of the true and
only Headship of Christ, by placing Antichrist in his rome, 2. The denial of
the Sole sufficient sacrafice of Christ by the use of their blasphemous and
Idolatrous Mass: 3. The denial of our justification in the blood of Christ
by says alone, by thrusting in rags and merits of their own: This being as I
say, the whole frame and groundworke of popery, whenever any man renounceth
and a bandoneth this, he is no more say I a Papist, though not withstanding in
some other smaller respects, he may peradventure justly be called Popish, and
so may a protestant to in some sort, as if a woman for the great love she bare
to her husband, would by noe means be persuaded but to pray for his soul
when he is gone, or if a man in some scruple of conscience would in noe sort be
drawn to taste any meare on good friday as they call it: This man or woman
(though otherwise sound in the grounds of religion) may in this regard, truly
be called popish, and yet none of the papists neither for all that: In which
sense, if M. Some should understand popish, he must needs make a very warm
conclusion of it, for so might the protestants Church be called a popish
church. Therefore understanding popery in that sense that all the godly learned
for the most part understand it, that is, for a profession that holds of
these three heads I spoke of before: vz. That Antichrist of Rome: The
idolatrous Mass: and the denial of our justification in the blood of Christ.
In this sense I take it, my minor proposition is in it self sufficiently
rampered against the strongest battery of the best learned pen under heaven: For
who dare say that any man holding any of these three, and so continuing, can
be a visible member of the Church? And if a man may ask it, what was that I
pray you that cut of the Jews from being the people of God? Was it not
Insidelitie? For I take it the Apostle does not mean in that place that
vnbelese made them a stained or a corrupted Church, but that it quite broke
them of from being any Church at all I mean any vizible church, otherwise from
the everlasting covenant I know there can be no breaking of, neither can
infidelity lay hold of those that are once enrolled in the bocke of life: well
then if it be an aparant truth that infidelity cut of the Jews, not only
from being a sound Church, but from being any Church at all, I would
gladly know what Charter of privilege the Church of Rome has, but that the
very same defection which was the breaking of of the Jews, must needs also
(and that by Gods just judgment) be the cuttinge of of them: But will you hear
any more of my arguments? For I begin now to be of M. Somes humor, that is, to
have a pretty good lik^ng of my self.

1 The church of Infidels can in no sort be the Church of God. 2 But the Popish
Church is the church of infidells, Ergo.
Remember I pray you that I speak (...) here of a Church of insidels, not that
among insidels there is or may be a church, for that is nothing to the matter:
no more is that, That under the Papacy there is a Church, as M. Some tells us
of that poor Church that is there held under captivity, and that many of them
in the agonies and conflictes of death, did wholly cleave to the cross of
Christ, and that numbers of them forsooth held the foundation that is Jesus
Christ. etc. which as they be mysteries that noe man doubts of, so we answer
your D. that look how many of them did so indeed, look how many of them
claue wholly and thoroughly (as he says) to the Cross of Christ without
wavering, so many of them (say we) were noe longer papists: as a Jew by
profession in what moment of hour soever he forsakes his Iudaisme and cleaues
to the Messiah, at the same very moment is he no longer a Jew but a christian,
otherwise it is not possible that either a papist continuing a papist, or a
Jew continuing a Jew should hold the foundation: Therefore the Mayor is
clear, that The Church of Insidells continuing Insidels, can in noe sort be
the Church of God. The minor is D. Fulks, whose learned judgment (having so
notably deserved of this Church of England) if we should now for once and use
it not, set against the bare authority of Calvin or Beza in this case, I do
not see that it would be any great prejudice or disparagement to any: These
be his words: The catholic Church of Christ (whereof the Church of England is
a part,) is an invizible Church, etc. Contrariwise the Popish Church Consu.
S^nd of Imag. 168
which is vizible is the church of Insidels, and Rome which is upon earth is
the mother of all Antichristians: Nay but for spending of time it should
manifestly appear unto you, that there were nothing more easy then to dash
this assertion of M. Somes in pieces, and to prove against all the world, that
The Popish Church is not (as he and some others would have it). a stained,
corrupted, an unsound Church but flatly noe Church of God at al: For how if a
man should reason thus?

1 That Church that denies the foundation of our salvation, can in no sort be
the church of God at al: 2. But the popish Church denies the foundation of our
salvation. Ergo.
Taking the Mayor to be so clear that noe man of judgmente can deny it
without some check to his own heart and conscience, I would easily for need
and never go farther, confirm my Minor by the sacred and inviolable authority
of M. Bridges, Scilicet si sanum haberet Sinciput, that is, if his brain were
in temper, or his judgment were worth a marginal note: For he setts down
plainly in one place: That the Church of Rome does overthrowe the foundation,
which by his confession in an other place is Jesus christ: but because I hear
that this learned D. is one of Tarletons executors, and it may be he is now
very busy in proouing of his will, I would be loath to trouble him at this
time, neither were it reason to draw him from proouing his friends Testament,
to help to prove any proposition of mine, and therefore I will for this once
give him good leave to walk where he will, and content my self only with the
testimony of D. Fulke whose words against Stapleton be these: If pieces of
truth Contra. Stapl. Fort. page 35.
might be sufficient to make them the Church of Christ, many heretics might
chaleng the church which have confessed and practiced a great number of more
truths the^ they, and do err but in one article, as the Arlans Pelagians.
etc. whereas the papists err in many, yea in the whole doctrine of
justification by faith and the worship of God: Therefore papistry is not only
a scisme, error or heresy, but an Apostacy, defection, and Antichristianitie,
etc. Nay more against Bristowe he speaks to this effect: seeing beside these
errors of the fathers ye hold many blasphemous Rejond. to B^istovv, page 10.
heresies which they never hold, and utterly deny the office of Christ, the
foundation of our salvation, therefore we justly deny you to be of the true
church of Christ. And yet there is an other place as pregnant as any of these,
in the 14. page as I take it of the same book against Bristowe, where he
speaks likewise to the papists in this sort: Ye therefore building salvation
upon good works done after baptism, do manifestly build Rejond. 14.
upon another foundation, then the only true ^oundation Jesus Christ: and
therefore notwithstanding your error, you cannot (as the old Fathers erring in
small matters) be yet the church of God.

Thus you see, I am not so ill befriended, but that I can fetch in my proofs,
though M. Bridges were at no leisure to help me. But I pray you speak
indifferently, is not the evidence very clear for me, and is not D. Fulk flat
against M. Some in that point? does he not say directly that the popish church
is both the church of Infidells, and that it does deny the foundation, which
were the two points you know, I had in hand to prove? Neither if you mark
it, does he mince it with any of these calm and gentle quallifications, as if
he did allow it for a Church in a sort, though an unsound Church, but he lays
it down flatly and expressly (as you see) to the view of al men, that it is not
at all the Church of God: and he yields this reason, because it buildes not upon
the foundation Jesus Christ. Can there any thing be clearer then this? Now
your D. had best take D. Fulke in hand, and tell him another while, that he
does err grossly, and that (if he have any learning) he does toto coelo
errare: or that ^is one of the strangest divines that ever he heard off: or
that he is very ignorant, very absurd, and that his arguments are pitiful,
and his divinity at a low eb: or else that his judgment is not worth a rushe,
etc. For some such pretty dagger without a sheathe would become the house well,
and trouble D. Fulke shrewdly: And so we might happen have a merry world of
it, when the sick man should fall a casting of the physicians water, and M.
Some fall a setting Doct. Fulke to school. Well yet we must desire him for all
that (because it is a law of his own making) that he will not be ouerhastie to
confute M. Fulke before he have confuted his reso^, for so he wishes M. Penri
to do by Calvine and others. In deed M. Fulke is a man of singular learning,
an enemy to papists, etc. A notable light and 143
ornament in Gods Church. What M. Some is, we will not say, we would be loath
to do him wrong: Therefore we 168
will not match him with so famous a man as M. Fulke is. You may see now by
this, whether I be not old excellent at the Art of imitation. Me thinks your D.
should know the sound of this bell by his clapper, I believe he can quickly
smell out of what forge it came, and therefore I have purposely quoted the
place that you may commend my wit, for it is but a little altering of the
names, you see otherwise the case is all one. And how if the ignorant Welshman
should now in some requital, be so saucy to tell him, that he for his part,
does rest in the judgment of this excellent man, with all his heart, and
thereupon should will him Never to stand 177
pidling longer, but to go through stitch withal, and sithence he is gone over
the shoes to rush over the boots, etc. and 147
to confute M. Fulke, and to confute him soundly if he can, so shall he have
the garlande, and be counted the rarest 155
man alive, etc. But if he cannot (which we are assured of) he shall no more go
for a Patriarch among his ignorant followers. etc. And if he give th'onset and
fail, be shall be sure to lose no credit of learning, etc. These with many 18^
other mo, being as you know, but the crops and flowers of his own pretty
garden. I muze with what patience he would disgeast it, if a man should thus
wipe his nose with his own sleeue: And by this you may see how much your D.
has aduantaged himself, by troubling the printer with a number of such
worthio Enigmaes, as may as naturally be apropriate to John a Style as to
himself: By means whereof, if he should happen by occasion hereafter, to appeal
from D. Fulke to the word, M. Penri having learned the trick of it, would be
sure to choke him straight with a pill, out of his own confectionarie in this
or the like manner. A strange kind of appealing, when M. Fulkes arguments are
drawn from the word: and then might not your D. well rue the time that ever
he drew out his adversary such a line, as by turning of a thredd, might go
near to strangle himself? or is it not full as good English, and every way
as good sense for M. Penri to say thus? The argument that I made is indeed M.
Fulks and a very sure one: as it is for M. Some to say thus, The argument that
I made, is indeed M. Caluines, and a very 80
sure one? What great ods is there I pray you, betwixt these two countertenors?
Being famous learned men both, and both notable members of Gods Church. I see
no such difference, but that the balance is full as heavy at this end as at
that: and that it were as lawful for M. Penri (if he were so disposed) to say
with reverence, that He does more esteem of one Fulke, then of a thousand
Somes, as it is for M. Some in a kind of swelling and disdainful contempt
(which he has notably laid open in above 200. places in his book) to say that
He does more esteem of one Calvin, then of a thousand Penries, as if that
were any thing to the matter, or as if 168
the bare defacing of his adversary, would any whit better his cause in the
judgment of the wise, or as if the truth of God did at any time hang upon the
gifts and credit of men.

But now I remember me this is not altogether the bare judgment of D. Fulke
alone nether, for his books (being as you see authorized) and aparantly stamped
with that State mark of Seen and allowed, we may in that regard trewly say,
that look what is there advisedly set down as this point, that the popish
church is no church at al, must needs be, because it is so often iterated and
redoubled, and to be proved very near in 20. places of his works: therefore I
say, look what is there advisedly set down, and not by error or oversight
mistaken, is implicit the very judgment and resolution of our Church and
State: which being true, M. Some has a warm suit of it to keep such a stir
about the authority of Calvine, when those that my L. of Cant. says can teach
Calvine, are of a contrary judgment, whereupon I could here once again for
need (if I had old Dorbel of Sarum lying by me,) blunder you out an other
proper figure or 2. to trou^ce M. Some with, that should sound in your ears
like a Jews trumpe, after the old melodious manner: Yea my learned D. are you
good at that; Is the wind in that door? are you still controling of our
church and state. etc. But because you are reasonably acquainted with this
sweet note already, I will not stand now to set it in parts, only you may see
by this, that if a man should chance to tell M. Some to his face, that to hold
that the Romish church is in a sort the church of God, is a gross and palpable
error, there were no danger in it at all, because he that should so do, has
you see, not only the judgment of a famous learned man to back him, but also
the flat alowance of the Church of England to bear him out in it: For Papistry
being (as M. Fulke has proved) not only a Scisme, error, and heresy Rejond,
to Bristovve page 5.
but an utter defection and a mere Apostacy compact of all errors, what
should fear us to say and avowe that our christian magistrates have done well
not only with Thrasibulus to fly from the tyranny of Athens, but rather with
Lot and his family to leave the whole city of Sodom, wherein there was not any
free place but all the body one a blister? Even so if the popish Church be in
truth nothing else, but a very lump, mass, and body of Apostacy, what a
proper nice disstinction were this to say, that our Magistrates have indeed
severed themselves from the corruption of Apostacy, but not from Apostacy it
self, as if there were any thing in Apostacy but corruption? Therefore if M.
Some do think he have any advantage that way, good leave have he to make his
best of it: For we, are not afraid to say and say it again, yea and if it
were possible, to proclaim it in the hearing of all the churches in the world,
that Q. Elizabeth and her godly magistrates have not only severed themselves
from the plague that pestereth the city, but from the very city of Sodom it
self, not only as he says from the corruption of the popish Church, but from
the very popish Church it self, and the reason is because it is in no sort the
Church of God, having overthrown the foundation, and therefore must needs
(whether M. Some will or not) be the very Sinagog of Satan: And then say I as
before, that our magistrates have done well, and that which they may justify
by good warrant from Gods word, otherwise they should be apparantlye guilty
of a grievous sin which after my kind of Logic I prove thus.

1 All christian Magistrates are bound utterly to divorce themselves from that
Church, not only from the corruptions of that Church, but from that very Church
and society it self, which has made a diuorcement from Christ and erreth in
the foundation of our faith:

2 But the Romish Church (as is before sufficiently proved) has made such a
divorcement and erreth in the very foundation: Ergo.

Our Magistrates ought (as thanks be to God they have done) utterly to divorce
themselves from that very Church it self, and therefore need not M. Somes
help to clear them from being Scismatikes:

Thus you may see M. Somes worthy distinction of our Magistrates, not severing
themselves from the Church but from the Idolatry of the Church, etc. Is by
this means quite quashed in pieces: For if it were indeed in any sort the
Church of God, then would fall out this strange paradoxe, that one and the
self same body of a Church might in a sort be the church of Christ and in a
sort again the Church of Antichrist, and that might be a piece of John a
Bridges divinity well enough for the soundness of it: Furthermore if it were
only but from the stains and corruptions of the popish Church that this our
separation was made (as M. Some would have it) then belike they and we are
both one body of a Church, though ours be as much more refined body then
theirs: But how can that be when they hold not the same head and foundation
that we do? For one body you know must have but one head otherwise it is a
monster: They then having an other head, then we have, we may safely conclude
that they are not of the same body with us, neither do I see any warrant for a
Christian man to severe himself from the body of Gods Church (in that sort as
we have severed our selves from Rome) for any blemishes or corruptions
whatsoever: For so might out Brownists (if they list) get themselves a pretty
pleadable shelter of defense, and tell us, That they do not forsooth severe
themselves from our congregation as from the City: but from the plague that
pestereth the city. Not from the common wealth, but from the Tirannie that
oppresses the common wealth: Not from our Church, but from the soul disorders
that bleamish our Church, etc. And if they should thus temper the matter, I
muze whether M. Some would be so courteous to take that for payment: But it is
not come to that you see, for our Brownists are far of any such coulorable
pretenses: They go more roundly to work with us then so, and bash not to tell
us plainly (though indeed very wretchedly and falsely) That our church is not
at all the vizible church of God, and for that cause it is, that they bear us in
hand, they do so single themselves from us, and not for any disorders that
might otherwise bleamish or dissigure our Church, why should we then more
mince it with our papists?, then these men do with us, clawing them with I
konwe not what tolerable and half faced alowance of a Church forsooth: though
an unsound Church? Or why should not we deal as roundly with the enemies of
God in a truth as the Brownists do with the children of God in a falsehood? Or
why should we fear to make known unto the world that it is not for this or
that corruption, or any patches or pieces of vnsoundenesse, that we have thus
severed from the Romish Sinagogue, but only for that the very founteine it
self is altogether as a poizened puddle, whence nothing can flow naturally
but continual streams of corruption? And therefore that it is not, nor never
was since her general defection and Apostacy, any more the Church of God, then
the very church of the heathen or Infidels. Mark I pray you, that I say noe
more the Church of God, for albeit in some regard it may peradventure be
nearer the Church of God, (in that they have amongst them I know not what
rubbishes, remnants, and traces of some good things,) yet to speak of a Church
indeed as a Church, it may truly be said to be no more the Church of God then
the very church of the heathen or Infidels, I speak not here of the nation of
the Jews, who in regard of Gods promise are nearest of al, I speak only of
the heathen and Infidels, and in comparison with them, I say that as a lump of
Iron or steel is no more an axe head, then either a piece of wood or stone,
though in nature and possibility it be nearer: Even so, if M. Some will have
us say that the Romish Church is any thing nearer, or in possibility liker to
be the Church of God, then that of the hethen or Infidels, we will not greatly
stick with him: Any farther alowance we may not well give to the popish Church
without sin, the reason is because it has utterly cast of the foundation of
Jesus Christ crucified, without whom all the learning and eloquence of men or
Angels can not make a Church, and therefore he that shall either file his pen
or strain his wits to prove it, shall when he has strugled to the
uttermost, but miserably strive like a bird in the lime, and so flutter
himself windelesse in his own conceit.

Now for those prerogatives and preheminences that are commonly given to the
popish Church above other hethen and Idolatrous Churches, if a man should ask
M. Some what they be, it is like he would begin straight with true baptism,
which if M. Penri should stand upon as a slat begging of the question, I do
not think that your D. with all his skill could travel much farther that way:
But allow it to be so, that in popery there is baptism, yet you see by M.
Somes divinity, we are never the nearer for a Church, because he holds that
true baptism may be our of the church Well what be the other good things that
they are supposed to have? If you say the Trinity, I ask where? in their
windows? If you say the scriptures, I ask where? in their coffers? If you
say our savior Christ I ask how many of them they have, or rather how many
hundred dozen of them? For him alone I am sure, either as mediator,
intercessor, or redeemer they have not. So that a man may truly say, they
have much good things but the swine eat them up all. The very truth is, let
the faith and profession of a christian be rightly scanned after the line of
Gods word, and it will be found (howsoever men like to smothe it, or smother
it) that they have in deed none of all these things, and the more they have of
them, in that manner as they have them, the greater is their condemnation And I
take it, that M. Beza himself in his Antithesis betwixt the faith of a
christian, and the faith of a papist, does sufficiently prove that they hold
not a sound profession in any one article of the faith. How can that be then
the Church of God that venteth and runs our every where, that fails in
every article, and has not so much as one sound sinowe to trust unto? yea and
by your leave I do not see, but that out of M. Calvin himself if he were
narrowly looked into (though M. Some erect him as a pillar against us, in a
manner in every leaf) there might easily enough be drawn arguments to
confirm this judgment of ours. I grant indeed he says thus: Whereas we will
not simply grant to the papists the title of the Church, we do not therefore
deny that there be churches among them: likewise again in another place in the
same section he says thus, We do not deny but that under the tyranny of
Antichrist remain Churches, etc. Which is no more in effect then M. Some
himself has said before. And I cannot conceive how this should prejudice the
cause any whit, for let us draw it into form if you please:

Among the papists there are Churches, or under the tyranny of Antichrist
there are Churches:

Ergo The popish Church is in a sort the church of God

I deny the argument, neither is there any consequence in it at all: For it is
not enough say I, to be among and under, but as I have proved before, they
must be themselves thorough papists, even in the maine grounds of popery, and
so continue unto the end, otherwise it is not possible to frame th'argument,
with out the string hault do what they can. Yet rather this seems to be much
stronger against it, when M. Calvin reasons to this effect: Like as a man's
life is at an end Institut. lib. 4. cap. 2. sect. 1.
when his throat is thruste thorough, or his heart deadly wounded, So when
lying is broken into the chief Tower of religion (as no man doubts I trow, but
it is in popery) the destruction of the Church follows. Mark here, he says
not the corruption of the Church (as M. Some would have it) but the destruction
of the church, which immediately after he explaneth thus: If the true church be
the pillar and stay of the truth, it is certain that there is no Church (he
dorh not say an unsound Church) where lying and falsehood has usurped the
dominion. Ye and in the fourth section of the same chapter, he is yet more
clear for us to this effect: Where the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles
is not, there remains nothing that gives any true signification of the
church: if nothing, what babble they of baptism, Lords prayer and I know not
what? But in popery say I, the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles is not.
Ergo: and me thinks th'argument is unanswerable, which in the end of the
seventh section he confirms thus: Who dare call that the Church, where the
word of the Lord is openly and freely troaden under foot, yea the very soul
of the Church is destroyed, etc: But in popery this is aparant, Ergo. Lastly,
in the tenth section of the same chap. he reasons thus: If they be Churches
(says he, speaking of popish Churches) then they have the power of the keys:
But the keys are unseperably knit with the word, which from thence is quite
driven away, and there upon he concludes, That either the promise of Christ is
in vain, or else that in that respect they are no Churches. Can any thing be
spoken more plainly and directly then this? out of which places, how if a man
should now argue with M. Some in this manner.

Where the power of the keys is not, and where the word of God is quite driven
away, there it is impossible to be any church of God at all:

But in popery this is so, witness M. Calvin. Ergo.

I confess to you it is strange, and strange again to me, that the vizible
Church being (as I take it) always known by the Word, Sacraments and
Discipline: the special and principal mark of the 3. being the word, in
that it gives life and authority to the other, there should yet be a church
where this word is not: that where this word is quite driven away, where the
very soul of the church is destroyed, where there cannot be so much as any
true signification of the church, the doctrine of the prophets and Apostles
being utterly bannished, wherefore I say, all this is (as Master Calvin
sufficiently proves) there should yet be a Church, this is a wonderful
misterye to me. It had need be in deed as they say, a church secundum quid:
And yet if there be nor (as Master Calvin says) so much as any true
signification of the Church) I do not see but that they may be bold to blot
out secundum quid, and by good warrant make it none at al: As for that which is
said of the Trinity, I ask whether the Devil do not also believe the
Trinity, for in the trinity I am sure non of them both believe: I have heard
that Demones credunt et contremiscunt: Then if this be a good argument, the
Papist is better then the Turk because he holds the Trinytie: Then say I, The
Devil is likewise better then the Turk because he holds the Trinity: There
is only this difference, that the papist or the Turk may be a convert and dye
penitent, so can nor the Devil, but then say I still he is no longer either
Turk or papist: By this you may see that it is not then having bare reading or
coffering up of the scriptures, Lords prayer, Articles of the faith, etc. Nor
the naming, picturing or spelling of the Trinity, but the sound profession of
these holy things, according to the rule of Gods word that does make the Church.

And me thinks (if a man consider of it well,) that which is aleaged before of
M. Fulke against Stapleton, should so cut the face of these poor prerogatives
brought in for defense of this Church Secundun quid, that they should never
peep out of doors again, in any printed record without blushing, shall I
repeat it to you again? Ispeeces of truth (says he) might be sufficient to
make them the Church of Christ, many heretics Contra. Siaple. page 35.
might challenge the Church which confessed and practiced a number of more
truths then they, and do err but in one article, as the Arians, Pelagians,
etc. what means M. Some then to tell us a tale of a Tub, of the Lords 149
prayer, articles of the faith, Commandments, and some other good things that
are amongst them: when these and a hundredth of these (so long as they err as
they do in the foundation) can not make them the church? For the papists says
D. Fulke in the place before recited, do err in many articles, yea in the
whole doctrine of justification of says and the worship of God: Therefore
Papistrie is not only a Scisme, error and heresy, but an apostacy: Defection,
and Antichristianitie, etc. and then belike it is somewhat more then M. Some in
his calm conceit can well afforde it to be, for it seems he dare go noe
farther then to An aberration of the Christian 150
Church, and so far you see he dare go boldly: And is not that well? For it
may be Cardinal Alen with all his troop dare not go half so far: well for a
small resolution of the whole (being as we are so strengthened and confirmed
herein by the judgment of D. Fulke) look what offer the Demonstration of
Discipline makes to our Bb. that is their lives to their bishoprics: the very
same offer is here presently tendered to M. Some, that upon notice given and
leave obtained of a judicial hearing before her majesty, and the State, (D.
Reynoldes and D. Whitakers being judges) if it do not appear by unavoidable
proofs that the popish Church is not only An unsound Church, but no church of
God at all, and so by that means that M. Some is manifestly overthrown as well
in this point as in sundry others of his tretise, the man that so presents him
self to this encounter, will ask no favor, but willingly submit himself to
such heavy censure and punishment, as shall be thought meet for so rash a
disturber of the peace of the Church.

There is yet an other point in your D. book, that in my conceit his frinds
may as well cover with a curteyne as any of the rest, and that is his loose
defense of Bare reading and pronouncing the words of th'institution by Dumb
Ministers, M. Penri denying that unpreaching Ministers do add an edifying
word to the Element, M. Some will prove it you shall see. But first you must
give him leave to warm himself a little at the Magistrates fire, for it may
be his hands are a cold: And then (when he has stirred the coals a while
for the better conjuring of his adversary) you shall see him prove his
Anticedent, as I believe you have not seen many Anticedents proved by a D. of
divinity in your life. My Anticedent was (says he) that vnpreching Ministers
do ad an edifieng word to th'Element: very well, and will you have this
proved now? Then take this with you for a pattern: The sum of Cbristes 98
Sermon in th'institution and administration of the holy Supper is the very
same that we use here in the Church of England: Ergo. unless we will deny the
sum of Christ's Sermon to be an edifiing word, we must confess we have
verbum aedisicans, etc. and what is this else but (as M. Some says) to prove
that Midnight is not high Noone, and yet I have heard that with the Antipodes,
our midnight is there high noone: Nevertheless M. Some (we thank him for his
cost,) bestows above 20. lines to prove this deep mystery unto us,
paraphrasing upon it full demurely: So that ear he have done withal I dare lay
a good wager he will make it as clear as it was before, and that it was clear
enough, That the word of institution and the sum of Christ's Sermon does
edify, which if Blind Bartemeus could not have spied, yet I doubt not but
his cousin german of Sarum (who it may be would disdain to be either his or
a better man's inferior in Blindness) would willingly subscribe unto it
without wresteling. And I muze if on should defend That women, idiots,
Sorcerers, and Conjurers can not ad an edifying word to th'Element, though
they should repeat the words of th'institution a thousand times over. I muze I
say, whether M. Some would refute this even as he has don the former, by
telling us that which the very boys that learn their pricksong, could not I
trow, be ignorant of, vz. That the sum of Christ's Sermon is an edifying word:
For who doubts (unless his brains be out) that The word of God is in his own
nature an edifying word? That the Scripture is autopisos, that is of credit
in it self, and inspired not of man but of God, etc. who doubts of all this?
but what of that? Shall we therefore infer that out of a Coniurers mouth it is
an edifying word, or that wheresoever else, the word is wretchedly profaned
hand over head, as by a woman at baptism, or by a cursed man of no calling in
the congregation, there must needs be Edification straight? O but you will say,
M. Some does not say so, he speaks only of unpreaching ministers: But I say
again he must needs say so whether he will or no, for the reason that he brings
does point as directly, and conclude as forcibly for sorcerers and conlurers,
as for Dumb Ministers, and therein I pray you be judge your self. The sum of
christ's Sermon (says he) is an edifying word, Ergo. The dumb Ministers
repeating the same Sermon do ad an edifying word. And why not I pray you by
the same proportion, Ergo. Women, Ergo. Witches, Ergo. Madmen, Ergo. Idiots
repeating the same Sermon, do ad an edifying word? For if there be no more in
the matter but only the words of the institution, and the sermon of Christ
without regard had of the calling of the man, and of Gods inviolable ordinance
therein: And M. Penri holding that our dumb dogs that have no measure of
gifts, are no more capable of the ministry then these, then is it not possible
but that M. Some must either (as his usual delight is) beg the question, or
else the consequences must be al one in spite of his heart. I know right well,
that a godly man may even then be edified by the word, when it is most
blasphemed by a hellish mouth, and I know that a man may be edified some times
and stricken with remorse upon the sight of some horrible murder, as he may
also at on of these plays or Theater Spectacles, as some have not let to give
out, That they for their parts have bin more edified by a play then by all this
preaching: nevertheless I hope no man of sense will say that either murder or
blaspheming the word of God, or the same word wretchedly profaned in a play,
is therefore an ordinary means to edify: And what warrant has any man to
seek for Edification there where there is noe promise he shall be edefied?
Though the word it self be an edefieng word, yet may not the Lord choose
whether it shallbe an edifying word to us or no, especially when we make noe
conscience of repairing thither, where we know before hand his holy ordinance
is profaned? Farther it is worth marking, that whereas M. Penri says, Noe
learned man will deny the Lords prayer rightly said to be an edefying word,
now M. Some as a man that had long fasted, and thereby glad of any thing to
relieve his hunger, does hereuppon all to be thank him: I thank you (says
he) for this, and therefore do conclude against you that the Scripture barely
read, and to non other 120
purpose then to edify, by reading is wholesome doctrine: for the Lords prayer
is part of the holy Scripture: wherein I know not well whether M. Penri
should do better to thank him for his cost, or praise him for his courtesy.
Nevertheless when the matter shall come to sifting, I fear it will hardly
deserve half the Thanks that M. Some bestows. For did you never hear of a
man that took post horses to ride northwarde, and yet by wandering all night,
found himself within 2. mile of Lambeth in the morning? This was sure M.
Some, who making more have then good speed to ride away with his poor
advantage, is after his long travel and wandering (as you see) returned home by
some night spirit, by means whereof he is (if you mark it) as near his
jornies end as when he first set foot in stirrup. Why alas cannot so great
a Clarke as M. Some is see into these words, Rightly said, unless they be
written in great text letters or printed in Folio? Or is he now to learn that
Noe popish Priest as a Priest, Noe Papist as a Papist, Noe Witch as a Witch,
did ever say the Lords prayer rightly in his life? What a squinteyed conclusion
is this then, to draw an argument from Rightly said, to Barely read? As if we
were so childish to grant him that which is Barely read of a minister in his
place and function, were Rightly said, or that the hurrying over the Lords
prayer or any other piece of Scripture, either without book or within book
were rightly said: that is to say, that the word profaned contrary to the
holy ordinance and institution of Christ were wholesome doctrine. But how shall
we do now? M. Some has yet spied out an other blasphemy, an other strange
point of divinity, and what is that? Forsooth The word of God uttered, is
not an edifying word, unless it be uttered according to th'ordinance, both in
regard of the persons that uttered the same, and the end wherefore it is
uttered: whereupon he questioneth with his adversary in this manner: Is not
this M. Penri to make the person to give credit to the holy word of God? which
position is very grosso 120
and blasphemons. We answer in M. Penries behalf, no in deed is it not:
First it is clear M. Penri speaks here (as he does in the whole course of
his book) of that which is ordinary and not extraordinary: For what have we to
do now with miracles or extraordinary revelatious: Or (as I said before) if
any man be edified by a Play, by a Murder, by Blaspheming or profaning of the
word of God, what have we to do with that? This being set down then as a
thing clear and out of question that M. Penri speaks only of that which is
ordinary, we answer that his assertion stands firm and inviolable against
M. Some and all the wrangling spirits in the world, vz. That the word uttered
is not an edefying word, unless it be uttered according to the ordinance both
in regard of the persons, etc. neither is this at all To make the person give
credit to the holy word, noe more then we say that the bread and wine prepared
for the Lords table, can be no sacramet unless he be a minister that delivers
it. Is this to make the sacrament depend upon the person, or the person to give
credit to the sacrament? I think not, no more is it of the word. And who sees
not that when he speaks here of the persons, he means not (as M. Some would
seem to enforce) of the dignity or worthiness of the persons, or barely of the
persons themselves as they be of men (for that were too childishe) but only of
the Calling and office of the parsons, which being the holy ordinance of God
prescribed in the word, what incongruitie or absurdity is it, for the Lord to
restrane th'ordinarie blessing of edification to his own ordinance, as if he
should say, My word is in deed the word of life, nevertheless if any man abuse
it, or profane it, if any man presume to deal withal, that has no calling or
warrant thereunto, let him never look that I will bloue upon it with my
spirit. And who dare say that there is or can be edification, where the Lord
breaths not with his spirit? Therefore let M. Some say what he will, there can
be neither error nor heresy to make not the person, but the holy calling of the
person, that is, the Lords own ordinance to give a majesty and credit to his
own word, which in truth is nothing else, but to make the very word give a
credit to the word, and so it is Autopisos still. Now for his manner of
writing, I rest even of the same judgment I was, when the book came first into
my hands: you know what I then told you upon the first taste of it, and I dare
warrant you, you shall find it to be true: for he is all in his short cuts and
questions like pretty apothegs. What say you to 40. full points in 50. lines, to
30. full points, in 33. lines, to 6. full points in 4. lines, to 4. full points in
3. lines? Nay in one place, about the pa. 76. as I remember, he has more full
points then lines: yen and in that space that John a Bridges has one period, I
dare be bound M. Some has 50 or upward. And is not that sententiously written?
Nay farther, let his whole book be well viewed, I mean his last book which of it
self, is not much above 40. leaves and that in a large letter, such as
consumes a great deal of paper in a little matter, and I dare undertake you
shall find above 1500. full points. So that whereas in one place he tells his
adversary, that unless it be granted him, that unpreaching ministers have no
calling, he is at a 118
full point: his adversary may now justly reply upon him, unless the contrary be
granted him, he is at a 1000. full points. And I pray you tell me, are not his
lungs in great danger think you, that he is so short winded that he can scarce
tie 2. propositio^s together in mood and figure I promise you for mine own
part I am half afraid of him, if he look not to himself in time. Well, I could
tell M. Some a notable receipt for this shortness of breath, if he would be
ruled by me. First he must cross the Thames no more toward Lambeth, for the
moistues of the air so nere the water side is very dangerous: he^ the closenes
of London streats is perilous for the stop ping of his pipes: more, the great
fare and entertainme^t about the court and at Bb. houses, may breed in time a
Lethergie: therefore his only way (if he love his health) must be to get him into
the country in the open air, and to make his only residence and ordinary
aboade upon Gyrton benefice, shaking of all other appendixes and hangbies
whatsoever, and even there in love and consience to take pains with his poor
parishuers, as well by public teaching and catechizing of them, as by private
admonishment and familiar conferences, seeking to win them by all other good
and godly means that the Lord has prescribed in his word. And let him ask M.
Grenham whether this be not an excelent medicine for the shortness of the
breath, I warrant you he has tried it, and has found good of it, for he has
wind at will ye see, and as shril pipes as most men. Now M. Some may choose he
has my direction for nothing, and if I might see his water I might happen tell
him more. I know there be other paltry practicioners in Phisike that will
advise him otherwise, but let him take it of my word, it will not be so good for
him in the end. For it is sure this short windiness and nothing else that makes
him thus in a kind of kingly manner with so many uncontrollable periods to
debate with us: I agree with you in this: I dissent from you in this: strange
sansies have almost consumed you: your reverence I make very base account of: I
think great scorn I tell you, to be one of ignorant Penries disciples, etc.
Sure your D. persuades himself I believe, that look what he says it is a
statute straght, otherwise he would never come upon his poor adversary in
this jumping manner. Well for all that if he can make shift with all the skill
he has to fetch a jump from his benefice at Girton to some sweet Deanery or
Bishopric, it will sure be one of the pretiest jumps that ever he made in his
life. There be of his betters that have made such Alemaine leapes in their
days, and thereby may the better direct him the way if need be, how think
you by these jumps. From Peter house to Penbrooke hall, from thence to Trinity
College, from thence to Lincoln, from Lincoln to Worcester, from Worcester
you know whither. But were not these vengeable steps? Well let your D. look to
it, for I have known a man bursten in my days, with fetching such strides.
And this I fear me is the blessinge that he so often harpeth upon as well in
his preface as in his book: It pleased God (says he) to assist me graciously
preface
in my pains I have taken: I thank his majesty very humbly for it: And I
doubt not but he will give ablessing unto it. And again in an other place, I
was desired 177
(says he) to provide a plaster, I did so, and God has given a blessing to
it. And yet again, I doubt not but that blessing which god has given already
to my last tretise, and which his majesty will give to this, will mar your
market. And last of all he closes up the mouth of all with this: My comfort
is that almighty God will bless 198
this labor. But you may tell M. Some when you see him that I have heard of a
man who dreaming of gold overnight, had but an ilfauored mishap in the
mornning: These hasty promises of golden mountains had neeede we suppose have
better grounds, then these dreaming conceits and fancies of men: For unless
it be some such blessing as I spoke of before, namly some hope or promise of
promotion, (which is not so privileged neither but that it may end in
bitterness) I durst me thinks in this case stand betwixt M. D. and the danger
of any other great blessing that may befall him. As to those high words of
his, that he thinks soul scorn to be one of ignorant Penries disciples,
etc. Considering how rightly it sorteth with the rest of his rhetoric, it
can neither bring any grace to him* self, nor disgrace to his aduersatie.
Alas it does but lay open the rottenness and corruption of his heart, being
very far from that spirit that teaches, Let the greatest among you be as the
least, etc. It is well enough known that there be M. Somes betters, I mean in
Luke. 22. 26.
learning and judgment, that will not refuse even in the fear of God to learn
sometimes of far meaner men in gifts then ever M. Penri was, whom how the Lord
has blessed in plentiful measure that way, his adversaries themselves have bin
forced to acknowledge: but I would you would ask M. Some when you see him,
where was Humile peccatum, when he did thus tread upon his adversary with a
disdainful foot. Well to correct this bad humor of his, you may do well to
refer him to Apollos in the 18. of the Act. who though he were an eloquent
man and mighty in the Scripture, informed in the way of the Lord, and seruent
in the spirit, yet says the text, did he not disdain to learn of Aquila and
Priscilla, who expounded unto him the way of God perfectly, whereupon our Bb.
own note in the margent is this, which we presume M. Some will give ear unto
with reverence: Apollo (say they) being a learned man was not ashamed to be
taught and instructed in the doctrine of Christ, of a poor crafts man and his
wise, what great disparagement then could it be for such a man as M. Some is,
were he as great as an Archb. or a Cardinal, to learn some small trifling
things of of a poorer and meaner student, because he knows that the Lord
sometimes chooses the weak things of the world to confound the wise. And
therefore he that should wish your D. less learning and more modesty,
should I suppose wish him no hurt. Thus have you my verdicte because you
requested it: I confess I have bin too long, but it is my falt, wherein as in
any thing else, I am very well content you shall censure me as you please.

I. G.


