Moses Vnuailed: OR THOSE FIGVRES WHICH SERVED UNTO the pattern and shadow of
heavenly things, pointing out the Messiah CHRIST JESUS, briefly explained.

Where unto is added the Harmony of all the Prophets, breathing with one mouth
the Mystery of his Coming, and of that Redemption which by his Death he was
to accomplish: To confirm the CHRISTIAN, and convince the JEW: very
profitable and full of comfort.

By WILLIAM GVILD, Minister of Gods Word at King-Edward in Scotland.

HEB. 10. 1.

For the Law had the shadow of good things to come, and not the very Image of
the things themselves.

LONDON, Printed by G. P. for John Budge: and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1620.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND, MOST GRAVE, LEARned, and worthy Prelate, and Father in
GOD, My Lord Bishop of Winchester.
AS in the Creation darkness went before light, or as the dawning precedes the
brightness of the day, and as Joseph obscurely at first behaved himself unto
his Brethren, and Moses covered with a veil stood before the people: Even so
(Right Reverend) in the detection of the glorious work of man's Redemption,
mystical promises went before merciful performance, dark shadows were the
forerunners of that bright substance, obscure types were harbingers to that
glorious Antitype the Messiah, who was coming after, and Leui's Law with its
figurative and veiled Ceremonies, was the viue resemblance, painting and
pointing out that clear Lamp and Lamb of God, the express Image and
engraven Character of the Father: So that as folded in swaddling clouts, and
lying in a Crib, he was seen and shown unto the Wisemen that came from the
East; so inuolued in typical ordinances, and lurking under shaddowish signs,
he was offered and exhibited unto the Jews that saw his day but afar off;
the eclipsed and dim light of the Moon (as it were) as yet only glimmering,
or the twinkling brightness of starry Lamps as yet only dazedly glistering:
Until the true Phosphorus, that glorious Sun himself did arise in the
Horizon of our humanity, dispersing the beams of his bounty, and manifesting
himself to be that only light of the world, promised to them that sit in the
Region of darkness, for comfort and illumination, and to the joy of all in
heaven and earth, the Lamb himself only opening that sealed Book, and
unfolding the truth of former hid mysteries.

Then that Ladder of Heaven, and Leader to glory, was more brightly seen, then
Jacob saw the same formerly in a dream. Then that true Tree of Life planted in
the earth of our nature, was plainly viewed without the limits of that heavenly
Paradise. Then that heavenly Manna which the Father gave from above, most
abundantly offered it self, unto the refreshment of all hungring Israelites.
And that blessed Rock from City to City, and place to place following them,
most clearly gushed out the comfortable waters of Life, for every one to
drink, and never to thirst after. Then the true curing Serpent was graciously
re-erected on high for all men to behold with the eye of Faith, and then all
the Mosaicall sacrifices, and rudimentall Rites, which like the Baptist,
pointed out Christ Jesus to be that Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world, unfolded themselves in their former dark shaddowish signification,
and while they remained in vigor, albeit (like Zachary before his sons
birth) they were dumb and obscure signers, yet ceasing, and in their departure
(the substantial body filling up the room) with their eternal farewell,
opening their mouth as it were, they said that which before they signed, and
gave a hearty congratulation and welcome to their accomplishing verity, as
night gives place to day; Leui thus yielding to a more excellent High Priest;
and Hagar the bondwoman, unto her free Dame Sarah.

Herein how Evangelical light has discovered the meaning of Legal
obscurity; and how Aarons Bells sounded never but Christ Jesus and him
Crucified; nor his silver Trumpets, but the joyful Iubile of souls freedom;
his many sacrifices pointing out that one all-sufficient: And how the
successiue diversity of types of sundry things, places, persons, and actions,
etc. from time to time couchedly involued, and cunningly conveyed, the blessed
mystery and deep secret of the abyss of unsearchable love to mankind, and
extense of mercy past comprehending, as by secret water-spouts from posterity
to posterity, for continuance of the vigorous hope of the faithful; who with
Simeon longed to see the Salvation of the Lord Herein, I say, the pains that I
have taken, is briefly (for the case of the Reader) to point only (as it
were) at the same in order as they occur in Scripture, joining with succinct
breuity to avoid tediousnes, as great plainness and perspicuitie as I could,
to avoid Mark.
obscurenesse. And comparing some things for conueniencie of case only (which
prettily may be so compared) wherein I acknowledge in the purpose of the Holy
Ghost a typical resemblance ever, of any answerable verity is not to be
sought. And keeping still in all (I hope) the Analogy of faith, as the right
measure of the Temple, the pattern on the Mount, and just Balance of the
Sanctuary.

This Treatise then (Right Reverend and most worthy Prelate) as a testimony of
my most indeared affection, I have dedicate to your Lordship, and shrouded the
same under the wings of your Learned patrocinie, by experience having in my own
person found (especially at your Lordships late being in Scotland) yet more
the^ courteous regard, and most kind respectiuenesse ever usual by your
Lordship toward all, but chiefly toward those who are Fellow Laborers in
the Sacred dispensation af that holy mystery with you: Whereby not only I,
but the hearts of many with me, who had that happy occasion of your Lordships
acquaintance, are so warmed (though under a cold Climate) and inflamed with the
Reverend memory of your Lordships humanity, and other singular holy virtues,
and rare gifts (wherewith your good GOD has endued you; and which as a strong
chain has linked so that singular regard of your Prince unto you, as that
sooner, I persuade my self, their bodies shall begin to resolve into ashes,
then that fire of affection in their conquered and captiued hearts shall cease,
to be vigorous and burn.

As some sparkles then, (my Lord) hereof for my part, tending and bursting
forth toward the place of your Lordships residence, receive these succinct
Lucubrations, consecrate to your Lordships Name: subjected to your Censure, and
to be disposed as your Lordship shall think fit thereof. Of whose most gentle
and gracious acceptance, as I rest assured: So, as for others, I hope,
Christian love, and charitable affection shall be my Censurer of all, regarding
chiefly my honest aim herein. And where others are enabled to do better, or
to amend my Labors, beseeching the Lord to enable them more and more, and to
enlighten my mind with them, that mine eyes being anointed with the eye-salue
of his Spirit, with David I may know the secrets of his Law, and that neither I
may envy their rich gift with an evil eye, nor yet despise my own poor mite
with a wicked heart: but indeuouring to gain something with my small Talent
unto my bountiful Master, I may not incur neither the bitter reproof, nor
deserved judgment of an evil or unprofitable servant at his hands. Beseeching
which God to thrust out many faithful Laborers into his Harvest, and to
continue your Lordship in a long and happy life, with a success-full blessing
upon your Lordships government and travels, to the co^for^ and edification of
his Church, rests

Your Lordships in all hearty and most affectionate duty in Christ, WILLIAM
GVILD

MOSES VN-VAILED
1. THE TREE OF LIFE, GENESIS 2. 9.
The Congruitie.
1 AS it was called the Tree of Life. So Christ is that true Tree of Life,
giving the fruit and juice both of grace and glory, Ioh. 15. 1. 2. It was in
the midst of the Garden. So Christ is to be found in the midst of his Church,
Mat. 18. 20. 3. It was in the earthly Paradise planted. So Christ is in the
heavenly placed, Mar. 16. 19: 4. Adam in his standing might eat of the Tree of
Life (as of all other trees, saving that one which was forbidden.) Genesis 2. 16.
So shall the godly that persevere, eat of that true Tree of Life promised,
Ren. 2. 7. 5. Sin exiled man out of the earthly Paradise from the fruition of
the one, Genesis 3. 24. So sin does out of the heavenly, from the fruition of
the other, Ioh. 15. 6. 6. Adam condemned once to be expelled from the same, got
no regresse, Genesis 3. 24. So neither man in judgment once debarred from heaven
and Christ, shall have no recovery, Math. 25. 41. 7. The Lord only planted the
one, making it to grow out of the earth. So also did he the other in the earth
of our humanity, Ioh. 1. 14. who did increase in wisdom, stature, and favor
both with God and Man, Luke 2. 52.

The Disparitie.
1. THat tree of Life endured but for a time: but our Tree of Life endures for
ever, Heb. 7. 24. Secondly, it could not restore life again to Adam, being
only the Sacrament of the Covenant of life in case of perseverance: but our
Tree of Life Christ Jesus restores life lost, to his own chosen; yea, a
better life then Adams in Paradise. And since he is the end of the Law to them
that believe, Romans 10. he now becomes to us by the covenant of Grace, the true
Tree of Life, performing that, which that of works could not attain unto, by
reason of man's fall.

2. Adam, Romans 5. 14.
1. ADAM, man, red earth, or bloody. So was Christ Man in his Incarnation, and
bloody in his Passion, Mat. 1. and 27. 2. Adam, man, without woman's bearing,
and so without a Mother. So Christ Man, without man's begetting, and so without
a father, Mat. 1. 20. 3. Adams Father only God, Genesis 2. 7. So likewise
Christ's, John 8. 16. 4. Adam made Lord over the creatures, and heir of the
outmost bounds of the earth. So is Christ that truly, Psalm. 2. 5. Adam was
appointed to dress the Garden and keep it, Genesis 2. 16. So Christ, to
sanctify and save his Church, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 6. Adam was sent out of Paradise,
for his sin committed, to endure painful labors, Genesis 3. 23. but
unwillingly. So was Christ sent from the heavens for our sins imputed, to
endure painful sufferings, Isai. 53. yet most willingly. 7. Thorns were made
a curse to the one, Genesis 3. 17. So were they made a crown to the other, Mat.
27. 29. 8. The sweat of the brow was in labor imposed on the one, Genesis 3. 19.
So the sweat of blood in agony was imposed on the other, Luke 22. 44. 9. Adam
sleeping, Euah was formed, Genesis 2. 21. So Christ dying on the Cross, his
Church was framed. 10. Adam gives to his, that which is his own by generation,
Genesis 5. 3. So Christ does to his, that which is his own, by Regeneration, Romans
1. 17. Gal. 2. 17. 11. We have borne already here the image of the earthly. So
shall we bear the Image of the heavenly, 1. Cor. 15. 49. 12. Adam created to
the Image of God, Genesis 1. 27. So Christ incarnate, the engraven Character of
his Father, Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3. 13. Adam was King, Priest, and Prophet, in
his Family. So is Christ the same in his Church and family of the faithful,
Reu. 1^. Romans 3. Heb. 9. 13. 14. Adam had Cain and Abel in his house, Genesis 4.
So has Christ Elect, and Reprobates, true worshippers and Hypocrites in his
visible Church, Math. 13. 24. 15. Adam had perfect wisdom and knowledge, as
may be seen in naming of all the creatures, Ge. 2. 19. So in Christ dwells
the fall treasure of both, Col. 2. 3. 16. Likewise as by the offense of the
one, the fault came on all men to condemnation, and many were made sinners. So
by the justifying of the other, the benefit abounded toward all men, to the
justification of life; so that by his obedience, shall many be made righteous,
Romans 5. 18. that as sin had reigned unto death; so might grace also reign by
righteousness unto eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Disparitie.
But yet the gift is not so, as is the offense: for if through the offense of
Adam many be dead; much more the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is
by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. Neither is the gift so, as
that which entered in by one that sinned. For the fault came of one offense unto
Condemnation: but the gift is of many offenses unto Justification. For if by
the offense of one, death reigned through one; much more shall they which
receive that abundance of grace, and gift of that righteousness, reign in life
through one, that is, Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 15, 16, 17. Likewise the first man
was of the earth, earthly and natural; but the second man is the Lord from
heaven, heavenly and spiritual, 1. Cor. 15. 47. and as is the earthly, such
are they that are earthly, and as is the heavenly, such are they that are
heavenly, verse 48. Also the first man Adam was made a living soul, but the
last Adam was made a quickening Spirit, 1. Cor. 15. 45.

3. Abel, Genesis 4.
1. ABEL, or Habel, mourning or vanity. Such was the life of Christ, a
mourning for our vanity and wickedness, Mat. 26. Mar. 8. 2. Abel offered an
acceptable sacrifice unto the Lord, Heb. 11. Genesis 44. So did Christ upon the
Altar of the Cross, Romans 3. 25. when he offered up himself, Heb. 7. 27. 3.
Abel was a Shepherd, Genesis 4. 2. So Christ is the true Shepherd of our souls.
1. Pet. 2. 15. 4. Abel was slain by his brother Cain in the field innocently,
after he had spoken to him, Genesis 4. 8. So was Christ by his brethren according
to the flesh (the Jews) without the City, after they had falsely accused him,
Lu. 23 5. After Abels death till Seth and Enosh, true worship and Religion by
Cains seed was long time suppressed, Genesis 4. 26. So after Christ's death, was
Christianity under the Heathen Emperors long persecuted, Reu. 12. Eusebius. 6.
And as after the restoration of true worship, corruption of life crept in, and
brought the deluge upon the Primitive world, Genesis 6. So after the truth was by
Laws established under Christian Emperors, (open persecution ceasing)
secretly and slyly corruption of life and doctrine crept in, and brought a
deluge of miseries and darkness upon the visible Church, Centuriae Ecclesiae.

The Disparitie.
ABels sacrifice was only for himself: but that of Christ's, for the sins of
the world. Abel was privily murdered: but Christ publicly suffered. Abels
blood cried to the Lord for revenge and wrath: but the blood of sprinkling shed
by Christ, speaks better things then that of Abel, Heb. 12. 24.

4. Enoch, Genesis 5. 21.
1. ENOCH, dedicate. So was Christ dedicate and decreed to be that Savior of
mankind, Isai. 25. 9. 2. Enoch walked with God, Genesis 5. 22. So did Christ in
all perfection of sanctimonie and righteousness, Isay 53. 7. 3. Enoch pleased
God, and was beloved of him, Wisd. 4. 10. So did Christ his Father, and is
declared to be his well-beloved, in whom he was well pleased, Math. 3. 17. 4.
Enoch was matchless in his age, so that none was like him, Ecclus. 49. 14. So
was Christ through all ages, and ever shall be peerless, none daring to
compare with him, John 3. 35. 5. In order of History, take those that dyed
first, he is reported and brought in as one that saw not death, but was
translated, Genesis 5. 24. To yield that comfort to the Church, and type Christ
therein, who should make death to be swallowed up in victory, and
immortality, and to assure us also of the Resurection, Col. 1. 18. Romans 4. 25.

The Disparitie.
ENoch's righteousness did not avail others, but that of our Saviors does
avail us, and becomes others. His translation likewise was comfortatiue, and
typical: but the Resurrection of Christ to us, is operative and effectual.

Note also, that Enochs translation before the Law, and Eliahs under the Law,
are types and pledges (as it were) of that last translation of them under the
Gospel, that shall be found alive at the Lords second Coming.

Noah, Genesis 5. 32.
1. NOah, ceasing or rest. So Christ has caused Gods wrath to cease, and
gives rest thereby to the troubled conscience. Mat. 3 2. Noah lived in a most
corrupt time, and general defection both in doctrine and manners, Genesis 6. 5.
So did Christ Jesus upon earth in a like age, as appears, Math. 5. 6. 7, chap.
3. Noah was acquainted with the Lords Decree, Genesis 6. 13. So was Christ fully
with the will of his Father, John 1. 4. Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness to
the wicked world, 1. Pet. 3. So was Christ the same, exhorting them to repent:
for the Kingdom of God was at hand, Luke 2. 32. Isay 60. 1. 5. Noah by his
obedience saved all that entered within his Arc, Genesis 6. 23. So does Christ al
those, that by a true Faith do enter into his Church, 1. Tim. 1. 15. 6. Noah's
Arc was tossed upon the waters. So is the Church of Christ in this world, by
diverse temptations and persecutions, Ioh. 16. 7. In Noah's Arc were clean, and
unclean also, were Sem, and Iapheth, ver. 7, 8. So in Christ's visible Church
are Hypocrites, and true Believers; Jews also and Gentiles, Ephesians. 2. Math.
13. 8. Noah only (as principal efficient) did build his Arc, verse 14. So
does Christ edify, and build up his Church, 1^. Cor. 3. 9. Noah was long in
building thereof, verse 3. So has Christ bee^ from the beginning of the world,
hitherto, and shall be to the worlds end, Ephe. 4. in building of his Church.
10. Noah having built his Arc, the flood did come, which destroyed the first
world, verse 21. So the number of Christ's Church being accomplished, the fire
shall come to destroy the second world. 11. Noah made his Arc of many Trees,
closely seamed together, strong, fresh, and dressed, verse 14. So has Christ
compacted his Church of many members, united by the bond of the Spirit,
strengthened with Grace, freed from the domining corruption of sin, and
sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Gal. 3. 7. 12. Noah had sundry rooms in his
Arc, Ibidem. So Christ has sundry functions in his Church, 1. Cor. 12. 13.
Noah pitched his Arc within and without against the waters. So has Christ
fortified his Church sufficiently against all temptations, Ioh. 15. 14. Noah
made one door only to his Arc, verse 16. So has Christ appointed one only
entry to his Church, John 10. 7. 15. Noah's Arc had little outward light, Ibid.
So neither is the light of Christ's Church, worldly carnal wisdom, To. 8. 7.
16. Noah abode in the Arc all the time of the tossing thereof. So does Christ
remain in the midst of his Church, being with them to the worlds end, in all
tentations and afflictions thereof, John 14. 18. 17. Noah saved few in his
Arc, in respect of the world. So the number that are to be saned in Christ's
Church is but a handful likewise, Math. 22. 14. 18. The Wrights that built the
Arc, notwithstanding perished. So many Preachers in the Church may likewise be
damned, Math. 7. 22. 19. All sorts of creatures Noah received into the Arc. So
all sorts of persons and Nations, Christ accepts into his Church, Ephesians. 2.
18. 20. In the days of Noah, defection from true Religion, oppression,
sensuality, and security, after 1656. years, brought on the first
destruction on the world. So the like sins non reigning, about the like time,
is like to bring on the second Judgment on the latter world, Math. 24. 21.
Those that were saved, was by being within the Arc, in the waters. Figuring
that those that are redeemed, must enter into the Church by Baptism, 1. Pet.
3. 20. 22. Noah's tossings upon the waters being ended, he sent out the Dove,
Genesis 8. 12. So Christ's sufferings being finished, be sent out his Spirit into
the world, to comfort and lead his own, John 14. 23. Noah offered a Sacrifice
unto the LORD, wherein he smelled a savor of rest, verse 21. So has Christ
unto his Father, whereby his wrath is fully appeased, To. 3. 25. 24. With Noah
God made a Covenant to his posterity, and confirmed it with a sign, Genesis 9.
9. So in Christ with the Church has the Lord made a new Covenant of mercy, and
ratified it with Sacraments, Mat. 3. 17. 25. The cover of the Arc being taken
off, and Noah's Family going out of the same (after the Deluge dried up)
increased and multiplied wonderfully, Genesis 10. So the time of the true Churches
lurking being ended, and the hid marked ones bursting forth, after the Deluge
of darkness, dried up in a good measure, the Church shall become more and more
visible, and increase, to the abridging of Antichrists power daily, Reu. 19.

The Disparitie.
NOah preached, but converted none of the first world: but not so Christ, by
whose voice many were turned, and daily by the efficacy thereof are brought
into his Church. Noah's Arc likewise putrified and perished at last; but never
shall the Church of Christ so perish or decay. The tossing of the waters did
wear and make the Arc worse; but trials and afflictions do better ever the
Church, Psalm. 119.

6. Abraham, Genesis 12.
1. ABram, and Abraham, a high father, and a father of a multitude. So is
Christ a high and heavenly Father of the multitude of his faithful, Esaias 6. 9.
2. Abraham went out of his native country and fathers house at Gods command,
Genesis 12. 4. So Christ, according to the Decree of the Father, lest the heavens,
and took painful iourneys on earth, to work man's Redemption, Luke 2. 31. 3.
To Abraham and his seed GOD promised Canaan, v. 7. So to Christ his spiritual
seed has he granted Heaven, Tit. 2. 11. 4. Abraham delivered Lot and many
captives by a great victory, Genesis 14. 61. So Christ has delivered his chosen
from sin, Satan, and damnation, and freed them wonderfully, Luke 1. 71. Ioh.
16. 33. 5. Abraham and his Family behooued to be circumcised, Genesis 17. 23. So
Christ his Church behooves to be sanctified, Esaias 4. 3. 6. Abraham was King,
Priest and Prophet in his own Family. So is Christ Jesus in his Church the
same, Heb. 9. 13. Ioh. 8. 26. Zach. 14. 9. 7. The Lord revealed to Abraham the
purpose of his will, Genesis 18. 17. So has he the same i^ all things perfectly
vnt^ his Senne Jesus, Ioh. 1. 8. Abraham interceded for the righteous in
Sodom, Genesis 18. 25. and for the wicked for their sake. So is Christ a Mediator
continually for the godly in the world, Heb. 8. 6. Ioh. 17. 9. as he spares
also even the wicked for their sake, and prayed for them that crucified him. 9.
Abraham was obedient in all things to God, even till the offering up of him,
who was his own flesh and blood upon Mount Moriah, Genesis 22. So was Christ even
unto death, and immolation of himself unto the Father upon Mount Golgotha,
Phil. 2. 8. 10. Abraham put Hagar and Ismael out of his house, Genesis 21. 14. So
shall Christ expel out of the number of his Church all bastard hypocrites,
despisers and mockers of the godly, Mat. 22. 11. God delivered Lot for Abraham's
sake, with his Family, from the fire of Sodom, Genesis 19. So has the Lord the
godly for Christ's sake, from the condemnation of the wicked, 1. Ioh. 2. 12.
Abraham, called the Heir of the world, Romans 14. 13. and Father of the
Faithful. So is Christ Jesus the same most properly and truly, Psalm. 2. Heb.
1. 13. To Abraham it was said; In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth
be blessed, Genesis 12. 3. Which only in Christ Jesus is fully accomplished, Luke
2. 30, Gal. 3.

The Disparitie.
FRom obscurenesse of estate in Vr of the Caldees, to an honorable and eminent
estate in Canaan, Abraham was brought: but from a glorious estate in highest
Majesty, to a base condition in ignominy, was our Savior brought for us:
Abraham's wife was barren: but not so is the Church of Christ, which must be
fruitful in good works. She was taken from Abraham: but none can take the
Sheep of Christ out of his hand, which are his Spouse.

7. Circumcision typing Baptism, our Sanctification, and Christ's blood which
is our inward washing, Genesis 17.
1. Circumcision was the sign of Gods Covenant to Israel, Genesis 17. 11. So
Baptism is the same to the Church, even a sign and seal of the Covenant of
mercy, 1. Pet. 3. 21. 2. It was Abraham and his household that was comprehended
in the one, verse 13. So is it Christ Jesus his Church that is comprehended in
the other, Ibid. 3. Not only was Isaac, but Ismael also circumcised; the born
and the bought; the children, and the hirelings, ibid. So, not only are the
godly baptized outwardly in the visible Church, but the wicked also: not only
the redeemed number, but the natural sort, the true children, and those that
are but hyrelings, Romans 3. 22. 4. Whosoever was not circumcised, having the
Covenant in his flesh, was cut off from Israel, verse 14. So, whosoever
contemnes Baptism, yea, is not in the Spirit renewed, is not a true member of
the Church of God, Mat. 28. 19, 20. 5. There was a circumcision of the flesh
which auailed not, being alone; and there was a circumcision of the heart which
made the true Israelite, To. 2. 28. So there is an outward Baptism by
elementary wa ter, which of the body and being alone auailes not, and there is
an inward Baptism of the soul or Spirit, which makes the true Christian, Mar.
16. 16. 1. 8. Romans 4. 1. 6. In circumcision there was a cutting away of the
foreskin by blood. Signifying that even so it is by the blood of Christ, that
our sins are taken away, and by the Spirit of sanctification that we are
renewed, mortifying sin, and quickening grace in us, Ephesians. 5. 26. 7. It was
painful to flesh and blood. So is mortification and abandoning of fleshly
concupiscence to the carnal man at first, Ioh. 3. 8. Infants were circumcised,
verse 10. So also are they to be baptized, Mark. 10. 14. Romans 3. 3.

Isaac, Genesis 21.
1. ISaac, or Iitschac, laughter or rejoicing. So is Christ true matter of
joyful laughter and reioicing to all the faithful, Isai. 61. 10. 2. Isaac,
the son of the Father of the faithful, Genesis 17. 19. So is Christ the only
natural Son of God, on whom all the faithful call Abba Father, Mat. 3. 17.
Romans 8. 3. Isaac against the course of nature born of the dead womb of old
Sarah, Ge. 21. 3. So was Christ borne of the inuiolate womb of a chaste
Virgin, Mat. 1. 23. as all those that are his likewise, are borne not of blood,
nor of the will of flesh, nor of man, but of God, Ioh. 1. 13. 4. Isaac the seed
of Promise made unto Abraham, and borne in his old age at the time appointed,
Genesis 18. 14. So is Christ the same most properly, in whom all the Nations of
the earth are blessed: Borne in the fullness of time decreed. 5. An Angel
announceth the Birth of the one in Sarahs hearing, who thinks it impossible,
Ge. 18. 12. So an Angel does our Saviors Birth in Mary's, who likewise says,
How shall this be? Luke 1. 34. 6. Isaac was circumcised the eight day, and in
his infancy persecuted by Ismael, Gal. 4. 29. So likewise was Christ, Luke 2.
and immediately thereafter persecuted by Herod, Mat. 2. 7. Isaac willingly
yields himself to be a burnt-offering to the Lord, Genesis 22. Even so did
Christ, in laying down his life for satisfying his Fathers justice, Ioh. 16.
28. 8. Isaac carried the wood whereon he was bound, to Moriah, verse 6. So did
Christ the Cross whereon he was nailed, to Golgotha, Ioh. 19. 9. Thus Isaac
was obedient to his Father even unto death. Even so was Christ that most
truly, Phil. 2. 8. 10. Isaac came the third day to the place of Immolation, v.
4. So did Christ to his suffering in the 33. year of his age; or thereby
consisting of three tens, and three unites: as also neither in the time of the
Law of Nature, nor in the written Law: but in the time of Grace, even that
perfect fullness of time decreed. 11. Isaac only got the heritage to him and
his: and Ismael with others the moueables, Genesis 25. 5, 6. So has Christ the
heavenly inheritance only prepared for his Chosen: the wickeds portion being
worldly things, Psalm. 4. 7. Ioh. 17. 12. Isaac had Esau and Jacob, who
struggled in the womb of Rebecca, Genesis 25. 22. So Christ has Elect and
Reprobates in his visible Church, who disagree in manners, Math. 22. 13. Isaacs
wife was taken of one kindred with himself, Genesis 24. 4. So is Christ's Church
of that same flesh and nature which he did assume, Mat. 1. 23. 14. Isaacs wife
was fair, Genesis 26. 7. So is Christ's Church beautiful within, Reu. 21. 15.
She was owed by his fathers servant and brought unto him, Genesis 24. So is the
Church by the true Pastors, and brought unto Christ, dispensatione Verbi, Cant.
1. 7. 16. She forsakes all, and veiled, comes to her Husband, adorned with
his Jewels that were given unto her, Genesis 24. 65. So must the Church forsake
all, in preferment of affection; and in humility decked with his graces, must
come unto Christ, Cant. 3. 17. Isaac meets his Wife, coming to him, Genesis 24.
63. So does Christ his Church, with preventing grace and acceptance, Ephesians. 2.
18. Her name was Ribekah, which is fed, verse 64. So is Christ his Church with
that heavenly food and comfort of his Word, Cant. 2. 5. 19. Isaac brought her
into the Tent of his Mother, and was comforted after her death, verse. 67. So
Christ has brought the Church of the Gentiles in the place of the Jews, of
whom he was borne, and does rejoice concerning their ingrafting, Isaiah 22. 6.
20. Isaac was offered, and yet dyed not: for he was received from death after
a sort, Heb. 11. 19. So Christ, God and Man in one Person was offered, and yet
according to his Godhead dyed not: but by virtue thereof in his manhood rose
from the dead, Math. 28. 6. 21. In the hand of the Father, to the sacrificing,
was carried the knife and the fire, Genesis 22. 6. So to the Cross and Immolation
of Christ, in the hand of his Father, likewise went sharp Justice, and fervent
love withal concurring, Math. 26.

The Disparitie.
ISaac being waxed old, and through the dimnesse of his eyes, not being able
to discern or see, was deceived by Jacob, who got so the blessing of his elder
brother Esau: but our unalterable all-seeing Jesus can never be deceived, to
bestow the blessing upon one for another, or place the same wrong.

The Allegory of the Blessing. Genesis 27.
AS Isaac loved Esau the elder; so did Christ the Jews, whom longing to gather
under his wings, he called in the latter time, and craved of them that meat
which his soul loved, whereof he spoke when he said; My meat is to do the
will of the Father: but they went out, having not yet returned; and in the
mean while the Gentiles (the younger Brother) entered in, not daring to do so
by their own presumption: but persuaded by the promises of Grace, having the
sauourie meat of the merit of their Saviors death to offer, which they found
not without in the world, but prepared within in the Church, and so clothed
with the garments of the elder which is adoption, and right to the promises;
their neck and hands covered with the skin of the Kid, which is the remembrance
of their sins that killed their Savior, or which is his perfect
righteousness, they smelled sweetly before their Father, through free
acceptance, and obtained the fruitfulness of grace, with the assurance of the
remission of their sins, wherein the blessing consists.

9. Melchisedech, Genesis 14.
1. MElchisedech, a King of righteousness. So is Christ that truly, Reu. 15.
Heb. 7. 2. 2. Also King of Salem, or Peace. So is Christ Jesus our Prince of
Peace, Esa. 9. 6. Heb. 7. 3. 3. He was the Priest of the most High God, Genesis
14. 18. So likewise is Christ, made not after the carnal commandment: but
after the power of endless life, Heb. 7. 16. 4. He was without Father or
Mother (viz. mentioned) Heb. 7. So Christ as God, is (...), motherlesse, and as
man (...), without a Father. 5. He was without Kindred, Ibid. So likewise
Christ according to his Deity. 6. He was of another order then Aaron. So also
Christ (and of the same order with Melchisedech) Heb. 7. 16. to show the
imperfection of the Priesthood of Leui, verse 11. and the necessity of the
change of the Law, 12. 7. He continues Priest for ever, and has neither
beginning of days, nor end of life (to wit mentioned) Heb. 7. 3. So does
Christ continue our High Priest for ever, whose Priesthood cannot pass from
one to another; and therefore is able perfectly to save the, that come to God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 24, 25.
and whose Priesthood is confirmed by an oath, Psalm. 110. to show that by so
much is Jesus made a surety of a better Testament, Heb. 7. 21, 22. 8. He
received tithe of all from Abraham, and blessed him in whose Ioynes Leui was,
Genesis 14. 20. To show thereby that as therein he was greater then Abraham, Heb.
7. 7. so the excellency and greatness of our High Priest Jesus, above Leui or
the Priesthood of the Law, (being of one order, as is said, with Melchisedech)
by bringing in a better hope, whereby we draw near to God, and being himself
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the heavens, Heb. 7. 19,
26. 9. He gave Bread and Wine to refresh Abraham and his company, after the
battle, and not that he offered up the same as any sacrifice, Genesis 14. 18. So
Christ does give his body and blood for the refreshment of the faithful
receivers, which once already himself offered up as an all-sufficient
sacrifice upon the Cross, neu^ again to be repeated, Heb. 7. 27. 10.
Melchisedech was greater then Abraham: and consequently, then all Israel which
then was in his loins, Heb. 7. 7. So Christ is greater and more excellent then
the Church or his mystical body, he being the head thereof, Zech. 14. 9. 11.
Melchisedech was but one of his order only before or under the Law. So is
Christ that one only Priest of his order under the Gospel, to offer up
propitiatory sacrifice unto the Father, needing no successors therein, seeing
he is immortal, and is consecrated for evermore, Heb. 7. 24, 28.

The Disparitie.
MElchisedech was man only, and consequently sinful: but our High Priest is
God and Man, sinlesse, and therefore needed not to offer for himself. Again,
Melchisedechs Priesthood was not confirmed with an oath unto him, as was
Christ's, as is said, and the reason given. Melchisedech also ^ad Christ
succeeding to him in the same order: but Christ shall have none unto, or after
him: he gave bodily refreshment only to Abraham and his Family: but Christ
gives both corporal and spiritual to his Elect.

10. Jacob, Genesis 26.
1. Jacob, a supplanter. So is Christ of Death, Sin and Satan, etc. Col. 2.
15. Luke 1. 71. 2. Also, he was called Israel, a Prince of God, or prevailing
with God, Genesis 32. So is Christ that heavenly Prince prevailing at his Fathers
hands by his intercession for all good things to his own, He. 8. 6. 3. He
purchased the birthright by red Pottage, and obtained the blessing by
presenting up sauourie Venison unto his father, clothed in Esaus garment, Genesis
25. 30. and 27, 28. So has Christ purchased heavens inheritance to v^ by his
red blood; and obtained the blessing by offering up the sauourie merit of his
obedience, in the borrowed garment of our nature, Romans 3. 24. 4. He was a
plain man, and abode in Tents, Genesis 25. 27. So was Christ plain, meek and
merciful, frequenting the company of men, and sinners, Math. 9. 11. and 12.
18, 19. 5. Jacob was hated and persecuted by Esau, Genesis 27. 41. So was Christ
by Satan, and the Scribes and Pharisees, albeit they were his brethren according
to the flesh. 6. He leaves his fathers house, and goes to serve in Haran, Genesis
28. 10. So Christ left the glorious heavens, and came in the shape of a servant
unto the earth, 2. Cor. 8. 7. In his persecution by Esau, by the way he sees
the Angels of God ascending, and descending unto him, verse 12. So after
Christ's temptation in the Wilderness by Satan, the Angels came and ministered to
him, Mat. 4. 8. Jacob was a Shepherd, Genesis 29. So is Christ the Shepherd of
our souls, 1. Pet. 2. 9. Jacob served long for his Wives Rahel and Leah, Ibid.
So did Christ bear the shape of a servant 33. years and more, to redeem unto
himself a Church of Jews and Gentiles, Esaias 42. 10. Jacob being afraid of
death by E^au, went alone all ^ight to pray, Genesis ^2. So Christ fearing death
and wrath, went aside in Gethsemane to do so, Math. 26. 11. He wrestled long,
and at last was comforted, ver. 28. So did Christ in an Agony, and at last was
heard in that which he feared, Heb. 5. 12. Jacob purged his Family in the
way, Genesis 35. So does Christ his Church in the world, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 13. Jacob
was the Father of all the Israel in the flesh. So Christ is the Father of all
the Israel in the Spirit, Isai. 9. 6. 14. Jacob was obedient unto his Parents
in all things, Genesis 28. So was Christ both to his heavenly Father, and to his
earthly Parents, Lu. 3. 15. Jacob erected an Altar in Bethel, which by
interpretation, is, The house of God, Genesis 35. 1. So has Christ established
the true worship of his Father into his holy Church, Esaias 60. 1. 16. Jacobs
days were but few and evil upon earth. So was the estate of Christ on earth
afflicted, and so shall be the estate of the Church, unto the worlds end, Ioh.
16. 33. 17. Jacobs flock was spotted or parti-colored, Genesis 30. 32. So have the
godly heer^ their own spets, and ar^ in part but sanctified, (...) Ioh. 3.

The Disparitie.
Jacobs father loved his elder son better then him: but not so did the Father
love any equally to his Son, even his only well-beloved Christ Jesus. Jacob
attained to the birthright and blessing for himself, and that through
subtlety: But Christ Jesus has purchased that heavenly and blessed
inheritance for us only, and that by paying therefore dearly. Jacob and Esau
were at once both borne of the womb of Rebecca: but Christ Jesus alone only
was borne of the womb of the inviolable chaste Virgin Mary, without an
associate, either in his matchless birth, or eternity of age.

11. Jacobs Ladder, Genesis 28.
1. Jacobs Ladder, which he saw in a Vision, stood upon the earth, but the top
reached to Heaven: So Christ, albeit L^ as humbled in shape of sinfu^l flesh,
touching the earth as it were, yet he was the most High God, reaching so to
heaven, and reconciling, a^ and so it joined as it were heaven and earth
together, Genesis 28. 12. as the two natures in himself by personal Union: so
God and us together by his death and mediation, To. 5. 10. 2. The Angels went
up and down by it. So by Christ Jesus they are become ministering spirits,
coming and returning for the good and protection of the godly, Heb. 1. as also
by him our prayers ascend, and Gods blessings descend. 3. No ascending up to
heaven, but by the Ladder. So no attaining to that inheritance, but by Jesus
Christ alone, Ioh. 10. 7. 4. Jacob in his Pilgrimage saw the Ladder only in a
Vision. So we see Christ here in our pilgrimage but in glass, as it were,
darkely and in part, 1. Cor. 13. 5. The Lord stood above it, and made his
promise of Canaan to Jacob, verse 13. So in Christ, and through him, are the
Lords promises of heaven, made and ratified to us, Ioh. 2. 1. 6. In the place
which was the House of God, and gate of Heaven, was the Ladder seen, verse 19.
So in Christ's Church (which is the foresaid truly) through Faith can we only
get a spiritual sight of Christ. 7. At the foot of this Ladder, Jacob did
repose and sleep. Shadowing the rest and peace of conscience, which the godly
have under the shadow of Christ's intercession.

The Disparitie.
IT was a Ladder whereon to climb, but not giving strength to that effect: but
Christ Jesus, that blessed Ladder, is both. That Ladder at Jacobs awaking
vanished, and begat fear by the Vision thereof: but Christ Jesus, at our
awaking in the Resurrection, shall more clearly appear, whose sight by faith
here expels fear, and begets confident joy, and whose cleerer sight then
shall beget far greater.

12. Joseph, Genesis 37.
1. Joseph, increasing or perfect. So Christ increased in his humane body in
strength, and in favor with God and Man, and still now increases in his
mystical body also, and only he on earth was perfect. 2. Joseph was best
beloved of his Father, Genesis 37. 3. So was Christ declared to be that
well-beloved Son, in whom the Father is well pleased, Mat. 3. 17. 3. Joseph was
the firstborn of beloved Rahel, Genesis 30. 24. So was Christ the firstborne of
the freely beloved Mary, Luke 1. 28. 4. He was hated of his brethren, the more
for his heavenly reulations and words, that he should be exalted above them,
Genesis 37. 4. So was Christ of the Jews, and the more, because he called
himself the Son of God, John 5. 18. Math. 27. 5. All the sheaues of the
field, with Sun, Moon and Stars worshipped Joseph, verse 7. So at the Name
of Jesus, all things in heaven and earth shall bow the knee, and him both
heaven and earth must adore, Ephesians. 1. 20. 1. Cor. 15. Phil. 2. 10. 6. Joseph
is sent by his Father to visit his Brethren in the wilderness, verse 13. So was
Christ sent to visit mankind in the world, who were straying in sin, Math.
9. 15. 7. Humbly vvalking on foot, and alone vnder-going this message
willingly, with great travel, he ceases not till he have found them in
Dothan, which is, Defection, verse 17. So Christ Jesus, in the shape of a
servant willingly alone undertaking the office of a Savior, seeke^h out his
Brethren the lost sheep of the Jews and Gentiles, and finds them both in
defection of life and doctrine, 1. Ioh. 4. 10. Mat. 5. Romans 2. 8. Yet Joseph
comes near, his Brethren conspire against him, and called him a dreamer, verse
19. So Christ was scarce borne, when Herod conspired for his life, and scarce
entered in his function, when the Scribes and Pharisees laid snares for him, and
called him a seducer, Ioh. 8. 9. Joseph is stripped naked, and cast into a pit,
and sold for 20. pieces of silver to the Idumeans by his own brethren, verse
24. So was Christ strips of his garments, and cast into the pit of death and
the grave, after he had been sold for thirti^ pieces of silver to the Scribes
and Pharisees by one of his own Disciples, Mat. 26. 10. Joseph was carried down
to Egypt, in his childhood, verse 28. So was Christ Jesus in his infancy,
Math. 2. 11. Joseph was tempted to carnal whoredom in solitariness, and
overcame, Genesis 39. So was Christ unto Spiritual in the wilderness, when Satan
said, Fall down and worship me, and overcame likewise, Math. 4. 12. Joseph
was a beautiful personage, verse 6. So was Christ both inwardly and outwardly.
13. He was falsely accused, condemned, and put in prison, where Pharaohs Baker
and Butler were also put, verse 20. So was Christ accused falsely, condemned
unjustly, and crucified cruelly between two Malefactors, and put in the prison
of the grave, where godly and wicked remain, till they come out to diverse
Judgment, Mat. 27. 14. He was made Governor over the Prison, verse 21. So is
Christ Lord and victor over death and the grave, Hos. 13. 15. He comforted the
Butler in the Prison, assuring him of life and preferment, Genesis 40. 13. So did
Christ the Thief upon the Cross bound with him: assuring him, that that night
he should be with him in Paradise, Luke 23. 16. Joseph being brought out of
the Prison, was exalted next unto Pharaoh the King, Genes. 41. 40. So Christ
having risen from the grave, was exalted next unto the Father, Psalm. 110. 17.
Joseph was declared to be one, like to whom none was in understanding and
wisdom, in whom Gods Spirit was so, verse 38. So was Christ matchless in
wisdom, to whom GOD measured not his Spirit, Mat. 4. 18. Joseph is set over
the whole Land, and over the Kings house, verse 40. So is Christ Lord of the
whole earth: but chiefly of his Church, Zech. 14. 9. 19. Joseph's name is called
Zaphnapaaneah, that is, the expounder of secrets, and in the Egyptian tongue, a
Sauer of the world, verse 45. So is Christ this truly, the manifester of
heavenly mysteries, who has the Key of David, and the blessed Savior of
mankind, 1. Cor. 10. 30. 20. Joseph was richly attired in his preferment,
verse 42. So is Christ, in that highest exaltation of his, with glory above all
things, Ioh. 3. 35. 21. A forerunner cried to the people to kneel down before
Joseph, verse 43. So the Baptist cried to prepare the way before Jesus, Mar. 1.
22. A Virgin was given in Wife unto Joseph by the King, verse 45. So are the
godly given to Jesus by his Father, to be his Church, Col. 1. 18. 23. Joseph
was thirty years old when he was preferred by Pharaoh to his Office, verse
46. So was Christ of that same age, when he entered to his Calling, Math. 3. 24.
Pharaoh then directed his people to Joseph, verse 55. So did the Father the
godly to Christ, saying, Hear him, Mat. 3. 17. 25. Joseph with Pharaohs garner
feeds all Egypt, and other Nations, verse 57. So with the Word of GOD, penned
by his Spirits inspiration, Christ feeds Jew and Gentile, Ioh. 6. 26. Joseph's
Brethren at last come for food, and reverence him, Genesis 42. So shall the Jews
at last, (albeit long lingering) come to the profession of Christ, and adore
him, Zech. 12. 10. 27. He knows his brethren first, before they know him,
verse 8. So does Christ love us first, and find us out, before we can love,
know, or find him, 1. Ioh. 4. 19. 28. He spoke unto them long by midmen,
before clearly he revealed himself unto them, verse 23. So does he speak to
us by the ministry of the Gospel here, before he manifest himself clearly
unto our souls in glory hereafter, and manifested himself by obscure
Prophecies, before he uttered himself by his own lively voice, Heb. 1. 29.
Until Joseph told them, that he was their Brother, they did not know him,
verse 8. So until Christ discover himself unto our souls, we cannot
discern him, Ioh. 1. 30. At first he was strange and rough unto them, to make
them remember their fault: but in the mean while he gave them food without
money, and afterward comforted them, verse 7. So at the first does Christ by
touch of conscience, without feeling of assurance of mercy at an instant,
humble us: but in the mean time be in love gives us secret grace freely, that
we despair not, till we get the feeling of solid comfort, 2. Cor. 1. 3. 31.
Joseph accepts of their small gifts, albeit he had no need of them, Genesis
43. 15. So does our Savior of our Spiritual and charitable offerings, Phil.
4. 18. 32. They are washed in his house, and set at his Table, verse 33. So are
the true brethren of Christ made clean by the water of the Spirit, and fed at
his Table, Ephesians. 5. 26. 33. No acceptance without Ben^amin, Genesis 42. 34. that
was borne with sorrow. So no acceptance before GOD of us, but by Faith and
Repentance, Ephesians. 2. 8. 43. He first manifests himself unto his Brethren,
before to the Egyptians, that he was Joseph, Ge. 45. 3. So Christ revealed
himself first unto the Jews, that he was the Messiah, before he turned to
the Gentiles, Math. 10. 3. 35. It was not his Brethrens malice so much, as GOD
that sent him to Egypt, to save the Family of Israel alive by a great
deliverance, verse 5. So neither was it the malice of the Jews that crucified
Christ, so much as the Lords Decree, that it should be so, for the salvation of
his Church, Romans 3. 25. 36. Joseph recommends concord and love to his Brethren
in the way, seeing he forgave them: and gives them victuals and Chariots for
the journey, verse 24. So does Christ recommend love amongst his members: and
seeing he has pardoned us, that we mutually forgive one another, and has
given us the means of his Word and Sacraments, to further us in the way of our
salvation, Ioh. 15. 37. They show by word and by his gifts unto their Father,
that Joseph was alive, verse 27. So should we by our profession, and the
graces of the Spirit shining in our lives, that Jesus is living in us, 2. Cor.
5. 15. 38. The words of Joseph reported by his Brethren, were confirmed by the
sight of the Chariots unto Jacob. So are the promises of Jesus uttered by his
Ministers, ratified and sealed unto his people by the blessed Sacraments, Math.
28. 19. which are the chariots of grace to all true Believers. 39. The Lords
promise of protection, the desire to see Joseph, and the hunger in the Land,
joined al together, moved Jacob the more quickly and gladly to remove, Genesis
46. So Gods promise of connoy by his Angels, the desire to be with Christ, and
the scarcity of goodness here, mooues the godly more willingly to depart,
Phil. 1. 23. Joseph went out, and met his Brethren, Ge. 46. 29. So does Jesus
obuiat all those that come unto him, Luke 15. by his grace here, and Angels
hereafter. 41. Pharaoh and his Court rejoiced at their coming, Genesis 47. So
does the Lord and the Angels of Heaven rejoice at the conversion of sinners,
Luke 15. 8. 42. He goes to Pharaoh, and speaks for them, and instructs
them how to speak before Pharaoh, Genesis 46. 31. So does Christ intercede for us
at the Fathers hands, and instructs us how to pray to him, Math. 6. Heb. 5.
Romans 8. 43. He placed them in pleasant Goshen there, while thence they should
go to fruitful Canaan thereafter, Genesis 47. 11. So Christ places his own in
the estate of Grace here, while they be transplanted into the estate of
glory, and of his triumphant Church hereafter, John 17. 24. 44. Jacobs
Petition concerning Joseph, when they met, was, Now let me dye in peace,
seeing I have seen thy face, Genesis 46. 30. So was old Simeons concerning
Christ: Now let ^y servant depart in Peace, seeing I have seens the salvation
of the Lord, Luke (...). 45. Joseph brought his two sons to be blessed of
his Father, Genesis 48. So has Christ brought his Chosen of the Jew and Gentile a
new way to be blessed of his Father, Heb. 10. 20. 46. Jacob wills that his
name be named on Joseph's sons, and that they be accounted as his, Genesis 48. 16.
Even so has the Lord adopted us to be his sons through Christ, and willed
that his name likewise be called upon by us, saying, Abba Father, To. 8. 47.
Joseph buried his Father solemnly, Genesis 50. So did Christ the shadowish types
that went before him perfectly, John 19. 30. 48. While Joseph lived, Israel did
not so increase. So while Christ suffered, the Church did not so flourish,
Eusebius. Hist. 49. Israel was afflicted after Joseph's death, while at last the
Lord delivered them. So was the Church under the ten Persecutions after Christ's
death, till the Lord at last did settle the same in peace, Eusebius.

The Disparitie,
Joseph accused his Brethren unto his Father, and brought him their evil
saying, Genesis 37. 2. But Christ Jesus excuses his brethren, covering their
faults, and intercedeth for them.

13. Moses.
1. MOses, drawn, or taken out. So was Christ drawn out of the waters of many
afflictions, to be consecrated our Savior, and taken out of the race of
mankind to be that Blessed Seed, Genesis 3. 15. 2. He was meanly borne, Exodus
2. 1. So was Christ of a poor Virgin, Math. 1. 3. He was immediately after his
birth persecuted by the cruelty of Pharaoh, ver. 3. Even so was Christ, by the
cruelty of Herod, Math. 2. 4. His Cradle was an Arc dawbed with slime and
Pitch. So was Christ's first cradle, an uncleanly crib, Luke 2. 5. He was
wonderfully preserved by her whose son he was called, verse 9. So was Christ
by Joseph (being admonished in a dream) whose son he was reputed, Math. 2.
6. He left Pharaohs Court to be a Deliverer of his People, and to suffer with
them, verse 15. So did Christ the Court of Heaven, to deliver his Chosen, and
both to suffer for, and with them, Esaias 53. 7. He was a Shepherd, and his Wife
black, but fruitful, verse 21. So is Christ the Shepherd of our souls, and
hi^ Church black, but come^* and fruitful in godliness. 1. Pet. 2. Cant. 2.
8. Moses was sent to deliver Israel out of Pharaohs bondage, Exodus 3. 10. So is
the Messiah, that sent of God, to deliver hi^ Church from Satan, si^ and
damnation, 1. Co^ 15. 57. 9. He was meek above all men: but wrathful at the
erection of the golden Calfe, Exodus 31. So was Christ mee^ it self, but full
of zealo^ anger, at the abusing (...) Gods House, Mar. 11. 10. He was
faithful in all Gods house, Heb. 3. 2. So was Christ Jesus: but in a more
excellent manner, as a Son, and not as a servant, Heb. 3. 3. 11. At his
coming to deliver Israel, Pharaoh raged and oppressed them the more, Exodus 5.
So did Satan and his instruments rage the more at the coming of Christ to
redeem mankind: and still rages the more that his kingdom is near a^ end,
1. Pet. 5. 8. 12. The Egyptians mis-regarded his message, Exodus 7. So did the
wicked Scribes Christ's speeches: and still as yet the ungodly contemn his
Word, Math. 7. 6. 13. Israel was baptized in their delivery from Pharaoh unto
Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea, 1. Cor. 10. Typing how the Church of God
in their delivery from Satan, sin and death by Christ Jesus, should be
baptized unto him, and by him in the Red Sea of his precious blood, 1. Cor. 12.
13. 14. Moses instituted the Passover, and delivered Israel by his Rod through
the red Sea, Exodus 12. So did Christ the Lords Supper, and delivered h^ Church
by his Cross through his blood, Math. 26. 1. Ioh. 2. 15. He sweetened Marah
unto the people, by the Tree he did cast in, Exodus 15. 25. So has Christ our
afflictions, by the Cross that he did bear, Heb. 2. 10. 16. While he prayed
with his hands up, Israel overcame their enemies, and at his mediation Gods
wrath was appeased, Numb. 14. Exodus 17. So by the intercession of Christ, grace
is given us to overcome our spiritual enemies, and Gods wrath is altogether
quenched, Heb. 8. 6. 17. The Law was given by Moses, and exhibited by wonders,
Exodus 20. So is the Gospel by Christ, and confirmed by miracles, Ioh. 1. 18.
Moses fasted forty days before he gave the Law on Sinai, Exodus 19. So did
Christ fast so long in the wilderness, before he began to preach the Gospel
in Judea, Math. 4. 19. God was more clearly manifested to him, then any other
in Israel, Exodus 33. 11. So was the Lord more clearly seen by Christ, then by
any creature, Ioh. 1. 18. 20. He was in a sort transfigured in face on Sinai,
when he shined so before the people, that they could not behold him vnuailed,
Exodus 34. 33. So was Christ transfigured wholly on Tabor, when his body and
garments shined to his Disciples, that they were ravished, and wist not what
they said, Math. 17. 21. Many of the people were destroyed with Korah, for
offending against him: for murmuring and insurrection, Numb. 16. So were most
of the Jews by Titus, for trespassing so against our Savior in crucifying
him, Josephus History. 22. He dyed willingly upon Mount Abarim, and left
Joshua to supply his room, Deuteronomy. 34. 5. So did Christ upon Mount Golgotha, and
having ascended, sent his Spirit to supply his rooms, Act. 2. 23. His grave was
never found, for he rose again, as is apparent by his apparition on Tabor
with Elias, talking with Christ, Deuteronomy. 34. 6. Math. 17. So likewise did
Christ Jesus rise the third day, not being found of them that sought him in
the grave, Math. 28. 24. He led Israel to Canaan, Deuteronomy. 32. So does Christ
lead his Church to Heaven, John 14. 6. 25. He was King, Prophet, and
Mediator of the people. Typing so Christ Jesus in all these his Offices, Heb.
9. 13. 26. He appointed the Tabernacle, and service thereof, as the Lord
commanded him, and according to the pattern, Exodus 25. 40. So has Christ
appointed the worship of his Father, in the Ministry and Government of his
Church, according to the Word.

The Disparitie.
MOses was most unwilling to undergo that calling of Deliverance of Israel.
But Christ most willingly undertook the Deliverance of his Church. Moses hands
also were wearied in holding up: therefore fell down, till Aaron and Hur
stayed them up: But the hands of our blessed Mediator are never weary to
intercede for his people. Moses saw not GOD face to face: but he that
proceeded out of the bosom of the Father, did see him clearly, even Christ,
that is the engraven Character of the Father. Also Moses led the people only
into the sight of Canaan, and unto the borders thereof, but gave them not
possession therein: But our Mediator and Messiah has purchased the same unto
his Chosen, and has gone before to prepate a place for us in that celestial
Canaan, that we may possess the same peaceably, after the day of our
dissolution.

Of holy times in general.
AS there were amongst the Jews in that Leuiticall and Typical Law of theirs,
holy Persons, holy Things, holy Places; so were there holy Times, which were
either Days, Moons, Seasons or Years, calling to memory special benefits,
and therewith pointing at more higher mysteries.

1. Days, were the Sabbath, which was holy. Which did call to mind the
benefit of our Creation, for which we should be thankful: and did therewith
signify that eternal rest of Gods Chosen, which they should enjoy, Reu. 14.
13. 2. Moons: Such was the New Moon, which was holy. Which did put in mind
the Lords Gubernation of all things, as from whom all alterations and changes
do come: and therefore teaches us to rely on his providence, Psol. 23. 1. 3.
Seasons: which were three. 1. The Passover. Typing and teaching the benefit of
our Redemption, as shall be hereafter more fully declared. 2. The Pentecost.
Remembering us thereby, to acknowledge the benefit of our Sanctification by the
holy Ghost. 3. The Feast of Tabernacles, or Tents. To make us mindful, (as
well as the jews) of our Protection: who are daily preserved, as the
Israelites in Tents were in the Wilderness. 4. Years: which was every seventh
year: but in special that great Iubile after a Sabbath of seven years. To
remember us of that full freedom and joy, in that great day of the glorifying
of Gods Saints. So that being Created, Governed, Redeemed, and preserved here:
by the same God we shall be Glorified hereafter.

The Passover, Exodus 12. 2. Cor. 5. 7.
1. IT was called the Passover; because the destroying Angel passed over all
their houses, whose doore-posts were striked with the blood thereof, and
wherein the same was eaten, Exodus 12. 27. So is Christ called; because Gods
wrath passes over all them, whose souls are sprinkled with his blood, and
truly by Faith feed upon him, 1. Cor. 5. 7. 2. It was killed, before Israel
was delivered, Exodus 12. 6. So Christ behooued to suffer, before we could be
redeemed, Act. 17. 2. 3. It was killed, before Moses Law, or Aarons Sacrifices
were ^nioyned. To show, that by none of them, but by the true Passover, that
Lamb of God, killed from the beginning, deliverance comes to mankind, Romans 3.
Heb. 9. 4. It was killed, and to be killed yearly the first Month of the
year, ver. 2. when the day lengthening, and the Sun ascending, each thing
begins to revive. To show, that by the true Passover, not only is our
time, and all other things sanctified: but also that we should in recent
remembrance of that benefit of our Redemption, all our days and years be
thankful to our gracious Redeemer, Ephesians. 5. 4. 20. and that by his death,
true life and reviving came unto mankind. 5. It was slain the 14. day, which
was the fourth day after the separation thereof, ver. 6. which was then full
moon, shaddowing, that the^ Christ should suffer, when the fulness of
ceremonial light was in him accomplished, and in his death to make a full
period, ever thereafter to decay and vanish, as also To show first, that
instantly after his Birth, our Passover should not be sacrificed, till the
appointed hour: and secondly, that as thereby they were taught to prepare
themselves to the eating thereof: so should we to the eating of our Lamb by
true Faith and Repentance, 1. Cor. 11. 6. In the evening the Passover was
killed, ibid. Showing thereby that in the latter time Christ should suffer: and
as at night there is darkness and all are at rest: So when all mankind was
sitting in darkness of mind and life, and all the world at a general outward
rest of peace, then should our Savior come and suffer. As also the killing
thereof at even, did show how, as at even, the Sun goes too: so it was the
Sun of righteousness that was to suffer and dye, and at his Passion, what
universal darkness should be upon the whole earth, Luke 23. 44. 7. At night
also the Passover was eaten, verse 8. Prefiguring so unto us how our true
Paschall Lamb should be eaten by us, in mysterio scilicet, accenso alio
lumine quam naturali. 8. It was eaten in Goshen, Israel being in Egypt, and in
Jerusalem, they being in Canaan: both, places of the Churches abode. To show
that in his true Church only is our true Pastor to be found, and profitably
fed upon, Col. 1. 18. 9. It was (more particularly) eaten in the Family, each
house a Lamb, verse 3. Showing that with unity in faith and love, as all of
one family we must eat of our true Passover, and that they are but few who
truly feed, and are partakers of this Lamb, Mat. 7. 13. 10. The house must be
prepared. To warn us so to prepare our hearts, 1. Cor. 11. 11. If the house be
too little, the neighbors must be assumed, yea the strangers so be he be
circumcised, verse 4. To signify first the super abundant virtue of Christ's
death: for the house may be too little for the Lamb, but not the Lamb for a
house: as likewise, the sweet Communion of Saints in love, the joyful Vocation
also of the neighbor Gentiles, and admission to the fellowship of faith,
being inwardly circumcised, and at last, to condemn the private giving of the
Sacrament to one or two only. 12. The Passover was to be taken of the Lambs,
verse 5. To show that our Savior should be innocent in life; meek and
patient in death, and profitable always, Isai. 53. 13. Or it was to be taken of
the Kids, ibid. And in the general, the taking of it from among the flock,
did signify the separation of Christ from sinners. To show, albeit our Savior
was sinlesse himself, yet he should come of the race of sinners: (as the Kid
comes of the Goat) as also, that in wrong reputation, and true imputation,
being made sin for us, he should be as a Kidde or a Goat, 2. Cor. 5. 21.
Isai. 53. 4. 14. It must be without any blemish, ibid. Shaddowing thereby the
perfection and innocence of Christ, Psalm. 40. 7. 15. He must be a Male, ibid.
Noting thereby the excellency of strength and dignity (most proper to that
Sex) which should be in Christ, Hos. 1. 11. 16. He must be a year old,
ibid. Signifying the experience that Christ should have of our miseries, whereof
even a days continuance yields sufficient proof. As also that perfection of
Christ in like sort, and that in fulness of time he should come and suffer (a
year being a perfect revolution of the Suns full course,) He. 4. 15. 5. 2.
17. It must be set apart awhile, verse 6. Teaching thereby preparation, and
due meditation of the Lords great work of our delivery, 1. Co. 11. Ps. 103 18.
It was then killed, and that by Israel, Ibid. So Christ behooued to dye, ere
comfort could flow to us of appeasing Gods wrath, and satisfying his justice,
the merit of whose death redounds to his chosen Church only, Isaiah 59. 20 19.
The blood was besprinkled on the Lintell and dooreposts, that the Angel seeing
the same might pass by, verse 7. Signifying, that by Christ's blood applied,
the wrath of God is made to pass by us: and where Christ the Lamb is inwardly
in the house of the Soul, the sprinkling of Christ's blood will be seen by
Sanctification outwardly in the practice of the life, 1. Cor. 1. 30. Note also,
that the aspersio^ of this blood by Hysope (which is a purging Herb) does give
us to understand the threefold virtue of Christ's blood. First, as it is a
ransom to Gods justice: and secondly, preserves from the destroyer of Gods
wrath: so thirdly, it purges also the polluted soul. Also the sprinkling of
the blood upon the dooreposts: noted, how going in and out, ever we should
remember Christ's death, and not be ashamed of the profession of his Cross: And
that by Baptism our souls must first be sprinkled with his blood, before we
can look for to be partakers truly of his body, 1. Cor. 12. 13. 20. The
Lamb must be roast with fire, and that wholly, or all of it, verse 8.
Signifying thereby the agony of Christ in the Garden, and the wrath of his
Father which he did endure both in soul and body, Math. 20. 21. It must not
be eaten raw, verse 9. Noting, that we should not vnpreparedly receive, nor
grossly conceive of Christ in the Sacrament, Ioh. 6. 1. Cor. 11. 22. It must
not be sodden with water. Showing that to his Institution we must not join our
inventions (adding altering or impairing) nor to the merit of his all
sufficient sacrifice, the proud merit of our menstruous righteousness, Isai. 57.
12. 23. It must be eaten all, and that with unleavened bread, ver. 8. To show
that nothing in Christ is unprofitable or to be rejected, and that to the true
participation of him, we must eschew corruption of doctrine, of manners, and
malice, 2. Cor. 5. 24. With sour herbs also the Passover must be eaten.
Signifying thereby, that with repentance we must eat our Passover, in
remembrance of our bitter and sour estate of sins slavery, wherein we were
captiuate, and of the bitter Passion of Christ, whose teeth were set on edge
when we had eaten the sour Grapes, Isai. 53. 4, 9. 25. They behooued to eat
the Passover, their loins being girded, their staves in their hands, and
their shoes on their feet, verse 11. To show how we should eat our
Passover, like pilgrims, to wit, not looking for a permanent City here: our
loins girded with verity, and the preparation of the Gospel on our feet, the
staff of Gods Word in our hands, and with alacrity and readiness making
forward to our heavenly mansion, Phil. 3. 13. 26. They behooued likewise to
eat the same in haste, as not doubting of the speedy work of their delivery,
and as ready waiters when they should be called out of doors. To signify
likewise in Faith and readiness to come when Jesus calls, and with the
affections of Fear and Love, (which are the two usual causes of haste)
desirously and holily we should eat our Passover, 1. Cor. 11. 27. Nothing
was to be reserved till to morrow of the Lamb, verse 10. Noting thereby the
fullness of theirs and our deliverance: nor that we should reserve one sin
to live in awhile, keeping up, as it were a part of Christ's death for it.
Popish reservation also of the Host is condemned hereby. 28. If any remain
thereof ouernight, the same must be burnt with fire, verse 10. Teaching to
avoid profanation of holy things hereby: Hoc pacto etiam compellens accersere
egenos (says a Father) This burning is apishly imitated in the popish Host.
29. No uncircumcised person might eat of the Passover. So no unsanctified
person can be truly partaker of Christ Jesus, Mat. 22. 30. The bones thereof
might not be broken. Typing hereby in Christ* suffering, how not a bone (...)
him should be broken as was foretold, John 19. 36. 31. None might go out of
door that night. Perseverance in Christ's Family or Church, and in the bosom
thereof being pointed at hereby, not going out in affection to the world
again, Ren. 2. 10. 32. One Law shall be for all (says the Lord) verse 49.
Showing thereby, whereby the Church of Christ is governed, and that with God
there is no exception of Persons, Act. 10. 34. 33. It was to be observed, with
the word of instruction, to be joined thereto, verse 26, 27. So is the
Sacrament to be celebrate with the word of institution, and exhortation to be
added thereto likewise, as the Seal and Charter going together, 1. Cor. 11.
Last, in that the blood of the Lamb was first sprinkled, and then it self
prepared and eaten. It shows that first Christ was made a sacrifice to God,
and then a Sacramens to us.

The Disparitie.
THe Jewish Passover did feed the body: but our Passover Christ does feed the
soul. It was a sign of their deliverance: but Christ is the very worker of
our deliverance. There were many Lambs eaten in the whole camp, all called the
Passover; because they pointed at one alone who should be the true Passover,
and who alone suffices the whole number of his faithful. The Lamb being
eaten, nothing thereof did remain: but Christ being fed upon, is no whit
impaired, but remains as perpetual nourishment to his own Chosen.

15. Aaron.
1. AAron, a Teacher, or the mountain of fortitude. So is Christ the true
Teacher of his Church, and exalted mountain of invincible strength, Math. 10.
21. 2. He was Moses mouth to the people, Exodus 4. 30. So was Christ his
Fathers mouth, to the world; in declaring his will, Ioh. 1. 3. He was the
blesser of the people, Leu. 9. 22. So is Christ the true blesser of his people
and Church, Genesis 12. 3. 4. He was the High Priest of the Lord, Leu. 8. And so
was Christ that only true High Priest of his faithful, Heb. 9. 5. He dyed on
the top of Mount Hor, called Mosera, Numb. 20. So Christ dyed on the top of
Mount Golgotha, Luke 23.

The Disparitie.
AAron dyed in the wilderness for his own offense, for disobeying the Lord at
the waters of Meribah: but Christ Jesus our High Priest dyed in the world, for
our offenses and manifold disobedience imputed to him, and undertaken by him.
Also Aaron brought not the people into Canaan, neither entered there himself:
but our High Priest has both entered himself into that heavenly Canaan, and
brings the members of his true Church there also.

The High Priest, Exodus 28.
1. He was taken of men, but behooued not to have any blemish, Le. 22. 17. So
was Christ of the race of mankind according to the flesh: but was altogether
sinlesse, Heb. 7. 2. He assumed not this honor to himself, but it was given
him of God. So neither did Christ, but it was given him of the Father, Heb. 5.
5. 3. He was washed with water, and anointed with the holy oil, Exodus 29. 7.
Leu. 16. 4. To note that immaculate sanctity that should be in Christ, and
that he should be anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Isai.
61. 2. 4. His flesh and loins were covered with clean linen, Exodus 28. 42.
So was Christ's Humanity clothed with true holiness, Isai. 53. 5. He was
clothed gloriously, Exo. 28. 2. So was Christ with perfect righteousness, and
the Majesty of his Deity. 6. He had a holy crown upon his head, Exodus 29. 6.
Signifying thereby the Deity of Christ (which as a circle has neither
beginning nor end) and the royal dignity wherewith he is crowned King of his
Chosen, Ier. 23. 5. 7. He had an engraven plate with Holiness unto the Lord
on his forehead, Exo. 28. 36. Noting the intercessorie oblation of the
perfection of his Holiness, whereby our imperfect righteousness is at the
Fathers hands accepted, Heb. 8. 8. The colors of the embroidering of his
garments being Blue, Purple, Skarlet and White, Exodus 28. 6. Signified the
truth of his Prophetical Office, the Majesty of his Royal, the perfection of
his Priestly, and his sincere sanctity in execution of all, with all other his
resplendent grace beautifying his blessed person, He. 10. Ioh. 18. Act. 7. 9.
The edge of wouen work about the Collar of the Robe of the Ephod, that it
should not tear, ver. 32. Pointed the spiritual strength, and entire
righteousness of Christ, Heb. 7. 26. 10. He had Vrim and Thummim upon his
breast, verse 30. So had Christ the perfection of true light, and perfect
holiness in his heart, ibid. 11. He bore the names of the Tribes of Israel
upon his breast, when he went in before the Lord, verse 29. Typing the
continual intercession of Christ for his Church; Heb. 7. 25. 12. These names
were engraven in hard stones. So are the godly not lightly written: but
indelebly graven in the memory and love of Christ, 1. Ioh. 4. 13. Likewise he
bore the names in two Onyx stones upon his shoulders, Ex. 28. 9. So does Christ
bears and up bear his own, by his secret power and grace, even when his back
seems turned upon them, Ier. 8. interceding forthem, He. 7. 14. The wreathed
chain tied to the rings of pure gold, wherewith the brestplate and Humerall
was tied, verse 14. Signified the perfect connexture of all heavenly virtues
adorning Christ's humanity: as also, that true faith, whereby we are girt unto
him, Ier. 13. 15. The Bells and Pomegranates hanging about his vesture, whereby
he was heard when he entered into the Sanctuary and Holiest, verse 33.
Shaddowed his proclaiming of the joyful Gospel, and confirming the same by
his holy works and miracles upon earth: as also typed his continual
intercession for his Chosen in Heaven, Heb. 8. 16. His costly wrought Girdle,
ver. 39. Signified that truth and constancy whereby our High Priest in his
gracious promises of the Gospel is perfectly girt about. 17. He alone entered
into the holiest place, and that not without blood, to make atonement and
intercession for the people, Leu. 16. So has Christ entered into the heavens,
there alone, and only to be our Mediator, through the merit of his precious
bloodshed and atonement once made for all, to procure good things, and appease
wrath for us, Heb. 7. 18. He might not go forth of the Sanctuary to lament
for the dead. Shaddowing that Christ now being ascended and entered into the
holy heavens, his beatitude now can not be interrupted by any more sufferings
of misery or dolor, ibid. 19. His Wife behooued to be a chaste Virgin. So must
Christ's Church be as a Virgin, chaste, and giving neither her love, nor his
worship unto any other, Math. 25. 20. The putting of the blood of the solemn
sacrifice upon his right ear, thumb, and toe, Exo. 29. 20. Did show that in
Christ there is nothing but right and unblameable, and that it is his blood,
that should make them blessed that should sit at his right hand. As also, the
consecrating of Christ's whole person by his death and bloodshed to be the
Prince of our salvation, even as we should likewise in all things by his blood
be consecrate unto his holy obedience in all our senses, actions, and walkings,
Heb. 7. 21. His garments Even so does the garment of the righteousness of
remained for ever, for his sons to be clothed withal, Exodus 29. 29. Christ
abide for ever for to cloth his own children withal, in Justification, unto
Sanctification and glory, Esaias 61. 10.

(As for the linen garments of the inferior Priests, they signified that
Holiness which the ministry ought to be clothed withal, set down by the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 3.)

The Disparitie, Heb. 7.
THe Jewish HighPriest was taken of the Tribe of Leui; but our High Priest is
sprung of the Tribe of Judah, not after the order of Aaron, but after the order
of Melchisedech. Wherefore the Priesthood being thus changed, of necessity
there behooued to be a change of the Covenant. Again, the lewish High Priest
was made without an ^oath. For as much then as Christ is nor made without an
oath, by so much is he ^ade surety of a better Covenant. Theirs was ^ade after
the Law of the carnal comman^ement: but our High Priest is made after the
power of endless life. Theirs needed a successor; therefore they were many,
because they were mortal: but Ours, because he endures for ever, has a
Priesthood which cannot pass from one to another. Theirs behooued to offer up
sacrifice for his own sins: but our High Priest is holy, harmless,
undefiled and separate from sinners, without spot. Theirs did frequently offer
up sacrifice of beasts whose blood could not purge: but our High Priest has
once offered up an all-sufficient sacrifice, never to be reiterate, even
himself to the Father, whose blood cleanses us from all our sins. Theirs
every year entered into the Holiest by the blood o^ Bulls and Calves, which
could not take away sins: but our High Priest, by his own blou^ has he once
entered into the holy place, an^ obtained eternal Redemption for us, by the
veil of his flesh, pearcing the highest heavens, to appear now in the sight
of God for his Church, Heb. 9. 12.

17. The Cloudy Pillar. Exodus 14.
1. THe Cloudie Pillar was Isreal's guide, which they followed in their several
campings from Egypt to Canaan, Number. 9. 15, 16, 17. etc. So is Christ our true
guide, which we must follow in our journey to heaven, both in the precepts of
his Word, and practice of his Life, Math. 11. 29. 2. It was in the shape of a
Pillar. So is Christ like a Pillar, firm, stable, and straight, and with his
strength supporting all those that rely upon him, Exodus 15. 2. 3. In going
behind between the camps of Israel, and the Egyptians, it was a defense unto
them, Exo. 14. 19. So is Christ not only a Directer, but a Protector to his
Church, from all their enemies, Psalm. 18. 1. 4. It was darkness to the
Egyptians, but gave light unto them of Israel, ver. 20. So is Christ salvation
to the godly: but a stumbling block and stone of offense unto the wicked,
Math. 21. 44. 5. It was a Cloud by day, and a Fire by night to Israel, ibid. So
is Christ a cooling refreshment to his own in the scorching day of temptation
or trouble: and a comfortable Lamp of light to direct them in the time of this
life, Ioh. 1. 6. It was a Fire, and a Cloud, yet both but one Pillar. So Christ
is God, and Man likewise, yet in both but one person, Esa. 9. 6. 7. It was a
fiery Pillar. So is Christ not only strong as a Pillar for the defense and
bearing up of his own, and as a fire illuminating, purging, comforting* and
kindling zeal in his Chosen ones: but also he is (...) fire, fearfully to
consume his enemies, as stubble b^ fore the flame, Psalm. 2. 8. In the fire, and
in the Cloud, God was seen by Israel in the Wilderness: but both ceased in
Canaan. So in the Word and i^ the Sacraments he is see^ by his Church in the
world but both shall cease i^ heaven.

The Disparitie.
THe Cloud vanished and was no more seen, after they came to Canaan: but our
blessed Pillar Christ Jesus, when we enter, and come to that celestial
Canaan, shall then more clearly and constantly be seen then before, the
foresaid dim sight of him in Word and Sacraments ceasing.

18. The Rock, Exodus 17.
IT was a Rock fixed and sure. So is Christ that sure Rock and foundation
upon whom the godly build, and a^inst which the blind wicked ones dashing,
bruise them^lues in pieces. To which also, his own do run, as to a ^ong
defense, and against which, the gates of hell it ^fe shall in no wise prevail,
Math. 16. 2. It had no out^ard delightful show (...) the Wilderness, but (...)
a bare hard Rock. So neither had Christ any outward form or beauty in the
world, that we should desire him: but as a root out of a dry ground, was a
^nfull of sorrows, and it hard distress and poverty, ^ay 53, 2, 3. It seemed
wonderful, and almost incredible even unto Moses, that God would make the
Rock to give water to such a murmuring people. So likewise was it a wonderful
work of love, that the Lord should make his own Son to shead his
heart-bloud, for such a rebellious generation as mankind: therefore Esa. 53. 1.
cries out, Who will believe our report? 4. It gave water abundantly unto the
people, when they could get no other to quench their thirst; so that, in
respect of the running streams thereof, it is said to have followed them, 1.
Cor. 10. and this water only sufficiently refreshed them all. So Christ shead
hi^ blood abundantly, when nothing else could redeem^ us, nor quench the
tormenting thirst of an acc^sing or grieved conscience and this blood only is
sufficient to purge all our sinn^ perfectly, Heb. 7. 5. It was first stricken
with Moses Rod, before it yielded forth the waters for the people, Exo. 17. 6.
So was Christ nailed (...) the Cross, according (...) that, Cursed is ever one
that hangs on Tree: our transgressions the Law being laid vp^ him, before
his precious blood issued forth of his heart and wounds, to consummate the
Redemption of his Church, Luke 23. 6. Moses at that time debarred himself from
Canaan, and led the people only unto the borders thereof, delivering them to
Joshua. To show, that Christ having suffered, by the Law there is no
Justification, nor attaining unto heaven: but being imperfect and weak in it
self, is now but a pedagogy unto Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 20.

The Disparitie.
ALl Israel promiseuously did drink of the Rock; as well the murmurers, as the
godly and patient sort: but so shall not all in the visible Church be
partakers of the blood of Christ; but they only who truly repent and believe.

19. Manna, Exodus 16. Ioh. 6.
THe Lord gave the people Manna to satisfy their ^unger, to testify his
bounty, power and providence, to tempt or try them in the Wilderness, Exodus
16. 4. So the Lord sent Christ into the world, to be made meet food for the
hunger of our souls: to show us likewise his vnmerited mercy and kindness,
and poor and lowly he sent him, to try who notwithstanding would believe in
him. Esaias 53. 2. Manna was little in quantity, ver. 14. So was Christ little
and contemptible in the eyes of the world in reputation, ib. 3. It was white of
color, verse 31. So was Christ holy and sanctified in nature, Psalm 40. 8. 4.
It was round in shape. To note the perfectness^ and entirenesse of Christ in
all heavenly graces, He. 7. 5. It was sweet, and tasted like fresh oil or
wafers, baked with honey, Numb. 11. 7. So is Christ most swe^ and pleasant to
all afflicte^ consciences, by the rece^ and cheering consolation (...) his
bloodshed and Spirit, Ioh. 16. 7. 6. It came down from heaven, Ioh. 6. So did
Christ Jesus Ioh. 6. 7. The name thereof was Man, or Manbu: which is a portion,
an admirable gift, or meat prepared, Exodus 16. 15. So is Christ the portion of
his Chosen, the admir^ble great gift of the Father and prepared food for ever
hungring soul, Ioh. 6. 51 8. It came down with the dew, and was gathered,
verse 14. So Christ comes to us with the dew of grace, and thereby is applied.
9. It fell round about the camp of Israel, and was sufficient for all to
gather thereof, and fell in no other place, verse 13. So Christ is conversant
within the limits of his Church, and is the fullness of grace to all who are
true partakers of him, and no where else to be found, Reu. 1. 10. It was
gathered by measure in the Wilderness, and he who gathered least had no lack,
ver. 18. So is Christ's grace in this world given, but by measure, and he who
has the weakest faith, so it be true, shall attain to the same salvation
which he of a stronger does, 2. Pet. 3. Luke 17. 6. 11. When it came, it made
the people to admire, for they wist not what it was, verse 15. So when Christ
came, many did wonder; yea, He rode, and all Jerusalem with him were troubled,
and sundry wist not what that mystery of his Incarnation meant, Math. 2. 12.
It was, as sufficient for all; so common to all, and that freely. So is Christ
a free imparter of salvation to rich and poor, King and Beggar, without
respect of persons, Act. 10. 34. 13. It was ground and baked, before it was
meet food for the people, verse 23. So Christ behooued first diverse ways to
suffer, before he could be a meet Comforter and Savior to his Church, Act.
17. 2. 14. It was gathered early, verse 21. So is Christ and his grace to be
embraced speedily and timously, Math. 25. 15. It was daily gathered except on
the Sabbath, verse 23. So for a further degree of grace daily, we must always
labor here, while that eternal Sabbath of rest come, when grace shall be
perfected in glory hereafter, 2. Pet. 3. 18. 16. They went out of their Tents
to gather it. So must we go out of the old man and love of the world, to
participate of Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 17. To the breakers of Gods command, in
keeping the same ouernight, it turned into putrefaction to them, and stunke,
Numb. 11. So to the hearers of Christ's Word, and contrary practisers unto the
same, it becomes unto them the savor of death, Iam. 1. 18. It ceased when they
came to Canaan, Josh. 5. 12. So shall the Word and Sacraments, when we come to
the Kingdom of Heaven, and see Christ face to face, 1. Cor. 13. 19. Manna was
kept and put in a golden pot before the Lord, to remain in the holiest for
ever, Exodus 16. 13. So Christ Jesus glorified in his Humanity at the right
hand of God in the heavens, abides for ever unto all ages of the faithful,
Heb. 7. 20. Manna was loathed by the wicked marmurers, on whom the Lords wrath
fell, Number. 11. 6. So is Christ Jesus in his Word and Sacraments. by the carnal
and ungodly, whom GOD in his anger shall likewise destroy, Jude 4. 21. Manna
fed the natural life. So does Christ Jesus the spiritual life.

The Disparitie.
MAnna did feed only the natural life: but Christ Jesus is the food of the
spiritual life. Again, Manna did corrupt and putrify: but so cannot our
spiritual Manna, who abides for ever solid and sweet comfort to every
distressed conscience. They inioyed it only in the Wilderness: but our chief
and fullest inioying of our Manna, shall be in the celestial Canaan. It was not
to be found but at a set time, for it melted away when the Sun arose: but our
Manna, Christ, is ever at all times to be found, both in prosperity and
affliction, late and early, never disappointing those that truly seek him.
Manna that was reserved in the Holiest, was spoiled and did perish thereafter
at the captivity: but our heavenly Manna, seated in highest glory, can never
perish nor suffer any violence.

20. The Brazen Serpent, Numb. 21.
1. NEither Moses nor the Law could cure the people of the stinging of the
fiery Serpents: but only the Brazen Serpent. So neither the Law, nor any
creature could cure mankind, and redeem them from the cruel power of Satan,
but only Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 25. 2. After many had dyed for murmuring, then
the Brazen Serpent was set up, Number. 21. 6. So after that all mankind through
sin was subdued to death and condemnation, then Christ came for our recovery
to be crucified, Esaias 53. 3. A Serpent stung, and a Serpent cured. So man (the
first Adam) lost mankind: and Man again (the second Adam) redeemed mankind,
Romans 5. 14. 4. Albeit it was called a Serpent, yet it was both without poison
or sting. So albeit Christ was thought a sinner (as other men) yet was he both
sinlesse and spotless, He. 7. 26. 5. It was made of brass, and not of gold,
verse 9. So was Christ sent, not with outward glory, or worldly pompous show:
but base and humble in outward appearance, Isaiah 53. 2. 6. It was not forged
by man's hand, or hammer, but in a mould yet in the fire. So Christ was not
begottenly man: but conceived by the Holy Ghost to the likeness of the Father,
Luke 2. 35. 7. It was not only made, but before it cured it was set up on
high. So Christ behooued not only to be borne: but also be crucified, before
our Redemption could be finished. 8. They were only cured who looked upon the
same. So they only are redeemed from death to eternal life, who only by
faith eyes him. Isai 46. 22. believing in Christ, and that crucified. 9. It was
a wonderful means of cure, and undeservedly devised of God, of mere pity;
yea against the merit of these murmurers. So is the death of the only Son of
God for rebellious mankind, an admirable work of vnmerited mercy likewise,
above our merit, without our merit, and against our merit, Ephesians. 1. 4. Yet
albeit it was instituted by GOD, and great miracles wrought at the presence
thereof: (the Lords institution lasting, and right use being made thereof by
the people in the Wilderness) yet at last it being Idolatrously abused, was
destroyed, by that godly King Hezechiah, and called Nehushtan, or a mass of
brass, 2. King. 18. Showing thereby how lawful by the like example, and much
more likewise, Images and other inventions of men, turning to an Idolatrous or
superstitious abuse, their abrogating is in a reformed Christian Church.

The Disparitie.
THe Brazen Serpent was destroyed (as is said) but our exalted Jesus can never
be destroyed. It retained not always the virtue of curing: but our blessed
Savior does ever retain the virtue and efficacy of saving.

21. The Tabernacle, Exodus 26.
1. IT had three places therein: the outward Court, wherein the brazen Lauer,
and brazen Altar stood. Representing the visible Church, wherein is outward
Baptism, and external exercise of worship common to all Called and Elect,
Mat. 13. Secondly, the Holy place, wherein was the Candlestick, the table of
Shewbread, and the Altar of perfume. Representing the inuisisible true Church,
consisting of the elect only, militant on earth, wherein is the light of the
Spirit by the Word, the true participation of Christ, the bread of life, and
the sincere acceptable sacrifice of true prayer and praise. Within this place
enters only the Royal Priesthood of God, Romans 12. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 5. Thirdly;
the Holiest of all, wherein was the Mercy-Seat, the glory of GOD between the
Cherubims, Representing the triumphant Church in the heavens, wherein is seated
Christ Jesus in glory, the society of the blessed Angels, and the praise of
the and the golden Censor. glorified spirits, with the continual intercession
of our Savior for his Saints on earth, Heb. 8. 2. The entry to the Holiest,
was by the Holy place, and to the holy place, was by the utter Court. So our
entry to the heavens is by being members of the i^uisible Church, through
faith in a good conscience, and our entry to be members of the invisible
Church, is by associating our selves to the visible Church professing Word and
Sacraments in the Primitue Apostolic sincerity. 3. The fixed Pillars of the
holy place, Signifies the Apostolic doctrines, in respect of the ministry
whereof, the Church it self is called, the Pillar of Truth, 1. Tim. 3. 17. 4.
The diverse ornaments and instruments thereof, Typeth the diversity of
spiritual gifts and functions in the Christian Church, Romans 12. 6. 5. The
several co^erings thereof, Does note the Lords sure protection of his Church
by his power and Angels, Heb. 1. 14 6. Gold within, and skins without,
Shaddoweth the spiritual and inward glory of the Church, and her account
before God, albeit contemptible to the world in outward, Cant. 1. 4. 7. The
Tabernacle and all the instruments thereof: yea the very Ash-pans and Snuffers
of the Candlestick, must be made according to the pattern in the Mount, Exo.
25. 40. Heb. 8. 5. Showing thereby that the Church, and all the exercise of
worship that is therein, whether doctrine or discipline, must be conformed unto
the written Word, Gal. 1. 8. 8. The voluntary oblation of the people to build
the Tabernacle, Represents that willing allotment and portion that Christians
should give for the upholding of Gods worship and ministry amongst them, and
for the maintenance of the poor members of Christ's mystical body, 2. Cor. 9.
8. 9. The principal builders of the Tabernacle, were Bezaleel and Aholiab,
extraordinarily endued with cunning in every work, and the secondary, was
every skilful workman in whose mind God had put skill, and will to assist the
work, Exodus 36. These figuring the Apostles, as Master Builders laying the
foundation of the Christian Church, and the other the ordinary Pastors building
on their foundation aright, being gifted and fitted for that effect, 1. Cor.
3. 10. To. 12. 6. Ephesians 11. 28. 10 The parts of the Tabernacle were so made,
that they might be joined or separate when they list, Deuteronomy. 12. 9. To show the
faithful in this Tabernacle of their body, which is to be laid down, and
raised again, to be far from their resting place, while they be in that
gloricus Temple of the heavens settled and seated with Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 4.
11. The Curtens of the Tabernacle imbroidered with Cherubims, Signified the
service and protection of the Church by the holy Angels, Isa 6. 12. These
Curtens were coupled by their strings and golden hooks, that it might be one
Tabernacle, Exodus 36. 13. Showing, the the d^uers members of the Church,
(whether triumphant or militant, and every where dispersed, make up but one
Tabernacle, Ephesians. 4. 8. Heb. 9. 11. 13. The glorious door of the Tabernacle,
Shaddowed Christ Jesus, who says of himself expressly, I am the door, Ioh.
10. 7. by whom we get entry either to grace or glory. 14. The Tabernacle thus
by all the couplings thereof being erected. Did signify the knitting together
by every joint, of the whole body of the Church in Christ the Head by the truth
in charity, for the furniture whereof (according to the effectual power which
is in the measure of every part) it receives increase of the body, unto the
edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 16. 15. Every board of the Tabernacle,
signified each several member of Christ and his Church, of Sittim wood: that
is, chosen and sanctified, ouerlaid with gold, that is, made glorious in
Christ, standing upright, by the erection of hope, fixed by the tenons of
Faith, and founded on the socket Christ, as also joined by bars, which is the
^itie of one Spirit, and love: the couerture of this Tabernacle, is Christ, the
linen represents his innocence, the Goats hair, his afflictions (the
Penitentiars garment being usually made of such) the third covering dyed red,
figuring his blood covering our sins, and the fourth of broken skins, his
abasement and humility. The door of the Tabernacle was not of any hard or
debarring matter, but of a veil, easily penetrable, to show our easy access
to grace in Christ, and acceptance in the bosom of his Church.

22. The Veil of the Holiest, Exodus 26. 31.
1. IT was glorious, of embroidered work of diverse colors. So was the body of
Christ beautified with excellent, diverse and heavenly graces, Hebr. 7. 26. Col.
2. 3. 2. It was replenished and wrought full of Cherubims. Noting thereby that
serviceable and ready attendance of the Angels on the person and body of
Christ, Ioh. 1. 51. 3. It was borne up by glorious and costly Pillars, ouerlaid
with gold, on Sockets of silver, which it covered, and whereon it did hang. To
show that the Humanity of Christ (specially in his suffering) should be borne
up by his Deity, which his manhood did oueruaile, and under which it again in
a manner did lurk. 4. By the Veil only there was entry into the Holiest
place of all. So by the veil of his flesh only (rent upon the Cross) has
Christ made a new and living way for us, to God, and to Heaven, Heb. 10. 20.

23. The Arc, Exodus 25. 10. to 17.
1. THe Arc was made of Sittim wood, which was durable, and not subject to
putrefaction. So Christ Jesus was neither subject to the corruption of sin,
nor putrefaction of the grave, Psalm. 16. 9, 10. 2. The Wood was ouerlaid within
and without with fine gold and pure. So the excellent divine nature of Christ
was so united to his humane, that not only the virtue thereof glanced inwardly
in his soul and mind: but outwardly also did shine most gloriously in his
actions, Col. 2. 3. It had a crown of gold round about. Signifying thereby the
Majesty of Christ's Kingdom, or eternity of his Deity, which (as a circle)
has neither beginning nor end, Ioh. 1. 1. 4. It had Iength, breadth, and
height, and was in shape fouresquare. Shaddowing the patience and
long-suffering of Christ, the ample extense of his love and grace, and the
sublimitie of his glory and reward stable in himself, who could not be
overthrown, and constant in mercy, who never can vary, Psalm. 103. 5. The
measure of the Arc exceeded not the dimensions of man's proportion; so that he
might fadom it about. Showing thereby how Christ being made man, dimitted
himself to our capacity, was seen, heard, and handled, and remains still
accessible, Heb. 4. 16. 6. It had four rings and bars, whereby it was
carried. Signifying how Christ should be carried in the ministry of the
Gospel, by his faithful Preachers, to the four corners of the earth, Math.
28. 7. The bars in the rings must never be severed from the Arc. So
preaching and Christ must never be asunder, but adhering to the Arc and ground
stone, truth must be taught, Gal. 1. 8. 8. The two tables were in the Arc,
Signifying thereby that Christ is the end of the Law, satisfying the same for
us, delivering us from the curse thereof, and making our obedience also to the
Law acceptable to the Father, by covering the imperfection of our works, Psalm.
130. 3. Romans 3. 21. 9. In it was the pot of Manna. To show, that in Christ is
the treasure of comfort, spiritual nourishment and life, Reu. 2. 17. Col. 3.
1. 10. In it also was Aarons Rod that budded and bore fruit. To signify that
in Christ we have assurance of a blessed Resurrection, and that by him our
rebellion is covered: as also that in him Aarons Priesthood is wrapped up, and
ceases, Heb. 8. 11. God spoke by Oracle out of the Arc. To prefigure that out
of the nature of man in Christ he should speak to the world, Heb. 1. 12. The
Arc was an assurance of Gods presence amongst the people, and God did dwell
therein. So Christ is the cause and assurance that God in mercy is present with
us, Ioh. 17 21. and in Christ personally the Deity did dwell. 13. Where the
Arc was, there only it was lawful to offer sacrifice, and no where else was
it accepted. To show, that where Christ is, to wit, in the Church, there, and
through him only our service is acceptable. 14. By the Arc Jordan was
divided, so that the people went dry and safe over to Canaan. So by Christ a
ready way is made through all the horrors of death, for us to come safely to
our heavenly Kingdom, Psalm. 23. 4. 15. The people a great way might not come
near unto the Arc. Showing thereby what reverence ^ught to be to Christ in
his Word and Sacraments, Act. 10. 16. By the Arkes compassing of Jericho, with
the blowing of the Horns, the walls of the City fell down, and by the presence
thereof in battle, the people were assured of victory. So where Christ corns
by the powerful preaching of his Word, Principalities and highest powers must
yield, and if he be with us, who can prevail against us? Romans 8. 17. When the
Arc was set up in the temple of Dagon, Dagon fell and brake. So where Christ
comes by his Gospel of Truth, Idolatry goes down, Act. 19. 18. The
Philistims were plagued at the presence of the Arc with them: but Obed-Edom
was blessed by having it with him. So where Christ is in wrath, their estate is
dangerous: but where he is in love, their blessings are with him, Ioh. 17. 19.
The people of Bethshemesh were fearfully punished, for looking into the Arc:
To teach us how dangerous it is to prye into Gods secrets unrevealed, and not
be wise according to sobriety, Romans 12. 3. 20. After long transporting at
last it was gloriously conveyed, and settled in Salomons temple there still to
remain. So after many iourneys, and long suffering on earth, Christ Jesus at
last was received up in glory, in the holiest heavens, to sit at the Fathers
right hand for ever, Psalm. 110. 1.

24. The Arc, as it typed the mystical body of Christ,
1. IT was the keeper of the testimony. So is the Church the keeper of the
Scriptures. 2. It was wooden, but covered with pure gold. So the Church is in
it self infirm, but through Christ is strengthened and beautified with grace,
Cant. 1. 4. 3. God was present with the Arc. So is he with his Church until
the worlds end, Ioh. 14. 4. The Propitiatory covered the Arc. So does Christ's
death cover the spots of his Church, and the accusing of the Law, Gal. 3. 13.
5. The Cherubims stood above the Arc. So the protection of the Angels stands
above and about the Church, Heb. 1. 6. It was transportatiue ever, while it was
seated at last in the glorious Temple of Solomon. So the Church has no
constant place on earth, while it be at last settled in the glorious heaven,
Heb. 13. 14. 7. It had a crown of gold about it. So is the Church crowned with
diverse graces and gifts here, and shall be with the crown of glory
hereafter, 1. Cor. 12. 8. It had the four dimensions proportionably. So has
the Church of Christ, the depth of Faith, the height of Hope, the Latitude of
Charity, and the Longitude of Perseverance. 9. In it was the pot of Manna, and
Aarons Rod. So in Christ's Church is the comfort of true doctrine, and
regiment of whelesome discipline, R^u. 11. 4.

25. The Mercy-Seat or Propitiatory, Exodus 25. 17. to 23.
1. IT was called the Mercy-Seat, or Propitiatory. So is Christ he in whom
mercy is truly seated, and has made Propitiation for our sins, Romans 3. 25.
2. It was the cover of the Arc where the two Tables lay of the Law of Moses.
So Christ is the true cover and deliverer of us, from the curse and accusation
of the Law, Romans 3. 3. It was of pure gold. Noting thereby the spotless
holiness of Christ, Heb. 6. 26. 4. Upon it were two Cherubims, showing that
the very Angels have their stablishment in Christ their Mediator, by
confirmation, as also Signifying the Angels ready attendance on Christ and his
Church: as also, figured, that when we draw near to the Mercy-Seat Christ,
being adopted and ingraft in him, then are we joined to the society of the
Angels, Luke 20. 5. They stretched their wings on high, covering so the
Mercy-Seat. Figuring so the Majesty of Christ's Deity, which none in glory can
behold, of the very Angels, but with their faces covered: and shaddowing forth
likewise hereby the most comfortable and sure protection of the Church, Mich.
4. 11. and the readiness to act Christ's will. 6. They looked down upon the
Mercy-Seat. Signifying the mystical Majesty of the Incarnation, into the
which the Angels desired to pry and behold, 1. Pet. 1. 12. 7. The faces of the
Cherubims were one toward another, and both toward the Mercy-Seat. So
representing also the consent of the old and new Testament, and their mutual
witnes-bearing one to another, and both looking upon Christ, the one pointing
him to come, and the other already come: as also, signifying the holy love and
agreement that the Angels have among themselves in Christ. 8. From the
Mercy-Seat between the Cherubims, the Lord uttered his will to the people, and
no more in a Bush, or in a Cloud spoke he, So in diverse manner did the Lord
speak in old time to the Fathers, by dreams and visions: but now in the last
days has he spoken by his Son, and still as yet does in the two testaments
of his sacred Word, He. 1. 9. The Cherubims were of gold, beaten out with the
hammer. Signifying the glistering brightness of heavenly wisdom contained in
the Scriptures, whose worth is above gold, and is given by the inspiration of
the Spirit of God, and penned by holy men, Psalm. 119 2. Tim. 3. 16. 10. Note
last of all, that not between Seraphims (which are put for executers of
Justice, as Isai. 6. but between Cherubims, as Messengers of Mercy, the Lord
in Christ shows himself appeased.

26. The Golden Censor, Heb. 9.
With this golden Censor the High Priest putting Incense therein, filled the
Holiest place with a sweet perfume; when he entered in to speak before the
Lord. Signifying thereby the Lord Jesus intercession through the pure and
perfect merit of his sauourie obedience wherewith he has filled the Holiest
heavens, as with a sweet odor and incense, appeasing Gods wrath, and making us
and our prayers and works acceptable, Heb. 4. 14.

27. The Table of Shewbread, Exodus 25. 23. to 31.
1. IT was of Sittim wood, covered over with gold, and a crown about it.
Noting, (as is said) the purity of Christ's Humanity, with the glory of his
Deity, and Majesty of his Kingdom. 2. It had food thereon, whereof only the
Priests might eat. Signifying that spiritual and heavenly nourishment in
Christ, whereof only the royal Priesthood of the faithful are partakers. 3.
The Shewbread was ever upon this Table. So true preaching, and sincere
administration of the Sacraments (whereby that bread of Life is set before us)
must ever be upon Christ crucified, as on the sure ground, Gal. 1. 8. 1. Cor.
3. 4. The incense cups were upon the Table, Signifying, that with the preaching
of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments, Prayer must be joined, and
on Christ's institution and rule, as on the Table, to be set and grounded, 1.
Cor. 11. 23. 5. The bread was renewed often, and set before the Lord. Teaching
us that due acknowledging and thankefulnes which we should have, and renew
frequently, for the benefits of the Lord which he renueth evening and morning
toward us: as also typing that variety of doctrine and comfort contained in
Christ's Word, and wherewith, as with old store and new, every skillful Pastor
should be furnished in due time to dispense, 2. Tim. 3. 6. The several
instruments thereof: as Dishes, Goblets, and Couers were all of pure gold,
Figuring the diversity of gifts, places and functions in Christ's Church,
wherein every one ought sincerely and holily to walk, 1. Cor. 12. 7. The bread
in number were twelve, for the twelve Tribes of Israel, Signifying sufficient
food to be in Christ's Church, and in the Scripture proponed for all the members
of that spiritual Israel, and Elect to participate.

28. The Candlestick, Exodus 25. 31. to 40.
1. IT was the only thing that gave light unto the Sanctuary. So Christ is
that only light, and light-giuer, which shines in his Church, Ioh. 1. 2. It
was of pure gold, Shaddowing so the excellency of Christ, and of his Pastors,
through that light whereof they are bearers, Reu. 1. and noting thereby also
the dignity of the Word, Psalm. 119. 3. It had seven Lamps. Sign sying so the
perfection of the light of Christ, (seven being the number of perfection.) 4.
It was placed in the Sanctuary. So is the light of Christ placed in his
Church, and there only to be scene in the brightness of his Word, and
illumination of his Spirit. So that where that light shines not, there is not
the true Church, Ioh. 10. 4, 5. 5. It had an upright Stem, which did bear
the many branches that did issue and proceed from the same. Typing Christ Jesus
that true stalk and fountain of light, from whom all light flows, and which
bears up, and keeps constant in the truth all the branches, and true
light-bearers of his Word, Reu. 1. 20. 6. The branches were adorned with their
Bowls, Knops, and Flowers. So are the true light-bearers of Christ, adorned
with diverse meet graces and gifts by him, tending both to the spiritual
delectation, and profit of his Church, 1. Cor. 12. 14. 33. 7. Aaron did dress
those Lamps, and renewed their Oil daily. So is our blessed High Priest, the
only enlightner and fitter of his Pastors, to shine the more clearly in his
Church, and the powrer in of grace into their hearts, to be as Lamps to others
by true faith in a good conscience, ibid. 8. It had Snuffers and Snuffe-dishes
of pure gold. Showing how with doctrine, the sincerity of discipline,
according to Gods Word, whereby the light of the Church is kept clear, should
ever be joined, and excommunication used of all scandalous and rebellious
persons, like the extinguishing of noisome smelling Snuffes. As likewise, that
every one ought to content himself with his room, how low soever it be, so it
be in the Sanctuary, and as the Snuffers were of gold; so they conscionably
to walk in their station, Romans 16. 17. 9. It was in the Holy place: but not in
the Holiest. Showing, how the light of Gods Word must be in the Militant
Church, but shall not need to be in the triumphant, when face to face we shall
see the Lord in glory, Reu. 21. 22. 10. Also as the Candlestick had Flowers,
signifying as it is before, the spiritual delectation of the Word, so the
Knops or Almonds which it had. Did represent the efficacy of the Word, unto
the bringing forth of the fruits of holiness. Last, the pure oil powered into
the Lamps, making the same to burn. Signified the grace of the Spirit
accompanying the Word, making the same powerful in operation.

29. The Altar of Perfume, Exodus 30. 1. to 13.
1. IT was of Sitttim wood, ouerlaid with gold, and having a crown about it.
Shaddowing (as before) Christ, in both his natures, the Deity yielding glory
to his Humanity, and crowned now with Majesty, as the gold adorned the Sittim
wood, and circled the Altar. 2. It had Horns on the four corners thereof,
ouerlaid with gold. Shaddowing the powerful and holy virtue of the
intercession of Christ, to extend it self to the four corners of the earth,
to the comfort of his Church dispersed every where, Heb. 7. 25. 3. The Incense
behooued to be offered only upon it. Showing how our prayers must be made in
his name, and through his mediation is only acceptable, ibid. 4. It behooued
first to be beaten, made and prepared, before it was put on this Altar.
Noting, how our prayers must proceed out of a humbled and contrite Spirit,
which we offer up in the name of Jesus, Psa. 51. 5. It was kindled by fire
upon the Altar. So must our prayers be by a holy and fervent zeal and desire,
through the operation and stirring up of the holy Spirit, To. 8. 26. 6. It was
offered up by the Priest. So are the prayers of the faithful offered up, and
made acceptable to the Father, through the Oblation and Intercession of our
High Priest Jesus. As also, they who offer up acceptable prayers upon the Altar
of our mediation, are the holy Priesthood of the Lords Chosen, Reu. 1. 6. 7. No
strange Incense was to be offered upon this Altar. So no unwarranted or
unlawful form of prayer, superstitiously or idolatrously devised, to any
Saint (...) Angel, is in Christ, or by him any wise to be thought acceptable,
Math. 6. 8. The perfume behooued to be perpetually before the Lord. Showing
thereby, not only the continual exercise of Prayer which daily we should use
on earth: but also the continual Intercession of our Savior in the Heavens
for us, Heb. 7. 25. 9. The High Priest made this perfume only, and might not
be applied to any other use, but to burn before the Lord. Teaching that is
Christ Jesus only his direction, which we must follow in praying, according
as he has taught us to say, Our Father, etc. and not to make our Petitions to
any other in Heaven, or on earth, Math. 6. 10. After the clearing of the Lamps
of the Candlestick, evening and morning, then the incense was burnt. Showing
so, that our Prayers, and all our Christian duties in Christ, must be done
according to the light and direction of his Word and Spirit, 1. Cor. 14. 11.
The Incense was made of diverse Spices. So must the prayers of the godly be
seasoned with diverse graces, true Repentance, lively faith, unfeigned love, and
such like, Ps. 51* 12. The Incense was offered up in the Holy place, without
the veil of the Holiest, near to the Testimony before the Mercy-Seat. So the
prayers of the godly in his Church hecre on earth, must proceed out of a holy
heart, be made agreeable to the Testimon^ of Gods Word, and through faith have
an eye ever to Christ Jesus, our true Mercy-Seat, in him and for his sake, to
be heard of the Father, Ioh. 14. 13. 13. Once a year the Altar was sprinkled
with the blood of the expiatorie Sacrifice. Showing how Christ is by his
bloodshed consecrate our blessed Mediator, and that no prayer is acceptable to
God: but that man's, who, through the blood of Christ, is reconciled to him,
ibid.

30. The Altar of burnt-offering. Exodus 27. 1. 109.
1. IT was of Brass in the Court of the Sanctuary. Showing how that Christ
Jesus, albeit now shining in glory (like the golden Arc in the Holiest) yet in
the world he should abase himself, (like Brass) coming in the shape of a
Servant, Isai. 53. 2. 2. This Altar was but one, and in one place, and the
Sacrifice to be offered thereon in this one place, Figuring thereby that we
have but one Altar of Redemption, and Salvation, Christ Jesus alone, who only
once, and in one place has offered up a sufficient vnreiterable Sacrifice for
mankind, Heb. 7. 27. 3. It had four Horns on the four corners thereof,
Signifying the spiritual strength of Christ, which should be manifested to the
four corners of the earth, and that with a strong faith flying thither, we
should in all our distresses stay only on him, and tie our carnal affections
to the Altars Horns, by captiuating them to Christ, 2. Cor. 5. 15. 4. It had a
Brazen grate in the midst thereof, whereon the fire was put. Representing so,
the humbled soul of our blessed Savior, which did bear the fire of Gods
wrath for our sins, Isai. 53. 12. 5. It had diverse instruments serving for
the same, Typing, the sundry callings that Christ has in his Church, for the
glory of his Name, and edifying of his Church, 1. Cor. 12. 6. It was to be
cleansed seven days, and sanctified: so it was most holy, and whatsoever
touched it, was holy, Exodus 29. 37. Figuring thereby the perfect sanctifying
of our most holy Altar Christ Jesus: and that whosoever touches him by true
faith, is made holy by him, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 7. Also, the grate or Net-worke
purged the Sacrifice, To show that even so does Christ Jesus purge our
sacrifices offered on him, and makes them acceptable. 8. This Altar was hollow
between the boords. Signifying thereby the emptying, and examination of
Christ. 9. Last, in that it behooued the Sittim wood to be ouerlaid with
Brass, that thereby it might endure the fire. It figured, that so the humane
nature of Christ (tho holy) was unable to endure Gods wrath, as it did: except
underpropped and strengthened by the Deity.

31. The Brazen Lauer, Exodus 30. 18. to 23.
1. THe Brazen Lauer served for the Priests to wash their hands and feet
thereat, before they ministered before the Lord. Typing that inward Baptism by
Christ's blood, wherewith the holy Priesthood of his Chosen must be washed, and
sanctified in action and affection, before their service can be acceptable,
Ephesians. 5. 26. 2. After the Priests had washed themselves clean, and arrayed
themselves with clean linen, then they entered into the Holy place, So, after
that the godly are inwardly washed by the blood of Christ, and have received
the garment of his righteousness unto sanctification, then it is that they
become members of his true Church, 1. Cor. 12. 13. 3. They shall wash
themselves (says the Lord) lest they dye, So must we be purged (as is said)
and sanctified by the Spirit of grace, if we would not incur eternal death
and damnation, Mat. 28. Mar. 16. 15. 4. He that touches the Lauer, it being
anointed with the holy Oil, (as all other things in the Holy, and in the most
Holy place were) shall be holy, (says the same Lord.) Showing how all they,
who by a lively faith touch the Lord Jesus (who is anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows) shall be, in acceptance and reputation, accounted
likewise holy before the Lord, Romans 4.

The Disparitie of all the former.
THese things of the Tabernacle were material and earthly: but that which is
represented by them, is spiritual and heavenly: the one was perishable, the
other endures for ever. For Israel in the flesh, only to abide in Jerusalem
the first was ordained: but for the Israel in the Spirit, even the Church
universal, where-euer pure hands is lifted up: the second is open and
prepared, Psa. 141. 2. the former were under the Law, and Moses, typing things
to come: the latter is under the Gospel and the Messiah, exhibiting the things
themselves.

The burnt-offering of Beasts, Leu. 1. 10, 14. and 6. 9. to 13.
1. THe burnt-offering of beasts, behooued to be of those that are the horned
sort, Signifying thereby the Princely and Priestly Offices of Christ, which
that Beast seeks to counterfeit, Reu. 13. 11. in being horned like the Lamb,
but speaking like the Dragon. 2. They behooued also to be of the tame sort, as
of the Herd or Flocks, and not of wild savage beasts, who by force are brought
to death. Showing thereby that Christ should be meek and mild in life, and
patient in death it self, like a Lamb led to the Shambles, Esaias 53. 3. They
were required in like manner to be of the male kind and young. Shaddowing
thereby the excellency of strength in Jesus Christ, proper to that sex and
age. 4. They must be without blemish, and presented of voluntary will.
Thereby noting, the purity and perfection of Holiness in Christ, who should
willingly lay down his life, and offer up himself, for the salvation of
mankind, Ioh. 19. 11. 5. They were to be presented at the door of the
Tabernacle to be slain, Typing thereby that by the Oblation of Christ, and by
his bloodshed, both our entry is made (as by a door) into the Church here,
and into the heavens hereafter, Heb. 10. 20. 6. They must lay their hands upon
the head of the Beast, who brought it, Signifying hereby the imputation of our
sins upon Christ, for the which he suffered, and that we must lay our hand
by a true faith upon him, if we look for any comfort of his Death and
Passion, Esaias 53. 3. 7. Then the burnt offering was slain, Signifying that so
Christ should d^e, and b^hooued to be crucified, that by his death, life might
come to us, ibid. 8. The blood thereof was sprinkled round about the Altar,
Noting, the all sufficiency of Christ's Death, and plenty of his bloodshed, with
the large-spred preaching thereof universally throughout the whole world
toward all parts, Math. 28. 9. The skin thereof was plucked off, and it cut in
pieces, Hereby showing the grieuousnes of Christ's suffering, and his extreme
dereliction, being stripped, as it were, of all divine or humane help, comfort,
or regard, when he cried, Why have thou forsaken me, Math. 27. 46. 10. The
body, the head, and the fat, and all was laid upon the fire, Showing thereby,
how whole Christ should suffer for us, both in body and soul, Isai. 53. 12.
11. The inwards and legs thereof were to be washed in water, Shaddowing
thereby how. Christ should bring no uncleanness unto his Passion: but he
should be clean both inwardly, and outwardly; in mind, and in walking, Heb. 7.
12. This burnt-offering was called a sweet savor unto the Lord, Which in
Christ's death is sole and only accomplished, whereby Gods wrath is appeased,
and his justice satisfied, Phil. 2. 8. 13. Of the Flocks, it was a Lamb, a
Ram, or a Goat. Signifying that Christ should be meek, the guide or leader
of his flock, and have sin, but only by imputation, Isai. 53. 14. The
burnt-offering of the Flocks shall be killed on the North-side of the Altar,
Showing not only, that al these Oblations were but a dark Starry light (the
Sun not rising in that air: but being opposite unto him in his highest
splendour) but also that Christ should dye at Jerusalem; whereof the Prophet
says, On the Northside is the City of the great King, Dan. 9. 26. 15. The
Priest shall put off his garments, and put on his linen breeches, and take
away the ashes, when the fire has consumed the burnt-offering, Leu. 6. 10.
Noting thereby how that Christ being stripped of his clothes, should suffer in
nakedness, and innocence, and after he had finished the work of our
Redeption on the Cross, should be buried, and then swallow up death in
Immortaluse, Hos. 13. 16. The Ashes behooued to be carried without the Host,
and put in a clean place. Shaddowing thereby how Christ should be buried
without Jerusalem, in a tomb where never man was laid, and how his body should
never see corruption, Heb. 13. 17. The fire which consumed the burnt-offering,
came down from heaven, Typing either that wrath which for our sakes seyzed on
Christ Jesus in the Garden, and on the Cross, which came from the Father, or
that love which moved Christ to suffer for mankind, which was heavenly and
free, Ioh. 15. 13. 18. This fire was to be continually upon the Altar,
Shaddowing the constant unchangeableness of that love of his to his Church,
and recent virtue of his meri^ and death, Heb. 7. 19. This fire was to be fed,
that it went not out, and no other fire was to be used but this in the
Sanctuary, Teaching us how carefully we should entertain the love, and
Spirit of Christ, by sanctimony of life and obedience and that we should try
the spirits, and admit no other sprit, but the Spirit of Christ in his Word, to
rule and teach his Church, 1. Ioh. 4. 20. The skin of the burnt-offering went
to the Priest, Len. 7. 8. Showing thereby not only the maintenance that they
should have who preach the Gospel, as they that served at the Altar, lived of
the Altar, 1. Cor. 9. 13, 14. but also that the righteousness of Jesus must be
apprehended by his Chosen, and holy Priesthood of the godly, by the hand of
true Faith, unto Justification, and Sanctification, Romans 5.

33. The Burnt-offering of Fowls, Leu. 1. 14. to the end of the Chapter.
1. THe burnt-offering of Fowls was of Turtles, or Pigeons, Showing thereby
the simplicity, meeknes, and innocence of Christ, Isa. 53. 7. 2. The neck
thereof shall be pinch't with the nail, that the blood might go out: but not
that the head should be plucked off from the body, Shaddowing how Christ should
dye, and shead his blood, yet thereby his Deity (as the head or principal
part) should not be divided from his humanity: nor yet by his death should he
(who is our Head) be taken from the body of his Church, but should rise
again, and be with them by his Spirit for ever, Ioh. 14. 3. The Maw and
Feathers were to be cast away as unclean, To show thereby that Christ should
bring no uncleanness (as is said before) to his suffering, but should be
offered up spotless to his Father, Isai. 53. 9. 4. The Priest did cleave it
with it wings, but not divide it asunder. Noting thereb^, that albert Christ
dyed. yet he should not thereby be quite extinguished, but should rise again,
live, and ascend up to heaven: as also to the same is to be referred the
signification of this, Not a bone of him shall be broken, Exodus 12. 5. The
blood thereof was strained or pressed out at the side of the Altar, before it
was plucked, and laid upon the Altar to be burned. Shaddowing thereby the
straining or pressing out of Christ's blood in his agony, before he was taken,
and stripped to be crucified, Luke 22. 44.

34. The daily Sacrifice, Exodus 29. 38. to 45.
1. THe daily sacrifice was a Lamb, So our sacrifice, not daily, but once for
all, offered up unto the Father, is the Lamb Christ Jesus, Heb. 7. 2. It was
slain in the morning, and in the evening, To show not only that morning and
evening we should exercise our selves in the worship of God: but also, that it
was not in the latter days alone, that Christ was slain, but was so in the
Lords Decree, lively apprehension of Faith, and virtue of his death, to all
true believers, from the beginning of the world, Ioh. 1. 29. 3. It was to be
offered up with fine Flower, beaten Oil, and Wine. To show that Christ by his
death and oblation becomes not only unto us Redemption, but spiritual food,
gladness, and cheering comfort, yea all in all unto us, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 4. Where
this sacrifice was offered, there the Lord made appointment to speak unto
Israel, and show himself, Exodus 29. 42. To signify, that in Christ and
through his death and bloodshed, the new appointment, or Covenant of his will,
and manifestation of his grace and mercy is established to his Church, Heb. 9.

35. The Sinne-offering.
1. THe blood of the sinne-offering Showing, how the blood of Christ Jesus our
true sinne-offering, behooued t^ (what beast so ever it were) was to be powered
out. be powered out and shed upon the Cross. For without bloudshedding there
was no reconciliation, Heb. 10. 2. The Priest shall dip his finger in the blood
of the Bullock that is a sinne-offering, and sprinkle thereof seven times
before the Lord. Shaddowing the perfection of that expiation, and satisfaction
for sin, which Christ should make, in the virtue, quality, and perpetuity
thereof (the number of seven being the number of perfection.) Heb. 9. 26. 3.
The Priest shall bring in of the blood of the Bullock into the Tabernacle of
the Congregation. Showing thereby, how the merit of Christ's blood should enter
into the Holiest heavens to appease wrath, satisfy Justice, and conciliate
favor, and be a perfect purgation to his elect Church, Heb. 9. 14. 4. Of the
blood, the Priest shall put some also upon the four Horns of the Altar.
Signifying thereby how the preaching of the Gospel, concerning the blood of
Christ, should be published and proclaimed to the four corners of the earth,
Math. 28. 5. And all the rest of the blood shall be powered out at the foot of
the Altar. Figuring hereby, the abundant shedding of the blood of Christ, and
super-aboundant merit thereof, Act. 22. 16. As likewise, that albeit it be so
abundant and sufficient for all, yet it is not efficient to all, but is
improfitably powered out to many, through their own contempt, and incredulous
induration. 6. All the fat upon the inwards was to be burnt, and offered to the
Lord, To show that all the best we have, even our inwards of soul, heart, and
best affections, we should offer unto the Lord, Psalm. 16. 7. Romans 12. 1. As
also, that not only should the body of Christ suffer, but his soul likewise
(like the fat in the inwards, which is the best part) as in his Agony and cry
on the Cross is evident, cited before. 7. The rest of the whole Bullock
(typing so Christ in strength) shall be carried out of the Host, and be burnt
upon the wood in the fire, where the ashes are cast out. Signifying that even
so Christ Jesus should suffer without the gate in the place of dead men's skuls,
and not in the City, Heb. 13. 11, 12. and teaching us thereby likewise to
bear his reproach, going in affection out of this earthly city of the world,
and our body seeking a better, Heb. 13. 13. 8. The Priest shall eat the
sin-offering in the holy place, whose blood was not brought into the Tabernacle
of the Congregation, Showing that Christ Jesus in his Church is not only
reconciliation, but also blessed food for all those that are a holy and Royal
Priesthood through him, Ioh. 6. 9. If any of the blood of the sinne-offering
was dropped upon a garment, it might not be carried out so: but washed in the
Holy place. Signifying thereby, not only that holy things should not be
profaned: but that without the Church also, there is no participation of the
blood of Christ, and so, no salvation, Ge. 5. Mar. 16. 15. Math. 7. 6. 10. The
earthen vessel wherein the sin-offering that was eaten, was sodden, it was
broken: but if it was a Brazen pot, it was scowred and washed, Expressing
either the wonderful pollution of sin, that so hardly can be done away: or,
that those who have received reco^ciliation through Christ, ought not to give
themselves again unto the world, but keep themselves clean and undefiled of
the wickedness thereof, 2. Cor. 5. 11. If a private person sin, (and not the
Priest, the Congregation or a Ruler) such a one shall offer a She-Goat, or a
Female Lamb for a sinne-offering, Yielding thereby a co^for^ to all women,
that for that Sex Christ should dye as well as for men, and by faith through
Christ, that they should be co-heires of his Kingdom, Gal. 3. 28. 12. And if
he were of the poorer sort, he should offer of Turtles or Pigeons (the
signification whereof look in the burnt-offering of Fowls,) or of fine
Flower, without putting Oil or Incense thereto, for it is a sinne-offering.
Whereby was shaddowed, with Christ Jesus our sinne-offering, in the work of
satisfaction we must join nothing else, be it never so plausible in man's
conce^, 1. Cor. 3. 13. And the Priest shall make Atonement, (still this is
repeated.) So ever signifying, that not in^hese sacrifices, but in the
Priesthood was the matter, which typed Christ, his office of reconciliation and
intercession, whereby only we are accepted, Heb. 7.

The Disparitie.
THese Sacrifices were of Beasts: but our Sacrifice was of the Son of God
himself. These could never sanctify the comers thereunto, Heb. 10. 1. but in
them was a yearly remembrance of sins: ver. 3. but our Sacrifice Christ
Jesus, sanctifies all those that by a true Faith draw near unto him, purging
the conscience from dead works, to serve the living Lord. For the blood of
those Sacrifices, such as Bulls and Goats, could not take away sins: but by
the blood of Christ we have full remission of them. These sacrifices were often
offered, in token of their imperfection, and the similitudes of heavenly things
were purified only with their blood: but our Sacrifice was once only offered,
in token of the perfection thereof, and by the same, as by a better sacrifice,
were the heavenly things themselves purified and consecrate, Heb. 9. 23, 25.

36. The meat offering, Leuit. 2. and 6. 14. to 20.
1. IT was called a meat offering, Because it was an acknowledgement that they
did hold their meat or food of God, and had received it of his blessing: and
because part thereof went as meat unto the Priest: as likewise, teaching us,
that Christ Jesus is the true meat, and comfortable nourishment of every hungry
soul, once for all offered to the Father, and daily in his Word and Sacraments
offered and exhibited to us, Ioh. 6. 2. If it be of Flower, it shall be fine
Flower, Leu. 2. 1. Showing thereby, that we should offer our best things to the
Lord, and not the blind and the lame, and noting thereby also, the purity and
perfection of Christ, Heb. 7. 26. 3. Oil shall be powered, and Incense put
thereon, Signifying, that with gladness* and delight our worship of the Lord
should be, either in devotion toward himself, or distribution toward his
Saints: as also typing thereby that soft and loving kindness, and sweet
comfortable mediation of Christ for his Church, Heb. 7. 25. 4. It must be
presented to the Priest, and he shall bring it to the Altar, verse 2.
Shaddowing that it is by Christ, and his oblation, that all our works, and
duties of Gods worship is only acceptable, he interceding for us, ibid. 5. It
was a memorial, that which burnt thereof, for a sweet savor before the Lord,
Prefiguring, that even so, Christ Jesus his death and merit thereof, should be
an eternal memorial before his Father, to be merciful to us, Heb. 9. 24. 6.
The meat offering which was cooked and prepared, was baked, fried, or sodden,
Showing the painful and manifold sufferings of Christ thereby: and how our
worship of God should not be raw, or zeale-lesse, Reu. 3. 16. 7. It must be
without Leven, verse 3. Prefiguring that our worship of GOD must be without
malice of our neighbor: as also the perfect purity of Christ's life and
doctrine, 2. Cor. 5. 9. 8. It must have no honey, which albeit it be sweet in
taste, is bitter in effect, ingendring Choler, which also surfetteth the Eater
of too much thereof, and being burnt, has no good smell, verse 11. Pointing
out thereby unto us the nature of Christ, in whom there is no such sweetness
as ingendreth bitterness or hurt to any faithful eater: Of whom also we can
never receive too much to surfeit, and whose death and oblation smells most
sweetly before God, and to every distressed conscience, He. 7. 9. All
meat-offrings behooued to have Salt, wherewith they were salted, verse 13.
Signifying thereby, that as salt seasoneth, and keeps from corruption: so
Christ, is he, who like sauourie salt seasoneth us and all our works, and
makes them acceptable, and that with the salt of sanctification in Christ we
should season all our worship of the Father, keeping our selves from the
corruption of hypocrisy and wickedness, Mar. 9. 49. 10. The meat offering of
the first fruits shall be ears of come, dried by the fire, and wheat, beaten
out of the Husks, verse 14. Whereby was figured not only, that our worship of
God (as is said) should be in sincerity and zeal, going out of our selves, to
lay hold on Christ: but also, what wrath Christ should suffer, and diverse
pains for our sake, who is the first fruits of all flesh, by whom all the
field of the whole race of mankind, is truly sanctified, and perfectly by his
oblation redeemed, Isa. 53. Heb. 9. 11. The Priest and his sons shall eat of
the meat offering in the Holy place, without Leaven, Showing that so the Lords
Ministers, and their Families are to be maintained, and live by their calling:
as also, that Holy Priesthood of the godly, in the Church, enjoy the benefit of
Christ only, and there must feed upon him by faith in a purged conscience, 1.
Cor. 9. 14. Ioh. 6. 12. Every meat offering of the Priest shall be burnt
altogether, it shall not be eaten, Whereby was shaddowed the perfection of
that oblation made by Christ, wherein no part is left to man in that matter, by
merit, or penal satisfaction, Heb. 7. 25.

37. The Peace Offering, Leu. 3. and 7. 11. to 23.
Wherein this offering was alike with the Rites of the burnt or sinne-offering:
the signification needs not repetition, and wherein they were unlike, is, first,

1. ALl the fat, with the rump hard by the backbone, was offered and burnt
before the Lord, Leu. 3. 9. Shaddowing not only the full obedience of Christ
extensiuely unto death it self: but that we also in our obedience unto the
Father, and offering of our best things unto him should persevere unto the end,
Reu. 2. 10. 2. A part of the Peace-offring went to him that brought it, Whereby
was figured, that Christ should dye for all: and the people as well as the
Priest should have a portion, and a blessing in him, Isai. 45. 22. 3. But they
must neither eat the fat, nor the blood, verse 17. Signifying, that all they
who have a part in Christ, must neither be carnal, nor cruel: but sacrifice
their carnalitie by mortification, and be meek as the Master is, 2. Corin. 5.
1. Ioh. 2. 4. The peace offering shall be offered up with Cakes of Leauened
bread, Leuit. 7. 13. Shaddowing, that as leaven seasoneth the bread, and makes
it to rise and heave up; so Christ Jesus is he, who makes us and all our
actions sauourie bef^ God, lightning our hearts with joy of his Spirit, and
making ou^soules in love, thankfulness and true comfort to heave up to God,
Psalm. 103. 5. Of all the sacrifice, he shall offer but one Cake for a
heaue-offering, Leu. 7. 14. Signifying the simplicity or sincerity of our
thankfulness, and worship of God which should be true and from the heart,
Psalm. 18. 41. 6. The flesh of the offering for thanksgiving must be eaten the
same day, and for a Vow, within two days at the furthest, none might be eaten
the third day, but burnt if ought remained, Leu. 7. 16. Teaching us ever, not
to prolong our duty of thankfulness and sanctification: but in recencie for
benefits daily renewed, to practice the same: stale lingering thanksgiving, which
seldom is sincere, is rejected by God, Deu. 8. 10. 7. If any unclean person
eat of the flesh of the peace offering, he shall be cut off from his people,
ver. 20. Forewarning us of that fearful destruction and punishment that abides
al carnal professors, who will be thought partakers of Christ, and yet lead
an unclean and unconscionable life, Math. 7. 8. The flesh that touches any
unclean thing shall not be eaten: but as unclean it self, shall be burnt,
Leu. 7. 19. Showing us that the holy things of God are not to be profaned, nor
that we should eat with the guiltiness of wickedness and iniquity, 1. Cor.
11. 9. The offerer shall bring the sacrifice with his own hands, verse 30.
Teaching us thereby, that every one is accepted, and lives by his own faith,
Romans 5. 10. It must be heaued up before the Lord, ibid. Noting, the heauing up
of our hearts in due thanksgiving to God, and professing of the benefits
received, Hos. 14. 2. as also the heauing or lifting up of Christ Jesus upon
the Cross for us. 11. It must be shaken to and fro, East, West, North and
South, Shaddowing the public thanksgiving of the faithful in the Congregation
of his Saints, to the Lord, whose presence is euerywhere, as also, the
proclaiming or publishing of the death of Christ in the Gospel, that should
be made known through all the parts of the world, Lu. 24. 47. 12. The right
shoulder and breast was heaued up before the Lord, and then given unto the
Priests for their portion, verse 33. Signifying, not only that in action and
affection ^ur thankfulness should be to GOD: but also that Christ Jesus
heaued up for us, is both breast and shoulder, that is, wisdom and strength to
all his elect Priesthood whose portion he is, 1. Cor. 1. 30.

38. The solemn yearly sacrifice of the Bullock and Goat, Leu. 16.
1. OF the two He Goats it was by Lot that the one was taken, and the other
escaped, Leuit. 16. 8. So was it by the secret Decree of the Lords allotment,
that Christ should suffer, that so we might escape damnation, Psalm. 40. 7. 2.
He on whom the Lot fell, was made a sinne-offering for the people, verse 9. So
Christ whom the Lord decreed in his eternal counsel, and chose to be offered
for mankind, was made a sinne-offering for his Church, Heb. 7. 3. His blood
(as also the blood of the Bullock) was brought within the Veil, and was
sprinkled upon and before the Mercy-Seat, on the East Side which was toward
the people, verse 18. So is the merit of the blood of Jesus brought within the
Holiest heavens before the Throne of grace, to plead for mercy for us, Heb. 9.
23. 4. The Holy place was purged so thereby from the uncleanness of the
children of Israel, verse 20. So is not only the Church purged by the blood of
Jesus, but heaven it self sanctified (as it were) and prepared to be a place
of rest for his own Chosen, Heb. 9. 23. 5. No man shall be in the Tabernacle,
when the Priest goes in to make atonement in the Holy place, while he come out
again, and have made it, and he only shall make the atonement, verse 17.
Signifying thereby, that no creature is partner with him in the work of man's
Redemption, but he alone is the perfect Savior and Mediator of his Church,
Heb. 7. 25. 6. The Altar of Incense shall be sprinkled with the blood of the
Goat. Shaddowing, that through his own blood, he should be consecrate our
intercessor, and through the merit thereof our prayers should be accepted, Heb.
8. 6. 7. The High Priest shall cast off his glorious garments, when he makes
this atonement, verse 4. Presiguring that even so should Christ Jesus the glory
of his divine Majesty, while in the shape of a servant he should finish the
work of man's atonement and Reconciliation, Isa. 53. 8. Once only a year this
atonement was made, verse 34. Showing, that not often, but once for ever,
without repetition, that perfect atonement should be made by Christ Jesus his
own blood, whereby he should enter into the Holiest heavens, to appear for
us before God eternally, Heb. 9. 9. The day of atonement shall be a Sabbath
forever, ver. 31. Shaddowing thereby, that by the atonement, and expiation of
Christ, rest everlasting should be obtained for us, and in his death all other
typical sacrifices should have their end and rest, Heb. 10.

39. The Scapegoat, Leu. 16.
1. THe Scapegoat was so called, because he escaped alive, Representing so
Christ Jesus, who notwithstanding he dyed for our sins according to his
humanity, yet could not be detained or overcome by death: but reporting
victory over death, and the grave, by virtue of his impassible Deity rose
again triumphantly, Mat. 28. 6. 2. He was presented alive, that by him
Reconciliation might be made, Leu. 16. 10. Signifying that all mankind being
dead in sin, he only was presented alive, even fully righteous and holy, to
make reconcil^ation for us, Heb. 7. 26. 3. With both hands upon his head were
confessed the sins and trespasses of the whole people, and he did bear them
all, verse 21. Showing, how even so Christ Jesus should bear all the sins
both great and small of his elect, and satisfy for them, and how that we by a
true faith ought to lay them all upon him, Romans 5. 4. So bearing all their
iniquities, he was sent unto a land of separation (says the original.) verse
22. Figuring, that even so should Christ Jesus bearing the iniquities of his
Chosen, be carried forth of Jerusalem unto death, whereby his soul was
separate from his body a time, Esaias 53. 12. 5. He was led out by a man
appointed, verse 21. Noting thereby, that the sins of man, even of so many as
are appointed to be saved by him, led Christ forth to suffer, ibid. ver. 3. 6.
He who led him forth, must wash his flesh and clothes after his return, and
then come into the Host, verse 26. Signifying thereby, not only, that, that
which made Christ to dye, is the polluter of our souls: but also, that
whosoever has laid hand on Christ by a true faith, must lead a clean and
holy life, if he would be accepted as one of Christ's Church, purging himself
of all uncleanness and iniquity, 2. Cor. 5. 15.

40. The clensing of the Leper, Leuit. 14.
1. THe Bird that was killed for that use, was a Sparrow (one of the clean
sort of Birds) by whose blood the Leper to be cleansed, behooued to be
sprinkled seven times, Leu. 14. 52. Representing so the Lord Jesus, who like a
Sparrow was of small account in the world, clean and innocent, by whose blood
our leprous souls to be cleansed must be perfectly sprinkled, Esaias 52. 14. 2.
This Sparrow was killed over pure water, in an earthen vessel, Leu. 14. 5.
Signifying thereby Christ Jesus, who has suffered for us, his innocence and
cleerenesse in our humane nature, Heb. 7. 26. 3. The live Sparrow being dipped
with Cedarwood, a Skarlet Lace, and Hysope, in the blood of the Sparrow slain,
was let go into the broad field, verse 6. Shaddowing thereby how that man by a
true faith (which has ever with it a fervent love, and a sweet sanctified
life) bathing himself in the blood of Christ, by his death attaines both to
life and freedom, Ioh. 14. 6. 4. As also the dipping of the live Sparrow into
the blood of the dead, and that of necessity (behoouing to be so.) Signified,
that the impassible Deity of Christ can no ways yield comfort to us,
considered alone, concerning the remission of sins, without the humane nature
of Jesus Christ, that suffered for us the death of the Cross, Act. 20. 28. 2.
Cor. 5. 19. Heb. 2. 14. 5. And the letting of the live Sparrow fly in the open
air or broad field, ver. 7. Shaddowed Christ Jesus by death, once consecrate
to be the Author of eternal salvation, that he should ascend on high, and be
seated in the Holiest heavens, Heb. 9. 5, 7, 26. 6. The Leper that is healed,
must wash his clothes, and his flesh, and shave off his hair, after he is
discerned by the Priest to be clean, before that he must enter into the Host,
and there after must remain seven days before he enter into his Tent, verse
8, 9. Showing that a rebellious or scandalous person by excommunication
separate from the Church, becoming penitent, must not be again rashly
received, without evident proofs of his repentance given, both to Pastor and
People, 2. These. 3. 7. The putting of the blood then of his trespasse-offring
upon the right ear, thumb, and toe of him that was Leper, and of the oil upon
all those places and his head, after he had washed himself, Leu. 14. 17.
Signified the perfect expiation of the sins of every penitent in Christ's
blood, and consecration of them to Sanctification and cleanness of life
thereafter, Act. 8. 22. 2. Cor. 2. 6.

41. The sacrifice of the Red Cow, and the sprinkling water, Numb. 19.
1. THe color of this Kow was Red, Numb. 19. 2. Whereby was betokened the
bloudinesse of our Savior in his Passion, Mat. 27. 2. She behooued to be
without blemish, upon whom never yoke came, ibid. Signifying thereby the
perfect holiness of Christ, who never bore the yoke of sinfulness, nor was
subject to the Precepts of man, Isai. 53. 3. She was burned without the Host,
and her blood seven times sprinkled before the Tabernacle of the congregation,
ver. 3. Showing how Christ should suffer without the City, and his blood
should be a perfect purging of his Church, Heb. 13. 11. 4. She shall be all
burned, and Cedar wood, a Skarlet Lace, and Hysop shall be cast into the fire
with her, ver. 6. Shaddowing how that nothing in Christ is unprofitable, and
that through the eternal Spirit, by the sheading of his blood, he should
offer up himself wholly without fault unto God, to purge our conscience from
dead works to serve the living Lord, an vncorrupt life, a fervent love to
mankind, and sauoury obedience in all things to his Father, accompanying him
in his sufferings, Ephesians. 4. 2. 5. The ashes of this sin-offering was laid up
in a clean place, to be made a Sprinkling Water for the Congregation, ver. 9.
Figuring thereby how the merit of the bloodshed and death of Christ, (the true
Sinne-offering) in the Holiest heavens ever recent, should be a perpetual
purging and sprinkling water unto his Church, Heb. 9. 13. 6. That person that
is defiled by the dead, and has not the same sprinkled upon him, shall be cut
off from Israel, verse 13. Whereby was signified, that, that person that is
defiled with the corruption of sin, and has not the blood of Christ
sprinkled upon his soul, shall likewise be cut off from the number and
inheritance of the Saints, Mar. 16. 16. 7. The Priest only shall sprinkle this
water upon the unclean person, and purge him. So it is Christ Jesus only, who
does sprinkle his blood upon penitent souls who come unto him, and from him
only is to be expected true pardon of our sins, Math. 9. 6.

The signification of other things, look in the preceding sacrifices.

The Disparitie.
THis sprinkling water made of the Ashes of the Heifer, sprinkling them that
were unclean, sanctified only as touching the purifying of the flesh: but the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without fault
to God, purges the conscience from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb.
9. 13, 14.

42. IOSHV A.
1. IOSHVA, a Savior. So was Jesus both in name and in deed, Mat. 1. 2. He was
the son of Nun, which is by interpretation, Eternal, and the servant of
Moses, Exodus 24. So was Christ the Son of the truly eternal Father, and may
be said to be Moses servant in a sort; because he followed after Moses in
order, and subjected himself unto Moses Law, in fulfilling what it commanded
or typed, Mat. 5. 17. 3. He overcame the enemies of Israel, and going before
them, brought them into the Land of Canaan, allotting to each one their
portion, Josh. 13. So has Christ overcome the enemies of his Church, and has
ascended up on high into the heavens before us, there to prepare a place for
each one of us, and to bring us thither, Ioh. 14. 2. 4. Moses being dead, he
was made the Captain of Gods people, he leading them to the Land: but Joshua
entering them in the Land, Deuteronomy. 31. 7. So the Law ceasing, and the ceremonies
thereof, he was appointed likewise the captain of his Church: the Law leading
to Christ and heaven through him: but Christ by his death and conquest giving
us entry therein, Heb. 9. 5. He saved Rachabs house that had the Red cord hung
out at the window, and who received his Spies, Josh. 6. So does Christ save the
soul of every penitent sinner that has true faith in his blood, and the
expressiue grace thereof receiving his Word in their hearts, and the Ministers
thereof for his cause, Isai. 49. 6. 6. Under Moses leading, the Cloud went
before: but under Joshua's the same did vanish. So in the time of the Law,
obseur^e and darkness was: but through the light of the Gospel under Christ
the same did depart, Heb. 9. 13. 7. Ieshua was confirmed in his Calling, by the
dividing of the waters in Jordan, at the presence of the Arc standing therein,
Josh. 3. So was Christ in the same Jordan, by the dividing of the heavens, and
presence of the holy Spirit descending and resting upon him, Math. 3. 8. He
led Israel through those waters unto Canaan. So does Christ his Chosen,
through many afflictions, and death it self unto heaven, Psalm. 23. 9. Moses
circumcised not the people: but Joshua, Josh. 5. So the Law sanctifies not,
but grace through Christ, Romans 8. 3. Heb. 7. 19. 10. Manna ceased under Joshua
in Canaan, Josh. 5. 13. So shall our knowledge of Christ by Word and Sacraments
cease in that heavenly glory, Reu. 21. 23. 11. With the sounding of Rams Horns
by the Levites, the Arc compassing Jericho, the high walls thereof fell down,
and the inhabitants thereof were so overcome by him, Josh. 6. So by the sound
of the Word, albeit contemptible in the mouths of his Ministers, Christ
humbles the high machinations of man's heart, and ouercomes his Adversaries, 1.
Io. 2. 14. 12. The earth (as the walls of Jericho) prostrated it self before
him: the waters (as these of Jordan) yielded unto him, and the heavens (as the
Sun and Moon by their standing still) obeyed him, Josh. 6. 3. and 10. So
heaven and earth, and all things that are therein, bow themselves in reverent
obedience unto the Lord Jesus, Phil. 2. 10. 13. He made his Captains tread
upon the necks of the Canaanite Kings after the battle, whom he had overcome,
and closed up before, Josh. 10. So will Jesus do to all his Chosen at their
death: but especially at that day of general Judgment, shall he make all
their enemies, Satan, sin and death, with all other their foes to be their
footstool, whose power even in this life, and day of battle was abated and
confined, Psalm. 110. 2. 14. He accepted the Gibeonites who humbly entreated
peace of him, Josh. 9. So does Christ accept all penitent sinners, who in the
time of grace come wisely unto him, Luke 15. 11.

The Disparitie.
Joshua conquered Canaan, not only for the people of Israel, but also for
himself in part: but Christ Jesus has purchased that heavenly Canaan, only
for our sakes, having had it himself before, by the right of inheritance. He
conquest it not by himself alone, but with the aid of the Tribes of Israel:
but Christ has by himself only purchased that heavenly inheritance: he did
the one without his own bloodshed or death: but Christ has not this other
without both these: he could not quite expel the Canaanite out of the Land:
but Christ Jesus has fully one and all overcome our enemies.

43. Gideon, Judge. 6, 7, and 8. compared.
1. GIdeon, a Destroyer, or Breaker, who is called a Judge, and a Savior of
Israel, by miracle confirmed in his Calling. So is Christ a Destroyer of his
enemies, and a Judge, to judge the cause of his Chosen, and to save and deliver
them, whose Calling was confirmed in like manner by miracles, Math. 3. 1. Cor.
15. 57. 2. Before the battle with his foes, he is comforted by the Angel,
and assured of victory. So was Christ before his conflict with death, and his
other adversaries, comforted in his Agony, Luke 22. 3. He destroyed the Altar
of Baal, and erected another unto the Lord in that same place. So has Christ
the worship of Heathenish Idols, and by the preaching of the Gospel
established in place thereof, the true worship of God. 4. He offered up a
sacrifice, which the Lord, by fire from heaven, declared to be acceptable. So
has Christ offered up himself, and wherein the Lord by his voice and Spirit
from Heaven likewise, has declared himself well-pleased, Mat. 3. 5. They who
bowed down on their knees to drink of the waters, were counted unfit
Soldiers for Gideon. So they who delight in the pleasures of this world, and
give themselves unto them, are as unfit for Christ, Jude 4. 6. Gideon is
expounded by his Adversaries to be a Barley Cake, yet which should ouerturne
and throw down their Tents. So was Christ vilipended by his enemies in the
world, yet should overthrow them at last, and subdue them unto him, Psalm. 110.
7. By the sound of Trumpet, and shining of Lamps out of earthen broken vessels,
he overcame his enemies. So by the trumpet of his Word, and light of the
Gospel, carried through the world by weak instruments, has he confounded his
adversaries, 1. John 2. 14. 8. The swords of his Enemies killed themselves. So
does the malice and practices of the enemies of Christ, against him or his,
turn back into their own bowels, Psalm. 7. 15. 9. He was very meek, and a
man of no contention, as his answer to Ephraim shows. So was Christ meek and
humble, whose voice was not heard in the streets, Isai 42. 2. 10. After his
victory he severely punished the men of Succoth, who denied him bread in his
extremity. So shall Christ punish those at that Great day, who when he was
hungry, fed him not, when he has subdued his enemies, and made them all his
footstool, Psalm. 110. 2. 11. Gideon denied to reign over Israel, but
interceded for them, Iud. 6. 13. So did Christ, being sought by the people to
be a worldly King: but intercedeth in Heaven for his Church for ever, Heb. 8.

The Disparitie.
GIdeon, not without other associates (as is said of Joshua) overcame his
enemies: but Christ alone, without the aid of any creature, overcame his: he
was loath a long time to undergo that Calling to deliver Israel: but Christ
most willingly and readily undertook to deliver mankind: his sons after his
death were slain and destroyed: but so cannot the children and sons of
Christ be destroyed, their life being in his hands, and one hair of whose
head cannot fall to the ground without his good will and pleasure: He left an
Ephod with the people, which thereafter induced them to Idolatry: but Christ
has left his Word with his Church, to preserve them from the same for ever.

44. Iephte, Judge. 11. and 12. compared.
1. IEPHTE, opening. So is Christ the opening and manifestation of his Fathers
will to us, of our hearts also to himself, and of the gates of that heavenly
Paradise to our souls after death, Heb. 9. Io. 14. 2. 2. Iephte was rejected
of his brethren, and yet the Lord appointed none other to save and deliver
them, but him. So Christ, albeit he came to his own, yet they received him
not, but disdainfully refused him, and yet the Lord decreed him to be the only
sauer of his people, and that by no other Name under heaven we should look
for salvation, but by the name of Jesus, Phil. 2. Act. 3. 6. 3. In time of a
great bondage he is stirred up to be a deliverer of Israel. So in the time of
the universal bondage of sin, Satan, and death, which had captiuate and
thralled all men, Christ Jesus came to deliver his Church, Hos. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
4. He punished and subdued after his victory the rebellious Ephraimites. So
shall Christ at the consummation of all things fully subdue all his rebellious
enemies, Psalm. 110.

The Disparitie.
IEphte was begotten in sin and whoredom: but Christ was begotten without
sin in Virginity. Iephte offered his Daughter, which was an unlawful and
unacceptable sacrifice unto the Lord: but Christ offered himself as a holy and
acceptable sacrifice unto his Father.

45. Samson, Judge. 13, 14, 15, and 16.
1. SAmson, or Shimshon, there the second time, because the Angel appeared
twice unto his Parents; or he was so called from Shemesh, which signifies the
Sun. So did the Angel appear once to Mary at the Annunciation, and the
second time to Joseph in a dream, resolving him concerning the mystery of
Christ's conception who is our Sun of righteousness, Math. 1. Luke 1. 2. Israel
was in great thraldom and misery before his birth. So was the Jews, and the
whole world in the thraldom of sin, and ignorance, before Christ's Birth,
Romans 3. 3. Unexpectedly the Angel comes to his Mother, and albeit she was
barren, promises that she should bear a son, who should deliver Israel. So
did the Angel to Mary* and albeit she was a (...)* promises the same
likewise, Luke 1. 30. 4. The Angel confirmed his promise by a sign to Samsons
mother. So did the Angel to Mary, in saying, And behold, thy cousin Elizabeth,
etc. verse 36. 5. Samsons parents were at first terrified and astonished, but
thereafter were comforted. So was Mary and Joseph at first troubled in mind,
but thereafter by Christ's Birth comforted, Luke 1. 29. Mat. 1. 6. Samson grew,
and the Spirit waxed strong upon him: and he was a Nazarite. So did Christ in
body, and in favor with GOD and Man, and the Spirit was not measured unto him,
and he was also a Nazarite, Luke 2. 52. Math. 2. 7. He took not a Wife of his
own people, but a stranger of the Philistims. So has Christ his Church, not
so much of Jews as Gentiles, who were aliens from God, Isai. 55. 5. 8. He
assayed his strength first on a Lion, who assaulted him in the way, when he
was going to seek his wife, out of which a little thereafter he took forth
honey. So did Christ manifest his matchless strength, first on Satan who
tempted him in the Wilderness, when he was entering in his calling after
Baptism, and overcame him. Whereof we that are tempted in like manner, may
gather this comfort, that he that overcame for us, will also overcome in us,
Heb. 4. 15. 9. He put forth his mind to the Philistims in a Riddle. So did
Christ his doctrine to the Pharisees in Parables, Math. 13. 34. 10. He was sold
by Dalilah for money, and under show of love is traitoured to the Philistims. So
was Christ by Judas, for thirty pieces of money, and with a kiss and
salutation was betrayed to the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 25. 11. He
was bound, led away, blinded and at their Feast, brought forth, bound to a
Pillar and mocked: but by that Pillar and pulling down thereof, he destroyed
more of his enemies at his death, then he did in his life. So was Christ
bound, led away, blinded with blood and spettle, and at last, at the Feast of
the Passover, was nailed to the Cross, and mocked at: but by that crucifying
on the Cross, he destroyed his enomies in a greater degree by his death, then
ever they were in the time of his life, Luke 23. 1. Cor. 15. 57. 12. His
Brethren thereafter buried him. So after Christ's death, Joseph of Arimathea,
and others of the godly buried him, ibid. verse 50. 13. The strength of Samson
for a time lurked in the prison. So did the power of Christ's Deity in the
grave. 14. Notwithstanding that he was watched in Gaza, that he might not
escape: yet when al were asleep, he took off the gates of the City, and
carried them away unto the Mountain with him. So notwithstanding that Christ
was watched in the grave, that he might not be taken away: yet when all the
soldiers were asleep, he gloriously arose, ouercomming so the power of death
and the grave, and carrying the triumphant victory thereof with him unto
heaven, Luke 24.

The Disparitie.
SAmson lost his former strength when he was betrayed, and was apprehended,
because he could not be able to resist: but so lost not Christ Jesus his
powerful strength when he was betrayed, which he did manifest, by his Word,
asking, Whom seek you? and saying, I am he: in making the Soldiers that came
to take him, fall backward to the ground; and in that he said to Peter, that he
was able to command millions of Angels to assist him if he listed; so that
willingly he offered himself, and was not violently taken. Also, Samsons Wife
was taken from him, and given to another: but the Spouse of Christ his Church,
can no creature take from him or give out of his hand. The overthrow of his
enemies, was his overthrow likewise, and as they dyed, so he dyed; but so it
was not with Christ, for they only did bruise his heel: but he did break
their head: they assaulted him only violently: but he wounded them mortally,
and overcame.

46. Samuel, 1. Sam. 1. compared.
1. SAmuel, or Shemuel, appointed or heard of God. So was Christ appointed to
be the Savior of mankind, and was heard of the Lord in all things he
desired, Heb. 6. 2. He was in favor with God and Man, 1. Sam. 2. 26. So was
Christ, and did grow in both, Luke 2. 52. 3. He was called of God, and the Lord
manifested his will to him, 1. Sam. 3. 4. So was Christ called of the Father,
and had the clear and full manifestation of his will to declare to mankind,
Ioh. 8. 46. Acts 7. 37. 4. He was borne by expectation of any, of the barren
womb of Hanna, and dedicate to the Lord, 1. Sam. 1. So was Christ of the
blessed womb of a chaste Virgin Mary, and consecrate unto the Father, Math. 1.
5. He was Priest, Prophet, and Ruler in Israel, 1. Sam. 3. 4, 7, 5. So is
Christ all these most truly in his Church, Heb. 9. Ioh. 18. Ioh. 8. 6. He was
most diligent and faithful in Gods work, and of a most innocent life, 1. Sam.
7. 16. 12. 12. So was Christ Jesus in all these incomparable and matchless. 7.
He was vngra^efully used of the people; who rejecting his Government, craved
another to be a King, and to reign over them, 1. Sam. 12. Even so was Christ
of the Jews, (his own People, whom so feign he would have gathered) who
repudiating him likewise, professed that they had no King, but Caesar, John 19.
15.

The Disparitie.
THe sons of Samuel were wicked, and walked not in his ways: but the
children and sons of Jesus Christ are holy and sanctified, and tread in his
footsteps, following his example of life. He delivered the government from him
unto wicked Saul: but so shall Christ Jesus deliver up his Kingdom to none,
nor the Regiment of his Church, till all things be fulfilled, and the number of
his Chosen accomplished.

47. David, 1. Sam. 13, etc.
1. David, beloved, or a man according to Gods own heart, 1. King. 14. 8. So
was Christ that truly well-beloved of God, in whom his soul was well content
and pleased, Mat. 3. 17. 2. He was a Shepherd, 1. Sam. 17. 15. So is Christ
the true Shepherd of our souls, 1. Pet. 2. 3. He pulled the Sheep out of
the Lions mouth, and the Lamb out of the paws of the Bear, 1. Sam. 17. So
has Christ powerfully delivered his own Chosen Flock out of the power of
Satan and damnation, 1. Cor. 15. 57. 4. He was anointed to be King and Ruler
of Israel, 1. Sa. 16. So i^ Christ with the oil of gladness, to be the Ruler
and King of his Church, Ier. 23. 5. 5. Between the time of his anointing, and
installing in the possession of the kingdom, many troubles and persecutions
interuened. So between the anointing of Christ, with the fullness of the
Spirit, and his glorious installing in the Kingdom of the Father, many
afflictions and persecutions, yea death it self for our sakes interuened
likewise, Isai. 53. 6. Though he suffered innocently: yet he was meek and
merciful to all his persecuting enemies, 1. Sam. 24, etc. So, though Christ
suffered causelessely, yet ever he offered grace and mercy, and prayed for his
crucifiers, Isai. 53. 12. 7. He was a Prophet also in Israel, Math. 27. 35. So
was Christ that Great Prophet of his Church, Act. 7. 37. Ioh. 1. 8. He
delivered the Host of Israel from that great Goliath, whom he killed, albeit
being little of account: and with his own sword he cut off his head, 1. Sam.
17. So has Christ delivered his Church, which none else could do, from that
fearful Giant Satan, whom he has overcome, albeit contemptible in the eyes of
the world, and with his own machinations has trod down his head, Genes. 3.
15. 9. The Lord honored him with many and great victories, 1. Sam. 18. 2. Sa.
21. So likewise did he Christ Jesus over that old Serpent, and all our
spiritual enemies, 1. Cor. 15. 10. He brought back the Arc again, 2. Sam.
6. So has Christ Jesus the truth that lay obscured by the false
interpretation of the Scribes and Pharisees, Math. 5. 6. etc. and has reduced
the Church from the spiritual captivity thereof fully, and from the
obscurenesse of types, to the clear beholding of the bright substance,
establishing it in that estate for ever, Heb. 9. 11. Even those that sat at
his Table, rose up against him, Psalm. 41. 9. So one of Christ's Disciples,
Judas, who did dip in the platter with him, betrayed him, Math. 26. 12. Last,
in many Prophetical speeches he typed Christ Jesus, as, Thou will not suffer
thy Holy One to see corruption: and, They parted my garments amongst them, and
on my vesture did cast Lots; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and
such like many, as are quoted and set down orderly in the Treatise following.
All which, in competencie of substantial truth, agreed properly to Christ
Jesus alone.

The Disparitie.
David was a man of blood: but Christ Jesus was meek and peaceable. David for
that cause was not suffered to build the Temple: but Christ Jesus is the sole
and only builder of his holy Church. His life was tainted with sundry blots:
but the life of Christ was altogether spotless.

48. SOLOMON.
1. Solomon, or Shelomoh, peaceable, the son of David, greatly beloved of
God, 2. Sa. 12. 24. So was Christ peaceable, yea, the Prince of Peace it self,
called also the son of David, because he came of him according to the flesh,
and who received that Testimony from Heaven, that he was the Lords
Well-beloued, in whom he is well pleased, Math. 3. 17. 2. He was very wise
and rich, yea, aaboue all others therein, 1. Kin. 3. and 4. So is Christ the
very wisdom and full treasure of the riches of the Father, and matchless in
both, Col. 2. 3. 3. The Queen of Sheba came to see Solomon from afar, and
brought gifts unto him, 1. King. 10. So came the Wise men from the East to see
Jesus, and offered Gold, Myrrh, and Incense to him, Mat. 2. 4. The fame of
Salomons speeches and doings spread afar off. So did the fame of Christ Jesus
his doctrine and miracles, Mat. 5. 31. 5. He built the Temple, and dedicate it
to the Father, 1. King. 6. So has Christ built the Church, and consecrate it
unto his Father, Gal. 3. 7, 8. He desired that all that should pray within the
Temple, might be heard, 1. King. 8. So Christ intercedeth, that all that pray
in his holy Church, as true members thereof, may be likewise heard, Ioh. 17.
7. He appointed the several Ministers and Office-bearers in the Temple. So
has Christ established the several ministerial functions and offices, that
should be in his Church, 1. Cor. 12.

The Disparitie.
Solomon did fall away in the end of his life from that sincerity, especially
in Gods worship, which he had in the beginning, therefore procured a heavy
punishment on his house after him: but Christ Jesus constantly perseuered unto
death, in that perfect obedience that he yielded always to the Father, and
therefore procured great blessings on his Church thereby for ever.

49. Salomons Temple, 1. King. 6. as it was a type of Christ's personal body,
Ioh. 2. 19.
1. IT was a most glorious edifice, 1. King. 5. 6, 7. Chapters. So was the
excellent Fabric of the Immaculate body of Christ. 2. It was stone without,
and gold within. To show the resplendent glory of divine Majesty, lurking
within a humane and humbled body, Esa. 9. 3. It was full of light through the
many windows therein. So our Savior was full of heavenly knowledge in the
will of God, which he revealed to mankind, Ioh. 1. 4. It was carved round
about with Cherubims, Palms and Flowers, To note the serviceable and ready
attendance of the holy Angels upon the person of Christ, the Palme-trees
signifying his triumphant victory over his and our enemies, and the Flowers,
his heavenly, diverse, and flourishing graces, Math. 4. 5. In the seventh year,
and Harvest month it was accomplished. To show not only the perfection of his
person (signified by that perfect number of seven, and ripeness of such a
season as Harnest) but also that in the fullness of time, to accomplish Gods
Decree, he should come and be incarnate, Psalm. 40. 7. 6. The Temple was
solemnly consecrate unto the Lord. So was the person of Christ, by perfect
obedience in life and death, unto his Father, ibid. 7. There was pleasant
Music used in the one, Which signified the heavenly harmony of divine graces
to the comfort of his Chosen, which should be in this other, Col. 2. 3. 8. In
it was the Arc, where the glory of GOD did appear, which glory did fill also
the Temple. So in Christ is the full treasure of all true wisdom, knowledge,
and grace, and in whom the Godhead personally inhabited, and did replenish
likewise this other, Col. 1. 19. 9. It was seated on Mount Moriah, and in the
midst of Jerusalem it did stand. So Christ is on high placed, and in the midst
of his Church is to be found, Psalm. 110. 10. It was not lawful but in the
Temple to offer sacrifice. So is not any spiritual sacrifice of ours, but in
Christ, and through him acceptable, Heb. 7. 11. Many presumed in the one,
saying, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, yet were destroyed. So
many presume in the verbal profession of Christ, that they believe in him, and
are baptized in his Name, yet shall be damned, Math. 7. 22.

The Disparitie.
FOrty and six years the Temple was in building, after that the same had
been destroyed, and cast down by the Babylonians: but within three days the
Temple of the body of Christ Jesus did arise, after that the same had been in
a manner destroyed, and crucified by the Jews and Romans, Ioh. 2. 19, 20, 21.

50. The Temple, as it was a type of Christ's mystical body, the Church. 1.
King. 6.
1. IT was of hewne polished stones and costly. So is the mystical body of
Christ of lively polished stones, even purged and reformed souls, costly and
precious in the Lords sight, Col. 1. 18. Psalm. 45. 10. 2. In the building of it
there was no noise heard. So in the building of the Church, the unity of truth,
and of the Spirit of love is hereby recommended, without iarring either in
opinion, or affection. As also, in that the stones were fitted for the work,
before they were brought to be built therein; it shows, that before we can
think, that we are to be counted as stones ready to be builded in that body
and Temple of the Church, we must be fitted and reformed likewise, Isa. 4. 3.
3. There concurred not only to the building thereof Solomon, and his servants:
but also Hiram of Tyrus, and the Sidonians, that did hew the Timber unto it. To
show that in the building of the Church, Jew and Gentile should concur: not
only the Apostles planting and founding the same, but their successors,
faithful Pastors every where watering it, and building on their ground, 1.
Cor. 13. 4. It was ouerlaid within with fine gold upon the carved Cedars. To
show the beauty of the Church, adorned with diverse gifts, to be inward, pure,
and precious, though unseen, and not perceived of the world, Psalm. 45. 5. In
the Temple were many windows, to make the house light. So in the Church is the
dispensation of many and diverse graces, to make the same bright and glorious,
1. Cor. 12. 4. 6. In the Temple were several degrees of Galleries or Lofts,
each one above another, and larger each then other, To show the several rooms
and places, which God has appointed in his Church: some higher, some lower;
Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors, Pastors and Elders, etc. the same also being
signified, by the diversity of Officers appointed in the Temple, ibid. 7. The
walls were carved round about, with Cherubims, Palme-Trees, and Flowers. To
note the protection of the Church of God, by the ministry of Angels, (tho
outwardly unseen) and the peaceable victorious flourishing under the same,
Heb. 1. 8. In the seventh year, and in the harvest month it was finished. So
in the fullness of time, when the great Harvest shall be, the number of the
Elect being accomplished, then shall the Church be wholly in a triumphant
company consummate, Re. 21. 22. 9. Solomon consecrate the Temple unto the Lord.
So has Christ, (that true Prince of Peace) his Church unto his Father, Ioh.
17. 10. The Music that was used in the one, Did signify the joy of the
faithful in the other, Esai. 4. 2. 11. In it was the Arc of the Testimony.
So in the Church is the Word of God, and covenant of Grace, borne by the
Levites of Christ's true Pastors, in the preaching and publishing of the same.
12. The glory of the Lord filled the Temple. So does the glorious presence of
God fill ever the other, being amongst his Chosen till the end of the world,
Ioh. 14. 13. The Lord promised to hallow this House, and that his eyes and
heart, if his people obeyed him, should be there perpetually. So will the Lord
sanctify his Church, and if we obey him constantly, his eye of mercy, and
heart of compassion will be upon us eternally, 1. Cor. 1. 30. 14. In the Porch
thereof were set two Pillars of Brass, Iachin and Boaz, or stabilitie and
strength, with Lillies and Pomegranates carried upon them. Noting thereby the
stabilitie and strength of Christ's Church through him, who is as a double
Pillar unto the same; or the two Sacraments of the Church, whereby our faith is
strengthened and confirmed unto holiness, and fruitfulness in good works,
Iam. 2.

The Disparitie.
THe stones of the Temple were dead and senseless: but the members of the
Church of God, are sensible and lively stones. They were polished and hewne by
the hand of man, but these are reformed and sanctified by the Spirit of Grace.
The Temple was utterly destroyed and burnt by the enemies of Israel: but the
true Church of God can never be so overthrown: yea, the very gates of hell
shall not prevail against it.

Note that some things here are rather for conueniencie of case compared, then
any typical signification is in them sought, as has been said in the Epistle
hitherto.

Elisha compared.
1 ELisha, the health of God. So is Christ the health and salvation of God
truly to all sick and lost souls, Math. 9. 12. 2. He succeeded Eliah, who
anointed him to be after him, 1. Kin. 19. 16. So Christ succeeded the Baptist
(that second Eliali) who baptized him, to come after him likewise, with the
baptism of the fire and Spirit to baptize, Luke 3. 3. He received the double
of the Spirit of Eliah, 2. Kin. 2. 9. So, Christ got not only the double, but
the full measure of the Spirit which John had, and that without measure, Ioh.
1. 14. 4. He cured Naaman of his Leprosy, he raised the dead, healed the
waters that were poisoned, with few loaves miraculously he fed many, etc. and
did many such miracles, 2. Kin. 5. and 2. and 4. So Christ does cure our
spiritual Leprosy by the bathing of his blood, and tempers the waters of
affliction to us, fed likewise many thousands with few loaves, raised the dead,
and daily raises dead souls by the quickening of his grace, and did far
many and greater miracles and wonders. 5. Elisha had an untrue and covetous
Gehezi that served him, who therefore was fearfully punished, 2. King. 5. So
Christ had a false and covetous Judas, who followed him, who therefore also
fearfully perished, Math. 26. 6. Elisha was called the Chariot and Horsemen of
Israel, 2. King. 13. So Christ is the Chariot whereby we are carried unto
heaven, and the sure defense and safeguard of his Chosen, against all their
enemies, Zech. 14. 12. 7. He divided the waters of Jordan with his Cloak, 2.
King. 2. 14. So has Christ made a safe way through death, by his Cross, Heb.
9. Psalm. 23. 8. They that mocked Elisha, were fearfully devoured, 2. Kin. 2.
23. So shall all those that mock Christ Jesus or his messengers, justly be
destroyed, 2. These. 2. 10. 9. No thing so secret could be hid from Elisha, 2.
King. 6. 8. and 32. So no secret thought of the very heart, can be hid from
Christ, Mat. 9. 4. 10. A dead body being cast into the Sepulcher of Elisha,
touching his bones is raised again, 2. King. 13. 21. So are our dead souls
quickened and raised here by the touch of Christ by faith, and so shall our
dead bodies also be raised from the grave hereafter by the virtue of his
Resurrection, who was laid in the grave likewise, Romans 4 25.

The Disparitie.
ELisha was of a severe Spirit, as appears in the example of the children who
mocked him, and of his servant Gehezi, etc. but Christ was of a most mild and
meek Spirit, as is evidently to be seen in his patient sufferings of all
injuries without revenge; yea, he kissed the mouth of him that betrayed him,
and cured the ear of Malchus who came out against him.

52. Daniel, compared.
1. DAniel, the judgment of God. So is Christ the judgment and wisdom of
the Father, Ioh. 1. 2. He was an excellent opener of secrets, Dan. 2. 5. So
was Christ that matchless manifester of heavenly and hid mysteries, ibid. and
Ioh. 8. 3. He was made one of the three Rulers of the whole Kingdom, Dan. 5.
29. So is Christ, with the Father and Holy Ghost, one of the Rulers of all the
Kingdom of Heaven and of earth, with all things that therein are, Ioh. 3. 35.
4. He was preferred by the King, to be above all the other Rulers in the whole
Realm, Dan. 6. 3. So Christ is by the Father advanced above all powers above
or below, whatsoever, Psalm. 110. 5. He was envied, innocently accused, taken,
condemned, and cast into the Lions den, Dan. 6. So was Christ Jesus likewise
(...) causelessely, accused innocently, taken wrongfully (...) unjustly, and
put to death cruelly. 6. The Lions had no power to devour him: wherefore he
came safely from them again. So neither has death power to destroy Christ,
nor the gr^ue p^er to detai^e him, but glorio^sly he rose again from both,
Psalm. 10. Luke 24. 7. His enemies were cast in, next to his delivery, and were
by the Lions speedily destroyed. So w^e the Ie^es after Christ's Ascension, by
the merciless Romans cruelly devoured, yea, death and the grave by Christ's
Resurrection were swallowed up in victory, Hos^a 13. D^n. 9. 8. He destroyed
Bell, and the Dragon, and overthrew Idolatry, Dan. 13. So has Christ overcome
sin and the Serpent, and by the preach^ng of his Truth, abrogate Heathe^sh
idolatrous worship, Genesis 3. 15.

53. JONAH.
1. Jonah, a Dove in name. So was Christ the same in nature, meek (to wit) and
humble, Esa. 53. 2. He was the Lords Prophet. So was Christ Jesus the same,
Ioh. 8. 3. For the safety of the rest in the Ship, he was cast into the Sea to
drown. So for the safety of mankind, Christ was sent into the world to dye,
Ephesians. 1. 10. 4. He was three days, and three nights in the Whales belly, yet
at last came forth, Jonah 2. 10. So was Christ three days and three nights in
the bowels of the earth, yet at last arose, Mat. 12. 40.

54. I^hoshua, Zech. 3. 3. to 6.
1. IEhoshuah, a Savior, or the salvation of the Lord. So is Jesus the same
both in name, and in effect. 2. He was the Lords High Priest. So is Jesus the
High Priest of GOD unto his chosen Church, Heb 7. 3. He stood up as a Mediator
for his people. So does Christ for ever for his Church, Heb. 8. 4. Satan
resisted him, but altogether in vain, for he was rebuked. So tempted he
Christ, but in vain likewise: for he was overcome, and resisted him in his
function by the Scribes and Pharisees, but prevailed not, Mat. 4. 5. Iehoshua
was clothed at first with filthy garments, but thereafter they were taken
away, and glorious garments were given unto him, signifying the taking away of
his sins, and couerture of him by the righteousness of Jesus Christ. So was
Christ Jesus himself at first clothed with ignominy, the base rags of our
nature, and shape of a servant, wherein be^ did suffer, having also the filthy
garment of our sins put upon him by imputation, but after this his
humiliation, he was brought to exaltation, and clothed not only with perfect
righteousness, but with that glory that he had with the Father, before the
beginning of the world, Psalm. 110. 6. A Diadem was likewise set upon the head
of Iehoshua. So was a Diadem of glory set upon the head of Jesus, to show him
thereby to be not only the High Priest, but Prince of his people, Zech. 149.

55. Zerubbabel, Haggai 1. and 2.
1. ZErubbabel, a stranger in Babel, or alien from confusion. So was Christ a
stranger in this wicked world, his proper seat being the heavens, and an alien
from sin, and eternal confusion, the wages thereof. 2. He is called the
Elect one of God in a special manner, Hag. 2. 24. So is Christ Jesus the same
most truly and properly. 3. The Lord promises to make him as a Signet,
signifying thereby that his dignity and glory should be most excellent. Which
^rely and fully is accomplished in Christ. 4. He was a Prince of his people. So
is Christ the only Prince of his Chose^. 5. He was appointed by God to build
the material temple. So was Christ Jesus to build the spiritual Temple. 6.
That which he built, was as nothing in outward show, in comparison of the first
Temple: but yet it was more glorious inwardly, in respect of the Lords filling
it with his presence, and giving of his peace therein, Hag. 2. 4. 8. and 10. So
the Church which Christ has built, is as nothing in outward glorious show,
being base and contemptible in this world, but (like the Kings daughter) she is
all glorious within, by the spiritual presence of her builder, her Head, and
Husband Jesus, who with his presence gives her also his peace, which the world
can neither give, receive, nor take away from her. 7. All nations, and the
desire of all nations shall be moved to come to this Temple of the Lord, Hag.
2. 8. Fore-prophecying so that accomplishment in the conversion of the
Gentiles, to the clear Faith, and true Church of Jesus.

FINIS.
THE HARMONY OF ALL THE PROPHETS: BREATHING WITH one mouth the mystery of
Christ's coming: and of that Redemption which by his Death he was to
accomplish: To confirm the CHRISTIAN; and convince the JEW.

By W. GVILD, Minister of Gods Word, at King Edward in Scotland.

The command, JOHN 5. 39.

Search the Scriptures: for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
are they that testify ^f me.

LONDON, Printed by G. Purslowe, for I. Budge: and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1619.

TO THE REVEREND AND RIGHT Worshipful, D. YOUNG, Deane of Winchester.
Right Worshipful,
THe Lord, who is the God of order, abhorring confusion, has by degrees of
light, from time to time manifested that hid treasure of his mercy, and our
comfort, fore-shaddowing first by Types, then fore-shewing by Prophecies, and
at last pointing more clearly and particularly at that Lamb of God, by the
Baptist his forerunner. So that each age and manner of Revelation has had
still the cleerer Demonstration of the Messiah, who was approaching: Even as the
earth more and more is illuminate, the nearer the Suns arising upon our
Horizon is at hand: like Noah who first opened the window of the Arc wherein
he was, then removed the covering thereof, and at last stepped forth himself.
This is the Ladder which Jacob saw coming thus down from Heaven, by the
several degrees of cleerer and nearer manifestation; and the Starry
fore-guiding light, leading at last to the place where the Babe was, but there
standing and vanishing without further progress.

So that it is a marvel how that the Veil so long should be upon the eyes of
Israel, or the Kall of induration upon the heart of Judah; but that even when
he came, marking every plain Prophecy, that was foretold of him, and seeing
the fulfilling of the same in his Person, they might have known their King.

Herod conuocates all the Ecclesiastical sort, and asks where he should be
borne; and they answer, At Bethleem: For so it was written, there they saw his
Humility at his first entrance into the world: and why then trusted they not
likewise their own quotation, and embraced their Lord?

Let them peruse in like manner, the rest of these Prophecies that are spoken of
him, (according to the particulars of the Treatise following) and (laying aside
their stiffe-neckednes, of old vpbraided unto them) truly apply, and they
shall beforced to come to that conclusion of Apollos, that it Acts 8. 28.
is evident by Scripture, That Jesus is that Christ, all those things spoken of
the Messiah, agreeing to him alone, and being applyable to no other besides.

The humble abasement of this lowly Lord, coming in the shape of a Servant,
and dying so ignominious a death for mankind, being the cause of this
stumbling of theirs, they expecting a worldly glorious King, and a corporal
Deliverance. Therefore Isaiah, foreseeing their incredulity for this cause,
cries out, Who will Isaiah 53.
believe our report? or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? And holy
Simeon Luke 2. 34.
pronounces him to be appointed for the rising and fall of many in Israel, and
for a sign which should be spoken against; the wise Economie of the Lords
grace being herein manifested, that by the reiection for a time, the fullness
of the Gentiles might be accomplished, all men might taste of grace, and the
ends of the earth might be his Sons possession. psalm. 2.


But would they enter within the Veil, and behold what glory of the Holiest is
under the base outward covering of the Arc, and by a holy consideration dig
within the earth of his humanity, and they should find the glorious Pearl
and treasure of the incomprehensible Deity, manifesting it self in his life,
in matchless miracles, possible only to that nature to perform; so that the
simple people are forced to confess, that none could do such things, except
GOD were with him, discovering it self also in his death by fearful wonders:
so that the Centurion proclaims, Of a surety he was the Son of God: and
after his glorious Resurrection and Ascension, notwithstanding the mightiest
opposition of the world, and Prince thereof, by strait Laws, close
imprisonments, cruel torments, far exilements, and sundry sorts of death; yet
this crucified Jesus, by a few Fishermen, whom he made Fishers of men, subdued
the world in short space to himself, making Emperors to lay down their
crowns at his feet, who was crowned with Thorns, their Scepters to sway to
the advancement of his Kingdom, in whose hand a Reed, for a Scepter, was
sometimes mockingly put; their Empires, Oracles, Idols, and former Heathenish
worship, like Dagon fallen before the Arc, lying overthrown, stricken dumb,
broken in pieces, and (as Sisera before Iael) prostrate at the foot of his
Cross, by ignorance (as the world accounted) subduing learning, by
simplicity, wisdom; by humility, pride; by weakness, power, by meekness,
cruelty; by suffering, obtaining victory; and by shame, attaining to glory, the
most glorious and most mighty Kingdoms which we see, being but small pieces
of their Conquests, and Monuments of their Trophe.

What a death then is this, that has done such things (...) all the living
could not do? What matchless power is this that has wrought such incredible
things by weakness, by contempt, by the folly of preaching? What base means
is this to bring down highest* Powers, Principalities, Thrones and Dominions?
And how comes it to pass, that these conquerors at last glory to dye for him,
who dyed such a cursed, and shameful death, but that they know he lives and
reigns for ever? and thereby they (having lived here by grace in him, and
dyed witnessing for him) should be brought to live and reign in glory
eternally with him?

But our hope (according to the promise) is, that the Veil at last will be
taken from their eyes, and Iapheth and Sem shall be found in one Tent: the Lord
will power wpon the House of David, and upon Zech. 12. 10.
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of compassion, and they
shall look on him whom they have pierced.

These pains, Sir, that I have taken herein, I have dedicate to your Name, as
a testimony of my more then deserved duty and affection to you, which I shall
think my self ever bound to owe, for your manifold courtesies, whereof at
your last being in your own native Country, I had sufficient proof;
especially, not only in that access of LEVI to his Sacred MAJESTY, by your
means, and your vnmerited speeches there-anent: but likewise in that Royal
gracing of the same which thereafter ensued, and of the Author (though
unworthy) thereof. The experience therefore of your modest, humane, and most
gentle inclination, assures me at this time, of your own courteous and kind
acceptance of this harmonicall consent, (in making the Old Testament (as it
were) by the hand to lead in the New; and the Trumpet of the Prophets to sound
the news of the Gospel) without the needing many (if any) words, earnestly to
suit the same. Receive therefore, Sir, from an affectionate heart, and dutiful
hand, this small Pledge of gratitude and remembrance, and what weakness or
defect is therein, let your better ability and learned Judgment cover,
support, and supply the same. Whereunto remitting and recommending it:
Beseeching God to multiply upon you the growth of his grace, and sensible
blessing, and that with our Master Jesus, you may daily grow more and more in
favor both with God and Man.

Your Worships in all sincere and dutiful affection in the Lord, WILLIAM GVILD.

THE HARMONY OF ALL THE PROPHETS.
1. His Forerunner, the BAPTIST.
BEHOLD, I will send my Messenger, Malachy 3. 1.
and he shall prepare the way before me, etc.

A Voice cries Isaiah 40. 3.
in the Wilderness, Prepare you the way of the Lord, make strait in the desert
a path for our God.

Every valley shall be exalted, Verse 4.
and every Mountain shall be made low, and the crooked shall be straight, and
the rough places plain.

And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall Verse 5.
see it together: for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

And thou, Babe, shall be called Zacharias, Luke 1. 76.
the Prophet of the most High: for thou shall go before the face of the Lord,
to prepare his ways,

And to give knowledge of Salvation unto his people, by the Verse 77.
remission of their sins:

Through the tender mercy of Verse 78.
our God, whereby the dayspring from on high has visited us.

To give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Verse 79.
death: and to guide our feet into the way of peace.

Behold, I will send you Eliah Malachy 4. 5.
the Prophet, before the coming of the great and fearful Day of the Lord,

And he shall turn the heart of Verse 6.
the Fathers to the Children, and the heart of the children to their fathers:
lest I come and smite the earth with cursing.

And if ye will receive it, John Math. 11. 14.
is that Elias (says Christ) which was to come.

2. His own coming or Birth.
THere shall come a Star of Balaam, Numb. 24. 1^
Jacob: and a Scepter shall arise of Israel, that shall smite the coasts of
Moab, and destroy the sons of Sheth.

O Zion, that bring good tidings, (...) 41 9.
get thee up into the high Mountains: O Jerusalem, that bring good tidings,
lift up thy voice with strength, lift it up, be not afraid; Say to the Cities
of Judah, Behold your GOD.

Behold, the Lord God will Verse 10.
come with power, and his arm shall rule for him: Behold, his reward is with
him, and his work is before him.

Therefore thus says the Lord Chap. 28. 16.
God; Behold, I will lay in Sion a Stone, a tried Stone, a precious Corner
Stone, a sure foundation, he that believes, shall not make haste.

For unto Us a Child is Borne, and unto Us a Son is Given, Chap. 9. 6.
and the government is upon his shoulder: and he shall call his Name
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, the increase of his government and peace shall have no end.

I will give unto Jerusalem one Chap. 41. 27.
that shall bring good tidings unto it.

And their noble Ruler shall be Ierem. 30. 21.
of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from the midst of them: and I
will cause him to draw near and approach unto me. For who is this that
directs his heart to come unto me (says the Lord?)

In those days, and at that time, Chap. 33. 15.
will I cause the Branch of Righteousness to grow up unto David: and he shall
execute Judgment and Righteousness in the Land.

Behold I will bring forth the Zech. 3. 8.
Branch my Servant.

For lo, the Stone that I have Verse 9.
laid before Iehoshua, upon that one Stone there shall be seven eyes: Behold,
I will cut out the grauing thereof, says the Lord of Hosts: and I will take
away the iniquity of the Land in one day.

In that day there shall be a Chap. 13. (...)
fountain opened to the House of David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
for sin and for uncleanness.

And the Lord whom ye seek, Malac. 3. 1.
shall speedily come to his Temple; even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye
desire: Behold, he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts.

But who may abide the day of Verse 2.
his coming? and who shall endure when he appears? For he is like a purging
fire, and like Fullers Soap.

And he shall sit down to try Verse 3.
and fine the silver: he shall even fine the sons of Leui, and purify them
as gold and silver, that they may bring offerings unto the Lord in
righteousness.

And the Redeemer shall come Isaiah 59. 20.
unto Zion; and unto them that turn from Iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord.

3. The time of his coming, or Birth.
THe Scepter shall not depart Jacob, Genesis 49. 10.
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come: and
the people shall be gathered unto him.

Now assemble thy Garrisons, Mica^ 5. 1.
O Daughter of Garrisons (Jerusalem) he has laid siege against us: they shall
smite the Judge of Israel with a Rod upon the cheek.

And thou Bethleem Ephrathah, Verse 2.
etc. out of thee shall he (then) come forth unto me, that shall be the Ruler
in Israel.

And there shall be a day (it is See Zac^rie 14. 7* 8.
known to the Lord) neither day nor night, but about the evening time it shall
be light: (that is, there shall be a gloomy time of trouble and subjection: in
the end whereof God shall send spiritual comfort to the Jews.)

And in that day shall there waters Verse 8.
of Life go out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the East Sea, and half
of them toward the uttermost Sea, and shall be both in Summer and Winter.

Seventy Weeks (which was Dan. 9. 24.
490. years till Christ's coming) are determined upon thy People, and upon the
holy City, to finish the wickedness, and to seal up the sins, and to
reueile the iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal
up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most Holy.

Know therefore and understand, Vers^ 25.
that from the going forth of the commandment to bring again the people, and
to build Jerusalem, unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and
threescore and two weeks, and the street shall be built again, and the wall in
a troublesome time.

See the Marginall note of the Bible, which explaines this count.

4. The place of his Birth, and of what Tribe he should be of.
AND thou, Bethleem-Ephrathah, Micah 5. (...).
art little to be amongst the thousands of Judah: yet out of thee shall he
come forth unto me, that shall be the Ruler in Israel, whose goings forth
have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.

And he shall stand, and feed in Verse 4.
the strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God,
and they shall dwell still: for now shall he be magnified unto the ends of the
world: And he shall be our peace.

8. He is carried to Egypt after his Birth, that it might be fulfilled,
OVt of Egypt have I called Hos. 11. 1.
my Son.

9. A great slaughter of the Bethleemite children ensues thereafter; whereby
this Prophecy was fulfilled,
IN Rhama was a voice heard, Ier. 31. 15.
mourning and weeping, and great howling; Rachel weeping for her children, and
would not be comforted, because they were not.

10. After his return, he is brought and abides in Nazareth: that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophets, Judges 13. 5. Being typed there, by
Samson. Math. 2. 23.

THat he should be called a Nazarite.

11. He should be God.
OZion, that bring good tidings, Isai. 40. 9.
etc. say to the Cities of Judah, Behold your God.

For unto us a Child is borne, Chap. 9. 6.
and unto us a Son is given, and his Government is upon his shoulder: and he
shall call his Name, Wonderful, Counselor, The mighty God, etc.

Say to them that are fearful, Chap. 35. 4.
Be strong, fear not, behold, your God comes with vengeance; even God with a
recompense, he will come and save you.

Then shall the eyes of the blind Verse 5.
be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be opened.

And in that day shall men say, Chap. 25. 9.
Lo, this is our God; we have waited for him, and he will save us.

12. He should be Man.
THe [Seed] of the Woman Genesis 3. 15.
shall bruise down the head of the Serpent.

In thee, and in [thy Seed] shall Chap. 12. 3. 26. 4. 28. 4.
all the Families of the earth be blessed.

I will raise them up a Prophet Deuteronomy. 18. 18.
from amongst their Brethren [like unto thee] and will put my words in his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command him: and whosoever
will not hearken to my words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require
it of him.

And their noble Ruler shall Ier. 30. 21.
be of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from the midst of them.

He is a Man, full of sorrows, Isaiah 53. 3.
and has experience of infirmities.

13. He should be both, united in one Person.
ANd they shall call his name Isaith 7. 14.
Immanuel: which is by Interpretation, God with us.

14. The Spirit of God should rest upon him: as was visibly seen in his
Baptism.
BEhold, my Servant, I will Isaiah 42. 1.
stay upon him [mine Elect, in whom my soul delighteth] I have put my Spirit
upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles.

And the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: the Spirit Chap. 11. 2.
of wisdom and understanding: the Spirit of counsel and strength: the Spirit
of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord:

And shall make him prudent Verse 3.
in the fear of the Lord: for he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes;
neither reprove by the hearing of his ears.

But with righteousness shall he Verse. 4.
judge the poor, and with equity shall he reprove for the meek of the earth:
and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of
his lips shall he slay the wicked.

And justice shall be the girdle Verse 5.
of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

15. His name should be JESUS CHRIST, or a Savior anointed by God: and to what
end his coming and anointing should be.
ANd thou shall know, that I Isaiah 60. 16. and 45. 21.
the Lord am thy Savior, and they Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob.

I, even I am the Lord, and besides Chap. 43. 11.
me there is no other Savior.

The Spirit of the Lord is upon Chap. 61. 1.
me; therefore has the Lord anointed me: he has sent me to preach good
tidings to the poor, to bind up the brokenhearted, to preach liberty to the
captives, and to them that are bound, the opening of the prison.

To preach the acceptable year Verse 2.
of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn.

To appoint unto them that Verse 3.
mourn in Zion, and to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning; the garment of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness; that they might
be called The trees of righteousness, The planting of the Lord, that he might
be glorified.

I the Lord have called thee in Chap. 42. 6.
righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and I will keep thee, and give thee
for a Covenant of the people, and for a light of the Gentiles.

That thou may open the eyes Verse 7.
of the blind, and bring out the prisoners from the prison: and them that sit
in darkness, out of the prison house.

The Kings of the earth band Psalm. 2. 2.
themselves, and the Princes are assembled together, against the Lord, and
against his Christ.

Thou love righteousness, and Psalm. 45. 7.
hate wickedness: because God, even thy God has anointed thee with the oil
of gladness above thy fellows.

Then the Angel said unto her; Luke 1 30.
Fear not, Mary, for thou have found favor with God. For lo, thou shall
conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son, and shall call his See ^dras 7. 2^. 29.
name Jesus.

16. His Kingly Office, and administration thereof.
HE shall sit upon the Throne Isaiah 9. 7.
of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it: and to stablish it with judgment
and with Justice.
justice, from henceforth, even for ever: The zeal of the Lord of Hosts will
perform this.

With righteousness shall he Chap. 11. 4.
judge the poor, and with equity shall he reprove for the meek of the earth:
and Power.
he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his
lips shall he slay the wicked.

And Justice shall be the girdle Verse 5.
of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins.

The Peace, o^ meekenes.
Wolf also shall dwell Verse 6.
with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the
Lion and the fat Beast together; and a little child shall lead them, etc.

Then shall none hurt nor destroy Verse 9.
in all the Mountain of my Holiness. For Plenty.
the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that
cover the Sea.

Behold, the days come (says Iere^ 23. 5.
the Lord) that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch: and a King shall
reign, and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and justice in the earth.

In his days Judah shall be Grace.
saved, Verse 6.
and Israel shall dwell Tranquillirie and
safely: and this is the name whereby they shall call him; The Lord our
Righteousness.
Righteousness.

He shall be great, and he shall be called, The Son of the most High: Luke 1.
32.
and the Lord shall give unto him the Throne of his father David.

And he shall reign over the Verse 33.
House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom shall be none end.

For, behold, I gave him for a Isaiah 55. 4.
witness (says the Lord) to the people: for a Prince, and a Master unto the
people.

17. His Priestly Office. What sacrifice he should offer; and for whom he
should pray.
YEt the Lord would break Isaiah 53. 10.
him, and make him subject to infirmities.

When he shall make His Obl^tion.
his Soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, and prolong his
days: and the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

Therefore will I give him a Verse 12.
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong,
because he has powered out his soul unto death: and he was counted with the
Transgressors, and bare the sins of many; and His Intercession.
prayed for the trespassers.

18. His Prophetical Office, and Pastor all function, abrogating ignorance,
and restoring light, etc.
He has sent me to preach Isaiah 61. 1.
good tidings unto the poor, to bind up the brokenhearted, to preach
liberty to the captives; and to them that are bound, the opening of the prison.

To preach the acceptable year Verse 2.
of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all that mourn.

Then shall the eyes of the blind Chap. 35. 5.
be lightened, and the ears of the deaf be opened.

And he will destroy in his Chap. 25. 7.
Mountain, the covering, that covers all people: and the veil that is spread
upon all Nations.

Moreover the light of the Chap. 30. 26.
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun; and the light of the Sun shall be
seuen-fold, and like the light of seven days, in the day that the Lord shall
bind up the breach of his people, and heal the stroke of their wound.

The Lord thy God (says Moses Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
to Israel) will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from among ye,
even of thy Brethren, unto him ye shall hearken.

He shall seed his Flock like a Isaiah 40. 11.
Shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall guide them with young.

And I will set up a Shepherd Ezekiel. 34. 23.
over them, and he shall feed them, even my Servant David (meaning Christ, of
whom David was a Figure) Ho^ (...). 5.
he shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd.

Thus says the Lord, In an acceptable Isai^h 49. 8.
time have I heard thee, and in a day of Salvation have I helped thee: and I
will preserve thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, that thou may
raise up the earth, and obtain the inheritance of the desolate heritages.

That thou may say to the prisoners, Verse 9.
Go forth, and to them that are in darkness, Show your selves: they shall
feed in the ways, and their pastures shall be in all the tops of the Hills.

They shall not be hungry, neither shall they be thirsty, neither Verse 10.
shall the heat smite them, nor the Sun: for he that has compassion on them,
shall lead them, even to the springs of waters shall he drive them.

19. He should be the natural Son of God: and therefore not begotten by man,
but conceived of the holy Ghost.
I Will declare the Decree: that is, the Lord has said unto me, Psalm. 2. 7.
Thou art my Son, this day, I have begotten thee.

Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, Verse 12.
and ye perish in the way, when his wrath shall suddenly burn: blessed are all
that trust in him.

Thou beheldest, till a stone was Dan. 2. 34.
cut off the Mountain, without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet.

And whosoever shall fall on Isai. 8. 14. cited Math. 21 44.
this stone, he shall be broken: but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will dash
him in pieces.

For lo, the stone that I have Zech. 3. 9.
laid before Iehoshua: upon that one stone there shall be seven eyes; Behold,
I will cut out the grauing thereof, says the Lord of Hosts.

And the Angel answered, and Luke 1. 35.
said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most
High shall ouershaddow thee. Therefore also that Holy thing which shall be borne
of thee, shall be called the Son See Heb. 10. 5. cited out of Psalm. 40. 7.
of God.

20. His low abasement upon earth.
I Am a Worm: and not a Man: a shame of men, and the contempt Psalm. 22. 6.
of the people.

But he shall grow up before him as a Branch, and as a Root Is^h 53. 2.
out of a dry ground: he has neither form nor beauty: when we shall see him,
there shall be no form that we should desire him.

He is despised and rejected of Verse 3.
men, he is a man full of sorrows, and has experience of infirmities, we hid
as it were our faces from him: he was despised, and we esteemed him not.

21. His perfect obedience unto the Father.
THe Lord God has opened Isaiah 50. 5.
my ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned I back.

Then said I, Lo, I come: for Psalm. 40. 7.
in the Roll of the Book it is written of me.

I desired to do thy good will, Verse 8.
O my God: yea thy Law is within my heart.

I have declared thy righteousness in the great Congregation: Verse 9.
Lo, I will not refrain my lips, O Lord, thou know, etc.

Because I kept the ways of the Psalm. 18. 21.
Lord, and did not wickedly against my God.

For all his laws were before me: and I did not cast away his Vers^ 22.
commandments.

I was upright also with him: Verse 23.
and have kept me from wickedness.

Therefore the Lord rewarded Verse 24.
me according to my righteousness, and according to the pureness of my hands
in his sight.

Thou love righteousness, and Psalm. 45. 7.
hate wickedness: because God, even thy GOD, has anointed thee with the
oil of gladness above thy fellows.

22. His meekness and mercy toward man.
A Bruised Reed he shall not Isaiah 42. 3.
break, and the smoking Flax shall he no^ quench: he shall bring forth
judgment in truth.

23. His humble behavior, and riding to Jerusalem on an Asse-Colt, Math. 21.
He shall not cry, nor lift up, Isaiah 42 2.
nor cause his voice to be heard in the street.

Rejoice greatly, O Daughter Ze^. 9. 9.
Zion: Shout for joy, O Daughter Jerusalem: Behold, thy King comes unto thee:
he is just, and saved himself: poor, and riding upon an Ass, and upon a
Colt, the Foale of an Ass.

24. His zealous purging of the Temple.
FOr the zeal of thine House Psalm. 69. 9.
has eaten me: and the rebukes of them, that rebuked thee, are fallen upon me.

25. The children cry in the Temple, Hosanna, to the Son of David, as it is
written.
BY the mouths of Babes and sucklings, thou have made perfect P^l 8. 2.
thy praise.

26. The time of his suffering.
ANd after threescore and two (...). 9. 26.
weeks, (which is 439. years after the building of the Temple, at the
commandment of Darius) shall Messiah be slain, and shall have nothing, etc.

And he shall confirm the Covenant (...) 27.
with many for one week: (till that eternal Sabbath) and in the midst of
the weeks (that is, after three years preaching, or thereabout,) he shall
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease, (Christ accomplishing and
abrogating the same by his Death and 2. ^sdr. 7. 28.
Passion) etc.

27. His betrayer, Judas a Disciple.
YEa my familiar friend, whom Psalm. 41. 9.
I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lifted up the heel against me.

Surely mine enemy did not defame Psalm. 55. 12.
me, for I could have borne it; neither did mine Adversary exalt himself
against me, for I would have hid my self from him.

But it was thou, O man, even Verse 13.
my companion, my guide, and my familiar,

Which delighted in consulting Vers^ 14.
together, and went into the House of God as companions.

And have rewarded me evil Psalm. 109. 5.
for good: and hatred for my friendship.

Set thou the wicked therefore Verse 6.
over him: and let the Adversary stand at his right hand: When he Verse 7.
shall be judged, let him be condemned, and let his prayer be turned into
sin.

Let his days be few: and let Verse 8.
another take his charge.

28. His exercise in the Garden, before he was betrayed, and what he suffered
there.
FOr my friendship, they were Psalm. 109. 4.
my Adversaries: but I gave my self to Prayer.

From above he sent fire into Lament. 1. 13.
my bones.

Mine eyes do fail with tears: Ch^p. 2. 11.
my bowels swell: my Liver is powered upon the earth, etc.

Behold, O Lord, how I am troubled: my bowels swell, my heart is turned within
me, for I am full of heaviness.

I am like water powered out, and Psalm. 22. 14.
all my bones are out of joint: my heart is like Wax, it is molten in the
midst of my bowels.

29. The price for which he was sold, and how it was bestowed.
SO they weighed for my wages Z^h. 11. 12.
(or price) thirty pieces of silver. And the Lord said unto me, Verse 13.
Cast it unto the Potter: a goodly price, that I was valued at of them. And I
took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the Potter in the House of
the Lord.

30. The scattering of his Disciples when he was betrayed, and taken, Math. 26.
ARise, O Sword, upon my Zech. 13. 7.
Shepherd, and upon the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of Hosts: Smite
the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall be scattered.

31. His preceding sufferings, before his crucifying, in Sco^rging, Buffeting,
Spetting, etc.
I Gave my back unto the smiters, Isaiah 50. 6.
and my cheeks to the nippers: I hid not my face from shame and spetting.

As many were astonished at thee Chap. 52. 14.
(his visage was so deformed of men, and his form of the sons of men) so
shall he sprinkle many Nations.

32. How his garments should be parted.
THey parted my garments amongst Psalm. 22. 18.
them, and did cast Lots upon my Vesture.

33. How he should be nailed on a Cross.
THey pierced my hands and Psalm. 22. 16.
my feet.

And in that he was to redeem Gal. 3. 13.
us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us: it behooued so to be,
as it is written,

Cursed is every one that hangs Deuteronomy. 21. 23.
on a Tree.

34. That he should be crucified between Malefactors.
ANd he was counted with Isaiah 53. 12.
the Transgressors.

35. How he should be mocked and taunted, both in words and gesture.
ALl they that see me, have me Psalm. 22. 7.
in derision: they make a mow, and nod the head, saying,

He trusted in the Lord, let him Verse 8.
deliver him: let him save him, seeing he loves him.

I became also a rebuke unto Psalm. 109. 25.
them: they that looked upon me, shaked their heads.

I was a derision to all my people, Lam. 3. 14.
and their song all the day.

36. What drink he should get upon the Cross.
FOr they gave me Gall in my Psalm. 69. 21.
meat, and in my thirst they gave me Vinegar to drink.

37. How he should be forsaken of all.
REbuke has broken my heart, Psalm. 69. 20.
and I am full of heaviness: and I looked for some to have pity on me, but
there was none: and for comforters, but I found none.

For these things I weep, mine Lam. 1. 16.
eye, even mine eye casts out water: because the Comforter that should refresh
my soul is far from me: and my children are desolate, because the enemy
has prevailed.

38. The last words that he should use.
COmplaining. My God, my Psalm. 22. 1.
God, why have thou forsaken me?

Interceding. And he prayed for Isaiah 53. 12.
the trespassers.

Recommending. Into thy hand, Psalm. 31. 5.
O Lord, I recommend my Spirit.

39. His patience that he should have in all his sufferings.
HE was oppressed, and he Isaiah 53. 7.
was afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth: He is brought as a Sheep to
the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her shearer is dumb, so he opened not
his mouth.

Thus am I, as a man that hears Psalm. 38. 13, 14.
not: and in whose mouth are no reproves.

For on thee, O Lord, do I wait: thou will hear me, my Verse 15.
Lord, my God.

40. For whom he should suffer all these things, and his own innocence
therein.
But he was wounded for our Isaiah 53. 5.
transgressions, he was broken for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

All we like sheep have gone Verse 6.
astray: we have turned every one to his own way, and the Lord has laid upon
him the iniquity of us all.

And he made his grave with Verse 9.
the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no
wickedness, neither was any deceit in his mouth.

41. His legs were not broken, as the others were that were crucified with
him, as was foretold.
NOt a Bone of him shall be broken. Exodus 12. 46.


42. His side was pierced with a Spear, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
ANd I will power upon the Zec. 12. 10.
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
of compassion, and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced.

43. His Burial.
ANd he made his grave with Isaiah 53. 9.
the wicked, and with the rich in his death.

44. His Resurrection.
Wherefore mine heart is Psalm. 16. 9.
glad, and my tongue rejoices: my flesh also does rest in hope.

For thou will not leave my Verse 10.
soul in the grave; neither vvilt thou suffer thy Holy One to see corruption.

Thou will show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness Verse 11.
of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.

45. His victory over Satan, Death, the Grave, and all our enemies.
THe [Seed] of the Woman Genesis 3. 15.
shall bruise down the head of the Serpent.

And he will destroy in his Isaiah 25. 7.
Mountain, the covering, that covers all people: and the veil that is spread
upon all Nations.

He will destroy death for ever, Verse 8.
and the Lord God will wipe away the tears from all faces, and the rebuke of
his people will he take away, out of all the earth: For the Lord has spoken
it.

And in that day shall men say, Uerse 9.
Lo, this is our God, we have waited upon him, and he will save us: This is
the Lord: we have waited for him, we will rejoice, and be joyful in his
salvation.

I will redeem them from the Hos. 13. 14.
power of the grave: I will deliver them from death: O death, I will be thy
death: O grave, I will be thy destruction: repentance is hid up from my eyes.

46. His Ascension, or exaltation, and sitting at the right hand of the Father.
THou art gone up on high, Psalm. 68. 18.
thou have led captivity captive, and received gifts for men: yea even the
rebellious have thou led, that the Lord God might dwell there.

The Stone which the builders Psalm. 118. 22.
refused, is made the Head of the corner.

This was the Lords doing, and Verse^ 23.
it is marvelous in our eyes.

The Lord said to my Lord, Psalm. 110. 1.
Sit at my right hand, until that I make thine enemies thy footstool.

47. The destruction of Jerusalem, that should shortly ensue after the death of
the Messiah and his ascension, by Titus, the son of Vespasian.
ANd after, the Messiah shall be slain, the people of the Dan. 9 26.
Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the Sanctuary, and the end
thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the battle it shall be
destroyed by desolations.

And for the ouerspreading of Verse (...).
the abominations, he shall make it desolate, even until the consummation
determined shall be powered upon the desolate.

48. Whereby? How? And who are saved by him?
ANd with his stripes we are Isaiah 53. 5.
healed.

And, as many were astonished at Chap. 52. 14.
thee (his visage was so deformed of men, and his form of the sons of men)
so shall he sprinkle many Nations.

Thou also shall be saved through Zech. 9. 11.
the blood of the Covenant.

By the knowledge of himself Isaiah 53. 11.
shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities.

Look unto me, and ye shall be Chap. 45. 22.
saved, all the ends of the earth shall be saved: for I am God, and there is no
other.

And the Redeemer shall come Chap. 59. 20.
unto Zion, and unto them that turn from iniquity in Jacob, says the Lord.

49. The Calling of the Gentiles, and largeness of his Dominion thereby, (with
the perpetuity thereof) according to Noah's wish, Genesis 9 27.
and the Promise made to Abraham. Genesis 12. 3.

Ask of me, and I shall give Psalm. 2. 8.
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy
possession.

His Dominion also shall be Psalm. 72. 8.
from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the Land.

They that dwell in the Wilderness, Verse 9.
shall kneel before him: and his enemies shall lick the dust, etc.

Yea, all Kings shall worship him: Verse 11.
and all Nations shall serve him.

I will give thee for a Covenant Isai. 42. 6.
of the people, and for a light of the Gentiles.

And in that day the Root of Ishai, Chap. 11. 10.
which shall stand up as a sign unto the people: the Nations shall seek unto
it, and his rest shall be glorious.

I will also give thee for a light Chap. 49. 6.
to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation, to the end of the world.

Thus says the Lord God, Behold, Verse 22.
I will lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the people:
and they shall bring thy sons in their arms: and thy daughters shall be
carried upon their shoulders.

And Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy Verse 23.
nurses: and they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, etc.

Therefore thy gates shall be Chap. 60. 11.
open continually, neither day nor night shall they be shut, that men may bring
unto thee the riches of the Gentiles, and that their Kings may be brought.

Behold, thou shall call a Nation Chap. 55. 5.
that thou know not, and a Nation that knew not thee, shall run unto thee,
because of the Lord thy God, and the Holy One of Israel, for he has glorified
thee.

I have been sought of them that asked not: I was found of Chap. 65. 1.
them that sought me not: I said, Behold me, behold me, unto a Nation that
called not upon my Name.

And the Kingdom, and the Dan. 7. 27.
dominion of the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be
given to the holy people of the most High, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all Powers shall serve and obey him.

And in the place where it was Hosea 1. 10.
said unto them, Ye are not my people, it shall be said unto them, Ye are the
sons of the living God.

But in the last days it shall Micah 4. 1.
come to pass, that the mountain of the House of the Lord shall be See Mal.
1. 10.
prepared in the top of the Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the
Hills, and people shall flow unto it:

Yea many Nations shall come, Verse 2.
and say; Come, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the
house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths: for the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the Word of the Lord
from Jerusalem, etc.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 8. 20.
that there shall yet come people, and the inhabitants of great Cities.

And they that dwell in one City, Verse 21.
shall go to another, saying, Up, let us go and pray before the Lord, and
seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go also.

Yea great People and mighty Verse 22. Chap. 9. 10.
Nations shall come to seek the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem, and to pray before
the Lord, etc.

And the Lord shall be King over Chap. 14. 9.
all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his Name shall be one.

And in these days of these Dan. 2. 44.
Kings, shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed: and this Kingdom shall not be given to another people, but it shall
break and destroy all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

Thy Throne, O God, is for ever Psalm 45. 6.
and ever: the Scepter of thy Kingdom is a scepter of righteousness.

50. The conversion of the Jews, and what shall precede the same.
FOr the children of Israel shall Hosea 3. 4.
remain many days without a King, and without a Prince, and without an
offering, and without an (Meaning an Oracle, delivered between the Cherubims.)
Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim.

Afterward shall the children of Israel convert, and seek the Lord their God,
and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the latter
days.

In those days, and at that time, Ierem. 50. 4.
says the Lord, the children of Israel shall come, they, and the children of
Judah together, going and weeping shall they go, and seek the Lord their God.

They shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward, Verse. 5.
saying, Come, and let us cleave to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that
shall not be forgotten.

Behold, I will bring them from Chap. 31. 8.
the North country, and gather them from the coasts of the world, with the
blind and the lame amongst them, with the Woman with child, and her that is
delivered also, a great company shall return hither.

They shall come weeping, and Verse (...).
with mercy will I bring them again: I will lead them by the Rivers of water
in a straight way wherein they shall not stumble: for I am a Father to Israel,
and Ephraim is my firstborn.

And I will power upon the house Zech. 12. 10.
of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of
compassion; and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they
shall lament for him, as one mourns for his only son, and be sorry for him,
as one is sorry for his firstborn.

In that day shall be a great mourning Verse 11.
in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the Valley of Megiddon.

Then shall the children of Judah, Hos. 1. 11.
and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoint themselves one
Head, and they shall come up out of the Land: for great is the day of Israel.

At the same day (says the Lord) Micah 4. 6, 7.
will I gather her that halteth, and I will gather her that is cast out, and
her that I have afflicted, etc.

51. The free and plentiful offer of grace to both Jew and Gentile.
IN that day there shall be a fountain Zech. 13. 1.
opened to the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin,
and for uncleanness.

And in that day, shall there waters Chap. 14. 8.
of Life go out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the East Sea, and half
of them toward the uttermost Sea: and shall be both in Summer and Winter.

Ho, every one that thirsts, Isaiah 55. 1.
come ye to the waters, and ye that have no silver: come, buy and eat, come, I
say, buy Wine and Milk without silver, and without money.

Incline your ears, and come Verse 3.
unto me: hear, and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.

52. The happy estate of the Church under Christ Jesus in the latter time.
But in the last days it shall come Micah. 4. 1.
to pass, that the Mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the
top of the Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the Hills, and people
shall flow unto it.

Yea, many Nations shall come, and say; Come, and let us go up Verse 2.
to the Mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will
teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for the Law shall go forth
of Zion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke mighty Nations Verse 3.
afar off, and they shall break their swords into Mattocks, and their Spears
into Sithes: Nation shall not lift up a sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn to fight any more.

But they shall sit every man under Verse 4.
his Vine, and under his Figgetree, and none shall make them afraid: for the
mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

At the same day (says the Lord) Verse 6.
will I gather her that halteth, and I will gather her that is cast out, and
her that I have afflicted.

And I will make her that halted Verse (...).
a remnant; and her that was cast far off, a mighty Nation; and the Lord
shall reign over them in Mount Zion, from henceforth, even for ever.

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, Isaiah 65. 19.
and joy in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her,
nor the voice of crying.

There shall be no more there a Verse 20.
child of years, nor an old man that has not filled his days; for he that
shall be an hundredth years old, shall^dye as a young man: but the sinner being
an hundredth years old, shall be accursed.

And they shall build houses, and Verse 21.
inhabit them, and plant Vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.

They shall not labor in vain, Verse 25.
nor bring forth in fear: for they are the Seed of the blessed of the Lord,
and their buds with them.

Yea before they call, I will answer; Verse 24.
and whiles they speak, I will hear.

The Wolf and the Lamb shall Verse 25.
feed together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Bullock: and to the
Serpent dust shall be his meat. They shall no more hurt nor destroy in all my
holy Mountain.

Look upon Zion, the City of Chap. 33. 20.
our solemn Feasts: thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a
Tabernacle that cannot be removed, and the stakes thereof can never be taken
away, neither shall any of the cords thereof be broken.

For there the mighty Lord will Verse 21.
be unto us, as a place of Floods and broad Rivers: whereby shall pass no
Ship with Oars, neither shall a great Ship pass thereby.

For the Lord is our judge, the Verse 22.
Lord is our Lawgiuer, the Lord is our King, he will save us.

Behold, a King shall reign in Chap. 32. 1.
Justice, and the Princes shall rule in Judgment.

And that man shall be as a hiding place from the wind, and as Verse 2.
a refuge for the tempest: as Rivers of water in a dry place, and as the
shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land.

The eyes of the seeing shall not Verse 3.
be shut; and the ears of them that hear, shall hearken.

And the heart of the foolish shall Verse 4.
understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stutters shall be ready to speak
distinctly.

A niggard shall be no more Verse 5.
called liberal, nor the churl rich.

And judgment shall dwell in Verse 16,
the Desert, and justice shall remain in the fruitful field.

And the work of justice shall be peace, even the work of justice Verse 17.
and quietness, and assurance for ever.

And my people shall dwell in the tabernacle of peace, and in sure Verse 18.
dwellings, and in safe resting places, etc.

He shall come down like the rain upon the mowne grass: and Psalm. 72. 6.
as the showers that water the earth.

In his days shall the righteous flourish: and abundance of peace Verse 7.
shall be so long as the Moon endures.

His dominion also shall be from Verse 8.
Sea to Sea, and from the River, to the ends of the Land.

Yea, all Kings shall worship him: Verse 11.
and all Nations shall serve him.

He shall be merciful to the Verse 13.
poor and needy, and shall preserve the souls of the poor.

He shall redeem their souls Verse 14.
from deceit and violence: and dear shall their blood be in his sight.

His name shall be for ever: his Verse 17.
name shall endure as long as the Sun: all Nations shall bless him, and be
blessed in him.

53. His second coming to Judgment, and the Resurrection of all flesh to
appear before him.
FOr I am sure that my Redeemer Job 19. 25.
lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth:

And though after my skin, Verse 26.
worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh.

Whom I my self shall see, and Verse 27.
mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins be consumed
within me.

Our God shall come, and not keep silence: a fire shall devour Psalm. 50. 3.
before him, and a mighty tempest shall be moved round about him.

He shall call the heaven above, Verse 4.
and the earth, to judge his people.

Gather my Saints together unto Verse 5.
me: those that make a Covenant with me, with sacrifice.

And the heavens shall declare his righteousness; for God is Verse 6.
Judge himself. Selah.

And at that time shall Michael stand up, the great Prince, which Dan. 12. 1.
stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of
trouble, such as never was since there began to be a Nation, unto that same
time: and at that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be
found written in the Book.

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake; Verse
(...).
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt.

And they that be wise, shall Verse 3.
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, shall shine as the Sea 2. Esdr. 7. 31. and 14. 35.
Stars for ever and ever.

Amen.
The Thanksgiving of a Christian Soul for the performance of all these
merciful predictions, and the full accomplishing of that great and glorious
work of our Redemption.
ISAI. 61. 10. and 63. 9. I Will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and my soul
shall be joyful in my God: For he has clothed me with the garments of
Salvation, and covered me with the Robe of Righteousness; he has decked me
like a Bridegroom, and as a Bride tireth her self with her Jewels.

In all our troubles he was troubled, and the Angel of his presence has saved
us: in his love and in his mercy he has redeemed us, and he bears and
carries us always continually.



PSALM. 72. 19. BLessed therefore be his glorious Name for ever, and let all
the earth be filled with his glory. So be it, even, So be it.

FINIS.

