ARMANDVS IOANNES DV PLESIS.
Cardinalis de Richelieu
Sic oculis, sic Ille manu* sic ore decorus:
Pallada, in hoc Martem Mercuriumque Vides.
P. G. De Vauchelles.



THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC. Translated into English, according to the
last Edition.

By W. T. Esquire.

Lege, and Collige.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Richard Clotterbuck, and are to be sold
at his shop, at the Ball in Little-Brittaine. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM Lord CRAVEN, Baron of Hamsted-Marshall, etc.
My LORD,
NOt to know your Lordship, is an ignorance next Barbarisine, but to be known
unto you, is an honor my ambition has always aimed at, but which my want of
merit, or evil fortune, never yet attained. In making this tender of my truest
service, I offer you the Votes of all (who not poisoned by that Viper Envy)
justly extol courage in youth, not forced to action, but by the only spur of
glory. The universal world (among the wonders of our age) numbers you: and our
world having the happiness to boast her self your mother, cherishes you, as
a man she has long time labored to produce. This Present is but a
Translation; which yet may (happily) as well for the general benefit, as
particular choice, be equal to an original, you can best judge: I have
therefore in part, vindicated my self from those who may accuseme of not
knowledge, or negligence. I submit all to your censure; and with this small
testimony of my devotion to true Nobility, do here sue to have these first
fruits of my labors, placed under the protection of so Honorable a Patron;
whose virtues, as they are worthy to be admired by all, so shall they,
together with this so noble a favor, be ever duly acknowledged by

My Lord, Your humblest servant,William Tirwhyt.

To the Lord CARDINAL of Richelieu.
MY LORD,
I Here present you Mounsieur Balzac's Letters, which may well be termed new
ones, even after the eighth Edition; for though they have long since been in
possession of public favor, yet may I justly say, this is the first time
their Author has avouched them. The aduantagious judgment you have delivered
of him, and the ardor wherewith all France has followed your approbation, well
deserves his best endeauours toward the perfectionating so excellent things: I
have been solicitous to draw him to this labor, to the end the world might
know, that if I be not worthy the share I have in his respects, yet that I
have at least been wise enough to make right use of my good fortune, and to
cause it to become serviceable to the glory of my Country. But truly, were
he master of his body, or did his maladies afford him liberty of spirit, he
would not suffer any but himself to speak in this cause; and his Pen
performing no slight acts, would have consecrated his own labors, and the
wonders they have produced. But since evils have no prefixed time of durance,
and in that all the good interims which hereafter may befall him, are wholly to
be employed in his Book, The Prince; I esteemed it to small purpose to attend
his health in this business, and that it was now no longer any time to defer
the purging of these curious Letters, from such blemishes as ill impressions
had left* upon them. They shall therefore now appear in the parity wherein
they were conceived, and with all their natural ornaments: Besides, I have
added diverse letters of his, not as yet come to light, which may serve as a
subject of greater satisfaction to all men, and be as a recompense of the
honor wherewith he has collected the former. And truly (my Lord) had it been
possible to place in the Frontispiece of this Book, a more illustrious name
then yours, or should Mounsieur de Balzac's incsination* and mine have been
far from any such intention, yet would not the order of things, or the law of
decency have permitted any other reflection, then what I now make: I speak not
at this present, of that dazeling greatness whereunto you are elevated, nor of
that so rare and necessary virtue, which rightly to recognize, the greatest
King on earth has esteemed himself not to be over able. I will only say, I
had reason to submit an eloquence produced in the shade, and formed in
solitariness, to this other eloquence quickened both with voice and action,
causing you to reign in soueraignety at all assemblies. Certainly (my Lord)
you are more powerful by this incomparable quality, then by the authority
wherein the King has placed you: The only accent of your voice has a hidden
property, to charm all such as hearken unto you; none can be possessed with
any so wilful passions, who will not be appeased by the reasons you propound;
and after you have spoken, you will at all times remain master of that part of
man, no way subject to the worlds order, and which has not any dependency upon
lawful power, or tyrannical usurpation. This is a truth (my Lord) as well
known as your name, and which you so solidly confirmed at the last assembly of
the Notables; as that in the great diversity of humors and judgments, whereof
it was composed, there was peradventure this only point well resolved on, That
you are the most eloquent man living. This being true, I can no way doubt, but
the perusal of this Book I offer unto you, will extraordinarily content you,
and that you will be well pleased to retire thither, sometimes to recreate
your spirits after agitation, and to suspend those great thoughts, who have for
their object the good of all Europe. It is a Book (my Lord) wherein you shall
find no common thing but the Title; (where entertaining some particular person)
Mounsieur de Balzac reads Lessons to all men; and where amidst the beauty of
Complements and dexterity of Ieasting, he often teaches of the most sublime
points of Philosophy: I mean not that wrangling part thereof which rejects
necessary verities, to seek after unprofitable ones, which cannot exercise the
under standing without provoking passions, nor speak of moderation without
distemper, and putting the soul into disorder: But of that, whereby Pericles
heretofore made himself master of Athens, and wherewith Epaminondas raised
himself to the prime place of Greece: which tempereth the manners of
particulars, regulateth the obligation of Princes, and necessarily brings
with it the felicity of all States where they command. This book will make it
apparent even to your enemies, that your life has been at all times equally
admirable, though not always alike glorious: How you have conserved the
opinion of your virtue, even in the time of your hardest fortunes, and how in
the greatest fury of the tempest, and in the most extreme violence of your
affairs, the integrity of your actions has never been reduced to the only
testimony of your conscience. To conclude, It is in this Book (my Lord) where
I suppose you will be well pleased to read the presages of your present
greatness, and what has been foretold; not by Astrologicall rules, or the
aspect of some Constellation, but by a true discourse founded upon the maxims
of reason, and experience of things past; causing him to presume, that God has
not conferred such extraordinary endowments upon you, to be for ever
encloistered within your self: And that he has loved France better, then to
deprive her of the good you ought to procure her. But all these verities shall
one day be comprised in that work the King, by your mouth, (my Lord) has
commanded Mounsieur de Balzac to undertake, and which one year of leisure will
effect. There shall it be, where he will cause all men to confess, that to
have the pourtraict of a perfect Prince, the reign of so great a Monarch as
ours* is to be attended; that the Divine Providence never showed it self more
apparently, then in the conduct of his designs, and in the event of his
enterprises; and how Heaven has so far declared it self in his favor, that
were his state assaulted on all sides, and all ordinary means of defense
should fail him; he has virtue sufficient to save himself, and perform
miracles. Now as you are the prime intelligence of his Council, and your
cogitations the first causes of the good resolutions therein taken, you are not
to doubt (my Lord) but you likewise possess the principal place therein,
after His Majesty; and that you participate more then any other of His
triumphs. There shall you be revenged of all those wretched writings you have
formerly slighted: There the spirits of all men shall be satisfied in the
justice of your deportments, and calumny it self will there be so powerfully
convinced, that to cry down so legal a government as yours, ill affected
Frenchmen, and those strangers enemies to this Crown, will find no further
pretext in affairs, nor credulity among men. And truly, when I (on the one
side) consider how fat all it is to those who govern, to be exposed to the
envy of great ones, and complaints of meaner persons, and how Public affairs
have this fatality, as how pure soever the administration thereof be, they
still afford sufficient color to calumny, to disguise them and cause them to
appear iniust. And on the other side, when I consider that to guide this State
is no less then to manage a body having no one sound part; and how there is no
sick person who does not sometimes murmr against his Physician; I dare be
confident (my Lord) that such a man as Mounsieur de Balzac will not prove
unuseful unto you, and that the luster of your actions, and glory of your life
shall receive no diminution in his hands. I would say more, did I not fear to
disoblige him in commending him, or if I believed him to be so great a self
admirer as his enemies figure him unto us. But I who have sufficiently studied
him to know him* and who am acquainted with his most secret Inclinations, and
the most particular conception*s he has in his soul, and of a far different
opinion to theirs. I will therefore rest there (my Lord) and not to cause you
to loose more time, and to the end you may the sooner enjoy the entertainment,
this excellent Book prepares for you: I will satisfy my self in letting you
know, that I esteem not my self so unfortunate as formerly I did, since I
have happened upon so fair an occasion, to let you know that I am,

My Lord, Your thrice humble, and most obedient servant, Silbon.

THE PREFACE Upon the Letters of Mounsieur de BALZAC: By Mounsieur de la Motte
Aigron.
I Doubt not, but among those who shall see these Works; some there are who
will esteem them worthy a more aduantagious Title then that of Letters, as
well in regard of the greatness of those things therein frequently handled, as
in respect of the exactness wherewherewith they seem to have been composed:
Butas I willingly excuse those, who with unapt complements imagine they have
composed a good Letter; nor do any more blame such as there in never digress
from their particular affairs, ^o must I likewise acknowledge, that such
writings as these, hauidg not been made with any intention to be put in
Print, the World might well have passed without them: And that it is only
allowed to the Germans to give account to the age they live in, and to
posterity forsooth, concerning the affairs and fortunes of their particular
families, and of the silly acts of their Colleagues. Truly it is an error to
believe, that grave and solemn subjects are to be banished out of all
Letters, or that even eloquence ought but slackly therein to appear; and that
the Majesty of both these is only reserved for Pulpits and Panegyric
Orations; as though valor never appeared save only in pitched Battles; and
that in single Combats it were lawful to run away, or that virtue therein were
utterly unuseful, because it has fewer witnesses, neither is so fully
regarded: But besides that, we are no longer in those times wherein the State
government was publicly questioned, where the Orators forced the Lieutenants
general of armies to render account of their several charges, and that
consequently, there is no more any means remaining to become eloquent in that
kind: Yet are there reasons, whereby we may understand the merit of Letters to
be of no less regard then that of Orations. Howbeit, if there be any
necessity to find some difference between these; this at least can neither be
in regard of the dignity of the Subjects, the force of Reasons, the
gracefulness of Discourses, nor in the sublimitie of Conceits. To speak
truth, when I consider the Orations yet remaining among the ruins of former
ages, some where of were publicly pronounced, others only penned; I am so
far from admiring any advantage they have over those Letters now extant among
us, both of the same Authors and Ages, as I do not so much as wonder at all,
how the first having been armed with discourse and voice, together with the
gesture and motion of the body, have produced such prodigious effects as we
all know, and have so often, as it were by maine force, extorted the consents
of all hearers; yet the second, though they had not the like arms and
allurements, have notwithstanding not been any way ^^^icient. Those smooth
Exordiums whereby they prepare, and put themselves by easy accesses, as it
were into possession of the Readers, those straites and passages whereby they
conduct the spirits of men from pleasant to painful, and from grievous, to
gracious objects, to the end, that having in a manner shaken and cast them out
of their former stations, they may afterward force them to fall on what side
they please. Surely all these advantages are so peculiar to Orations, as I
ingeniously confess, Letters do not so much as know what they mean. In
these, we enter at the first dash upon the matter, nor do we scarce at any
time, quit the same; the reasons go altogether alone without assistance, and
all the ornament allowed them, is only freedom of conceptions, the fecunditie
of language, and that they pass not promiscuously. But as concerning the
Subjects, they are common to both kinds of writings, and it is an error to
imagine, there are some so particular to the one, that the other cannot touch
upon the same withont injury thereunto. Upon the matter, Panegyric
discourses, Apologies, Confultations, Judgments upon moral actions, whether
good or bad opinions and censures upon occurrents, of those which please, and
those we ought to detest, yea even indifferent accidents* briefly whatsoever
may fall into discourse, and under reason, are the objects of Letters: So we
see, the greatest and most important mysteries of our religion have been left
unto us in Letters. All the wisdom of the Pagan^ contained in those of
Seneca, and we owe to those Cicero wrote to his friends, the knowledge of the
secrets, and certain inducements which caused the greatest reuolutions the
world has ever known, to wit the shaking and subversion of the Roman
Reipublike, we are therefore to confess Oratoricall Treatises to have no
other subject then Letters; and that if there be any difference, it is none
other then what is observed between our ancient Seas, and those not discovered
unto us till in our fathers times. The latter are no less deep then the
other, they are capable of the like shipping; their ebbes, and floods are
neither more just, nor less uncertain; and all the difference discovered
between them is only this, that the winds toss not those in like fort as it
does ours, and in that they are seldom or never subject either to storms, or
tempests. In like manner it being within the power and capacity of Letters to
treat of the same things, how much more emenent and excellent soever one may
conceive them to be then any other kind of writings, yet do they not indeed
receive those extraordinary motions which appear in Orations, since neither
the like high of excess, nor the same Enthusiasmes or Raptures are herein
found; In a word, it is a more middle beauty, and a more calm eloquence. And
surely, if the subject we make use of be as illustrious as the person before
whom we are to handle it, were it not as much as to abuse both the one and the
other, to come short in our expressions: Since the action ought neither to be
public, nor general, if you intend to perform it negligently, and not to
allow it all the ornaments whereof it is capable. And who can doubt that Cicero
being to make an Oration before Caesar, after the change of the Commonwealth,
had not a greater apprehension, and prepared not himself with more studious
care, then if he had only spoken to that beast with an hundred heads, he had
so often led after his own Fantasy, and whereof he was in so full
possession so long before, as to cause them to take the part best pleasing unto
him. In these last occasions, and in the presence of this man alone, he know
with whom he had to do: Now had he been timorous, or fearful to fail
before his Master, yet impute not this apprehension of his to proceed either
out of consideration he had of his greatness, nor from the reflection upon
those things he came to accomplish: But it was in that he considered him as a
man no less versed in the art of well-speaking then himself, and who had
heretofore contributed to the study of this science, so many rare gifts of
spirit, and so many fair indowments of nature, that had he not afterward
esteemed it more noble to conquer men by arms, then to convince them by
arguments, and if of the two most excellent exercises of this life, his fortune
and the famousnesse of his courage, had not caused him to make choice of the
former, he might easily have disputed for the glory of the latter with him. Or
were it so that this excellent Orator might at this day return into the
world, and were personally, or by his Pen to discourse with those two great
Cardinals to whom the most part of these Letters are addressed* is it not
probable, coming to know them as we do, that he would employ, and contribute
a a more exact study and solicitude, then when he was only to please a
multitude of ignorant Plebeians, and to speak to all that rabble of ancient
Rome. We shall yet again be amazed at the perfection of these Letters, some
whereof are written to the King, and appointed to be read (as in truth they
were) with admiration in full counsel, and a great part of the rest addressed
to the most eminent persons of our age. To speak truth we may justly say,
this is the first time any thing of perfection has appeared in our language;
so that if of all our ancient eloquence there be ought worthy of esteem in
any equality with this, it may be that with much labor you shall produce
some one Letter: For of all such who have hitherto written we may affirm,
that the most fortunate among them, when they made choice of subjects able to
subsist of themselves, have not been absolutely condemnable, and that amidst
their writings, the soliditie of learning, and the savageness of language (to
wit) the good and evil did equally appear. But when at any time they fell
upon subjects where eloquence only swayed the Scepter, there truly it was
where fortune forsook them, and where the feebleness of their proper forces
was manifestly perceived, if they were not some way assisted by strange
tongues. Some of them (to say the truth) have doubted what way they were to
take, and have striuen to show it to others, though themselves were not in it.
In a word, the greatest glory those gained who have written with most
perfection and purity, is only that which nature has reserved for women, to
which sex eminent actions being denied, it seems they perform sufficient if
they abstain from evil doing. But to say that any has joined Art to
abundance, and mingled mildness with Majesty, or has raised his style
without either loosing himself, or straying from his subject, that is it which
in truth we could not see till this present. And questionless these brave and
generous forms of discourse, and those great and strange conceptions wherewith
these Letters are so curiously limed, and so plentifully graced, have been
very slenderly known in proceeding ages: This very order, and this number,
whereof every tongue is not capable, and wherein ours owes nothing to the
Latin, and which appears in all his words, though diuersely, and as their
gender requires, do right happily appear in this place, though the most part of
writers before him have esteemed these perfections of small importance; yet
notwithstanding, without the help of these two great secrets, neither
ornaments of Art, nor graces of Nature, can be but in part pleasing; nor can
all the reasons the World can allege persuade a Very woman resolving to
resist: And to speak seriously, they are no less necessary among excellent
discourses, and conceits, then discipline amongst Soldiers, without which,
courage is of no effect, and valor most commonly proves unprofitable. As for
me who have known the Author from both our infancies, and who better then all
others, can depose in what fashion he effects his labors; besides, knowing
the great advantage he has over all those who write at this day: I have ever
thought, that if any were able to raise our Language to the merit and
reputation of such Eloquence, wherewith the Ancients were adorned, it should
be to him alone to whom our age owes this glory. Nor do I doubt, but the
comparison coming in question at this present, between these his writings,
and those of others; the difference will be easily discovered, assuring my
self, that all spirits will dispose themselves to be ranged herein to mine
opinion, and voluntarily to give way thereunto. As for my self, who read the
Ancients with all respect due unto them, and the Moderns without any
preiudicate opinion, do notwithstanding confess, that all I can conceive in
others is so far short of the merit of these Letters, that abstracting from
the passion I am possessed with, both for them, and their Author, hardly could
I dispose my self to frame this Preface for them. And who is there will make
any difficulty to give them their due? Since he whose very faults have been
esteemed so fair, that they caused a Sect during his life, which yet continues
after his death; having (at Meats) seen certain discourses this Author
composed in those miserable times, and which stood in need of another age to be
gratefully regarded, was astonished at his beginnings, confessing it was with
unwillingness, that the only thing he supposed to possess by the general
consent of all, was ravished from him by one who as yet had lived but twenty
years. But surely, it was in this strain of writing which in that it is not
restrained within so strict limits as that of Letters, is capable of all the
motions, and ornaments of Art; and of the same sort as was the other discourse
he addresseth to the Pope who now is, upon the like subject, as that of Saint
Bernards to Eugenius: And as God never chose among men any so accomplished with
all perfections, as this person to command all others, so can I not conceive
any thing either more great, or extraordinary, then what appears in this
work, nor more suitable to the excellency of the subject, and to the Majesty
of him to whom he dedicated his discourse: But if (to return to the
particulars of these Letters) it were necessary for the delivering an
impartial judgment, to consider those of the Ancients, I should seem more
respectfull then were requisite, if (putting them all together) I should
undertake to make them so much as enter into comparison with these; excepting
only those of Seneca, yea even in those (which in truth come not nere these)
there is so infinite abundance of matter as can hardly be imagined, and since
all things therein appear so confusedly, that it seems they were therein
couched without choice, and to say truth, as itwere at adventure, some who
will yet further tax his style will happily say, they are rather matters then
Works. But for my part, if there be any defects therein, I hold they ought
well to be borne with, in regard of so many rarities therein concurring; and
when we have said all, what appearance is there to vnderualew any thing we
receive from a man who was worth seven Millions of Gold? And who once in his
life had the heart, and ambition to aspire to the Empire of the whole world?
Let us therefore esteem all we receive from him, and from those times, yet
suffer us to commend our own, wherein this science which medleth with the
commanding of spirits, and which was but formerly in it is infancy, is now found
to be in his full maturitie, and as it were of ripe years. If therefore you
acknowledge any obligation due (as in truth there is) to these excellent
Letters, you shall in short time see so solid, and just a judgment proceed from
this Author, that the Parliament it self produces not any more able; and his
solitarines will be so satisfactorie unto you, that you will make no more
difference then I do, to prefer the fame before the magnificence of Princely
Courts, and the Pomp of most statelyest Cities.

THE TRANSLATOR To the Reader.
ABout five years since, I chanced to peruse Mounsieur Balzac's Letters (they
being then as I suppose) but lately come forth in French* and as it should
seem without the Authors approbation: For of eight Editions in several
places, since published, this only being the last, I was by him auowed. Having
therefore seen this Copy, was so far from supposing it unworthy the
reading, as (on the contrary) finding his style right eloquent, and altogether
vnafected, his conceptions high, and the whole Book richly adorned with great
variety of learning, appearing almost in every Page: It raised no small desire
in me to try how his way of writing would suit with our language: I thought
therefore good (as my occasions would permit, now and then for my private
recreation) to translate certain of his Letters, without any the least
intention to put them all into English, much less to publish them: But having
once begun, I found my self so taken with the freeedome of his discourse,
together with the facillitie of his expressions; and so surunded with the
torrent of his wit, that though I had small hopes of wading safely through,
notwithstanding it seemed even delightful unto me to be drenched in so rich
so pleasing, and so plentiful a flood, yet after diverse attempts, I at last
arrived on dry land, resolving to rest my self after these labors, and in
private to enjoy the content I took in hearing Mounsieur Balzac speak, though
but broken English. But I was not long left in peace with this resolution,
before certain my noble friends understanding I had traualled on this subject;
did importunately solicit me to put these Letters into Print, persuading me I
should here in perform no unacceptable service to my Country, especially to
such who are unacquainted with the French Language. Their power therefore
ouer-ruling my bashfullnesse, though otherwise seconding my willing desire to
be useful; I held it less faulty to incur the hazard of public censure,
then to be taxed of wilful inciuillitie. So as (worthy Reader) I have here
exposed them to thy view; If the coursnesse of the English habit wherein I have
clad them, seem unsuitable to their French attire, or unfashionable in thy
sight: Consider I beseech thee, that beautiful creatures are not altogether
blemished, though but plainly attyred. If therefore you please so far to
favor me, as to excuse these my errors, I will herafter endeavor to become
more serviceable. You will happily not here find all Balzac's Letters
Englished; yea and diverse clauses left out; the only reason has been, their
subject not altogether suitable to this State, nor very fitting for English
ears. The rest are here presented to thy gracious accetpance, not doubting but
they will prove both pleasing and profitable to diverse who endeavor to make
right use thereof. My desires have aimed at that end; and my greatest ambition
is to have them find courteous entertainment, and to afford Public Vtillitie.

Vale. VV. T.

PErlegi hunc librum cui titulus (Balzac his Letters) una cum praefatione
duplici ad Dominum Cardinal de Richelieu, and ad Lectorum, qui quidem liber
continet folio 176. (exceptis quae delentur) in quibus nihil reperio sanae
doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium, quo minus cum publica utilitate
Imprimatur: ita tamen ut si non intra annum proxime sequentem typis mandetur
haec licentia sit omnino irrita.

GVLIELMVS HAYWOOD, Capellan: domest. Archiep. Cantuar.

THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC.
THE FIRST BOOK.
A Letter from the Cardinal of Richelieu, to the Signior of BALZAC*
LETTER I.
SIR:
THough I have formerly delivered my Opinion to a friend of Yours; concerning
some of your letters he showed me; yet can I not satisfy my self before these
Lines afford you a more Authentical approbation thereof. It is not any
particular affection I bear to your person, which imsiteth me to this
allowance, but Truth it self, carrying with it such a Prerogative, that it
compels (all who have their Eyes, and Spirits rightly placed for the
delivering an impartial opinion) to represent them without Disguise: My
censure shall be seconded by many others, and if there be any of a contrary
conceit, I dare assure you, time will make them know, that the defects they
find in your Letters, proceed rather from their Spirits, then from your Pen;
and how nearely they resemble the Icterickes, who having the Iaundesse in their
Eyes, see nothing which seems not unto them to carry the same color:
Heretofore mean Wits admired all things above the pitch of their capacity; but
now, their Judgments seconding their Sufficiencies, they approve nothing but
what is within the compass of their Talent, and blame all whatsoever exceeds
their Studies. I dare (without presumption) say in what concerns you herein,
that I see things as they are, and declare them to be such as I see them: The
conceptions of your Letters are strong, and as transcendent above ordinary
imaginations, as they are conformable to the common sense of such who are of
sound judgment. The Language is pure, and the Words perfectly well chosen,
without affectation; the Sense is clear and neat, and the Periods
accomplished with all their numbers. This censure of mine, is by so much the
more ingenuous, as that approouing whatsoever is your own in your Letters: I
have not concealed to a certay ne Friend of yours, that I found some
rectification to be desired, concerning certain things you insert of other
men's: fearing least the liberty of your Pen should cause many to imagine that
it is to often dipped in their humors and manners; and draw such as are more
acquainted with you by name, then Conversation, to be otherwise conceited of
you, then you willingly could wish. The manner wherewith you have received this
my Advise, causes me that continuing my former freedom, I will conclude, in
aduertizing you, that you shall be answerable before God, if you suffer your
Pen to sleep, and that you are obliged to employ it upon more grave and
important Subjects; being contented that you shall blame me, if in so doing you
receive not the satisfaction, to see that what you perform herein, shall be
praised and esteemed, even by those wh would willingly pick occasion to
control them, which is one of the most sure marks of the perfection of any
Work. You shall receive some in this kind out of my Affection, when I may have
the opportunity to assure you, that I am,

Your well affectionate to serve you, the Cardinal of Richelieu.
From Paris the 4. of February. 1621.
To the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC.
LETTER. II.
MY LORD:
I Am as proud of the Letter you did me the Honor to address unto me, as if
there were a thousand Statues erected for me, or if I were assured by
infallible authority of my works excellency. Truly, to be commended by that man
our Age opposes to all antiquity, and upon whose Wisdom God might well
entrust the whole earths government, is a favor I could not wish for without
presumption, and which I am yet doubtful whether I have really received, or
only dreamed somesuch matter. But if it be so that my eyes have not deceived
me, and that you are he who has bestowed that voice upon me, which has bin
chosen by all France to present her petitions to the King, and by the King
himself to convey his Commands into Cities, and Armies: My Lord, I must
humbly then acknowledge you have already paid me before hand, for all the
services I can ever possibly perform unto you: and I should show my self very
ungrateful, if I should hereafter complain of my fortunes: since upon the
matter, the goods and honors of this World are most ordinarily none other then
the inheritance of Sotts, or rewards of Vice, Estimation and Commendation being
only reserved for Virtue. Ought I not then to rest highly satisfied, having
received from your Mouth the same Prize which Conquerors expect for their
Victories? yea, all that your self could hope for, in lieu of your great and
immortal Actions, if there were another Cardinal of Richelieu to give them
their due Commendations? But truly (my Lord) that is a thing which will
always be wanting to your Glory; for when by your only Presence you have
appeased the spirits of an incensed Multitude; when by your powerful Reasons
you have induced Christian Princes to set the Native Country of Jesus Christ
at liberty, and to undertake the Holy War, when you have gained whole Nations
to the Church, as well by the force of your Example, as by that of your
Doctrine, who is of ability to pay you the Reputation which you in all right
deserve? and where shall you find so excellent a Witness for all the
marvelous Acts of your Life, as I have of my Watchings and Studies? I cannot
choose but reiterate this, and my joy is over just to be concealed. Is it
possible this great Wit and high spirit, which has bin employed even from his
first Youth in persuading Princes, in giving instructions to Ambassadors, and
has been listened unto by old men, who have seen four Reigns? Is it
possible I say, this man should value me; on whose Approbation all enemies
agree? nor is there among all men a contrary party, or diversity of belief in
this point. If I had a purpose to disquiet the repose of this Kingdom, I would
seek for the consent of slack spirits; and I should stand in need of the
favor of all sorts of men, were I to study for Reputation in a popular State:
but truly I never affected confusion, or disorder, and my designs have ever
aimed at the pleasing of a few. For since you have declared your self in
favor, as he likewise has done, for whom France at this day enuieth Italy:
and since you carry after you the most solid part of the Court, I am content to
let the rest run astray with Turks and Infidels, who make the greater number
of Mankind. Yet (my Lord) I cannot think, that any hereafter will be so far
in love with himself, or so obstinate in his own opinion, as not to be a
Convertite by the only reading the Letter you honored me with, and who in
conclusion will not subscribe to your great Judgment? And, if it be certain
that truth it self could not be strong enough against you, there is no
question but that side whereon you two shall agree, oughtto be universally
followed. For my part (my Lord) let all men say what they will, I fix my self
with closed eyes there; and what enemies soever the reputation you have allowed
me procure me: yet knowing your abilities and what you are, I will be no
farther solicitus for mine own Interest, or future benefit, since it is become
your cause;

I am My Lord, Your most humble and most obedient servant, BALZAC.
The 10. of March, 1624.
To the Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC.
LETTER III.
My Lord,
I Humbly entreat you to be pleased by these presents, to permit me to
confirm unto you the assurance of my most humble Service, and that you would
allow me to crave some News from you: It is the only thing wherein I am now
curious, and which in the very depth of my retiredness, obliges me to reflect
sometimes upon worldly Affairs. But happen what can, I am most assured, you
will remain constant even amidst public ruins, and that Fortune cannot
bereave you of those advantages she never gave you. Yet could I wish, that
your life were somewhat more calm, and less glorious: And that Artemiza's
goodness having so great Affinity to what is infinite, and which is of power
to procure love even amidst the most savage beasts; does in right deserve to
obtain truce, and repose among reasonable Creatures. It is not in us to be
Authors of hereafter, nor do our wishes rule the event of humane Affairs. But
surely if there be any Justice in Heaven, (whereof there is no doubt) and if
God have an Eye to worldly matters: we must believe the tears of upright
persons shall not be shed in vain, or that your Queen shall wax old in her
Misfortunes: yet at the least, since our cogitations be still within our own
compass, and we being not forbidden to hope well, let us make the best use we
may of this small portion of Liberty yet remaining. The virtue she has
hitherto made use of, in resisting her afflictions, will happily oneday serve
to moderate her felicities. And if God struck a certain Madam Gabriella.
Woman with sudden death; for that she should have been seated in the place,
he destinated to this great Princess; he surely will not suffer that man to
live long, who has so highly injured her. Howsoever (my Lord) it is great
Honor unto you, not to have failed her in her afflictions, and to have
vnder-valewed all worldly Prerogatives, to be unfortunate with her. I know that
herein you satisfy your self with the testimony of a clear conscience, and
that it is not so much for Opinion of men, you undertake Worthy actions, as for
your own private Satisfaction. Nor are you a little to comfort your self, in
that at this present you are praised even by your very enemies; and to see your
Resolutions redoubtable to those who have great Armies on foot, and the chief
forces of the State under their Command. I would say more, did I not fear you
might suppose, I had some private design in my Discourse, or seek hereby to
prepare you to receive some kind of importunity from me: But I most humbly
beseech your Lordship to be confident, that I being of free Condition, am
little acquainted with Flattery; and that I am not so given over to gain, but
that notwithstanding you were still in Auignion, I would ever as really as at
this Hour remain

My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, BALZAC.
The 15. of May, 1623.
To the Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC.
LETTER IIII.
My Lord,
Were I not well acquainted with my own insufficiency, I might well be
possessed with no small vanity, upon the Letter you did me the Honor to
address unto me, and might well imagine my self to be some other thing then
if I was the day before I received it. But knowing it is no other then a mere
favor you pleased to afford me, I will not flatter my felfe in my good
fortune, nor lessen the Obligation due unto you, in presuming to merit the
same. If Virtue required any Recompense out of her self, she would not receive
it from other mouth then yours: and your Reputation is at this day so Just and
General, as it is become a Verity wherein the Wise agree with the Vulgar. I
do therefore account my self very happy, to be reputed of, by a Person who is
able to give a value to things of themselves worthless; and I attribute so
much to your Judgment, that I will no longer hold any mean opinion of my
self, lest therein I should contradict you. Truly (my Lord) very difficultly
will my parts any way answer your Expectation. The time my Fever affoordeth
me for rest is so short, I can hardly employ it to other purpose then to
complain of its cruelty. I have enough to do to live, and to make that good:
I keep my self as carefully as though I were composed of Crystal, or as if
I were some necessary matter for the good of all men. Yet (my Lord) you have so
great power over me, that I will ftrayne my self to show my Obedience, and to
give you an account of my leisure, since you please to think I ought not to
deprive the World thereof. It is better to utter glorious Dreams, then to
labor in gross Designs, and there are certain Acts of the spirit so
excellent, that Princes are too poor, and their power too slender to afford
them their full merit. But my Lord, you have often given so great testimonies
of me, that if I should not have some presumption, it were fit I lost my
memory* Wherefore out of the assurance you give me that my Style does not stray
from that perfection which men imagine, but never saw, nor have attained unto;
I will enter upon a design which shall amaze our vulgar wits, and cause those
who have hitherto supposed they surmount others, to see I have found what they
seek for. Whatsoever I do, I will at least have you at all times present to
my thoughts, thereby to oblige my self not to come short before so great an
example, nor will I forget the place where at this present I am, to the end not
to omit any thing worthy the Ancient Rome. It is impossible at once to have so
glorious objects, and degenerous thoughts, or not to be transported with all
those Tryumphs of times past, and with the glory of our Age. But this is not
the place where I intend to speak, it being of too small extent to receive so
illimitable a Subject: It shall therefore suffice in conclusion of this my
Letter to tell you, that since upon your advice all posterity depends, and
the whole Court expects from you what they are, or are not to believe; I
cannot choose (my Lord) but to esteem my self right happy even amidst my
greatest miseries, if you still continue unto me your equal Judgment with the
honor of your favors

BALZAC.
From Rome this 10. of April, 1623.
To the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu, from Mounsieur Balzac.
LETTER V.
My LORD;
MY purpose was at my arriual in France to have presented my Service unto you,
in the place of your Residence, that I might have had the honor to see you;
but my health having not been such, as to afford me the free disposition of
my self: I am forced to defer my contentment, in that kind, and to entreat
to hear some News from You, till I be able to go to understand them from your
Self. In the interim, the better to cheer my Spirits, I will believe they are
as good as I wish them, and will imagine this Collicke of yours, whereof I had
so great apprehension, shall be drowned in the fountain of Pougues. This truly
is so generally desired, and sought for at Gods hands, by so many mouths, that
I am confident he will not (in this point) leave the felicity He has prepared
for our times imperfect; and that He loves the World too well, to deprive it
of the good you are to Perform. Armies being defeated, new Forces may be set
on foot, and a second Fleet may be rigged, after the first perish: But if we
should want your Lordship, the World would not last long enough to be able to
repair such a loss: And the King might have just cause to bewail the same in
the midst of his greatest Tryumphes. He has indeed an inexhaustable Kingdom
of men. The Wars do daily afford him Captains. The number of Judges is not
much inferior to that of Criminals. It is only of wise men, and such as are
capable to guide the Stern of States, whereof the scarcity is great; and
without flattery to find out your Equal herein, all Nature had need put it
self into Action, and that God long promise the same to mankind before he be
pleased to produce him. I say nothing, (my Lord) I am not ready to swear in
verification of my belief* or which I confirm not by the Testimony of your
very Enemies. The authority of Kings is not so Sovereign, as that is, you
exercise over the Souls of such as hearken unto you. Your Spirit is right
powerful, and daily employed in great affairs, and which refreshes it self
in agitation of ordinary occurrents: You are destinated to fill the place of
that Cardinal, which at this present, makes one of the beautiful parties of
Heaven, and who has hitherto had no Successor, though he have had Heirs and
and Brothers. This being thus, who will doubt that public Prayers are to be
offered, for so precious and necessary a health as yours; or that your life
ought to be dear unto you, within you are to conserve the glory of our age. As
for me (my Lord) who am assaulted on all sides, and to whom nothing is
remaining save hope, being the only benefit of those who are deprived of all
others: since my misfortune will needs make me that public sacrifice, which
is, to be charged with the pains of all the people, and pay for all the World.
I could be well content you should send me your Collicke, and that it come to
accompany the Fever, the Scyatica, and the Stone. Since of so many Diseases,
there can but one Death be composed. Nor is it time any longer, to be a good
husband of what is already lost. But I will not enter further into this
discourse, whereof I shall find no end; and it were to small purpose to tell you,
he is the most wretched man in the World, who so much honors you, for fear
you should reject my affection, as somefatall thing, and least it avail me not
at all to protest that I am my Lord

Your most hamble and most obedient Servant; BALZAC.
September the 4. 1622.
To the Lord Cardinal of Richelieu.
LETTER. VI.
MY LORD:
AFter the sealing of these presents, a messenger passed by this place, by whom
I understand that the Pope has created you a Cardinal; I make no question but
you received this News as a matter indifferent unto you: and that your Spirit
being raised above the things of this world, you behold them with one and the
same Aspect. Yet since herein the public good meets with your particular
interest, and that for your sake the Church rejoices even in all the most
irksome Prisons of Europe, it is not reasonable you should deprive your self
of a contentment no less chaste, then those Heaven it self affoordeth us? and
which proceeds from the same cause. All good men (my Lord) ought in these
times to desire great Dignities, as necessary means to undertake great
matters. If they do otherwise; besides that God will demand a strict account
from them of those his graces, whereof they have made no good use: the World
has likewise just subject of Complaint, seeing them abandon it as a prey to
the wicked, and that their desire of ease causes them to forsake the public
good. This (my Lord) is to let you know, you are to reserve your Humility for
those Actions, passing between God and Your self: But that in other cases you
can neither have too much Wealth, nor over great power; since Obedience is due
to Wisdom; there being certain virtues not practiseable by the poor. I do
therefore infinitely rejoice, to see you at this present raised to that eminent
Dignity, wherein you fill the Universe with Splendour, and where your sole
Example will (I hope) carry so great weight, as to cause the Church to return
to the Purity of its first Jnfancy. Truly, if there be any hope to expect this
happiness, and to see rebellious Spirits persuaded, as we behold their Cities
forced; you doubtless are the man, from whom we are to expect this felicity;
and who is only able to finish the victories of Kings by the subversion of
Misbeleeuers: To this effect does all Christendom exact these atchieuments at
your hands, as a last instruction, and the general peace of Consciences: and
my self who have thus long been in search after the Jdea of Eloquence,
without finding among us any which is not either counterfeit or imperfect; am
very confident you will bring it to light in the same excellency as it was, when
at Rome the Tyrants were condemned, and when it defended the oppressed
Provinces. Though Purple be very refulgent, yet will it receive a farther
luster by this your Dignity, carrying command where ever it comes; and which
is particularly so proper for the conduct of Souls, as it is only to that
power whereto they will submit themselves. My Lord, if I have any hope to be
known in after Ages, or that my Name may pass to Posterity; they shall find
this consideration to be the first obligation unto me, of seeking the Honor of
your Acquaintance, and that having heard you speak, you did so absolutely
purchase both my thoughts and affections, that since then, I have ever
reflected upon you, as on an extraordinary person, and have ever passionately
remained

My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 16. of December, 1622.
To the Cardinal of Richelieu from BALZAC.
LETTER VI.
My LORD,
HAd the ways been safe, or if the good order you have taken for public
security, had not been subject to the like success as are wholesome Laws,
which are seldom well observed, I should not be necessitated to take a longer
time then you allotted me when I parted from Fountainebleau, nor had I till now
been constrained to spin out the time of my Dispatch. But though your
Commandments are all powerful in me, yet you know necessity will firstbe
obeyed, nor will you (I hope) be displeased that I have made choice of a Prison
whereto I am accustomed, to avoid another not so commodious for me. This has
not happened but to my extreme grief, since I have not been able to be a
witness of the most illustrious life of our Age, and have thereby lost half a
Year of your Actions which (well nigh) fill up all our History. For though we
are not so remote from the World, that no News can come to us, yet they pass
so many places, as it is impossible they receive not diverse Impressions, or
that they should arrive here in their purity, since they are often altered from
the very Loouer; yet have Ivnderstood, and Fame has published even in Deserts,
the great Conflicts by you undergone, and achieved for the Honor and
Reputation of France, and how you have subdued the subtilties of Strangers,
being in truth more to be feared then their Forces. I hear how Italy has
spent all her practices without hurting any, and how those Statesmen who made
account to Seignorize in all Assemblies, and to be Masters in all Reasons of
State, were unable to defend themselves against you, but with passion, and
choler: nor to complain of any other thing, but that you persuaded them to
whatsoever they were before* hand resolved not to yield. So as (my Lord) those
who termed us Barbartans, and by their treaties commonly took revenge of our
Victories, have in the end found wisdom on this side the Alps, and have well
perceived there is a man who has abilities to hinder them from deceiving
others. They stood amazed to see a Servant who would not suffer there should be
any Master greater then his Sovereign. Who was as sencible of the least Evils
of his Country, as of his proper sorrows, supposing himself to be wounded
upon the least apprehension, when any made show of trenching upon the Dignity
of this Crown. But when they found you applied present remedies to all such
inconveniences as they objected; that you prevented the difficulties they
offered to propose, that you diued into their souls, drawing thence their
closest Intentions, and how at the first conference you made answer to what
they reserved for a second. Then it was indeed, when their Fleame was turned
into Choler, and when you put their humane Wisdoms and politic Maxims to a
stand. So as we see it is sufficient only to let Good appear, to cause it to
be beloved: and truly if Reason had the like power over the Will, as it has
over the Understanding, all those Italians doubtless, who heard you speak,
had returned good Frenchmen, and the safety of Christendom together with the
security of her Princes, had been but one days work. Foreign wars had
been ended in your chamber; nor should we now have any more then one business
upon us, and the Kings Forces had at this present been employed only in
suppressing the Rebels of his own Kingdom. My Lord, I hope you are persuaded
(though I could not probably expect any slight occurrents from the place where
you are) yet that I received these with much emotion and transport, it not
being in my power to dissemble my joy, when I understood how their Majesty's
are not weary of your Service, and how after having tried diverse Councels, it
was in conclusion thought fit to follow yours, and that you precede in the
affairs of Europe, by being conductor of the Fortune of France. Truly, of all
exterior contentments, there is not any whereof I am so sensible as of that.
But on the other side, when I understand that your Health is daily assaulted,
or threatened by some accident, that the Tranquillity your Conscience affords
you, hinders you not from having ill Nights: And how amidst the happy successes
befalling you, life it self is notwithstanding sometimes tedious unto you; then
indeed I must confess they touch me in the tenderest part of my Soul. And
whilst the Court makes thousands of feined Protestations unto you; there is an
Hermit some hundred Leagues from you, who mournes for your maladies with
unfeigned tears. I know not whether or no I may presume to say, I love you:
yet is it not probable you will take offense at a Word wherewith, you know God
himself is well pleased. My Lord; I do in such manner Love you, as I am either
sick upon the Relation of your indisposition; or if the news be current that
you are recovered, yet have I still an apprehension of what alteration each
hour may bring upon you. Ought it then to be in the Fits of your Fever, and
in your inquietude for want of sleep, that you understand these public
acclamations, and the due praises you have purchased: Shall the Senses suffer,
and the Spirits rejoice, or they continue tortured amidst these Tryumphs, or
that you (at once) perform two contrary Actions, and at the same time have
need, as well of Moderation, as Patience: If Virtue could be miserable, or if
that Sect which acknowledges no other evil, but pain; nor any greater good
then pleasure, had not been generally condemned: the Divine providence had
received complaints from all parts of this Kingdom; nor had there been an
honest man known, who for your sake had not found something farther to be
desired in the conduct of this World. But (my Lord) you understand much better
then I do, that it is only touching the felicity of beasts, we are to believe
the body, and not concerning ours, residing only in the supreme part of our
selves, and which is as smally sensible of those disorders committed below her,
as those in Heaven can be offended by the tempests of the Air, or vapors of
the Earth. This being true: God forbid, that by the estate of your present
constitution, I should judge of that of your Condition; or that I should not
esteem him perfectly happy who is superlatiuely wise. You may please to
consider, that howbeit you have shared with other men the infirmities of humane
Nature, yet the advantage rests soly on your side: since (upon the matter)
there is only some small pain remaining with you, instead of an infinity of
errors, passions, and faults falling to our lots. Besides* I am confident that
the term of your sufferings is well nigh expired, and that the hereafter
prepares right solid and pure contentments for you, and a youth after its
season, as you are become old before your time. The King who has use of your
long living, makes no unprofitable wishes: Heaven bears not the prayers that
the Enemies of this State offer. We know no Successor that is able to effect
what you have not yet finished: and it being true, that our Forces are but the
Arms of your Head, and that your Councels have been chosen by God to
re-establish the Affairs of this Age: we ought not to be apprehensiue of a
loss which should not happen but to our Successors. It shall then be in your
time (my Lord, I hope) that oppressed Nations will come from the Worlds end to
implore the protection of this Crown: that by your means our Allies will
repair their losses, and that the Spaniard shall not be the sole Conqueror,
but that we shall prove the Infranchesers of the whole Earth. In your time (I
trust) the Holy Sea shall have her Opinions free, nor shall the inspirations of
the Holy Ghost be oppugned by the artifice of our Enemies, resolutions will be
raised worthy the ancient Jtaly for defense of the common cause. To conclude,
it will be through your Prudence (my Lord) that there shall no longer be any
Rebellion among us, or Tyranny among men: that all the Cities of this Kingdom
shall be seats of assurance for honest men; that novelties shall be no farther
in request; save only for colors and fashions of Attire* that the People will
resign Liberty, Religion, and the Commonwealth, into the hands of Superiors,
and that outof lawful government, and loyal obedience, there will arise that
felicity Politisians search after, as being the end of Civil life. My hope is
(my Lord) that all this will happen under your sage conduct, and that after you
have settled our repose, and procured the same for our Allies, you shall enjoy
your good deeds in great tranquillity, and see the estate of those things
endure, whereof your self have been a principal Author. All good men are
confident these blessed events will happen in your Age, and by your Advice. As
for me who am the meanest among those who justly admire your Virtues, I shall
not (I hope) prove the slackest in the expression of your Merits: Since
therefore they (of right) exact a general acknowledgment; if I should fail in
my particular contribution, I were for ever unworthy the Honor I so
ambitiously aspire unto; the highth whereof is to be esteemed

Your Lordships most humble and most obedient servant, BALZAC.

To the Lord Bishop of Air.
LETTER VIII.
My Lord,
IF at the first sight, you know not my Letter, and that you desire to be
informed who writes unto you: It is one more old*like then his Father, and as
ouer-worne as a Ship, having made three Voyages to the Indies; and who is no
other thing, then the Relickes of him, whom you saw at Rome. In those days I
sometimes complained without cause, and happily there was then no great
difference between the health of others, and my infirmity. Howsoever, be it
that my imagination is crazed, or that my present pain does no longer admit of
any comparison. I begin to lament the Fever and Scyatica as lost goods, and as
pleasures of my youth now past: See here to what terms I am reduced, and how
(as it were) I live, if it may be called living, to be in a continual
contestation with Death. True it is, there is not sufficient efficacy in all
the words whereof this World makes use, to express the miseries I endure; they
leave no place, either for the Physicians skill, or the sickemans* Patience;
nor has Nature ordained any other remedies for the same, save only Poison and
precipices. But I much fear least I suffer my self to be transported with
pain, or endure it less Christianly then beseems me, being a Witness of
your Vertus; and having had the means to profit my self by your Example. My
Lord, it is now time (or never) I subdue this wicked spirit, which does
forcibly transport my will; and that the old Adam obey the other. Yet does it
not a little grieve me, to be indebted to my misery for my Souls health, and*
that I much desire it were some other more noble consideration then necessity,
should cause me to become an honest man. But since the means to save us are
bestowed upon us* and that we choose them not, it is fitting that reason
convince our sensiblities, causing us to agree to what is otherwise
distastefull unto us. At the worst, we must at all times confess, that we
cannot be said to perish, when we are safely cast on shore by some Ship wrack;
and it may be, if God did not drive me as he does out of this Life, I should
never dream of a better. I will refer the rest to be related unto you at
your return from Jtaly, with purpose to lay open my naked Soul unto you,
together with my Thoughts in the same simplicity they spring in me: you are the
only Person from whom I expect Relief; and I hold my self richer in the
possession of your good Opinion* then if I enjoyed the favors of all earthly
Princes, and all the Wealth of their Territories and Kingdoms. Truly this is
the first time (since I writ unto you from Lions) I have made use of my hands;
and I have received a hundred Letters from my Friends without answering one.
Hereby (my Lord) you see, there is no other consideration (your self excepted)
of force to cause me to break silence, since for all others I have lost the
use of speaking. Yet I beseech you to think (notwithstanding all this) my
affection to be neither penurious nor ambitious. The Riches I crave at your
noble hands, are purely spiritual, and I am at this present in an estate,
wherein I have more need to settle some order for the affairs of my
Conscience, then to reflect upon the establishment of my worldly Fortunes. But
(my Lord) to change Discourse, and a little to retire my self from my pains,
what do you thus long at Rome? Does the Pope dally with us? and will he leave
to his Successor the glory of the best Election can be made? Is he not affraide
lest it be given out he has some intelligence with his Adversaries, and that
he takes not the advice of the Holy Ghost, in what concerns the Churches
Honor: for Gods cause bring us with speed this News, provided it be the
same the King demands, and all good men desire. I hope it shall not be said,
you have spoken Jtalian all this while to no purpose, or that you can accuse
his predictions, as erroneous, who never falsified his word with you, and who
is perfectly

My Lord Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 2. of July, 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air.
For the true understanding of this Letter: it is necessary to be acquainted
with the Gibbrige, the French residing at Rome, use to speak; who frame a new
kind of Language to themselves, composed of Italian words, having only French
terminations.

LETTER IX.
My Lord,
I Think you will never be weary of going to Cortege, and that you will for
ever have an apprehension of the Crepuscule all the days of your life; so it
is, that you have long enough caused the curtaynes of your Corroach to be
drawn in presence of those of Cardinals; and that you may well be (ere now)
acquaynted with the Court of Rome, even from the Papale subjects, to those who
desire to be admitted into the first degrees of sacred Orders. For my part, I
should soon be weary in seeing daily one and the same thing, and in beginning
the day from the first hour of night? What can there be so pleasing in the
place where you are, that should deserve to stay you there? In fair weather
the Sun is dangerous: half the Year they breath nothing but smoke, and in
the rest, it raineth so frequently, that it seems some Sea hangs over the
City of Rome. But it may be you take pleasure in seeing the Pope, a body
ouer-shaken, and trembling with age and infirmities, who has no other thing
then Ice in his veins, and Earth in his Visage I cannot imagine how this
object can afford you any great contentment; or that you are much taken with
the society and Company of the great multitude of my Lords his Assistants,
partaking of the one and the other Signature: Nor can it be Carriofile whom you
so often overrule, who should entreat you to stay there for the furtherance
of his Affairs. For being (as he is) a Popeline, and of the Family of the
Cardinal Ludouisio, who affoords him his full share* it cannot be but well
with him. I conclude therefore (my Lord) that I cannot guess the cause of your
stay, if you take not the pains to tell me. For to imagine Mounsieur de Luzon
not to be as yet a Cardinal, were no less then to wrong the Kings credit, and
to judge amiss of public acknowledgement. I am here at the Antipodes, where
there is not any thing but Air, the Earth, and a River; One had here need
make above ten days iourneyes to find a man: wherefore having in this place
no other communication but with the Dead, I can relate no other News unto you,
but of the other World. Is it not true, that he who would have burnt his shirt,
had it known his secrets, would hardly have been drawn to make his general
confession? and that Alexander the Great would with much difficulty have been
induced to purchase Paradise by Humility? What say you of poor Brutus? who
killed his Father, thinking to confound a Tyrant, and no less to repent
himself at his Death, in having loved Virtue, then if he had followed an
unfaithful Mistress. Do you not yet remember the first Consuls, whose words
smelt of Garlic and green roasted Meat? think you not they made use of
their hands insteede of feet, being so rough and durty as they were, and wore
Shoes instead of Gloves? These men were not acquainted either with Sugar,
Musk, or Amber-greeze. They had not (as then any gods of Gold, or Goblets of
Silver. They were ignorant in all sorts of Sciences, save only to make War,
and to have domination over men. I lately read how in Venice (in former times)
men of greatest quality, usually married with common women, and that either
the good Husbandry, or the mutual correspondency was such among the Citizens,
that one Wife served three Brothers. Think you that Francis the first is called
Great, for having vanquished the Swisses? or to distinguish him from his
Grand*child? or by reason of his great Nose? Give me a reason why Selim flew
his Father, his Brothers, and Nephews? and after all this dyed but once? Were
it not that I fear to be wearisome unto you, I should never make an end of my
News, yea I should be sufficiently stored to entertayne you my whole
lifetime. But it is high time that unprofitable Speeches, give place to Pious
Cogitations; and that I leave you among your Myrtles and Orange Trees, where
you are never better accompanied then when you are alone. I will here conclude,
rather out of Discretion, then for want of Matter: But this shall not be till
after I have said, that of all those who have any share in your Favors, there
is not any who is therein more proud of his good Fortune, then my self, or
more really then I am

My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, BALZAC.
The 25. of September, 1622.

To the Lord Bishop of Air from BALZAC.
LETTER X.
My LORD,
THese times are fatal, for abating those heads appearing above others, and
for changing the face of things: and questionless if this course still
continue, the King will either be forced to seek out a new people, or to
resolve himself for a solitary Reign: All the Court is black with mournings:
there is not a Frenchman who does not either weep, or is bewailed* and War
causes only slight sorrows; yet even among those whose loss we lament,
there are always some we willingly leave, and whose Catastrophe may serve us
as a consolation for the rest. Without further ambiguity, the man is seized on,
who grew lean by the well*fare of others, and who was one of those pale and
sober persons, borne for the Ruin of States; there is some appearance he dyed
as well of the Purples of M. L. C. D. R. as of his own, and that you sent him
his first surfeit from Rome; where he truly considering how there was no
longer any favor to follow, nor Favorite to flatter, he would leave to live
any longer, as though he had no further affairs in this World. Howsoever it
be, we are herein to acknowledge the Finger of God, and to confess, he does
sometimes punish Malefactors, without observing the forms of Justice* at least
it cannot be denied, but God loves the Queen extraordinarily, since he
reserueth to himself the revenge of all her injuries, nor will let any thing
remay ne in the world which may prove distastefull unto her. If she desired
the Sea should be calm in the most stormy days of Winter; or two Autumnes to
happen each Year: I am confident of Natures change, in conformity to her will:
nor is there any thing she cannot obtain of Heaven, which grants the very
prayers she has not as yet begun. I am here some hundred and fifty Leagues
from these fine things, where I study to solace my self as much as possibly I
can; and to this end, I make my self drunk every day: But to free you from
any sinister opinion of what I say, I assure you it is only with the water of
Pougues, which surely would be Ink, were it black; so that I surfeit without
finning against the Rules of Sobriety, and my frolickes are as Austeere as the
Minimes fastings. I have a great desire to enter covenants with my Physicians,
whereby it might be granted, that all agreeable things should be wholesome, and
that one might speedily recover his Health by the sent of Flowers, instead of
their Medicines which are ordinarily second miseries succeeding the former: yet
without spending much time, or trouble* I have made all impossibilities
passable with me, and in the case I am, I would swallow Fire, were it
prescribed me for the recovery of my health. It is no small advantage* not to
be reduced to these terms no more then you are, and not to know what it is to
suffer or complain. So is it for the general good of the whole World, that
GOD has given you this vigorous Health, to employ it in the service of Kings,
and in your Vigilance over the conduct of People. As for me, who should not
happily make so good use thereof as I ought, and who am far more inclinable
to Vice then to Virtue: I hold it convenient I be always crazy, and that GOD
take from me the means to offend Him, whereof otherwise I should infallibly
make but overmuch use: I write not at this present to M. it is all I can do to
finish this Letter in have, and to tell you what you long since knew, that

I am my Lord, Your most humble and passionate Servant; BALZAC.
October the 15. 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air, from BALZAC.
LETTER XI.
My Lord,
I Am infinitely glad to understand by your Letters, of your safe return into
France, and that you have now no further use of Cypbers, for the expression of
your mind to my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu. I shall at your pleasure (I
hope) understand the particulars of your Voyage, and what you have seen at
Naples and Venice, worthy your content. This is not out of any great curiosity
I have for these things, or that I admire dumble Marble, or Pictures being no
way so beautiful as the Persons: These trifles are to be left for the Vulgar,
with whom the same Objects limit their imagination and sight: and who (of all
times) reflect, mearely upon the present, and (of all things*) only upon the
appearance: but for my part I am of a contrary opinion. There are not in the
whole world any Palaces so sumptuous, or of so high a structure which are not
far under my thoughts, and I conceive in my spirit a poor hermitage, to the
foundation whereof many more materials are proiected, then were requisite for
establishing a Republicke. You see here my Lord, how in some sort I play the
Prince amidst my poverty, and with what insolency I scorn what the world so
much admireth; I am as haughty, as though I were a Minister of State; or as if
this last change in the Kingdom had been made for me alone: yet you know well
that I call not my self L. M. D. L. V, and how if there had been none but my
self to assault my Lord the Comte of Schambergs* Virtue, it still had
continued in the same place where it has been reverenced of all men. Each man
has his several censure concerning this great news, but whatsoever they can
say, I assure my self there can nothing befall that Lord, whereto he is not
at all times prepared, and that he has lived too long, not to know that
Fortune takes special delight in dallying with the affairs of France, and
has from all Ages made choice of our Court, as the Theater of her follies. If
he had not been provided of the government of this City, and what time the
King commanded him to come thence, his fall had been more fearful then it
was, but it is Gods will that Augolesme should be the fatal retreat of the
afflicted, and truly allthings well considered, it is no great downe*come to
light upon a Mountain: Now truly if the e be any thing amiss in the
administration of the Kings Moneys, he cannot be taxed for introducing this
error; for he found it there: and besides, the necessity of the times have
ever resisted his good intentions, and have hindered the appearance of what he
had in his heart, for the reformation of disorders* It is now necessary the
King undertake so glorious a Design, and set his hand to that part of the
State, which has more need of redress then all the rest. But he is first to
begin by the moderation of his Spirit, and he shall after gain their loyalty
who serve him. If those Princes our Elders have seen, had considered, that the
Coin coming into their Exchecquers, was no less then the blood, and tears
of their poor Subjects, whom they have often forced to fly into Forests, and
pass the Seas to save themselves from taxes and impositions: they would have
been more scrupulous and cautelous how they had touched upon so dreadful
undertakings: at least they would not have been at once both indigent and
unjust, nor have amazed all the Princes of Europe, who could never conceive why
they borrowed their own moneys of their Treasurers, who receive their
revenewes, as they purchase their own strong places from their Governors who
command therein. Truly, it is very strange the Great Turk can entrust his
Wives to the vigilance of others, and assure themselves their Chastity shall
thereby be conserved; yet that Kings know not to whom they may safely encharge
their Treasures. But the true reason is, for that an honest man is by so much
more difficultly found, then an Eunuch, by how much Miracles are more rare then
Monsters. Great Fortitude is requisite for the attayning of Honesty, but the
will only suffices to become covetous, and the most harmless have hands,
and may happen to have temptations. Were it my part to play the reformer, and
to preach before the Prelates, I would enlarge my self upon this Subject; but
in the condition wherein I stand, it is sufficient I approve not the ill, and
have a good Opinion of the present State: provided, the report be current, that
there is now no obstacle between the King and the Queen his Mother, likely to
hinder them from meeting; and that things are reduced to those terms wherein
Nature has placed them: Then will the face of the State shortly resume the
same beauty the late King bestowed thereon, and God will with a full hand power
his Graces upon so just a Government. Though my Lord the Cardinal of Richlieu
were only near Public affairs, without touching them, there is no question
but he would bring a blessing to all France, and though he intimated nothing to
the King, yet that he would at least inspire whatsoever were necessary for the
good of his Subjects, and Dignity of his Crown* I will reserve to speak as I
ought of this rare Virtue, till my great Work come to light* Where I will
render every man his right, and condemn even those as culpable, whom the
Parliaments crouch unto; There shall it be where I will canuasse the Court of
Rome* (which I always separate from the Church) with as much force, and
freedom as he used, from whose mouth we have seen lightning to issue, and
Thunder to be thrown out. There is not any thing of so fair a semblance whose
deformities I unmask not. There is nothing of eminency from one end of the
World to the other, I ouer-turne not* I will discover the defects of Princes
and States. I will expugne Vice wheresoever it is hidden, and with what
Protection soever it is palliated. To conclude, I will pass as severe a
Judgment as was that of the Areopagites in times past, or of the Inquisition
at this present. Yet my Lord, in this my common censure, I will take a
particular care of the Queen Mothers reputation, and will let all the World
see, that what heretofore others have called Virtue, is the natural habitude
of this great Princess. In the place for others appointed for Afflictions and
Calamities, She shall together with the King, receive only Flowers and
Crowns; and as her innocence had saved her from the general deluge, had she
then lived; so will it cause her to Triumph in my Story amidst the tuines of
others* I have not the faculty of Flattering, but the Art only to speak the
Truth in good terms; and the Actions you see, had need be more eminent then
those you have read of, if I equal them not by my Words. This being thus (my
Lord, as I hope, you doubt not;) imagine in what terms* I will iustific the
R. D. L. R, and in what fort I will entreat her enemies* if I have a mind to
it, I will make it one day appeard that (...) has been as cruel a Monster as
those who deuourewhole Cities, and denounce War against all Humane and Dinine
things. One will imagine by the marks I give him, that R. was a Magician,
which daily*pricked some Image of Wax with needles, and who disturbed the
repose of all Princes Courts of his time, by the force of his Charms. The
truth is, I will do great matters, provided my courage quail not on his part
whence I expect it should come, and to whom by a kind of strict Obligation, I
am excited to undertake this Judgment which will be no less famous then that
of Michael Angelo. At our next meeting I will more particularly acquaint you
with the whole design of my Work, with its order, ornaments, and artifice;
you shall there see whether or no I make good use of those hours I sometimes
obtain from the tyranny of my Phisisians and lingering maladies. In the interim
do me the Honor to love me still; nor think I speak the Court-language, or
that I compliment with you, when I assure you I am more then any man living

My Lord, Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 28. of December, 1622.
Another Letter to the Lord Bishop of Air.
LETTER XII.
My Lord,
IT must needs be, your Oath of Fealty does yet continue, and that the
Ceremony you are employed in, be longer then I imagined, since I have no news
from you: for I must freely confess unto you, I am not so slightly persuaded
of my self, as to have any thought, as that you neglect me. Besides, I am
certain that public faith, and what has ever been sworn upon Altars and
the Gospolls, are not more inviolable then your word, and that it will stand
good though Heaven and Earth should start; Besides, I can less conjecture,
that you are hindered by want of Health, whereof I hope you enjoy so large a
treasure, as it is like to contine as long as the World lasts. It were a
wrong to me, should you allege Sickness, and no less then to wrangle with me
for a thing in such manner appropriated to my self, as I cannot communicate it
to any other. I will therefore imagine whatsoever you will have me to think;
you may love me if you please, without taking the pains to tell me so: But
for my part, how importunate soever I am herein, yet am I resolute to write
unto you, till you cut off my hands, and to publish so long as I have a tongue,
that I am

Sir, Your most humble, and most affectionate servant, BALZAC*
The 16. of December, 1622.
To the Lord Bishop of Air from BALZAC.
LETTER XIII.
My Lord,
YOu cannot loose me, how little care soever you take to keep me; The Heavens
must necessarily infuse new affections in me, and utterly alter my
inclinations, if they intend to inhibite me to be your Servant. Yet does it
not a little grieve me, you do not testify what I know you believe; and that
having the power to make me happy by the least of your Letters, I have more
trouble to impetrate this favor, then I should find in the obtaining of three
Declarations from the King, and as many Briefes from his Holiness. But all
this notwithstanding I cannot be persuaded you place me among matters of mere
indifferency, or that you no longer remember what you have promised with so
large protestations, which I hold to be most authentical. I rather for the
satisfaction of my thoughts will be confident you have resolved to love me in
secret, thereby to avoid all jealousy; and will believe there is more
cunning, then coldness in your Silence; were it otherwise, or had I really
lost your Favors, certainly I would not survive so deep a discomfort, since
there is not any banishment, shipwreck, or sinister fortune, I could not
rather require at Gods hands, then such a loss: But these Discourses are as
much as to suppose impossibilities, or to invent Dreams: I will therefore
leave them, to let you understand some news from me. I can only say, the Air
of this Country is not offensive unto me: for to assure you that I am in
health were too great a boldness, I confess, I have now and then some
pleasing pauses, and I enjoy certain good Hours, which make me remember my
former Health: But there is great difference between this imperfect estate of
mine and a constitution comparable to that of yours, who have life sufficient
to viuifie thirty such worn bodies as mine, which needs but one blast to blow
it down. Howsoever, my Physicians have promised to make me a new man, and to
restore unto me what I have lost. I should be well contented they were men of
their words, and that I might at my ease attend all occasions, to testify how
passionately I am

The 6. of January, 1623. Your most humble and most affectionate Servant,
BALZAC.

To the Reverend Bishop of Air, from BALZAC.
LETTER XIIII.
My LORD,
SInce you have as much care of me as of your Diocese, and in that I perceive
you would imagine some defect, even in the felicities you expect in Heaven,
should you be saved without me; I will use my utmost endeavors to cause that
your desire of my Spiritual good prove not unprofitable, and to make my self
capable of the good Counsel you gave me by your Letter. True it is, I have
been so long habituated in vice, I have almost utterly forgotten my state of
Jnnocency, so as a particular Jubilee for my self only, were no more then
necessary: On the otherside, the pious motions I have, are so poor and
imperfect, that of all the flames the Primative Christians have felt and
endured, I should hardly support the mere smoke. Yet my Lord) even in this
bad state wherein I now stand, do I expect a Miracle from my Maker, who is
only able to raise Children out of the hardest Quarries; nor will I believe
his Mercy has finished what he intends to effect for the good of Mortals:
For since he has placed Ports upon the shoares of most dangerous Seas, and
given some kind of dawning, even to the darkest Nights; it may be there is yet
something reserved for me in the secrets of his Providence; and that if
hitherto I have ranged out of the right way, he will not any longer suffer me
to stray, or tire my self in the tracke of vice. And truly, I must here,
though much to my shame, acknowledge the truth unto you, with those few drops
of corrupt blood (which is all I have left) I am plunged in all those passions,
wherewith the foundest bodies are pressed: yea, Tyrants, who burn whole
Cities upon the first motion of rage, and choler, and who allow themselves to
act what unlawful thing soever, do nothing more then my self, save only to
enjoy those things I desire, and to execute those designs remaining only in
my will, I wanting their power to perpetrate the like: Nor can the Fever, the
Stone, nor the Scyatica, as yet tame my rebellious spirit, or cause it to
become capable of Discipline; and if time had added years to the rest of my
infirmities, I verily think I should desire to behold unclean sights with
spectacles, such I mean as you utterly avoid, and cause my self to be
carried to those lewd places, whither alone I were unable to go: Insomuch that
as there are diverse paintings which are necessarily to be clean defaced, to
take away the defects; so I much fear nothing but Death can stay the current
of my crimes, unless by your means I enter into a second Life, more fruitful
then the former. I therefore speak in good sadness, set your whole Clergy to
prayer, and command a public Fast in the same strictness, as though you
were to impetrate at the hands of God, the conversion of the great Turk, or of
the Persian Emperor* Propound to your self Monsters in my will to be mastred,
and an infinity of enemies to overcome in my passions, and after all this you
will bear me witness, I have not made matters greater then they are, and save
only a certain imperfect desire I have to repent, and a kind of small
resistance, I sometimes make against the beginnings and buddings of vice, there
is not any difference at all between my self and the greatest sinner living:
But take not (I beseech you) this I write, as a mark of my Humility, for you
never read a truer relation: and what St. Paul spoke in the person of Mankind,
accusing himself of other men's offenses, is my own simple deposition, which I
deliver into the hands of the Divine Justice. I hate my self; yet true it is,
I find so great coldness in the performance of pious actions, that my mind
seems to be imprisoned when at any time my Duty draws me to Church, and
when I am there, I rather seek diuertions and temptations, then instruction or
edification: Even mental prayer being an Oblation for all hours, and which
may be performed without either burnt Jncense, OF bloody Sacrifices, and the
finishing whereof is so near the first motion; is to me as laborious, as the
Pilgrimage of Mount Serrat, or of our Lady of Loretta, would be to another. I
am always sad, but never penitent; I love solitariness, but hate austerity; I
side with honest men, but reside with the wicked: if at any time some small
rays of Devotion reflect upon my crazy conscience, they are of so short
continuance, and so weak, as they neither afford me light nor heat, so as all
this being but accident, and mere chance, does not any way merit the name of
good, and it were great wrong to Virtue, to rank it in the number of casual
occurrents. You are therefore necessarily to labor for my conversion, which I
am unable to effect of my self, and that for my part, I only afford matter
whereon to make an honest man. If there be certain Saints whom we owe to the
tears and intercession of others, and if some Martyrs have made their very
Executioners Companions of their Glory, I may well hope you will be a powerful
means to save me with your self; and that one day (happily) I may be
mentioned among the rest of your Miracles* Sir, I know your life to be so
spotless, as though you were incorporeall, or never loved any other then that
Supreme beauty, from whence all others are derived* Wherefore there is no
question but so rare a Virtue may easily impetrate at Gods hands any
supplication you shall exhibit, nor is there any doubt he has (for you
allotted) other limits to his bounty, save his only omnipotency. You shall yet
at the least find in me Obedience and Docility, if I have not attained any
stronger habitudes. You shall have to do with one who amidst the corruption of
this Age, wherein well nigh all Spirits reuolte from the Faith, cannot be
drawn to believe any truth to be greater, then what he has understood from
his Nurse or Mother. If in what concerns not Religion, I have sometimes had
my private Sense and Opinion, I do with my very heart leave the same, to the
end, to reconcile my self with the Vulgar; and least I should appear an Enemy
to my Country for a slight word, or matter of small importance. If phphphph
had held himself to this Maxim, he might securely have lived among men, nor
had he been prosecuted with all extremity as the most savage of all beasts:
But he rather chose to make a Tragical end, then to expect a death wherewith
the World was unacquainted, or to execute only ordinary actions. So far as I
can learn, or if the report which passes be current, he had a conceit he
might one day prove to be that false Prophet, wherewith the declining age of
the Church is threatened: and though he be but of mean extraction, and poor
fortunes, he was notwithstanding so presumptuous, as to imagine himself to be
the man, who is to come with armed forces to disturb the quiet of Consciences,
and for whom the infernal Ministers keep all the Treasures yet hidden in the
Earths intrailes. So long as he contented himself in committing only humane
faults, writing as yet with an untainted Pen, I often told him, his Verses were
not passable; and that he was in the wrong to esteem himself an
understanding man. But he perceiving that the rules I propounded to him, for
bettering his abilities, to be ouer-sharpe and severe for him* and finding
small hope of arriving whether I desired to conduct him, he perhaps thought
best to seek out some other way to bring himself into credit at Court, hoping
of a mean Poet to become a mighty Prophet: So that (as it is generally
reported) after he had perverted a number of silly Spirits* and long showed
himself in the throng of the ignorant multitude; he in conclusion did as one
who should cast himself into a bottomless pit, on purpose to gain the
reputation of being an admirable Iumper. My Lord, you remember (I doubt not)
what our joint opinion has been of such like persons, and the weakness you
showed there was in the principles of their wicked Doctrine. Now truly how
extrauagant soever my Spirit has been, I have yet ever submitted the same to
the authority of GODS Church, and to the consent of Nations; and as I have
always held, that a single drop of Water, would more easily corrupt, then the
whole Ocean: So have I ever assured my self, that particular opinions could
never be either so sound or sollid, as the general Tenets. A silly man who
has no further knowledge of himself, then by the relations of others, who is
at his wits end, and wholly confounded in the consideration or reflection upon
the meanest works of Nature; who after the revolution of so many Ages, is not
able to assign the cause of a certain Rivers ouer-flow; nor of the interuals
or good days of a Tertian Ague: How dare he presume to speak confidently of
that Infinite Majesty, in whose presence the Angels themselves cover their
faces with their Wings, and under whom the very Heavens crouch, even to the
Earths lowest concauities. There is no other thing remaining for us, save the
only glory of Humility, and Obedience, within the limits whereof, we ought to
contain our selves: And since it is most certain, that Humane reason reaches
not to so high a pitch as to attayue the perfection of Knowledge, we ought
instead of disputing or questioning points of Religion, to rest satisfied in
the adoration of their Mysteries: for doubtless, if we strive to enter further
thereinto, or search for a thing utterly unknown to all Philosophy, and
concealed from the Sages of this World, we shall by such profane curiosity
gain only the dazeling of our Eyes, and confusion of our Senses: God by the
light of his Gospel has revealed unto us diverse Truths, whereof we were
utterly ignorant; but he reserueth for us far greater Mysteries, which we
shall never comprehend, but only in that Kingdom which he has prepared for
his chosen Servants, and by the only vision of his Face. In the mean time; to
the end, to augment the merit of our Faith, and the more to perfectionate our
Piety, his pleasure is, that Christians should become as blind Lovers, and that
they have not any other desires or hopes, but for those things above the reach
of their understandings, and which they can no way comprehend by Natural
reason. So soon as the time you have prefixed me, shall be expired, and the
Prime-roses make the Spring appear, I will not fail to wait upon you, and
diligently to address my self to the collection of your grave and important
Discourses, and to become an honest man by hearing, since that is the Sense
appointed for the apprehension of Christian virtues, and whereby the Son of
God was conceived, and his Kingdom established among men. But it is needless
to use any artifice, or that you paint the place of your abode in so glorious
colors, thereby to inuit me to come: For though you preached in the Desert,
or were you hidden in such a corner of the World, where the Sun did only
shine upon the sterile Sands and steep Rocks: you well know, I should esteem
my self happy where you are. Your Company being of power to make either a
prison or proscription pleasing unto me; and wherein I find the Loouer and the
whole Court, will add (to the description you have made of Air) diverse
beauties which Geographers have not hitherto observed, as being far greater
then others, though more secret. Those Mountains which will not allow France
and Spain to be one man's, and under which the Rain and Thunder are framed,
will appear to me more huge, then they formerly did, when I first saw them:
your waters which heretofore cured diuer Diseases, will even raise the Dead, if
you once bless them; and doubtlesle this people, always bred up to bear
Arms, and who as the Fire and Jron is only destinated for the use of War,
has (ere now) mollified their fierce humor by the moderation of your mild
conduct. For my part (Sir) I make account to become a new man under your hands,
and to receive a second Birth from you. Truly, it would be a thing right happy
to me, and in it self famous; if the like Spiritual health, proceeding from
the garments and shadows of the Apostles, might happen unto me by approaching
so holy a person; and if being your workmanship, and the Son of your Spirit,
I should instantly resemble a Father so happily endowed with all those rare
qualities and perfections, which are wholly deficient in me.

BALZAC.

To Mounsieur de la Motts Aigron.
LETTER XV.
YEsterday was one of those Sunlesse days (as you term them) which resemble
that beautiful blind Maid, wherewith Philip the second fell in Love. Truly,
I never took more pleasure in so private a solitariness; and though I walked
in a large and open Plain, whereof man could make no other use, but for two
Armies to fight in: yet the shade the Heavens cast on all sides, caused me
little to regard the shelter of Caves or Forests. There was a general and
quiet calm from the highest Region of the Air, even to the Superficies of the
Earth: the waters of Rivers seemed as even and smooth as those of Lakes; and
surely, if at Sea such a calm should for ever surpriseships, they could never
be either safe, or sunk. This I say, on purpose to make you repent the losle
of so pleasant a Day, for not coming abroad out of the City, as also to draw
you sometimes out of your Angoulesme, where you tread leuill with our Towers
and Steeples, to come and take part of those pleasures wherein the ancient
Princes of the World took delight: who usually refreshed themselves in
Fountains, and lived on those fruits which Forests afford. Your Friends
here are in a small circle environed with Mountains, and where is yet
remaining some few grains of that fair Gold whereof the first Age was
composed. In truth when the fire of War is flaming in the four corners of
France, and that within a hundred paces hence, the whole Earth is covered with
adverse Troops and Armies; they with mutual consent do always spare our
Village. The Springtime in other places producing the besiegings of Forts and
Cities, with other enterprises of War, and which for this dozen years has
been less looked for, in respect of the change of Seasons, then for any
alteration of Affairs, suffers us to see no other thing but Violets and Roses.
Our people are not contained in their primative innocence, either by fear of
Laws or Study of Sciences* They (to live uprightly) do simply follow their
natural Bounty, and draw more advantage from their ignorance of Vice, then
most of us do out of the knowledge of Virtue: so as in this. Territory of two
miles, they know not how to cosen any, save Birds and Beasts, and the pleading
Language is as unknown here, as that of America, or of other parts of the
World, which have escaped the avarice of Ferdinand* and the ambition of
Isabella. Those things which hurt the health of man, or offend their eyes, are
generally banished hence; Snakes nor Lizards are never seen here, and of
creping creatures we know no other but Melions and Strawberries. I intend not
here to draw you the portraite of a Palace, the workmanship whereof has not
bin ordered acording to the rules of architecture, nor the matter so precious as
Marble and Purphire. I will only tell you that at the Gates there is a Grove,
wherein at full noone there enters no more day then needs must not to make it
night, and to cause all colors not to look black* so that between the Sun
and the shade, there is a kind of third temper composed, which may well be
endured by the weakest eyes, and hide the deformities of painted faces. The
Trees here, are green to the very ground, as well with their own leaves, as
with Iuy which inuirones them: and as for the fruits wherein they are
deficient, their branches are all beset with Turtle-Doues and Phesants, and
this at all times in the year. From thence I march into a Meddow, where I
tread upon Tulipans and Anemons, having caused them to be mingled among other
Flowers, to confirm my opinion I brought from my Travails, that French
Flowers are not so fair, as those of Foreign Countries. I (sometimes walk
down into that Vallie, being the secret part of my Desert, and which till now)
was not known to any man: It is a Country to be wished for and painted. I have
made choice thereof for my most precious occupations, there to pass the most
pleasing hours of my life: The Trees and Water never suffer this place to want
coulenesse and verdure. The Swans which covered the whole River, are retired to
this place of security: living in a Channel, which causes the greatest
talkers to take a nappe, so soon as they come near; and on whose Banks I am
always happy; be I merry or melancholy: How short a time soever I stay there,
I suppose I enter into my first innocence: my desires, my fears and hopes stop
in a trice: all the motions of my soul flacken, nor have I any passions
remaining, or if I have any, I govern them as tame Beasts. The Sun conuayes
its light thither, but never its heat. The place is so low, as it can only
receive the last points of its beams: being therefore the more beautiful, in
that they are less burning, and the light thereof altogether pure. But as it
is my self who have discovered this new found Land; so do I possess it
without any partner, nor would I share it with my own brother. But in all
other quarters under my command, there is not a man who courts not his
Mistress without control, nor servant of mine who is not master; each one
satisfying himself of what he loves, and spending the time at pleasure. And on
the other side, when I see the Grass trodden down; and on the other, the
Corn full of Layers: I am well assured, it is neither Wind nor Hail, has
made this work, but only a Shepherd and his sweete-heart. At which door
soever I go out of my house, or on what side soever I turn mine eyes, in this
pleasant Pathmos, I find the river of Charauton well meriting as much fame, as
that of Tagus, and wherein, when Beasts go to drink, they see the Heavens as
clear as we do, and enjoy the same advantage, which elsewhere men have over
them. Besides, this pure water is so in love with this petty Province, that it
diuides it self into a thousand branches, and makes an infinite of windings
and turnings, as loath to leave and deprive it self of so pleasing a lodging;
and when at any time it ouer-floweth, it is only to make the year more
firtile, and to afford us means to catch Trouts and Pykes, leaving them upon
the leuill; and which are so great and excellent, as they equal the Sea
Monsters; the Crocadiles of Nile, and all the supposed Gold rolling in those
feigned Rivers so much spoken of by Poets. The great Duke of Espernon, comes
hither sometimes, for change of felicity, and to lay aside that austere virtue
and splendour, which dazeleth the eyes of all men, to assume milder qualities,
and a more accostable Majesty. This Cardinal likewise, by whom Heaven intends
to act so high designs, and of whom you hear me daily speak, after the loss
of his brother who was such a one, as if he might have chosen him among all
men, he would not have taken any other: after (as I say) having endured that
loss, well deserving to draw tears from the Queen, he made choice of this
place, here to exercise his patience, and to receive from Gods hands who loves
silence, and who is found in solitary retirements, what Philosophy affoordeth
not, nor is to be practiced among the throng of people. I would enlarge my
self upon other Examples, to show you how my Village has at all times bin
frequented by Heroical Hermits, and how the steps of Princes and great
Siegniors, are (as yet) newly trodden in my ordinary paths. But the more to
inuit you to come hither; I suppose it sufficient to say, that Virgil and
myself do here attend you: if therefore you be accompanied in this Voyage with
your Muses; and other Manuscripts, we shall not need to entertayne the time
with Court news, nor with the German troubles: Let me not live, if ever I
saw any thing comparable to your Spiritual Meditations, and if the least part
of the Work you showed me, be not of more worth, then all Frankford Mart, and
all those great Books which come to us from the North, bringing cold weather
and frosts along with them. I assure you the President of THOU, who was as
worthy a Judge of Latin Eloquence, as of the life and fortunes of men; and who
had left an exact History behind him, had he pleased to retract some things;
made no small esteem of these my Contrymen: But I cannot as yet conceive
what caused him to affect certain wits so contrary to his own, and who never
were acquainted, nor did so much as dream of that Roman purity, you pursue
with so great scrupulosity and exact diligence. You will let these men see I
assure my self; yea, and those wise Transalpines themselves likewise, who
think all such to be Scythians who are not Jtalians, even in what fashion they
spoke in Augustus his age, yea and in a time more clear from the corruption of
good customs. In a word, besides the propriety of terms, and chastity of
Style, which lends a luster to your elaborate Writings, your conceits are so
sublime, and so full of courage, that it is very probable the ancient
Republicke of Rome was adorned with the like, at what time it was victorious
over the World, and when the Senate conceived insemblable terms, the
Commandments they prescribed to greatest Princes, and the answers it addressed
to all Nations on earth: I will speak further, when you appear where I expect
you; and where instead of Flowers, Fruits, and Shades, which I prepare for
you, I hope to receive from you all the Riches of Art and Nature. In the
interim (to use my Lord the Cardinal d'Ossats term) I bid you good night,
and let you know, that if you seek excuses not to come, I am no longer

Your most humble and faithful Servant, BALZAC.
The 26. of September, 1622.
To Mounsieur de bois Robert from BALZAC.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
I was upon the point not to have written any more unto you, and to have
contented my self in sending you single commendations, since I see my Letters
procure you enemies: and for that you are in daily contestation for defending
them; if therefore you desire continuance of our conference in this kind, live
hence-forward reposedly, and reconcile your self to choice Wits, from whom I
should be sorry you should separate your self for my sake; it is far better
to conceal a small truth, then to disturb a general peace; and I should hold
my Eloquence as pernicious as the perfections of Helena, should it prove any
cause of your quarrels. Since there have been found men who have carped at the
Worlds composure, and spied spots in the Sun, it is very likely inferior
things cannot be more perfect; and that there is nothing so absolutely
approved, against which there has not been some thing disputed, and certain
weak Reasons alleged. I confess I write as men build Temples and Palaces,
and that I sometimes fetch my materials a far often; as we are to make a
voyage of two thousand Leagues, to transport the Treasures of America into
Spain. But if Pearls be not precious because they grow not in the sands of
Seine; or if in what I do, some condemn me, it suffices that I am not of
their mind; if the worst come, I appeal to my Lord the Cardinal of
Richelieu, of whose approbation I esteem more, then of popular favor, or
applause of Theaters. It is long since I understood from him that I exceeded
others; not excepting even those who strive to aspire to a kind of tyranny, and
to usurp a more absolute authority over wits, then is either lawful or
reasonable. This being so, I should much wrong that Great person, on whose
books God has placed the Truth we seek after, as well as the Eloquence all
of us imagine we have attained should I digress from his opinion, to regard
what four or five of those composers of Romands of the Rose say, who have no
other language but Legends: if I would content my self with my infant
conceptions, or determined to write as an honest Woman should speak, they
would happily find their own facility in my Works: though truly if I take
any pains therein, I assure myself they will sooner guess at, then gain my
conceptions. But truly, he who purposes to himself the Idea of perfection,
and who labors for Eternity, ought not to let any thing escape his Pen, till
after long and serious consultation with himself. Yet will I tell you, and all
the World may easily understand, that my writings smell more of Musk and Amber,
then of Oil or sweat; whereas out of that great labouriousnesse they so much
frame to themselves, there will infallibly arise obscurity, which none but the
Blind can tax me with* But as for those fellows, it is always night with
them, and they are rather to accuse their mothers of their defects, and not
colors or the light: I endeavor (in what I may) to make all my conceptions
popular, and to be intelligable among women and children, even when I speak of
things beyond their Capacity: but if your friends suppose certain of my
conceits to be ouer-farre fetched, let them thoroughly observe, whither they
transcend my subject, or their conceptions; or whither I goeastray, or they
loose sight of me: There are diverse things above reason, which yet are not
contrary thereto. An Heroical virtue making use of excesses and highth of
passions, goes as far beyond vulgar Virtue, as it surmounteth Vice: we are
not therefore to shut up all Wits within the same limits, nor presently to
censure that as Exorbitant, which is only extraordinary: Otherwise we should
resemble that poor Noruegian, who the first time he saw Roses, durst not touch
them for fear of burning his fingers, and was much amazed to see (as he
supposed) Trees to bear fire: Surely as Nouelty is not of force to make
Monsters well featured, so ought it not to hinder our affections to excellent
things, though unknown unto us. If for the understanding my language, it were
necessary to learn two; or that Anxietie, Decrepitude, and the Irritaments of
Despair, were familiar phrases with me; if I made use of Waves instead of
Water, and evil Fates for ill fortune; or the Flower-do-luce for France; to
the end to play the Poet in Prose; should I immolate my self to public
scorn, and sail upon the Ocean in the stormaticall seasons of the year, if I
should say, the misericordious Justice of God, and his inst Misericord; or
pluck comparisons from Pliny; and could I not commend a King without the help
of Alexander the Great, and Plutarckes Worthies; if instead of well-speaking, I
should translate Tacicus ill, and if in spite of him I should force him to
deliver his Opinion concerning all the affairs of this Age, you then might
rightly blame me from bringing follies so far off, and for taking so much
pains to make my self ridiculous. But surely I should be the most innocent of
all others, had I only offended therein; and I may safely say without vanity,
that even the follies of my Jnfancy, were more serious then those sweet
Rbetoricall flowers: when all is said, since there is nothing but Religion can
force us to belecue what she pleases, and that Kings themselves have no power
over Souls, I am well satisfied with the affection of my Friends, and do
willingly leave their judgments free to themselves. One Goodnight is more
worth then all our Eloquence, and not to know the miseries of this life* is to
be more learned then the Sorbonists and lessits. For my part, (despising the
world as I do) I cannot much esteem my self, who make up one of the
sickliest parts thereof; and I have so poor an opinion of my own sufficiency,
as I little esteem the Talents of others: Think not then, I adore the
workmanship of my hands, though I take as much pains therein, as did the
ancient Caruers, in counterfeiting their gods. Butcontrariwise, it is the
reason why I dislike them, and had I been a man of ten thousand Crowns rent,
I would have given the half of it to a Secretary, only to hire him not to
indite those Letters you have so much admired.

The 15. February, 1624.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC.
To my Lord Cardinal de la Valete; from Mounsieur D'BALZAC.
THE SECOND BOOK.
LETTER I.
My LORD:
Whilst you employ your hours in gayning hearts and Votes, and happily lay
the foundation of some eminent enterprise: I here enjoy a reposednesse not
unlike that of the dead, and which is never rouzed but by Clorinda's kisses. If
the Duke of Ossona be chosen King of Naples, (as you write the report runs)
I find no strangeness in it. The world is so old, and has seen so much, it
can hardly spy any new matter; nor is there at this day any lawful authority
whose Origin (for the most part) has not been unjust. And on the other side
the ill success of reuolts are far more frequent then are the change of
States: and the same action which has no less then a Diadem for the aim,
has often an ignominious death for its end. Howsoever this happens, it shall
not much trouble me since the issue cannot be other then aduantagious to this
State. For God herein will either make it appear, that he is the protector of
Kings: or it falling out otherwise, yet at least it will weaken the enemies to
this Crown. But I hope you will not advise me to beat my brains upon those
politic considerations; for should I do so* it were no less then to retract
the resolution I have taken, to look upon things passing among us and our
neighbors, as I do on the History of Japon, or the affairs of another World.
I ought to surrender this humor to vulgar spirits, who interest themselves in
all the quarrels of States and Princes, and who will always be parties, on
purpose to put themselves into choler, and be miserable in the misfortunes of
others. Truly we shall never have done if we will needs take all the affairs
of the world to heart, and be passionate for the public; whereof we make but
a very small part. It may be at this very instant wherein I write, the great
Indian Fleet suffers shipwreck within two Leagues of Land: happily the
great Turk has surprised some Province from the Christians, and taken thence
some twenty thousand souls, to convey them to their City of Constantinople:
It may be the Sea has exceeded its limits, and drowned some City in Zealand.
If we send for mischiefs so far off, there will not an hour pass wherein
some disconsolation or other will not come upon us. If we hold all the men in
the world to be of our affinity, let us make account to wear Mournings all our
life. As mine experience is not great, so are my years not many: yet since I
came into the world, I have seen so many strange accidents, and have
understood from my father such store of incredible occurrents, as I suppose
there can nothing now happen, able to cause admiration in me. The Emperor
Charles the fist his Grandchild, borne to the hopes of so many Kingdoms, was
condemned to death, for having ouer-soone desired them. The natural subjects
of the King of Spain do at this day dispute with him for the Empire of the
Sea; nor will they rest satisfied with their usurped liberty. Surely we should
hardly be drawn to believe these things upon the credit of others, and those
in succeeding ages will with much difficulty be persuaded to receive them for
truths; yet are these the ordinary recreations of Fortune, taking pleasure in
deceiving Mankind, by events far opposite to all appearance; yea, and
contrary to their judgments. Has she not delivered over to the peoples fury,
the man whom she had formerly raised above the rest, to the end, we should not
presume in greatest Prosperities? And has she not at the same time taken out
of the Bastile, a Prisoner, to make him General of a Royal Army, thereby to
oblige us not at any time to despair? I do here consider all this with a
reposed spirit, and as Fables presented on the Stage; or Pictures in a Gallery.
Now since the late Comet had like to have been as fatal unto me, as to the
Emperor Rodolphus, in that my curiosity to see it, caused me to rise in my
shirt, which gave me a cold all the Winter after. I am hereafter resolved not
to meddle with any thing above my reach; but to refer all to GOD and Nature.
So as Clorinda suffer me to serve her, and that I understand from her own
mouth that she loves me, I will hearken to no other news, nor search a second
Fortune. I therefore most humbly beseech your Lordship to excuse me, if upon
these occasions lately presented, I cannot afford you my personal attendance,
or refuse to follow you whither your resolution leads you; my Mistress having
commanded me, to render her an account how I shed my blood, and enioyning me
never to go to the Wars, but when Muskets are charged with Cypres-powder; I
am rather contented you should accuse me of Cowardice, then she justly to
charge me with Disobedience. And after all this tell me whether or no, you
think me to be in my right wits, and that I have not lost my reason, together
with the respect I owe you. I herein do as a delinquent; who fearing he should
not be soon enough punished, puts himself into the hands of Justice, not
staying either for the Rack, or examination of Judges, for the discovery of a
crime whereof he was never accused. I am well assured, that of all passions,
you have only those of Honor and Glory, and that your Spirits are so
replenished therewith, as there is no place left either for love, hate, or
fear. Yet do I withal consider, that it is a part of a wise man's felicity to
reflect upon other men's follies: howsoever, if any word has escaped me which
may offend your eyes, take it I beseech you, as a means sent you from God for
your farther mortification, in causing you to read things so distastefull unto
you. You are necessarily to endure far greater crosses amidst the corruption
of this Age: if you cannot live among the wicked, you must seek for another
kind of world then this, and for more perfect creatures then Mortals. There
will ever be poysnings beyond the Alps, Treasons at Court, and reuolts in this
Realm. Howsoever (my Lord) there will be love even in spite of you, so long as
there are eyes and beauties in the world; yea, the Wise themselves will love,
if they find Clorindaes, Dianaes, and Cassandraes to be beloved. Fire seazeth
sometimes on Churches and Palaces. God has framed Fools and Philosophers of
one and the same matter: And that cruel Sect which seeks to bereave us of the
one half of our selves, in seeking to free us from our passions and
affections, instead of making a wise man, have only raised a Statue. I must
therefore once again tell you that I love, since Nature will have it so; and
that I am of the progeny of our first Parent: but I must withal inform you,
that all my affections spring not from the distempers and diseases of my soul;
my inclination to serve you, having immortal reason, not momentary pleasure
for its foundation, one day happily I shall no more be amorous, but will
always remain

My Lord, Your most humble and most affectionate Servant, BALZAC.

To the Lord Cardinal of Valete, Son to the Duke of Espernon.
LETTER II.
My LORD;
AT length they have done you right, and you now enjoy what you deserved from
the first day of your Nativity: if there could be any thing added to a man who
reckons Kings among his Predecessors, and whose inclinations happily are
ouer-great to live under the power of another; I should advise you to rejoice
at this news; but being extracted as you are, from one of the most
illustrious* Origines on earth, and begotten by a Father, whose life is laden
with Miracles; it suffices that you pardon Fortune, since it has so happned
that present necessity has gained of her what she in right owed to your name.
I know well that some will tell you, you are created Prince of such an Estate,
as is bounded neither by Seas nor Mountains, and how the extent of your
jurisdiction is so illimitable, as were there many worlds, they ought all of
them to depend thereon as well as this. But I who suffer not mine eyes to be
dazeled by any other luster then that of Virtue, and who do not so much as
bestow the looking on, what most men admire; if I should esteem you either
more great, or happy then you were, I should not have sufficiently profited
under you, in the true understanding of you. Doubtless in the opinion of the
Vulgar, it is an extraordinary Honor to be a prime person in a Ceremony, and
to wear a Hat of equal esteem to Crowns and Diadems. Yet I presume you will
pardon me if I make bold to tell you, it is an honor can never oblige a wise
man to envy you. For had you this point only above me, I should still be my
own Master: Nor had I for your sake renounced that liberty, which was as dear
to me as the Commonwealth of Venice. Upon the matter, to have none other
Judge on Earth save only your reputation and conscience, and to have a great
train of followers, some whereof are employed in the procuring your spiritual
pleasures, others in the conduct of your temporal affairs, all this shall be
still the same with you, and diverse others whom you slight; but to perform
good and virtuous actions, when you are assured they shall never come to the
worlds eye; to fear nothing but dishonest things; to believe death to be
neither good nor bad in it self; but that if the occasion to embrace it be
honorable, it is always more valuable then a long life: to have the
reputation of integrity in your promises, in a time when the most credulous
have enough to do, to confide on public faith: This is it which I admire in
you my Lord; and not your Red Hat, and your fifty thousand Crowns Rent; yet I
will say, that for the honor of Rome, you ought to esteem of what she sends
you. The time has bin when she would have erected Statues for you, and
affoorded you sufficient subject to have merited Tryumphs: but those days
being past, and since that Empire is no longer maintained by such means, yet
ought you to rest satisfied with the honors of Peace, and accept (as a high
favor) a Dignity the King of Spaine's Son has made suite for. If there were
nothing else in it, but that it causes you to quit your Mourning-robes, to
reuest your self with the color of Roses, you can do no less then rejoice
at such a change. Howsoever the nearest objects to your eyes, will not be so
doleful as formerly they were, since there will be nothing upon you which
shall not be resplendent and glorious. I would willingly dilate this discourse,
but the speedy departure of the Post will not suffer me; and besides, I being
well assured, that if you esteem any thing in my Letters, it is not the
multitude of words; I ought to be contented to end this, after my humble suite
vuto you, to love me always, since I am passionately

My Lord, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant BALZAC.

To the Lord Cardinal de Valette* from Balzac.
J here send you two Letters which were delivered me, to be conveyed unto
you, the one from the Duke of Bauaria, the other from the Cardinal of Lerma.
My Lord, you shall thereby perceive that your proposition has affoorded joy,
both to the Victorious, and to the Afflicted; and that the World receives a
notable interest therein, since it augmenteth the contentment of Triumphs, and
sweetneth the harshnes of retyrement.

LETTER. III.
MY LORD:
I Suppose you have understood of the Election of the Pope, some two days
iournies from Paris; and that you will make no great have to add your
approbation to a thing already dispatched: I had sent a Post on purpose to
advertise you thereof; but my Lord Ambassador thought it not fit, but has
encharged his own Messenger to advertise you of all things, in your Voyage
this way, and to give you account of all occurrents. This makes me think that
the subject of your voyage ceasing, and the time of year being as yet some
what troublesome, for the undertaking thereof, you will rather reserve it for a
fitter season, when you may perform it with less disorder, and more
aduantagiously for the Kings service. My meaning is, that I would have you set
forward about the end of Autumn, that you may spend here with us, one of these
warm and springing Winters, laden with Roses, wholly reserved for our admirable
Italy. And my Lord, though herein the consideration of my private interest may
seem to make me speak thus, rather then my affection to your service; yet
would I willingly tell you, that all kind of contentments attend you here, and
if your great Spirit aspire to glorious things for the keeping it in action, it
shall infallibly find them at Rome. In the interim, how short a while soever
you stay here, you shall have the contentment to see France change some five or
six times. At your return you will hardly find any thing answerable to what
you left there; they shall not be the same men you formerly saw, and all things
will appear unto you, as the affairs of another Kingdom. But before the
matter be grown to that head, it is fitting you reign here in Sovereignty,
and become the Supreme Judge of three or four Conclaues: And truly it might
so happen (my Lord) that I should do you some acceptable service in those great
occasions, if I had my health; but to my great grief it is a happiness, for
which I envy my Grand mother, and howsoever I have heretofore been little, or
much estimable: I confess, that at this present, I am but the half of what I
was. It is therefore in vain to expect works of any great value from me, or
that you importune me to take pains for the Public; for in Conscience what
high defignes can a man have, between the affliction of diseases, and the
apprehension of Death? The one whereof does never forsake me, and the other
daily affrights me; or how can you imagine I should conceive eminent matters,
who am ready to dye at every instant. True it is, that the necessity to obey
you, which I have always before mine Eyes, is an extraordinary strong motive;
but (not to dissemble) the impossibility of my performance is yet more
forcible; and so long as I continue in the state I now am, I can not promise
you so much as the History of the Kingdom of A little Principality in France.
Yuetot; nor that of the Papacy of Campora, though it continued only one half
quarter of an hour*

From Rome this 27. of February 1622.

Another Letter unto Cardinal de la Valete from Balzac.
LETTER IIII.
My LORD,
YOur Cash-keeper has newly brought me the sum you commanded him to deliver
unto me. I would willingly show sufficient thankfulness for this high favor:
but besides that your benefits are boundless, and that you are so gracious an
obliger, that it does even augment the value of your Bounty, I should seem
over presumptuous to think any words of mine valuable to the least of your
actions. It shall therefore suffice me to protest unto you, that the bounty
wherewith the Letter I received from you, is so stored; (being of force to
infuse Love and Fidelity in the hearts of very Barbarians,) shall work no
less effect in the spirit of a person who has learned both by Nature and
Philosophy not to be ungrateful. Since I find my interest within my duty, I
must necessarily love you (if I hate not my self) and be an honest man by the
very Maxim of the wicked. Yet is not this last consideration the cause chiefly
obliging me to your service: For though I acknowledge diverse defects in my
self, yet may I without vanity affirm, I was never besotted with so base an
attraction as that of gain. I therefore reflect upon your favors in their
naked purity, and the esteem you make of me, is to me by so much a more strong
obligation then all others, in that it regards my merit, and not my instant
poverty, and proceeds from your judgment which is far more excellent, then
your fortunes are eminent. Herein (my Lord) it is manifest, that all your
inclinations are magnificent: for you knowing me neither to be fit to make the
Father of a Family, nor to solicit causes at the Counsell-table, nor well to
ride post: you make it appear, you are of the right blood of Kings, who are
only rich in superfluous things. Truly it were a hard matter to guess what
in this world is the true use of Pearls and Diamonds; or why a Picture should
cost more then a Palace; but only pleasure: which to satisfy the inventions
of Art, are daily employed, and Nature to that end produces whatsoever is
rare, being indeed a thing more noble then necessity, she being contented
with small matters, ever preferring profit besore pleasure. And I will here
stop, lest I speak too much to my own advantage: And if I have already
incurred that crime, I beseech you to believe it has not been with purpose to
praise my self, but only to extol your liberality: Yet will I make bold to
acquaint you, how I employ your money, and yield you a more particular account
of the affairs I dispatch for you here at Rome: First, in this hot Month I
seek all possible remedies against the violence of the Sun. I have a Fan
which wearieth the hands of four Grooms, and raises a wind in my Chamber
which would cause shipwreck in the maine Sea; I never die but I dye Snow in
the Wine of Naples, and make it melt under Mellons. I spend half my time under
water, and the rest on Land: I rise twice a day, and when I step out of my bed,
it is only to enter into a Grove of Orangetrees, where I slumber with the
pleasant purling of some twelve Fountains: but if occasion be offered to go
further once in a Week, I cross not the street but in Carroach, passing still
in the shade between Heaven and Earth: I leave the smell of sweetest flowers
unto the Vulgar, as having found the invention to eat and drink them. The
Spring*time never parts with me all the year either in variety of distilled
Waters, or in Conserues. I change perfumes according to the diversity of
Seasons; some I have sweeter, others stronger: And though the Air be a thing
Nature bestows for nothing, and whereof the poorest have plenty, yet that, I
breath in my Chamber, is as costly unto me as my houserent. Besides all this,
I in quality of my Lord your Agent, am almost daily feasted: and there whilst
others fill themselves with substantial and most ponderous cates; I who have
no great appetite, make choice of such Birds as are crammed with Sugar, and
nourish my self with the spirit of Fruits, and with a meat called felly. My
Lord, these are all the services I yield you in this place, and all the
functions of my residence near his holiness; and I hold my self particularly
obliged now the second time to thank you for this favor: for by your means I
enjoy two things seldom suiting together; a Master and Liberty; and the great
rest you allow me, is not the least present you please out of your Nobleness
to afford me.

Your Graces most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
From Rome the 15. of July, 1621.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valete from BALZAC.
LETTER V.
My Lord,
Within the Deserts of Arabia, nor in the Seas intrailes, was there ever so
furious a Monster found, as is the Scyatica: And if Tyrants whose memories are
hateful unto us, had beenestored with such instruments for effecting their
cruelties; surely I think it had been the Scyatica the Martyrs had endured
for Religion, and not the fire, and biting of wild Beasts. At every sting it
carries a poor sick person even to the borders of the other World, and
causes him sensible to touch the extremities of life. And surely, to support
it long, a greater remedy then Patience is no less then requisite, and other
forces then those of man* In the end GOD has sent me some case, after the
receite of an infinite of remedies, some whereof sharpened my grief, and the
rest assuaged it not. But the violence of my pain being now past, I begin to
enjoy such rest, as weariness and weakness affoordeth to ouer-tired bodies.
And though I be in a state of health, far less perfect then those who are
sound, yet measuring it by the proximity of the misery I have endured, and the
comparison of those pains I have suffered: I am right glad of my present
Fortune, nor am I so hardy, to dare as yet complain of my great weakness
remaining. To speak truth, J have no better legs then will serve to make a
show; and should I undertake to walk the length of my Chamber, my trouble
would be no less, then if I were to pass the Mountains, and cross all
Rivers I encounter. But, to the end to change Discourse, and to let you see
things in their fair shape; you are to understand that in this plight wherein
J stand, (being sufficient to cause you to pity me four hundred Leagues off:)
J am on the one side become so valiant, as not to fly though I were pursued by
a whole Army; and on the other* so stately, that if the Pope should come to
visit me, I would not conduct him so far as the Gates. This is the advantage I
draw from my bad legs, and the remedies arising in my bed, wherewith I
endeavor to comfort my self without the help of Physic. You will (I fear)
say I might well have forborne to entertain you with these impertinencies; nor
am I ignorant that perfect felicities, such as yours, desire not to be
disquieted either by the complaints of the distressed, or by the consideration
of distastefull things: But it is likewise true, that the first loss we endure
in pain, falls upon our judgment, and the body has such a proximity with the
soul, that the miseries of the one, do easily slide into the other. But what
reason soever I have to defend my evil humor, yet must it necessarily give
way to your contentment; and of the two passions wherewith I am assaulted, obey
the stronger. I will therefore be no longer sad but for others, and will hold
it fit I make you laugh upon the subject of XXXXX* to whom you lately addressed
your Letters. You may please to remember one of their Names to be A. the other
B; yet is it not sufficient only to know so much, but I must likewise inform
you somewhat of their shape and stature. The first I speak of, is so gross,
as I verily think he will instantly dye of an Apoplexcy; and the other so
little, as I would swear that since he came into the world* he never grew but
at the hairs end: before any indifferent Judges, an Ape would sooner pass for
a man then this Pigmy; nor will I believe he was made after the image of God,
lest therein I should wrong so excellent a Nature. Besides, it were an easier
task to raise the Dead, then to make this man's Teeth white; he has a Nose at
enmity with all others: and against which there is no possible defense but
Spanish Gloves. What can I say more, there is no part of his body that is not
shameful, or wherein Nature has not been defective. Yet notwithstanding one
of the fairest Princesses of Italy, is by a solemn contract condemned to lodge
night by night with this Monster. When you chance to see this man together with
the other great bellied beast, who stuffes a whole Carroach, you will presently
suppose God never made them to be Princes; and that it is not only as much as
to abuse the obedience of free persons, but even to wrong the meanest Grooms,
to give them Masters of this stamp. Now though the party you wot of, do in
some sort represent the latter person, yet is there still some small difference
between his actions and the others. The great V V V. is newly parted from this
Court, where he has not received from his Holiness his expected contentment.
His design was to break the Marriage his Brother has contracted, upon some
slight appearance of Sorcery, wherewith he deemed to dazzle the worlds eye, and
ground the nullity of an action, which was by so much the more free, in that
the parties who performed it, sought not the consent of any to approve it. In
conclusion after the loss of much time, and many words, he is gone without
obtaining any thing, save only the Popes benediction; and as for me, I remain
much satisfied to see Justice so exact at Rome, that they will not condemn the
Devil himself wrongfully. I have heard how in some places half hour
Marriages are made, the conditions whereof are neither disgested into writing,
nor any memory thereof reserved; but of these secret mysteries, there are no
other witnesses, save only the Night and Silence: And though the Court of Rome
approves them not, yet does she shut her eyes, fearing to see them. I am
resolved not to be long in the description of K K K, whom you know much better
then my self: Yet thus much I will say, that since Neroes death, there never
appeared in Jtaly a Comedian of more honorable extraction: And surely to make
the Company at this present in France complete; this personage were
sufficient: He makes Verses, he has read Aristotle, and understands Music,
and in a word he has all the excellent qualities unnecessary in a Prince. I
know here a German called S. to whom he gives a annual pension of a thousand
Crowns, assigned unto him upon an Abbey during life; this he has done, not
that he intends to use his service in his counsel, or with purpose to employ
him in any important negotiation for the good of his affairs: his only
ambition is to have him make a book, whereby it might appear how those of M M
M, are lineally descended from Julius Caesar. I should be glad he would yet
aim at some higher, or more eminent race, and that he would purchase a second
fable at the like rate he paid for the first. I would willingly give him his
choice of the Medes, Persians, Greeks, or Trojans, which of these he would
have of his Kindred, and without the relying upon the authority of tradition or
testimony of Stories: I would draw his descent from Hector, or Achilles, which
he best liked. There are certain Princes who are necessarily to be deceived,
if you mean to do them acceptable service, being far better pleased to be
entertained with a plausible lie, then to be advertised of an important truth.
I hold my self right happy you are not of this humor: for whatsoever I say, I
suppose it would be very hard for me to be of a fools mind, though he were a
Monarch. Iintend not to steal your favors, but to purchase them legally: and
having ever believed flattery to be as mischievous a means to gain affection
as charms, and sorcery: I cannot speak against my conscience, and were not
this true I tell you, I would not assure you that I am

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
From Rome this 10. of December 1622.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valete, from Balzac.
LETTER VI.
My LORD*
HOw great soever the subject of my sorrows be, yet do I find in your Letters
sufficient to make me happy in my hard fortune. The last I received has so
much obliged me, that, but for the displeasing news coming unto me which
tempered my joy, my reason had not been of sufficient force to moderate it.
But at this time the death of my poor Brother*being incessantly before mine
eyes, takes from me the taste of all good tidings: and the prosperity even of
the Kings affairs seem displeasing unto me, finding my self to bear upon
me the mournings of his Victory. Yet since in this fatal agitation of Europe,
it is not I alone who bewail some loss, and since your self have not been
able to preserve all that was dear unto you; I should seem very uncivil, if
I presumed to prefer my private interest before yours, or reflect upon my
particular affliction, having one common with yours. It is long since I have
not measured either the felicities or fatalities of this world, but by your
contentments, or discomforts; and that I behold you as the whole workmanship
God has made. Wherefore my Lord, I will lay aside whatsoever concerns my
self, to enter into your resentments, and to tell you, since you cannot make
unworthy elections, it must needs be that in the death of your Friends you can
suffer no small losses. Notwithstanding as you transcend sublimary things, and
in that all men draw examples out of the meanest actions of your life: I assure
my self they have acknowledged upon this occasion, that there is not any
accident to surmount against which you have use of all your virtue. Afflictions
are the gifts of God, though they be not of those we desire in our prayers; and
supposing you should not approve this proposition, yet have you at all times so
little regarded death, as I cannot believe you will bewail any; for being in a
condition your self esteems not miserable. My Lord, it suffices you conserve
the memory of those you have loved, in consequence of the protestation you
pleased to make unto me by your Letter: And truly if the Dead be any thing, (as
none can doubt) they cannot grieuefor ought in this world, wherein they still
enjoy your favors. In the mean time I take this to my self, and am most
happy in having conferred my dutiful affections upon a man, who sets so
high a value upon those things he has lost. For any thing (my Lord) I
perceive, there is small difference between good works, and the services we
offer you; they having their rewards both in this life, and the other; your
goodness being illimitable, as is the desire I have to tell you, I am

Your most humble and most faithful Servant, BALZAC.
From Rome the 29. of December, 1621.
To the Lord Cardinal of Valete, from BALZAC.
LETTER. VII.
MY LORD:
THough I be not in state either to perform any great exploite upon the person
of any man; nor have any great force to defend my self, yet cannot I touch
upon the Count Mansfield without taking it to heart, and joining my good
affections to the Kings forces. If this were the first time the Germans had
exceeded their limits, and sent their Armies to be ouerthr own in France; the
nouelty of these barbarous faces, and of those great lubberly swatrutters,
might easily have affrighted us: But upon the matter, we have to do with
known enemies, and who will suffer us to take so sufficient advantages over
them, besides those we naturally enjoy, as without being forced to make use of
Arms, we may defeat them only by their own evil conduct. I do not wonder
there are men who willingly forsake Frost and Snow, to seek their living under
a more pleasing and temperate climate then their own; and who quit bad
Countries, as being well assured, the place of their banishment shall be more
blissful unto them then that of their birth. Only herein it vexes me, in
the behalf of the Kings honor, to see him constrained to finish the remainder
of the Emperors victories, upon a sort of beaten Soldiers, and who rather fly
the fury of Marquess Spinola, then follow us. These great Bulwarks whose
neighbor I am, seeming rather the Fabrics of Giants, then the fortifications
of a Garrison-towne, will not ever be looked upon with amazement; one day (I
hope) there will appear nothing in their places but Cabbins for poor
Fishermen; or if it be requisite the works of Rebellion should still remain,
and the memory of these troublesome some people endure yet longer, we shall in
the vpshot see them remove Mountains, and diue into the Earths foundations to
provide themselves a Prison at their own charge. But withal (my Lord) I
beseech you, let there be no further speech made of occasions or expeditions,
and let a Peace be concluded which may continue till the Worlds end; let us
leave the War to the Turk, and King of Persia, and cause (I beseech you)
that we may lose the memory of these miserable times, wherein Fathers succeed
their Children, and wherein France is more the Country of Lansknights and
Swisses then ours. Though Peace did not turn the very Deserts into profitable
dwellings as it does, or caused not the quarries or flints to be come
fruitful, though it came unaccompanied, without being seconded with security
and plenty, yet were it necessary, only to refresh ourforces; thereby to
enable us the longer to endure War. As I was ending this last word, I heard a
voice which desired my dispatch oblieging me to end what I supposed I had but
begun. It is with much reluctation (my Lord) I am deprived of the only
contentment your absence affords me. But since you could not receive this
Letter, were it any longer, J am resolved to lose one part of my content, to
enjoy the other; and to say sooner then I supposed, that I am ever absolutely

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 16. of September, 1622.
To the Cardinal de Valette from BALZAC.
LETTER VIII.
My LORD,
YOu should oftener receive Letters from me, could I ouer-master my pain; but
to say truth it leaves me not one thought free to reflect upon any thing else;
and what desire soever I have to give you content, yet am I not able to do any
thing but at the Physicians good pleasure, and at the Feauers leisure; whilst
the Court affoordeth you all content, and prepares whatsoever is pleasant for
you, reserving distrusts and iealousies for others: I here endure torments,
such as wherewith one would make conscience to punish Paricides, and which I
would not wish to my worst enemies. If notwithstanding all this (in obedience
to the Counsel you give me in the Letter you did me the honor to write unto
me) I should make my self merry, I were necessarily to take my self for some
other body, and become a deeper dissembler then an honest man ought to be, My
Melancholy is merely corporeal, yet does my spirit give place, though not
consent thereto; and of the two parts whereof I am composed, the more worthy is
ouer-borne by the more weighty. Wherefore if the whole world should act
Comedies to make me laugh, and though St. Germans Fair were kept in all the
streets where I pass, the object of Death ever present before my eyes,
bereauing me of sight, would likewise bar me of content, and I should
remain disconsolate amidst the public Iubilations. Yea, if the stone I* so
much dread, were a Diamond, or the Philosophers Elixa, I should therein take
small comfort, but would rather beseech God to leave me poor, if he please to
bestow no better Riches upon me. But when I have said all, be it unto me as he
shall please to appoint, since I am well assured, my maladiys will either end,
or I shall not for ever hold out: yet should I dye with some discontent, if it
happen before I testify my dutiful affection toward you, and the sensibility
I have of your noble favors. But howsoever it fare with me, I would willingly
make a journey to Rome, there to finish the work I promised you, and which you
commanded me to undertake for the honor of this Crown. Certainly if I be not
the cause to make you in love with our language, and to prefer it in your
estimation before our neighbor Tongues; I am affraide you will be much
troubled to reuolte from the Roman Empire, and that it will not be for the
History of Matthew, or of Hallian, you will change that of Salust and Liuie. I
will not deceive you, nor delude my self; yet may I tell you, that my head is
full of inventions and designs, and if the Spring (for which I much long)
would afford me the least glimpse of health, I would contest with any who
should produce the rarest things. I have an infinite of loose flowers, which
only want binding up into Nosegayes: and I have suffered others to speak any
time these six years, on purpose to bethink my self what I have to say. But
I well perceive the public shall have only desires and hopes; and truly if
I spring not afresh with the trees, in stead of so many books you expect from
me, you shall not read any thing of minesaue only the end of this Letter, and
the protestation I here make unto you, to dye

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 7. of January, 1623.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valete from BALZAC.
LETTER IX.
My Lord,
THe hope which any time this three Months, I have had of your determination
to come into this Country, has hitherto hindered me from writing unto you, or
to make use of the only means remaining for me to be near your person. But
since you have supposed the speedy quitting the Court, to be as fatal as to
dye a sudden death, and that no less fortitude or time is requisite to
resolve to weane our selves from pleasing things, then to surmount painful
ones, I will by your permission resume the commerce the common rumor caused me
to surcease, and will not hereafter believe you can with any less difficulty
get out of Paris, then can the Arsenac or Loouer. Were it not a place all
stored with enchantments and chains, and which is of such power to attract and
retain men, as it has been necessary to hazard diverse battles, to drive
the Spaniards further off: one might well wonder at the difficulty you find to
convey your self thence. But in truth all the world does there find both
habitations and affairs: and for you my Lord, since in that Country our Kings
both enter into their first infancy, and grow old, as being the seat of their
Empire; no man can justly blame you for making ouerlong abode there, without
accusing you of over much love to your Master, and for desiring to be near his
person. At Rome you shall tread upon stones formerly the gods of Caesar and
Pompey, and shall contemplate the Ruins of those rare workmanships, the
antiquity whereof is yet amiable, and shall daily walk among Histories and
Fables: But these are the pastimes of weak spirits, which are pleased with
trifles, and not the employments of a Prince, who delights in sailing on
rough Seas, and who is not come into the world to let it rest idle: When you
have seen the Tyber, on whose banks the Romans have performed the
Apprentiships of their rare Victories, and begun that high design, which they
ended not but at the extreme limits of the Earth. When you shall ascend the
Capitol, where they supposed God was as well present as in Heaven; and had
there enclosed the fatality of the universal Monarchy: After you have crossed
that great Circus, dedicated to show pleasures to the people, and where the
blood of Martyrs has been often mingled with that of Malefactors and brute
beasts. I make no doubt but after you have seen these and diverse other things,
you will grow weary of the repose and tranquillity of Rome: and will say they
are two things more proper for the Night and Churchyards, then for the Court
and the Worlds eye. Yet have I not any purpose to give you the least distaste
of a Voyage the King has commanded you to undertake, and whereof I well hoped
to have bin the guide, if my crazy body would have seconded the motion of my
Will. But truly my Lord, I am deeply engaged in this business, and when I
look upon my self single, I sometimes have a desire to make you suspicious of
those felicities, I fear, I shall not be able to enjoy with you; yet whatsoever
I say, I am not so far in love with my self*, as to prefer my private
content before the general desires of all men, and the Churches necessities.
It is requisite for infinite considerations of importance, you should be
present at the first Conclaue, and that you appear at a War not therefore
less considerable, in being composed of disarmed persons, or for that it makes
no Widows nor Orphans. I am certain you have elsewhere seen more dangerous
encounters, and have often desired more bloody Victories. But how great soever
the object of your ambition be, yet can it not conceive any thing of such
Eminency, as at once to give a Successor to Consuls, to Emperors, and
Apostles; and to make with your breath the man who ouer-toppeth Kings, and who
commands over all reasonable Souls: Though my health be so uncertain, as I
cannot promise my self three days continuance thereof, yet have I not lost
all hope to see you (one day) in this Country, the prescriber of Laws to
inferiors, and of examples to Commanders. My Lord it may be, God reserueth me
for your sake, that nothing be wanting to your Glory, and to the end there
might be yet one man in the World, able to afford you the praises proper to
your merits.

My Lord, Your most humble and most faithful Servant, BALZAC.
The 23. of June, 1623.
To my Lord Cardinal de la Valete.
LETTER X.
My LORD,
IT must necessarily be the greatest Affair at this present in agitation on
Earth, that could oblige you to leave Paris; nor had you patted thence upon any
slighter condition, then to make a Head for all Christendom. If you arrive
there opportunely to have your part in this great Election, and that the
Conclaue attend your Presence, on purpose to afford a more full Reputation and
Authority, to what shall there be resolved upon: I do no way doubt but you
will maintain the same advantage over the Italian wits, as you have obtained
over ours; or that their policies will not be as impertinent in your Presence,
as the Charms of Magicians are frivolous, being confronted with Divine
matters. You have sufficient of their patience to put off affairs when
occasion is offered: but you have a courage they come short of, to carry
matters by strong hand if necessity require. Therefore my Lord, to what part
soever your Opinion shall incline, you will carry that with you which gains
victories, and causes the greater party to side with the sounder; yea, if
matters should pass without contestation, yet should you at least take notice
that you are entreated to that action, wherein God permits you to supply his
place, and intrusteth to your care the most important matter of all his Works.
To speak seriously, his providence is never in so high employment, as when he
is to choose the man who has power to use well, or abuse all the Riches of
Heaven, and who is to exercise a power nearest approaching to Divinity.
Heretofore God made use of Thunder and tempests, when he purposed to denounce
any thing to men, declaring his Will by other then ordinary means. But since
he has caused Oracles to cease, and suffers the Thunder to work only
natural effects: It is only by the voice of Cardinals he causes his desires
to be manifested, and ordayneth concerning the worlds Conduct. When you please
(my good Lord) I shall have some notice of these inspirations he has sent
you, and of the election you have made: For to force me (so soon) to inform
my self thereof in the place where it was performed, this Kingdom had need
be over hot for me, and that I were not so well acquainted as I am with the Sun
at Rome. That which blackes the Moors, and burns Lybia, is not so dangerous
at this Season; and were you not stored with treasures of Snow, and provided of
Halls of Marble, to defend you from the scorching Air, I should as soon choose
to be condemned to the fire, as to be forced to reside where you are at this
present. But your Grace I know can not be affrighted with all these
apprehensions of heat; you are none of those who will find fault with the
Air, which all that ancient Republicke breathed, or with the Sun, which has
helped to make so many Conquerours, and given light to so many glorious
Tryumphs. Yet for my part, I who have none of these considerations, and who
have wholly put my self into the power of Physic, it is requisite I avoid
the very shadow of danger, and live with as great apprehension of fear in this
world, as though I were in an Enemies Country, or in a Forest of wild
beasts. It is therefore out of pure necessity I attend your commands in this
place, and a more seasonable time, to testify unto you, without running the
hazard of my life, that I am with all my soul

My Lord, Your most humble, and most obedient servant, BALZAC.
The 2. of August, 1623.
To the Lord Cardinal de Valete, from Balzac.
LETTER XI.
My LORD;
I Verily believed I could never have bin so unfortunate, as to be forced to
search in the Gazettes for what you do, and to hear no other news from you,
then what common brute bestows in all parts of the World, and which the
English and Germans may as well know as I. This punishment is by so much the
more wounding, in that I have heretofore been enriched with those benefits,
whereof you now seem to bereave me; and in that the time was, when you pleased
so far to descend from the rank whence you are derived, as to lay aside all
those lusters, which incompasse you, to converse freely with me: But (my Lord)
since one word of your mouth has often cured my decayed spirits, and has many
times made me happy without the help of Fortune: I freely confess unto you, I
cannot resolve to change condition, as knowing the loss of the least of your
favors cannot be liittle; Yet being so innocent that I can no way imagine my
offense, and not acknowledging among men, other more assured verity then your
word, I have a great reluctation to be diffident of a thing, upon the certainty
whereof half the Court is engaged for War, and the besieged would make small
difficulty to surrender themselves. My Lord, you have pleased to promise you
would love me always; therefore I beseech you not to be offended, if I put you
in mind, that as the ancient gods of the Country where now you are* submitted
themselves to Destinies, after they had once assigned them: So you, though
above all other Laws, are yet subject to your word. I am confident it cannot
be revoked so long as the order of sublunary things change not, and the Decrees
of Gods providence remain immovable: and if you repent any one action in your
whole life, you therein do more then your very Enemies, who never as yet
called the least of them in question. For my part, I am far from thinking I
have totally lost your favors, lest I should wrong your Judgment, which
conferred them upon me, and blame the best eyes in the World, for having
heretofore been blind. I will rather suppose, if you send me no news, it is
because you think I know what will be done some ten years hence, and that I
am brimfull of the Roman Court, and of the Jtalian affairs. Truly I know the
present Pope, and I have ever belceued, there is not any humane wit more
capable to carry so ponderous a felicity, or to let us again behold the
Primitive beauty of Religion, and the golden age of Gods Church* I know how at
Rome idleness is day and night in action, and that the complements and
ceremonies there, put you to more trouble then you should find in governing the
whole world, if God had left it to your conduct. Me thinks I yet see this
great Tyrant with so many Heads, (I mean the Signoury of Venice) together with
all those petty Sovereigns, who would hazard more men in hanging one single
person, then the King would venture in two battles, or at the taking in of
four Cities. But my Lord all this with the rest does but slightly touch my
spirit, and as you are the sole worldly cause, which affords me either joy or
discomfort, so it is from you only I expect good or ill news: I have made
your affection in such soft necessary for my life's contentment, that without it
I should find defects even in Felicity it self, and should have an imperfect
feeling of the most happy successes could befall me. Restore therefore, if so
you please, or continue this your ancient favor toward me, which J cannot
possibly forbear. And since you are part of that body to which God has given
infalibility, and since it is forbidden to call the certainty of your wisdom
into the least question: condemn not I beseech you, what you have formerly
made, as though your Jtalian favors were some other things then your French
ones.

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 10. of December, 1623.
Balzac, his Letter to Mounsieur du Planty.
LETTER XII.
SIR,
SInce you cannot be here till after the Feast, and for that I presume you have
no purpose to oppose the Election of the Pope, being cannonically chosen. I
will advise you to stay your journey till the Spring be past, and the Snowes
melted* yet truly you are in such esteem here, as if you come not the sooner,
I verily think you will be sent for; and that the Court of Rome will commence
suite with the Loouer, to have my Lord the Cardinals presence. It is therefore
fitting (if so he please) that he undertake this Voyage, and put off
State-businesse, and the War to others, to live here in the midst of Glory
and Tryumphs. In the mean time, I may (so near as I can) inform my self
both of men and affairs, thereby to give you the better instructions at your
coming. Now to the end to afford you a taste of what I know, observe what I
say, for I will tell you strange things. There is a certain Great man here,
who entertaineth six Astrologers in Pension, to let him understand from time
to time who shall be Pope: Another takes large fees on both sides, finding it
the only way to bring his Clients to composition: A third has the most
extrauagant virtue you ever heard of, he leads a far more pleasant life then
the Duke of Ossuna; and having read in Holy Writ, how the Wisdom of the world
is folly in Gods sight, he imagines he should offend his Conscience, if he
were over wise. Here are Princes in this place, who in full peace pardon
neither Age nor Sex. There are others who keep their beds, though they be
well able to ride post; and who use all Physic possible to look pale, to be
feauerish, and full of Cathars, and who make use of all the sectets in Physic
to have a megar aspect. In conclusion, the highest place in this world, is
that, whether the more easily to arrive, it is necessary to be lame, and take
short steps; so as a sound Pope is commonly made out of a sickely Cardinal. At
our next meeting, I will inform you of the rest, and will in one half hour
infuse into you all the experience I have hither to gotten: But if I have not
this contentment so soon as I desire, fail not I pray you, to let me here
news of your health, and the rest of our good friends. But especially I
beseech you to assure Mounsieur de Mauroy, that I am passionatly his servant,
and that I find here much fubtilty and dissimulation, but not many so pure and
true virtues, as his are

BALZAC.
From Rome 10. of February, 1621.
A Letter to Mounsieur de la Magdelene from BALZAC.
LETTER. XIII.
SIR,
I Am extremely glad you are not of the number of those whom the King has
lost before St. John d' Angely. Conserve your self therefore so far forth as
your Honor and Courage will suffer or permit, and content your self to have
tasted what War is; which if you please to be advised by me, you should do
well never more to behold but with Flanders spectacles. You are bound to
execute good actions, but you are to perform many, and permanently; and to be
a better husband of a worthy man's life, then that of an ordinary Soldier of
the Guardes. At leastwise so long as you continue at the assembly of the
Clergy, you shall be serviceable to the Church at your own ease, and there
shall commonly be ten days journey between you and danger. Though I were not
any more of this world then those who lived before the late King, or who are to
come into the world after the decease of this, yet should I not fear to hazard
my self in this sort; and to keep all my blood for the Public, as readily
as the most valiant Jesuit of France. It is in this sort I have learned to
speak in this Court, where honest men are so wedded to their particular
interests, and do so little reflect upon the general affairs, as they think
there is nothing beyond the tips of their vpmost hairs, and suppose the world
ends at their feet. The C. L. dreams of no other thing, but how to fortify
himself with Men and Money against the C. B. whom he takes for the Turk and
an Heretic: And say what you will, the fifty Abbeys he has gotten in one
Year, is that portion of the Church which pleases him better then all the
rest. Behold in what terms we stand at this present: instead of procuring the
conversion of Nations, and to seek the means to set the Leuant at liberty: a
P. thinks he has worthily acquitted himself of his charge, so long as he
prouides to make his Nephew a greater man then his Predecessors was. But that I
fear lest my zeal should ouer-far transport me, or that you should become as
weary of my Discourse as of a tedious Preacher, I would dilate my self upon
this Subject; but I know the affairs in these parts are very indifferent unto
you, I will therefore refer the further relation wherewith I intended to
acquaint you, to my Lord, the Marquess of Caeuure. In brief, there are none
but himself and the Council, who can cause the Pope to incline to our
reasonable demands, and I will tell you without flattering him, that so long as
he is here, the King may glory that he reigns at Rome. As for other things,
what beautiful objects soever Rome presents to my view, and what pleasure
soever each man finds there conformable to his humor and inclination, yet
cannot I receive any, being so remote from persons so dear unto me* and shall
esteem my self unhappy, so long as I am necessitated to write Letters unto
you, and only say, what is not as yet in my power to cause to appear, that I
am

Mounsieur, Your most faithful servant BALZAC.

To Mounsieur de Montigny from BALZAC.
LETTER XIIII.
SIR,
THough you vseme ill, and that I have reason to be sensible of your neglects,
yet I am resolved to suffer from you with an obstinate patience, and to acquire
your favors by force* since I cannot obtain them otherwise. But I am assured
you are not so uncivil, as not to suffer your self to be beloved, nor so tied
to your own fancies, as that there remains no affection in you for
whatsoever is separate: Otherwise I should think your humor were as much
changed as are the affairs of France, or that you were snddainly become quite
another man. I will therefore rest confident in the Opinion most pleasing unto
me, and imagine you are sufficiently my friend in your thoughts* but that you
are over loyal a French man to have any intelligence out of the Kingdom: It
may be the Example of the Duke of Biron affrights you, and that you take all
such as are in Jtaly for Don Pedros, or Countes of Fuentes: in this case
intruth you have reason, and it is far better to write no Letters at all, then
to be forced to explain them before the Court of Parliament. But if you were
of my humor, and that you would refer the whole State, and all the affairs
therein to Mounsiour Luynes, me thinks our Amity could not pass for
conspiracy, and you might safely let me have news from your self, and the
rest of our friends, without any hazard at all. I desire only to know what you
do, and wherein you employ the fairest season of your life. Do you never part
from the lips of Opala; whose breath is so sweet, as it seems she feeds
only on Pinkes and Perfumes? are you in as high esteem in your Mistresses
thoughts as your merits and service deserves, and as your loyalty obliges her
unto? Is Clitophon still in his generous musings? does he daily take Towns at
table? and does he yet frame foreign designs between his Bed-curtaines? Is
there any good inclination in the Court for our great Cardinal? and are they
not persuaded that if he were Pope, the Church would soon be as well Mistress
in Germany as at Rome? After you have satisfied me in all these points, I am
contented to be at truce with you as long as you please; and if need be, will
suffer you to wax old upon the bosom of Opala, without ever asking you what
you do there.

Yours, BALZAC.

BALZAC his Letter to the Duke of Espernon.
LETTER XV.
My LORD;
Were I not borne (as I am) your most humble servant, yet should I show my
self a very degenerate Frenchman, if I did not much rejoice in the happiness
of your Family, since it is a public Felicity. I have heard the prosperous
success of the Voyage you made into Bearn, and of the great beginnings you
have given, to what the King desires there to undertake. And truly, the
Election He has made of you, to serve him in an occasion of such importance,
has been so generally approved, that, if heretofore there has been any
defects pretended in the conduct of our Affairs. we must necessarily auow,
that this last Action has sufficiently justified all the former; it appearing
plainly, that it is not only favor which sets the difference between men. J
no way doubt, but right, and power siding together, that the event of things
will be suitable to our desires: But, howsoever it happen, you have already the
glory of having facilitated the victory, and made it appear how the Enemies of
the State have no other force, but what they draw out of our weakness. It is
now time (my Lord) you take notice of those advantages God has given you above
the rest of men: You ought, at least to remember, how being tried with Worldly
affairs, and retired from Court, public necessity had not sought you out in
your private reposednes at home, to put the Kings royal Armies into your
hands, if you were not the only man from whom all men expect the
re-establishment of these affairs. I will not so farrerelie upon my own
opinion, as to answer for the future: Yet when J consider the actions of your
Life, which are so eminent, that we find difficulty to believe them, even after
they have been performed; and those in such number, that Strangers may well
imagine you have lived from the very beginning of our Monarchy: I suppose I
might boldly affirm, that, if there be yet any great matter remaining to be
achieved in the World, there is none but your Self must attempt it. You have
possessed the favor of Kings, as Fortunes which might fail you, and have not
feared that their passions could out-last your innocence. This Virtue we so
much admire, has succeeded the same authority, our Fathers have adored. You
have made no use of your power in State, which you have not ever since coserued
by the force of your Courage. You have at all times preserved the liberty of
France amidst the miseries of times, and the usurpation upon lawful power. Who
is there can say this of himself? where are they that have stood firm
between rebellion and servitude? where was there ever known an old age so
necessary for the world, or so much good and bad fortune equally glorious? My
Lord, you know your self too well, to suspect me of flattery; and my humor is
so aliene from any servile actions, as the Court has not sufficient hopes to
cause me to do any thing against my conscience. I then speak as I do now; for
the only interest of Virtue; and if that were not on your side, I would seek
for it among our enemies to do it right: None will suspect I have any
pretentions at Madrill; or that I intend to make a fortune in Holland; yet to
hear me speak of the Prince of Orange, and the Marquess Spinola, one would
say that I did at once expect Abbeys from the Hollanders, and were a pensioner
to Spain. In sum, I hold my self obliged to those, who afford me matter
and means to reconcile the two rarest things in this world, to wit; Virtue and
Eloquence. And as their reputation has need of my Pen, to make it immortal;
so are their lives and actions right useful unto me, when I employ my pains
on excellent Subjects. You have ever done me the honor to wish me well, and I
have received innumerable favors from my Lord the Cardinal your Son; but
howsoever, I humbly beseech you to be confident that my affections are
absolutely pure, and that my particular interests have not any alliance
therewith. I am so happy as to have served you in a troublesome time, and to
have bin of the weaker side; as judging it to be the more honest. I have not
since been of another mind; and the reasons drawing me to do what I did,
being still the same, I am really, as I ever have been,

My Lord, Your most humble and thrice obedient servant, BALZAC.

To the Duke of Espernon from Balzac.
LETTER XVI.
My LORD,
THe Letter I lately received from you, makes me know I am happier then I
supposed, since I have the honor to be sometimes in your memory. It is a place
so taken up with high thoughts, and which the public good does in such
measure make use of, as I had not the ambition to imagine, there could be any
room left for a man of so small importance as my self. But I fee, that as you
never had any so potent enemies as to exceed your courage, so have you not any
servants of so slight consideration, whom you esteem not worthy your care.
Herein my Lord, you make it appear that the meanest matters change their
nature into more noble subjects, so soon as they become yours: and how of all
men, you have conquered part, and acquired the rest. I am verily persuaded, it
were no less then to offend God, to deny obedience to a person so high in his
favor as you are, and that his meaning is, this commanding spirit he has
conferred upon you, should be master of all others. The Honor therefore to
you appertaining, being little inferior to what we owe to sacred things; and
that besides the ordinary providence which governs the world, there being a
particular one in Heaven, designed merely for the conduct of your life, to
make it admired in all after Ages: it is necessary as well in contemplation of
this common consideration, as for others particularly concerning my self, I
should perpetually remain

My Lord, Your most humble and most faithful Servant, BALZAC.
The 5. of April, 1622.
To the Duke of Espernon from Balzac.
LETTER XVII.
My LORD,
IN this general calm of the State, (wherein the affairs of this Kingdom
seem to be asleep, and the Worlds occurrents to be at a stand) all France
expects your presence at Court, to be the Author of the desired News, and to
draw from the Kings breast the good intentions wherewith it is so richly
stored. The reduction of Bearn not stained with any drop of blood: the truth
wherein you have instructed all men, concerning the possibility of taking
Rochell, and the order you have now lately left in Guiene, where you have
reduced the Factions to such a point, as their only power consists in their
perverse humors; puts us in hope, that if God should defer the safety of
our State till another Age, it could be no man (your self excepted) for whom
he has reserved so glorious an Enterprise. My Lord, it is certain he never
showed more miracles in those places himself has consecrated to his glory and
public Piety, and which he has chosen on purpose there to manifest his
power, then he has done in your person. And when I consider how often he has
protected you, contrary to all humane appearance; and the opposition you have
encountered, in arriving to this hight by so many rocks and precipices; I
cannot but constantly belecue you have ouerpassed the time of dying; and that
for the Worlds general good, it is fitting you endure as long as the Sun or
Stars. To stop here, were to praise you imperfectly, and only to make it
appear you are able to afford long services. I will therefore say more: on
which side soever I turn mine eyes, be it that I convey them beyond the Seas,
or make them pass those Mountains which separate us from our neighbors, I
find not that person in any place, who can justly dispute for glory with you;
or whose life is so illustrious as yours. I have seriously considered all
whatsoever might give value or reputation to the Courts of stranger Princes,
and there truly I find men who are well seen in Military affairs, and who
have gained to themselves no small experience by means of an infinity of rules
and maxims: But the difference between those men and your self, is, that
they cannot stir, nor make themselves awful without the Jndies, Armies, and
Cannons; whereas you are redoubtable all alone, and unarmed; yea, your very
stillness terrifieth the greatest enemies of France. This being absolutely true
(as no man can doubt) it is high time the King do really make use of a man
whom the necessity of his state requires of him, and that he no longer employ
those improsperous persons, under whose hands opportunities wax old, and his
good fortune will fail him. It is sufficient that the Rhyne and Alps have
formerly been French, and that our Language is spoken in neighboring
Provinces, without suffering a strange kind of people still to remain in the
very bowels of our Kingdom, who will not allow of our ancient Laws. There is
now no longer means to cover thisskarre which dishonoreth the face of State,
or to suffer that Rebellion and loyalty live together. To speak truth, what
kind correspondency can be expected between the Mistresle of the house, and
the Concubine? what a monstrous production would that prove between a Monarchy
and a popular government? and what kind of Sovereign should he be, who were
dependent on his subjects, and his Council subordinate to the Towne-house?
Truly, if Catholics should demand Cities of the King, proportionable to their
number, as others do, he should be forced hence-forward to remain all his
life time at Fountaine*bleau and S. Germins: nor would there remain unto him
any more then the bare title of a King, and the common fields of his Country.
But it shall not always be so if predictions prove true: And Reason as well as
Nature requires that things should be reduced to their ancient form. It were
no less then to iniure him who has promised to France a longer continuance
then to all her diseases, to think that he having given remedies against the
Goths and Moors, he will suffer it to dye at this day by the hands of a
small pack of Rebels: Provided, that face which I rather call immortal, then
ancient, do still assure us of the great source of life you retain in your
courageous heart, and that Heaven please to preserve for the worlds benefit,
the blessing it conferred upon us at your Nativity; we require not a more
certain presage of the end of our evils; nor is there any so sick or far
stricken in years, who hops not to survive these intestine troubles: But we
are not to imagine that Victory and Peace are two opposite things, though they
be different; for it is the one which assures the other, and setleth it in
state not to be any further either troubled or threatened by any. When all is
done, I find it were much to oblige these malcontents, to give a sure repose
to their distrustful spirits, and at once to rid them of all their hopes and
fears: when they shall no longer need to trouble themselves with making
assemblies, and that their lives shall be free from the fear of punishments.
When I say both they and we shall enjoy common security, it is not to be
doubted but their condition will be much bettered, it being a much fairer
fortune to be cast on shore by a storm in a craised Vessel, then to be still
in the power of Winds and Seawrackes. The word of Kings ought not to
contradict the functions of Regality, nor can they oblige themselves to leave
their Subjects in miserable estate, or to doecontrary to what they ought. And
in conscience since the ruin of Rebellion is written in Heaven, in the same
sort as is the Day of Judgment, and the Worlds dissolution; were it not as
much as to resist Gods will, and to oppugn his providence, should we so soon
grow weary of well-doing, or refuse to finish a work, the event whereof is
infalliable? There is nothing so easy for a great Prince, as either to find
or conceive faults, nor does any man doubt that dissimulation is just, when it
rends to the advantage and avail of the deceived. If a mad man were capable of
remedies, were it not lawful to cure him without asking his consent? were it
fit a Father should suffer his Son to be drowned, for fear of pulling him out
by the hair? Are we to suffer the State to perish, for that we cannot preferue
it by ordinary ways? No (my Lord) we ought not* there is no consideration can
cause that thing to change its nature, which of it self is just; and the Laws
of necessity do dispense with us for those of formality. Now to return to my
first discourse, and to what particularly regards your Lordship; seeing your
absence from Court has at all times threatened more miseries unto us, then the
apparition of Comets and other irregularities in Nature, and since to be
miserable, it is sufficient to be at odds with you. There is not any of your
enemies can escape the Divine justice, nor is there any doubt, but you will
generally find all those spirits favorable unto you, whom you have formerly
convinced; or that your propositions shall not be received as assured
Conquests. The best is, there are now no more any usurpers near the King, who
seek to ingrosse his favors to their own advantages, and bereave men of
those benefits which ought to be as common to them as the Fire or Air. His
Majesty's heart is open to all his Subjects, he receives truth at what hand
soever it comes unto him. This being so (my Lord) may we not rest confident
you shall not lose one word, and that your Virtue whereof the World is
incapable, shall at length be found the only means the King has to redress
and re-establish his affairs. Neither time, travail, nor cost, ought divert
him from this design* It is a work will be nothing so costly as to raise a
Favorite, and it being a thing all Christendom exacteth of him, as an
Hereditary debt the King his Father has left to be discharged. And truly, it
is most certain that the face of States has been changed, and whole
Provinces conquered, with less cost then diverse Pagan Princes have employed in
erecting of Idols* and causing them to be adored by their people. But to leave
this Jtalian severity you formerly reproved in me, and lest you should accuse
me for warring against the dead, I will for your sake pardon their memory; nor
will I farther dilate my self upon so odious a Subject. Yet is this but half
of what I intended to speak unto you at Coignac; if in that short abode you
made there, and the continual press hindering the freedom of my Speech unto
you, it had been permitted me to have had a longer Audience. But (my Lord)
what I could not perform by word of Mouth, I will continue by my Letters, if
you please to do me the honor as to command them; or if my words which you
have heretofore made choice of for the conception of your High thoughts, in
bewayling present miseries and public ingratitude, be, as pleasing unto you,
as I am perfectly

Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful servant, BALZAC
The 18 of November, 1623.
The Duke of Espernon his Letter to the French King: penned by BALZAC.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
I Understand by the Letter it pleased your Majesty to do me the honor to
write unto me, that upon the opinion wherewith some have possessed you
concerning the continuance of the German Wars, you judge it expedient for the
good of your service, I should not (as yet) leave this Frontire. Whereunto Sir,
I can give your Majesty no other answer, but that having at all times gathered
out of your commands, what my duty obliged me unto, and having never proposed
other end to my actions, then the good of your state, I should be careful of
straying from that design in an occasion wherein J might imagine your service
depended on my obedience. But at this present (Sir) the tranquillity of France
grows to be so general, your affairs so powerfully established, and the
Honor of your Amity so precious among all your neighboring Princes; that as
there is nothing in this Kingdom which does not bend under your Authority; so
is there not any Prince abroad, who does not respect your power, or who
conserueth not himself by your Justice. And as concerning the troubles of
Bohemia; besides, that time has euaporated the first heat of spirits, and that
they begin to retire from those extreamities wherein formerly they inuolued
themselves: the imagined danger is so far removed hence, as we cannot
conceive the least apprehension, even for those who are not our next neighbors
that way. It is certain (Sir) that on this side the Rhine all things seem to
be at rest under the shade of your State, and the ancient Allies of this
Crown who are nearest any danger, expect the end of War with our fearing it
should come any further toward them, or that out of all this noise, there will
arise any more then one War. These considerations then do no way oblige me
to stay in these parts, where things are in so good estate, as they may well
nigh subsist of themselves* besides the residence my Son of Valette shall
make there in my absence, being sufficient to give order to all occurrents
concerning the good of your affairs. I assure my self your Majesty will be so
impartial as to be pleased to reflect upon the necessity of my particular
occasions, and that suffering me to retire my self to my own house, you will
at least permit me to enjoy a favor, usually inflicted on others as a
punishment. I doubt not (Sir) but you will condescend to the desire I have to
undertake this Voyage, and I presume you will be pleased to consider, that I
being engaged in two hundred thousand Crowns for your service; after the sight
of your royal bounty in all sorts of hands, it were small reason (I receiving
nothing) should still in this place stand as a mere cipher for the honor of
France; or that I ruin my self with a rich show, only to continue strangers
in the opinion they have of the magnificent greatness of your Crown. Yet
(Sir) having never believed J could sustain any great detriment by the loss
of a thing J so slightly esteem, as I do worldly substance, I intend not in
this place to complain of my poverty: But (to speak truth) since all my words
and actions are by many misinterpreted; and that having affoorded my dutiful
attendance to the service of three great Kings, I yet find much difficulty to
defend my so long a loyalty against Calumny: I am with much sorrow constrained
to say, that if I stood firm in my duty, even when disobedience was Crowned
with rewards; and have maintained your Authority, when by some it was abused,
by others contemned: It is no small iujury to me, to imagine I will now begin to
fail in my loyalty at this age wherein I am, or suffer my self to be
reproached by posterity, whereto I study to annexe the last actions of my life.
But I see well (Sir) it is long since the hatred of dishonest Frenchmen has
been fatal unto me, and that it has been borne with me inseparably. From
the first hour I appeared in the World, there was never either peace or truce
unviolated to my prejudice; and as though I were excepted out of all treaties,
though War be ended, yet that made against me endures. At this present (Sir)
it suffices not I perform my charge without omitting or forgetting any thing
due to your service; or that the innocence of my actions be generally
acknowledged; but I am driven to those streights, as to be forced to give
account of my very thoughts, there being not any (my self excepted) from whom
satisfaction is required for the fault he has not as yet committed. If we
lived in a Country where virtue were avoided, as not concurrent with the
times, or adverse to the State, and where a great reputation were more
dangerous then an inglorious one, I should not need to make much search for
the cause of my misfortunes: but I well know the conduct you use, has more
honorable and honest grounds, and that your Majesty has no pretention to
reign with more assurance then the King your Father did before you. It is from
him (Sir) you may learn how you are to distinguish wounded innocence from
wicked impudency: and to know it is ordinary to draw honest men into suspicion,
thereby to make them unserviceable. In following his example, you shall find
out the truth, though never so closely hidden, or what shadow soever they cast
over the same to disguise it. And truly (Sir) since this great Prince in
bestowing your Origin upon you, has together therewith conferred his most
Royal inclinations, I will never believe, that to follow a stranger passion,
you will lose those perfections so proper, and natural unto you; or that for
me alone your Majesty has any other spirit then for the rest of men. Truly,
if when you were not yet at your own liberty, such has been the natural
goodness of your gracious disposition, as you have at all times resisted
violent counsels, nor have ever permitted your authority should be employed to
the ruin of your subjects: there is small appearance, that having now by
public and solemn act obliged your self to reign alone, and your bounty
finding not any obstacle to hinder the same, you would disturb the old age of
one of your best servants, or deny to his gray hairs that rest Nature requires
at your hands, (I ought to hope (at least) for this recompense for my long and
faithful services, since your Majesty may bestow it without incommodating your
affairs; and besides I having never expected other reward of worthy actions,
then the only contentment to have performed them, I shall hold my self
sufficiently happy, to receive from my conscience the testimonies which whilst
I live it will afford me, that I have been, really am, and ever will to the
end remain*

SIR, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and servant,
ESPERNON
From Mets 7 of January, 1619.
Another Letter to the French King from the Duke of Espernon, penned by the
same Balzac.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
Having long attended at Mets, the occasions not to be vnusefully there, and
not finding any thing either in the conduct of my present life, or in the
memory of my fore-passed time, which might justly cast me into a worse
condition then the rest of your subjects: I have presumed that the Laws of
this Kingdom, and my Births prerogative might permit me to make use of
public liberty, and to partake of that peace you have purchased to the rest
of your subjects. Nevertheless (Sir) your Majesty's will does so regulate
mine, that I had not removed, had not the cause of my stay there ceased, and
the difficulties of the Bohemian War been utterly removed. But having had
perfect intelligence by the relations the Duke of Loraine has received from
those parts, that the affairs there begin to be well settled, the ouerture
thereof beginning with the suspension of War on both sides; I could not
imagine the good of your service did any way oblige me to remain longer in a
place out of all danger in time of peace, and which will make good use of the
Empires weakness if the War continue: considering likewise that if there be
any part of your State less sound then the rest, and where your Authority had
need with more then ordinary care to be conserved, it is questionless in the
Province whither I am going, which bordering upon such neighbors as all honest
men may justly suspect; and being a people composed of diverse parts, have at
all times been either troubled or threatened with changes* yea, at this present
(Sir) the most common opinion is, that the assembly now holden at Rochell, is
no way pleasing unto you, and that if you have bin drawn to give any asscent
thereto, it has rather been a conniuency to the necessity of time, then
conformable to your will. Whereupon (Sir) if your Majesty please to reflect
upon the miseries of your State, whereout at least you have drawn this
advantage, that even in the very spring of your age, you have attained great
experience: You shall plainly see that all the miseries which befell your
Majesty in your minority, have been begun upon the like occasions. I therefore
using my best endeavors, if the intentions of those of Rachell be good; to
hinder that the events be not evil; therein I hope I shall no way disobey
your Majesty's commands; but do rather explain them according to the true
sense, allowing them the best interpretation, since it is most profitable for
your service. Truly (Sir) no man is ignorant, that as the conservation of your
authority is the principle Law of your State: so likewise that the most
express and important part of your commands, is the good of your affairs.
This being undoubtedly true, what appearance is there, it being in my power to
preserve the affections of a divided Province in due obedience to your Majesty,
and to pacify by my presence those affections easily drawn to revolt, if none
did confirm them in their loyalty: I should (for the interrupting so necessary
a voyage, propound to my self so frivolous considerations, and those so far
fetched as the Wars of Bohemia. I live not in an age (Sir) wherein I am
permitted to feed my self with variety; but I do not withal suppose your
Majesty does so slightly esteem of my service, as not to make any farther use
of me, save only to see the packets from Germany safely conveyed; nor do I
find my self so unuseful, as to be forced insteade of better employments;
only to let you know what news is stirring, and to give you an account of
ordinary rumors. I must humbly beseech your Majesty, to suffer me to dye in
this opinion I have of my self, and to allow me to make free use of my
leisure; if you please not to impose more honorable employments upon me for
your service. Howsoever it happen, (Sir) or how badly soever I be entreated, I
am determined to continue resolute in well-doing. And your Majesty may be most
assured, that neither Time, which affoordeth occasions to the most miserable to
raise their fortunes, nor Place often favoring their resentments, nor
Necessity which causes their actions to seem just; shall ever transport me
from remaining with the same affection I ever have done to be

Sir, Your most humble, most obedient, and most faithful subject and servant,
Espernon.
From Pent de Vichij the 7. of February, 1619.
Another Letter from the Duke of Espernon to the French King, penned by the
same Balzac.
LETTER XX.
SIR,
IF your Majesty have misconceiued mine intentions before you were charely
informed of them; I am persuaded, I have at this present in such sort justified
the same by my proceedings, as there is no further need to defend them by my
words. Truly, I may justly say, that the Conduct J have used, has been such:
the Queen your Mother, having done me the honor to make use of my service in a
business, she deemed much to import the good of your State; as not making use of
the advantages which might arise by causing mischief to continue, or by giving
way to such designs, the event whereof would have sufficiently commended the
resolution, had they not been disaduantagious unto you* I have contented my
self to restifie to all France, that I had respect to your authority even in
the hands of mine enemies: whereby (Sir) I trust I have caused my actions to
appear so pure and unspotted before your Majesty, that you remain fully
satisfied; nor will you I hope judge I have erred, in following a cause J might
probably suppose could not be well separated from yours. Now therefore since it
has pleased your Majesty to supply what seemed deficient in the felicity of
your Reign, and to settle peace in your State: All your true subjects (Sir)
are by so much the more obliged to rely on your Royal word; in that it is the
rock whereon all Christendom rests confident: And the same having been given
to the Queen your Mother, besides your obligation thereto by God and Nature,
your very reputation confirms the same unto her upon this sacred and
inviolable assurance, after having dedicated my sensibilities and interests to
public peace, and taken your Majesty's memory, as witness, that I have at
all times served you faithfully, though it has not always been by ordinary
and common ways; I assure my self you will be pleased to permit me hence
forward to pass the rest of my days in peace; and now at length to leave me
in the Haven whereinto I have been cast by so many violent Tempests. Sir, I
have but a short time to stay in this World, and surely I should suppose my
life ouer-long, could I find my self culpable of one single cogitation
repugnant to the Allegiance I owe to your Majesty, I therefore most humbly
beseech you (Sir) to be pleased to consider, that I desiting no other thing of
you, but either some small repose after my great pains, or an honorable death
in your service: I can no way herein allot more moderate limits to my ambition,
nor wish a more innocent end to my old age: Howsoever, J shall esteem it right
happy, may I end it in this sort; and if in losing it, I conserve the quality I
have ever hitherto inuiolably kept of

Your Majesty's most humble, most obedient, and most faithful Subject and
Servant, ESPERNON.
From Angoulosme the 10. of June, 1619.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC.
To my Lord the Duke de la Valete; from Mounsieur D' BALZAC.
THE THIRD BOOK.
LETTER I.
My LORD:
IN acquittance of my promise when I parted from Mets, I am to let your
Lordship know, we are at this instant beyond ten Rivers, and how all things
have bin propitious to my Lord your Fathers Voyage. To be diffident the
conclusion will not correspond to these fair beginnings: were either to make
doubt of Gods providence, or to distrust his Grace; but it has pleased his
Divine Majesty at all times to take so particular care for the conservation of
your Family, that he will as soon permit his Altars and Images to be
irreuerently entreated, as persons who are so high in his favor as all of you
are. Howsoever it happen (my Lord) if none but the prosperous can lose by
altorations; you will, I hope, confess no such change can any way happen,
whereout we shall not draw some advantage; and what interpretations soever
they give to my Lord your Fathers intentions, yet will all honest men judge
favorably thereof, nor will any man apprehend failing after so eminent an
example. All France attends his resolution to be rightly informed in the truth
of the Kings affairs, and all men know he is of such consideration in this
State, as his least discontentments are to be reckoned among public
miseries. I will persuade my self they will not proceed to any extremity,
and that there is not impudency enough in our Enemies to transport them to so
dangerous counsels. If the worst come, yet must this voyage necessarily produce
the one of two things, equally necessary in a troublesome time, War or
Liberty. J am not so clear sighted in future events, as to answer for what
shall happen; yet since the order of seasons are framed to facilitate our
passage, and that all things have chansed more succesfully unto us then we
presumed to desire; there is small appearance that Heaven will declare it self
in favor of the less supportable cause. But that which does the rather
fortify my confidence, is the vigorous estate wherein I find my Lord your
Father, he has no show of old age, save only experience and authority. The
late Ligue, the Rebels, the Sword, nor Poison have not been of power to kill
him, nor was there ever man so awful in his adverse fortune. As for you (my
Lord) who are the object of his hopes and fears; and who are to perform one
of the principal parts in his designed action: remember you have the command
of a The City of Mets.
place which has been the dishonor of Charles the fifth, and which affoordeth
France a revenge for all the affronts he offered thereto. He who defended it
against him had no more then two arms as you have, and one single life, nor
was he made of any other matter then other men are. It is true, he fought by
the Kings succors, but it suffices you fight for his service, and that all
men know you are resolved not to survive your fortunes. Were you borne to
perform ordinary actions, I should hold it fit to speak unto you in another
strain, but since you purpose not to exercise any idle dignity in this world,
nor are at this present in case to make use of the hands of a great Army, or
expect reputation in your bed; speak as high as you please, provided you act
accordingly; and that out of your particular forces (since those of the State
fail you) you make good unto the King, the last conquest of his Ancestors. One
only worthy man has heretofore been the whole Republicke of Rome, and has
resisted the fury of a victorious Army. So though there were no more true
Frenchmen, but my Lord your Father, your self, and my Lords your Brothers, I
could no way despair of Public affairs, nor of the fortune of this
Kingdom. My Lord, I am so weary, that I am forced to defer the continuation of
this discourse till another time, and to rest awhile to make a more ample
relation. I will content my self for the present, to pass my promise unto you
of that History, the subject whereof I require at your hands, and to assure you
it is impossible to be more then I am

Your most humble, most obedient, and most affectionate Servant, BALZAC.
The 9. of February, 1619.
To the Signiour of Plessis, Governor of Tollemount, from BALZAC.
LETTER. II.
SIR,
SInce it appears you have a will to lose every hour what you can in truth
spend but once, and that you so slightly esteem your life, as though it were
another man's; me thinks the War has dealt very kindly with you, in being
contented to leave you half a face, and that you may well account what is
left, as gotten goods. The Duke de Main, and the rest were not quit at so
easy a rate: and it has pleased God to show examples in this kind, to make
it appear that he approoueth not vanity; nor that he needs the advice of men
for the defense of his own and his Churches cause. Truly, if these men had
practiced with the enemy, they could not have been more confident; nor have
gone more naked to War, had they fought against women: And in truth I am so
far from praising their desperate courses, as I do not so much as pardon
them their deaths; and if my opinion had passed, I should have thought it fit
to have accused them as culpable of their own deaths, and as such who had
committed the greatest Parricides. It becomes me ill in this place to
prescribe rules to my Master; for should I attempt to tech your courage how
far it should extend it self, I might seem to do no less then prescribe
laws to what is illimitable. Yet be pleased (I pray you) to be informed, that
valor is so tender and delicate a virtue, that if it be not sometimes well
shielded and conserved by some others, it becomes more hurtful to him who
has it, then healthful for the State, often endamaged by it, or to the Prince
who makes use thereof. And surely without the assistance of Reason, which
ought to be its Gouernnesse, and Prudence as a guide unto it: there is not any
passion more blind, nor which does less differ from the fury of Beasts, and
the brutish ferocity of Barbarians: The latter of these think it cowardice to
quit the place, though the breach of a River roll upon them; or not to stand
firm though they see a house falling on their heads. But these wretches, and
we, have not the same pretentions; for as they propound to themselves, only
to kill, and to die, so should we only aim at victory, and neglect the rest;
otherwise to what end is the knowledge of Virtue unto us, and of the limits
which boundeth it, or to be borne under a more happy Climate, then that of
Polonia and Muscouia: if we draw no advantage either from the excellency of our
institutions or extractions; I do not at all wonder, why there are men who
prefer death before indigence, and who not finding any contentment in their
own Countries, are well pleased to pass beyond the Ice of their natural
air, as willing to forgo the infelicity of their fortunes. But a man of
worth, who at all hours inioyeth both perfect and pure contents, and who has
a great share of this Ages virtue to lose, is a Traitor to the Public, and a
Tyrant to himself, if he forsake all this for a mere fancy, and deprive the
world thereof only for a flash of Fame and vain Glory. You know this better
then I can tell it you, and if you suppose the Philosophy you have heretofore
so highly esteemed, be yet wise enough to instruct you, she will tell you that
Life is the groundwork of all other good that can here befall us; since by
means thereof one may recover Kingdoms though utterly lost, and remain
Victor, after having been defeated in four battles. There is no question
but a dead Lion is less worth then a living Dog, or that the most part of
those Princes of whom there has been so much speech, and those valiant
Captains with whose Heroicke acts so many Histories are stored, would not
willingly change their Laurels for our lives. Rejoice therefore (good Sir)
together with Nature: in that you are as yet in the number of men; and comfort
your self with Haniball, and the Father of Alexander the great, for the loss
you have received: whatsoever you can say, you have yet sight enough to cause
you to turn louesicke, and to contemplate the beauties of Heaven and Earth.
But suppose you were wholly blind, yet is it true, that the Night has its
pleasures as well as the Day, yea and such as you best love.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 18 of December, 1622.
Another Letter to Hidaspe from BALZAC.
LETTER III.
MY dear Hidaspe, thou can not imagine the content I take in thy Letter, and
in the good news it brings me, it is the only way to cause me to contradict
my self, when I account my estate miserable, since I hear thou art in health,
and love me. Were I not confident thereof, I should the next day drink
poison; or if not valiant enough to attempt so hardy an enterprise, I should
dye with sorrow. Thou art (then) as necessary for my living as life it self;
so as if thou desire my estate, thou need not for that any other means,
then to deprive me of thy good opinion: But truly I never had the least
apprehension of such a loss, and I assure my self if J were dead, thou
should be double as rich as thou desire to be. I have long since been
assured, thy thoughts are not inthralled to the earth, or that thy passions
only exceed those of the vulgar. Let me entreat thee to cherish them my dear
Hydaspe; and though I be continually sad, and at all times ill affected in my
health; yet remember that the very rauings of my Fever are sometimes more
prizeable then Philosophical meditations; and we see beautiful faces often
weep so gracefully, that some have been enamoured of their tears. I have
fully acquainted thee with our occurrents here, by my last Letters, nor will I
let any opportunity pass without giving my self the content of discoursing
with thee in that kind; bind me so much unto thee, as to do the like on thy
part: But if thy Letters be so short, as usually they are, I will now betimes
tell thee, I will read them so often, as they shall become long enough in spite
of thee. I know well how in the place where thou art, thou ought not lose
any minute of time; since opportunities last no longer; and resolve thy self
to take a thousand unprofitable iournies to thy Lords Chamber, before thou
make one to purpose. Great men use not to keep Registers of the absent, nor
remembrancers of them they usually forget: but rather to the contrary; they
imagining there is no other thing on earth but themselves, and what concerns
them: (provided, they find any who look like men) they never trouble
themselves to enquire for others, since with them assiduity often works more
then service; yea, and those whom they would not affect for merit, they will
love by custom: It is therefore necessary you be still in sight, and always
at hand for the entertainment of Fortune: It is a tradition the subtle
Gascoynes at their deaths leave to their Children: and truly as choler
assumeth Arms out of whatsoever it encounters; so is it true, that occasion
takes hold of all such as present themselves. We ought to contract perfect
love with honest men, but yet not to be at odds with others. Poisons
themselves are necessary in some cases; and since we are forced to live among
savage creatures, we had need have the industry either to familiarise or
force them. I advise thee not to look before thee, behind thee, and on every
side when thou speak; or to be in so great fear to be taken at thy word, as
thou dare not tell what a Clock it is if one asks thee. Thou shall gain
much by being silent, the dumb shall at all times therein exceed thee: For my
part, I never make question of speaking, when I have any thing in my head
better then silence. I do not hereby mean that we ought to discover our
intentions by our looks, or that our interior conceptions appear outwardly
with all their passions, namely, of fear, hatred, or distemper. This were to
betray our selves, and to give ill example to others. But herein you are to
make election of place, and persons, and not wilfully to deprive thy self of
the most pleasing fruit of man's life, there being not any, in whose breast we
may securely deposite either our griefs or joys. Besides, I would not have
thee of that Spaniards humor, who took for his device Que fi que no; but
consider with thy self that Reason is a sacred thing* whereto thou art to
yield, where ever it appears. I confess that most things are inuolued in
uncertainties, and that humane Sciences have very slender and uncertain
foundations; yet are there some truths so perspicuous, and so absolutely
received into the Worlds approbation, as it were no less then to lack common
sense, to call them into question; for he who should say, my Lord the
Constable d'Esdiguieres were not valiant, or my Lord the Cardinal of
Richelieu, were not a man of able parts: doubtless all men would wonder at
him, as at one who sought to introduce some new Sect, or endeavor to overthrow
the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. Nay, I tell you yet more; you are
piously to believe diverse sots to be sufficient men, since the World will have
it so; and that Kings are not the only men who desire complasency; since if we
mean to live among others, we must sometimes necessarily flatter, and frame
our selves to their opinions Let us then follow the judgment of the wise, and
the customs of the vulgar; let us keep our thoughts to our selves, and allow
them our actions and outsides. As J have advised thee not to be over silent,
so would I not have thee over talkatiue, nor to weary any one with thy
discourse of Mountauban, or the exploits thou have there seen performed. I
assure thee to avoid the company of these boasting companions; I would take
post, go to Sea, or fly to the Worlds end. They seem to me to have gotten a
patent for prating, and that it were no less then to take their purse, if one
should offer to speak a word in their presence: But above all, it is very
death to me, when these fellows come fresh out of Holland, or when they begin
to study the Mathematics. From Millan to Sienna I was haunted with one of
these Chapmen; whose company I shall so long as I have life, reckon among my
greatest misfortunes. He would needs reform all the fortifications of those
strong places we passed by; be trod on no earth at which he carped not, nor
travailed over any Mountain, on which he had not some design; he set upon
all the Cities in the Dukedom of Florence; he desired only a certain short
prefixed time, to take in all the States of Medena, Parma, and Vrbin: yea, I
had much ado to draw him from casting his designs upon the lands of the
Church, and St. Peter's Patrimony. These be diseases the roots whereof are not
to be cut up, without taking away the tongue withal: Nay, J fear when all
this is done, there will be yet need to pass further into the cure, and to
use means to bereave them of voice, for the general good of such as can
hear. There is yet another sort of importunate people, whose number does so
multiply in France, it is almost arrived to an infinity: These have not one
half hours intertainement for thee, without telling thee the King is raising
puissant forces; how such a one is out of credit with his faction; another is a
great searcher into, and medler in State-matters, and how a third diueth into
all the intricacies of Court-businesses. If you can have the patience to hear
them yet a while longer, you shall strait understand how the President Iannin
was the man who had the truest intentions of all the ministers of Justice: That
it is expedient to show a Masterpiece of State, to give reputation to the
present current of affairs: That the Kings authority was interessed in this
action: and that those who sought to cry down the present government, rather
aimed at their particular advantages, then redress of disorders. See here the
style wherewith they persecute me even to my poor Village, and which is a
cause I loath State, and public affairs. Tire not therefore my ears at
thine arrival, lest you turn mine adversary with intention to assault me
with these huge words. If you know not that these follies have not always the
same aspect, and that there are as well serious follies, as slight ones, I
would admonish thee in this place: Now though a man at twenty can have no great
experience of the World, yet have you a sufficient clear judgment to keep
your self from being deluded, by the appearance of good, or by the outward
luster of evil. I had need of more time then the bearer allows me, and of
more words then a Letter is capeable of, sufficiently to instruct thee what
thou ought to do, and what to avoid; or to learn thee a Science wherein my
self do study in teaching thee. I will therefore only say, since I am
hastened to make an end, that before all other things thou art to offer thy
whole will to God, if thou be not able to give the rest; and to have (at
least) good designs, if it be not as yet in thy power to do any good deeds. I
well know it is no slender task, to undertake to guard our selves from evil,
where inticements are extraordinary, and the danger extreme, and where (thou will tell me) that if God will hinder thee from loving beauty, he had need*
make thee blind. I having no pleasing answer to make thee hereto my dear
Hydaspe, I refer thee to thy Confessor: entreating thee to consider, how if
the King in the flower of his age wherein we see him, and in the midst of an
infinity of objects offering themselves to give him content, is yet
notwithstanding so firm in the resolution to virtue, that he as easily
surmounteth all voluptuous irregularities* as he does his most violent rebels,
and is not any way acquainted with forbidden pleasures, nor does glut himself
even with lawful ones: If as I say, this truth be generally auowed, I beseech
thee tell me why continency may not be placed among things possible? But I much
fear, there is no means to gain this for granted at thy hands; since thou
beleeuest as others do, that to be chaste, were no less then to usurp upon
the possession of married Wives. Yet at the least Hydaspe, if this body of
thine, being of sufficient ability to send Collonies into each corner of the
World, and to people the most desert places, will needs be employed; I
entreat thee to stay there, without being transported with the debauches of
the mouth, which have no other limits then the loss of reason, and ruin of
health. I should be in utter despair were it told me, that my brother drinks
as much as though he were in a continual Fever, and were as great a purueyer
for his panch, as if he were to enter into a besieged City. I confess thy
inclination does of it self sufficiently divert thee from these German
virtues, and that thou art not much less sober then my self, who have passed
over three years without suppers, and who would willingly feed only upon
Fennill and picktoothes, if I thought I could thereby recover health. Yet
truly this does not hinder me from having some apprehension, when I consider
how the examples of great ones does often give authority to vice: and that to
keep our selves upright in the midst of corruption, is not an effect of the
ordinary force of men: Consider then once again (Hydaspe) that we are
powerfully to resist temptations. Have an eye to the interest thou have to
contayneithy self within the limits of an orderly life; and be well advised,
whether thou could be contented to be of the proportion of those good
fellows, whose spirits are choked in their own grease, and who become such
comely creatures, that if their bodies were pierced, there would nothing pass
forth of their wounds but* Wine and Porridge. Besides, making profession as
thou do, to be a man of thy word, be not offended if I summon thee to observe
what thou have promised me: or that I freely tell thee, that if thou fallest
again to the old game, I shall have small subject to assure my self of thy
fidelity in other thy former promises. Were thou the King of the Indies, or thy
life endless, I would not forbid thee this exercise; but since we have scarce
leisure enough in this world to attain virtue, nor over great possessions to
secure us from poverty; believe me Hydaspe, it is very dangerous to suffer
shipwreck on shore; and besides, the expense of money, (which we esteem as
dear unto us as life) to lose our senses likewise, and our time, the last
whereof is irrecouerable, is both shameful and sinful; having here admonished
thee well near, though confusedly and scatteredly of those things thou
ought to fly, it were requisite I should likewise advise thee of what were
fit for thee to follow, and to cause if I could, good laws to arise out of
evil manners. But it is fit to take time to deliberate upon a matter of such
importance, and truly to speak herein to purpose, all the wit I have, joined
with that of others, were no more then sufficient.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 1* of January 1624.
To Hydaspe from Balzac.
LETTER IIII.
MY dear Hidaspe, if God had conferred a Kingdom upon me, with condition not
to have me sleep more then I do: I should prove the most vigilant Prince
living, nor should I need either Guards or Sentinels about my person. Surely
there is not any (my self excepted) for whom Night was not made, since when
the winds are calm, and all Nature quiet, I alone watch with the Stars. But
I much fear lest God will not be satisfied herewith, since I foresee so many
miseries ready to roll upon me, as I have no small apprehension to become more
wretched tomorrow, then I am at this present. The only countenance of Hydaspe
would refresh me, and cause my pain to be in some sort pleasing. But fince
there are now at least a dozen great Cities, and a hundred Leagues of Snow
between us, I have much ado to forbear dying, and to support my self upon
my weakest part. Yet my meaning is not to have thee return hither; for (were
it possible for me) I had much rather come to thee, and continually to gaze on
that face whereof I have drawn so many fair purtraicts. It is true, there are
few men living, whose love we should prefer before liberty. But assure thy
self thy Master is of those; be not therefore more proud then Henry the third,
who first obeyed him. For my part, though I be naturally refractory, yet have I
ever had a special inclination to his service, yea, when all things went
cross with him, and that his best Friends forsook him, I took pleasure in
perishing, on purpose to afford him some consolation in his calamities. Many
desire a dependency on him out of their particular ends but me thinks we
should have more noble designs, since his only virtue deserves to be
followed, and to cause a press wheresoever it passes. In truth, the service
we yield to so great a person, ought to hold the rank of the chief
recompenses we are to expect; vet after this, there follows another seldom
failing any of good parts, yea, or those who have but patience. If thou be
of the one, or other sort of such men, remember this maxim; and do not as
those honest persons, who think they do good service to the State, when they
betray their Masters. Beasts themselves are capeable of acknowledgement; and
that Italian had some small show of Reason, who called those Devils, who cured
Agues, good Angels. Yet truly it is no less then to be over mannerly to go
so far, nor would I thank Gods enemies for those gracious favors I indeed
receive from him only. But as touching the rest of worldly affairs, there is
no question, but we are to reflect upon the nearest occasions Fortune
affoordeth us; and those who seek after more remote means, shall in
conclusion find from one degree to another, that it is to Hugh Capete to whom
they are obliged. I was afraid lest I should have left my fingers upon this
paper, and have disenabled my self for ever writing more Letters after this,
had I any longer continued my discourse. I tell thee no lie Hydaspe, this is
the third Winter we have had this year, and the greatest irregularity I ever
observed in Nature. For Gods love inquire the cause of Father Joseph, and
entreat him from me, if your self be not acquainted with him, that he would
be pleased to employ the credit he has in Heaven, to cause the return of
warmer weather.

BALZAC
The 25. of January, 1624.
To the Seigneur de la Roche from Balzac.
LETTER V.
SIR,
I Cannot conceive your meaning, when you speak of my friendship, as of a
favor, or predestination, or in being so prodigal of your complements and
commendations. There was sufficient in the Letter you lately sent, to bereave
me of speech, and to make me fly to the Indies, were I forced to frame you a
punctual answer. But since you are usually victorious, be pleased, I beseech
you, to permit your courtesy to work the same effects, as does your courage;
and suffer me to yield unto you in this occasion, as I would do in those of
Rochell, or Mountuban. I only entreat you, henceforward to love me with less
ostentation and luster then you have done hitherto; and since it is not in my
power to hinder you from having me in estimation, let me at the least entreat
you to carry the matter so, as though you had committed some sin; that is,
without calling witness, or confirming the fact: otherwise, doubtless the
world will suppose your affection to be injurious to your judgment* and I much
fear, lest I should be blamed for blinding you, and for being more wicked then
the late War, which was contented only to make diverse of our friends,
blinkards. Truly that so complete a person, whose acquaintance you commend
unto me; not finding me suitable to the pourtraite you showed him, may well say,
you are not only satisfied in being singly seduced, but seek to raise
Heresies out of your errors, and a contagion out of your crazy constitution.
This being so, I see not how I can better make good, either mine own
reputation, or your report, then by voluntarily banishing my self from the
place where you are, and not by my presence, to overthrow all the Honor you
have hither to acquired for me. If therefore you will not appear a deceiuer,
nor declare your self my adversary, leave me I pray you, to my retiredness,
where I study only to maintain health, and take no other pains then to
procure my own repose, nor have any conference, but with my self.

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 10. of April, 1623.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert from Balzac.
LETTER VI.
SInce the dead never return but they affright us: I was persuaded I should
do you no small pleasure, nor a little oblige you, in forbearing to appear so
much as on Paper before you, suffering you purely to enjoy your accustomed
pleasures, without the mixture of any thing that might be distastefull unto
you. But since at this present you come to disturb the quiet of Churchyards,
and to find out a man, in affecting whose memory you might well be satisfied;
I am forced to tell you, that the party you so highly esteem, is wholly
remaining beyond the Alps, and how this is only his Ghost lately returned
into France. I break all the Looking*glasses I meet with, I blunder the water
of all Rivers I cross, I avoid the sight of all Paynters in any place where I
come, lest they show me the pattern of my pale visage. Yet if in the crazy
case wherein I am, J were any way capeable of consolation, I beseech you to be
assured, I should take it as proceeding from the good success of your
affairs, nor would I desire of my disease any long respite, then what were
requisite to rejoice with you. But truly, it is an enemy who knows not how to
admit of conditions of peace or truce, and I am so happy as not to be suffered
to quit my pains to resume them. The meat I here eat for sustenance, is to
me as pleasing as poison, and I endure life out of penance, whereas you (in
the place where you live) spend the remainder of the Golden age, refusing
nothing to your senses you lawfully may allow them. Though the Queens Court be
so chaste, as it were easier to drink drunk of a fountain, then to take any
dishonest pleasures thene; and that to gain admittance, it is requisite to be
first purified at the Porters lodge; yet are you allowed even there to have
pleasing temptations, and going elsewhere, to seek out more solid
contentments. But as for me in the case I am, I make no difference at all
between lovely creatures, and well limmed pictures: and the misery I endure,
having bereaved me of action, my wretched virtue is as much constrained, as the
sobriety of the poor is necessary. In all this I add not one word to the bare
truth; and if the Count of Pountgibaut had his pardon to let you know how it
is with me, he would tell you that I am more withered then the last years
Roses, and how all the Ingeniers in an Army, were no more then sufficient to
remove me. But my discourse will be more pleasing, if I speak of that Head
which deserves to fill a Diadem, then in continuing this wretched complaint.
When at the first I saw concurrent in him so much valor, and so great beauty,
I neither took him for man nor Woman; but after having recollected my self, J
supposed him to be the Amazonian Queen: and doubtlesle in the worlds infancy,
it was to such faces only, whereto all people yielded willing obedience, none
quitting their service, every man's duty being conformable to his inclination;
so as the only means then to be rebellious, was to beblinde. When this young
Lord came to Rome at his return from the battle of Prague, I can well
witness the jealousy he at once afforded both to men and their wives, and of
the great Prognostickes all such gave of him, who presumed to have any
experience in future occurrents, either by the aspect of Stars, or some more
sublime understanding: besides, to consider how at twenty years of age, there
is scarce any corner of the known world he has not traced, to encounter
honorable actions* nor any sort of combat wherein for the most part he has
not been Conqueror; that he has borne Arms against Turks and Jnfidels,
that he has appeared both in battles and sieges of Cities; that he has
given life to some enemies, and taken it from others. This (to speak truth) is
a thing God suffers as rarely to be seen as deluges, and other great effects
of his power or justice. In a long process of time the meerest Cowards may
become Masters; were it by no other means, but that by seeing all men dye
before them, they may inherit the whole world. Diverse likewise have performed
great exploits, who have begun their actions either with gross errors, or
mean adventures. But as there are very few Rivers nauigable even from their
first fountains, nor Countries where the Sun fendeth forth his full heat from
the very dayspring: so are such men (doubtless) very rare and singular, who
have not any need either of growth or years; nor are subject either to the
order of times, or rules of Nature. But I have no purpose to fold up a book
in a Letter: for though my grief do sometimes permit me to spend some small
time upon pleasing subjects, yet will it not allow me to make thereon any long
stay. I must therefore leave off, during my short good day, lest I fall sick
again in your presence, and once more clogge you with my complaints, insteade
of thanking you for your kind remembrance, and assuring you of the great
desire I have to remain so long as I live,

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 4. August, 1615.
A Letter from Balzac to Mounsieurde Bois Robert.
LETTER VII.
THough I receive no news from you, and howbeit those from Paris are generally
naught: yet am I so confident of your excellent constitution, as I cannot
imagine it can be endamaged by that contagious air: Surely if it be not in
such sort infected, that birds fall down dead, and that the Springs be not
corrupted, you have small cause to fear; and I have heretofore seen you of so
perfect a composition, and so strong a substance, that an ordinary infection (I
suppose) is unable to seize upon you: And rather then I will have any
apprehension of your being carried away with the current of those who dye of
this great mortality; I shall sooner believe that God reserueth you to make the
worlds Epitaph, and those last Songs appointed for the Catastrophe of all
humane joys. Yet ere it come to this point, remember your promise, I pray you,
and send me something to rid me of the Megreme I have taken in reading the
sotteries of these times. I cannot counterfeit the matter, but must confess I
taste Verses as I do Mellons; so as if these two sorts of Fruits have not a
relish near approaching to perfection, I know not how to commend them though
on the Kings Table, or in Homers works. Whatsoever you do, yet at the least
permit nothing to your spirit which may wound your reputation; and above all,
let me entreat you not to be the man who may justly be taxed of having
violated the chastity of our Language, or for instructing the French in
foreign vices, utterly unknown to their Predecessors. Poetry which God has
sometimes made choice of, for the uttering of Oracles, and to unfold his
secrets to Mankind, ought at the least to be employed in honest uses: Nor is
it a less offense to make use thereof in vicious matters then to violate a
Virgin. This I speak upon the subject of our Friend, whose end I fear will
hardly be natural, if he dye not the sooner of his fourth Pox. This is the
second time he has issued out of Paris by a breach, having escaped as furious
a flame as that of Troy. For my part, I cannot conceive what should be his
design. For to war against Heaven; besides, that he shall be but slackly
accompanied in such an expedition, nor has a hundred hands as it is said of
Giants; he ought to understand, it was an action they could never atchieue: and
how in Cicilia there are Mountains yet smoking with their Massacre. We come
not into this world to prescribe Laws, but to submit our selves to those we
find, and to content ourselves with the wisdom of our forefathers, as with
their Land and Sun. And truly, since in matters indifferent, novelties are
ever reprehensible, and that our Kings quit not their Lillies to quarter
Tulipans in their arms: by how much greater right are we obliged to conserve
the ancient, and fundamental points of Religion, which are by so much the more
pure in that by their antiquity they approach nearer to the Origin of things,
and for that between them, and the beginning of all good, there is the less
time subject to corruption. To speak plainly, there is small appearance that
truth has from the beginning of the world attended this man, on purpose to
discover it self unto him in a Brothell or Tavern; and to be sent forth of a
mouth which comes short in sobriety to that of a Suisse. I intend not to
intermeddle with the Courts of Parliament, nor to prevent their Decrees by mine
opinion: And to think to make this man more culpable then he is, were as much
as to cast Ink on an Ethiopians face; I owe so much to to the memory of our
fore-past acquaintance, as I rather pity him as a diseased person, then pursue
him as an enemy. I confess he has parts in him not absolutely ill, nor do I
deny I have much pleased my self with his freedom of speech, so long as he
proposed only men for his object, and spared to speak of holy things. But
when I heard say, he exceeded the bounds of inferior matters, and banded
himself even a against what is transcendent to Heaven, I instantly quitted all
acquaintance with him, and thought the only pleasure I could do him, was to
pray to God to restore him to his right senses, and to take pity on him as he
did of the Jews, who crucified our Savior. Hereafter I will be better advised
then to weary you with so long a discourse, or to tire my self in troubling
you: But truly I thought I could do no less after three years silence,
esteeming this not to be over much for a man who is so slow a play master, for
so many Letters he owes you. Yet cannot I conclude, before I inform you of
some particulars touching the place where I am at this present, and of my
employments here. First there is no day passes wherein I see not the rising
and setting of the Sun, and how during that time, I withdraw my self from
all other distractions, to enjoy the purity of that fair light. Behold here in
this present state wherein I am, all the Courtship I use, and the only
subjection I oblige my self unto. When I desire to take the Ayre*at other
hours of the day, I must indeed confess my eyes have no objects so vast as
the Sea, or Appenines, nor do I behold Rome under my feet as formerly I have
done: Yet do I on all sides discover so pleasing a prospect, as though it fill
not the capacity of my spirit so much as did the other, yet does it far more
content me. Painters come forty days iourneyes hence, to study in my chamber,
and if Nature cause her greatness to appear, even from the bottom of the
deepest Abysses, and darkest downefals, she has no less placed her rarest
perfections under my windows. Moreover, I am plunged in abundance up to the
eyes, but my Riches are tacked to the twigs and branches of Trees; for as
Summer has made me plentiful, so will Winter reduce me to my former puuerty.
In the mean time, I make Feasts of Figs and Mellons, yea, out of the very
Museadine Grapes I eat, there issues liquor enough to make half a Kingdom
drunk; and the thing whereat happily you will wonder, is, that I put all this
into a sick man's stomach, to whom well-nigh all good things are forbidden:
yet have I found a means to reconcile my surfets with my physical receipts,
and in one and the same day I both enjoy pleasure, and endure pain; for I
nourish my Fever with excellent fruits, and purge it with Rubarbe: but
howsoever I cannot hazard my health in more innocent debauches, since I
perform them without troubling the tranquillity either of Earth or Air, or
without bereauing any thing of life. The first men the world produced, attained
to extreme age with such pure cates as mine are; for as of all bloody meats
they only used Cherries and Mulberries; so was the simplicity of their lives
accompanied with a perfect reposednesse; Nature as yet being void of all
Monsters: There was as then no mention either of Geryon, or Minotaure, nor of
phphphph. The Inquisition and Parliament were only in the Jdea of things; and
of the two parts of Justice, there was that only known which gave merits
their due rewards.

BALZAC.
From BALZAC, 1623.
Another Letter from Balzac to Mounsieur de Bois Robert.
LETTER. VIII.
YOur Letter of the fifteenth of the last Month, came to my hands as I was
ready to seal these Presents. You might have just cause to tax me, should I
let them go unanswered, or if this dead man appearing in your presence, did
not give you thanks for the many excellent words you have used in the adorning
his Funeral Oration. I should be but too proud if others were of your opinion,
or were infected with the like error you are; but I much fear you will not
for the present herein find a party equal to that of the League, and do much
doubt if all of a contrary conceit, should be declared Criminals, there would
hardly be any acquitted in this Kingdom. Howsoever, I hold my self much
obliged unto you, in conferring so liberally that upon me, you so well know I
want, and for bestowing all your colors and mercuriall mixtures to make me
seem beautiful: I will be well advised how I fall out with him who flatters
me, and in the love I bear my self, I shall at all times suffer a rival with
much satisfaction. Since a certain Gentleman in Germany pleases himself in
being styled King of Jerusalem, and since those who have no real patrimonies,
tickle themselves with mere Titles and Arms: by the like reason may J imagine
my self to be the man you will needs have me, and receive from your courtesy
the qualities my Nativity has not affoorded me. But to disblame both of us, I
beseech you hereafter to have more care of my modesty, and not to put me in
danger either to lose it, or not to believe you. It is no less then to wrong
the Angels, to call other spirits then theirs divine, yea all the Celestial
Court is sensible of suffering that name to fall to ground. For my part, I am
so far from freeing my self of humane defects, as I do absolutely auow,
there is not any more imperfect then J am, no not so much as blinkards and
maimed persons. I espy faults enough, on which side soever I see my self, and
my wit is so disfurnished of foreign perfections, as I hold no man for
learned, if he be not adorned with those abilities whereof I am ignorant, yea
even in that whereof you suppose me to have a perfect understanding: I have in
truth no more then mere doubts and conjectures, so as if there were a man of
perfect Eloquence to befound at the worlds end, I would go in pilgrimage on
purpose to see one contrary to N N. To speak truly, there is great difference
between filling the care with some pleasing sound, and expressing the fancies
of Artizans and Clownes according to Grammatical Rules; and in reigning over
the spirits of men by force of Reason; and to share the government of the World
with Conquerours and lawful Kings* I have not the presumption to suppose I am
arrived at this point; but I likewise think few have attained thereto, and the
Philosophers Stone were with more ease to be extracted, then the Eloquence I
propose to my self. It is as yet a kind of Terraincognita, and which has not
been discovered together with the Indies. The Romans themselves could only
recover the bare image, as they did of those Territories, over which they
triumphed by a false title: Yea Greece her self how vainly soever she
boasted thereof, yet seized she only upon the shadow, not seeing the
substance: So as upon the matter diverse have possessed others with that
conceit, being first deceived themselves; and are obliged to the restitution
of an ill acquired reputation. Many of our friends have fallen into the like
errors; I will not name them, fearing to astonish at the first sight, all such
to whom you shall show this Letter; or lest I should publish odious truths. It
shall suffice I tell you by the way, that if to attain perfect Eloquence, it
sufficed only to weary our hands with Writing, none could therein any way
compare with our Practitioners and Pen-clarkes. Yet is there not any reason why
those who perform poor things, should draw their weakness to their own
advantage, or imagine I flatter them. A man is as well damned for one single
deadly sin, as for a thousand without repentance; nor is it the strength of
their judgment, which hinders them from committing many faults, but the only
barrenness of their wits which enables them not to write* many books. I might
enlarge my self upon this subject, and discover diverse secrets unto you, the
world is not yet acquainted with. But I have neither time nor paper left, save
only to tell you that J am

Sir, Your most humble servant, BALZAC.

Another Letter from Balzac to the same man.
LETTER IX.
IVnderstand some have taxed me for saying (in my last Letter unto you) the
spirits of Angels; since Angels being all Spirits, it seemed unto them to be
two inseparable terms: But to let such men see how ill grounded their
Objection is, (and I suppose our judgments will herein agree) it may please
them to remember, that we call Angels Spirits, to distinguish them from bodies,
being a far different signification from what the word Spirit imports, when
we take it for that part of the soul which understands, reasons, and
imagines, and which causes so different effects in the soul of a fool, and
that of a discreet person. Questionless (even among Angels themselves) there
may be a difference found between the spirits of some, and other some of them,
to wit, in the faculty of Ratiotination and Comprehension: Since those of the
last order are not illuminated, but by means of them of the precedent ranks,
and so of the rest even to the first; which have a far more sublime
intelligence then the inferior Orders, which as no man (how smally soever
seen in the Metaphisiques) will doubt of) come as far short of the
understanding the first Order is endued with, as they do of their degree. We
are therefore to admit of this difference, and say, that an Angel is
doubtless a Spirit, to wit, he is not a Body: but withal that an Angel has
moreover a spirit, namely, this faculty of knowing, and conceiving either
lesser, or more large, according to the privilege of his Order. So as if a
Spirit has no other signification then a simple and incomposed substance, this
inequality were not to be found among the Angels, being equally simple, and
far from all composition and mixture. When then I say it was a wrong done to
Angels to call any other Spirits divine save only theirs: I take the word
Spirit in its second signification, and thereby separate it from the Angel,
and distinguish the simple substance, and nature Angellicall from that faculty
of the Soul termed the understanding. But that one may not say, the spirit of
Angels, because they are all spirit, is a reason very reproueable, and whereto
there wants nothing but verity to make it no untruth; for that besides the
spirit or understanding affoording to Angels so eminent a knowledge of divine
things, they are likewise endued with will, causing them to love what they
know, and with memory daily adding something to their natural intellect. But
admitting I should yield to whatsoever these my reprehendors would have, and
that I limit the word Spirit within the bounds of its first signification, I
should still have the better of it. For in truth our ordinary manner of
conception cannot possibly represent Angels without bodies, yea, and the Church
it self affoordeth them so fair, beautiful, and perfect ones, that from
thence the best Poets ordinarily pick their Comparisons to pourtraite the
rarest beauties. Besides, if in holy Writ, mention be often made of the Spirit
of God, even before he assumed our corporal substance, and in a sense which
could not be understood of the third person in Trinity, why may not I as justly
speak of the spirits of Angels, being in comparison of Gods Spirit, no better
then earth, and material; and which approaches not by many degrees unto the
simplicity and purity of this maiesteriall cause, being as the Mother to all
the rest. You see here, that (howsoever) it is very dangerous to study by half
parts, or to understand some small matter more then those who never were at
School; yet is it out of such men as these, that Nouellists and superstitious
persons are raised; yea, and all the rest, who have reason enough to doubt, but
not science sufficiently to determine rightly.

BALZAC.

To Mounsieur de Bois Robert from Balzac.
LETTER X.
SIR,
YOu have anticipated what I intended to say, and have not left for me in all
Rhetoric, either complement or commendations to return you. This is to force
ingratitude by excess of obligation, and to reduce me to the necessity of
being indebted unto you after I be dead. In truth it were necessary I had the
power to promise you felicity and Paradise, in requital of the vows and
sacrifices you offer unto me, and that I were in case to be your advocate,
instead of being thus put to a stand to answer you. It may be you have a mind
in such sort to disguise me to my self, as I shall not hereafter know who I
am, but be forced to forget my own name, by causing me to imagine I am not the
same man I was yesterday. Proceed at your pleasure to deceive me in this sort,
for I am resolved not to contest with you in this kind, to the worlds end: nor
to arm my self against an enemy, who only throws Roses at my head. I should
be very glad all my life would pass in such pleasing Dreams, and that I might
never awake, for fear of knowing the truth to my prejudice. But for the
attayning this happiness, it is necessary I do quite contrary to your advice,
and never quit my Countrey-house, where none comes to enter into comparisons,
or contest with me, for the advantage I have over brute beasts, or my
Lackeyes. I agree with you that it is the Court-voice which either approves or
condemns all, and that out of its light, things though never so perfect, have
no appearance: But I know not whether it were my best, to make that my own
case; since I fear lest my presence there, will rather prejudice my reputation
and your judgment, then make good your position. Upon the matter, if there be
any tolerable parts in me, they appear so little outwardly, as I had need
have my breast opened to discover them: And in conclusion you will find it a
sufficient obligation for me, to have you think my soul is more eloquent then
my discourse, and that the better part of my virtue is concealed: Yet since my
promise is past, I must resolve for Paris, though it prove as strange a place
unto me, as if I were out of the World, or as though they should chase raw
Courtiers thence, as they do corrupt Statesmen. To tell you plainly how the
case stands, J am none of those who study the slightest actions of their lives,
and who use Art in all they do, or do not. I cannot light upon that accent,
wherewith they authorize their follies, nor make of every mean matter a
mystery by whispering it in the ear: And less do I know how to palliate my
faults; or make show of an honest man, if really I be not so: Now though I
could make my self capable of these Arts, yet would it anger me shrewdly, if
after having passed nine Ports, and abidden many backe-casts to get thither, to
be at last stayed at the Tenth: Nay, should I chance to get admittance; what a
hell were it for me to come into a Country where Hatts are not made to cover
heads, and where all men grow crooked with extreme cringeing. Consider
therefore, whether this humor of mine would suit with the place where you are;
or if a man whose points and garters seem ponderous unto him, and who finds
it a difficult matter to obey Gods Commandments, and the Kings Edicts, can be
drawn to be obliged to new laws, or procure to himself a third servitude.
In the state wherein I now am, all the Princes in the World act Comedies to
make me sport. I enjoy all the riches of Nature, from the Heavens to
riuer-waters, and I easily obtain of my moderate spirit, what I cannot attain
unto by the liberality of Fortune. This being thus, will you persuade me to
change those benefits none envy, with your fears, hopes, and suspicions; or
not think it fit I value liberty, for which the Hollanders have made War
(now this fifty years) against the King of Spain? But since I have passed my
word, I am not resolved to revoke it; yet when I must needs bid adieu to my
Woods and solitary places, which have taught me so many good things, and quit
this enchanted Palace of mine, where all my thoughts are real inspirations; I
shall have a great conflict within me, to keep my word with you. I will
believe none but your self, who best know whether or no I have reason to love
this prison my Father builded for me, or this little spot of Land, where there
is no defect but a Fountain of Gold, and other unnecessary things; there being
else sufficient here to satisfy a sober person; I must confess the last great
raines have blemished all the beauty abroad: And Winter which by right should
be condemned never to depart from Swedland, is already come to cross the
content I formerly enjoyed: But howsoever, there are yet pleasing remedies to
avoid these present incommodities. The perfumes I burn, and whereof I am as
prodigal, as though I exacted tribute from the Countries from whence they
come, makes me the less to miss the sweetness of the Spring: And a great
fire resembling the brightest beauty, which I term the Sun of the night,
and dark days, watches at all hours in my Chamber, and gives light to my
rest, as well as to my Studies. Before this witness (which I never loose sight
of) all Nature is the subject of my meditation* and I conceive works, which
happily may merit a place in your Library, and to be chosen Citizens of that
divine Republique. I know not what men do most esteem in books, but I am
confident, that in this I compose, Justice and Majesty, shall appear so euenly
tempered, as none shall therein find any thing either savoring of cowardice or
cruelty. I take and make use of the art of Ancients; as they would have done
from me, had I been the first man living. But I have no servile dependancy
upon their conceptions, nor am I borne their vassal, to follow no other laws
or examples, save theirs: To the contrary (if I deceive not my self) my
invention is far more happy then my imitation; and as there have been in our
age diverse new Stars discovered, till this present unperceived; so I in matter
of Eloquence, seek out singularities, hitherto unknown to any. It is
certain, and you know it as well as my self, you who know good things when
you see them, and who are the Author of diverse; that there are none so severe
Muses as the French, nor any tongue more hating affectation, and bare
apparances of things then ours. All kind of ornaments therefore are not
propper for her: and her purity is at such ods with the exorbitant license of
other languages, that a French vice in this kind, is often made a foreign
virtue. But (in this case) we are to take advice of the understanding and ear;
and for my part, I have for my pattern herein, the Idea of the great Cardinal
of Richelieu, as though he were present and privy to my conceptions, or as if
he at all times received or rejected them, as they happen to be either good or
otherwise: But to tell you the truth, I know not well which way I pass by this
tedious and untrodden path, or what use I intend to make of these so many
impertinent speeches. But I am as often out of my way, in the allies of my
hermitage, and I have many times much use of a man, to let me know whether it
be day or night, and to order my times and actions; yet would I have you know,
I do not usually fall into such errors, but only before such as I love and
honor, as I do you; at all other times, be it in my visits, or in my Letters;
I will be well advised, how I suffer the end to come far short of the
Exordium; and from the first word, I make all the haste I may to come to

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 11. of February, 1624.
To Mounsieur Girard, Secretary to the Duke of Espernon.
LETTER XI:
LEt me entreat you, that we may deface out of our intended History whatsoever
has passed these last four Months, let us imagine that time to have happened in
some fabulous age, and (for our mutual content) let us herein learn the Art
of Oblivion. Had I been constrained to quit our ancient acquaintance, being of
equal age to either of us* and whereof I make as great account as of my
Fathers inheritance; surely J had been driven to the like streights, as he
who with one hand should be forced to cut off the other. It is then the
necessity of my inclination, which forces me to affect Philander, though he
were mine enemy: and this passion does so please me, that should any man cure
me thereof, I would commense suit with him for my former malady. I will not
accuse any man for the fault committed: Let us both imagine it to be a Child
without a Father, and to clear all men, let us lay it up among the present
miseries, and impute it to the power of fortune. I will rather suppose it to be
the last effect of the Commet, then impute it to any act of your spirit, or
that you contrived the discontent I have endured. I swear upon whatsoever is
August or Sacred amongst men, I have no less loved you then my self, and have
equally shared my self between my brother and Philander. Hence* forward I
desire to do the like. But let us leave all these fair words, and petty
nicities to poor spirits, and hereafter confer together with such liberty as
Philosophy affoordeth us. But above all things J entreat you not to suffer a
supposed wisdom to restrain you within particular respects and petty
considerations, which may hinder you from speaking high in what concerns me.
Fear not to show your self my sure friend, for it is neither theft, nor
throat-cutting; and of the two extreamities of defect and excess, it is better
to fall into the fairest and least faculty. Otherwise if Friendship should
never appear, but remain at all times as a recluse, what better use can we
draw thence then of hatred alike hidden? and at the worst what use is there to
be made thereof, but only for the pleasure of conversation, and necessity of
commerce? But I will leave this discourse whereof I hope you have no use, to
ask you some news or the little man you sometimes see, and who imagines the
King bereaueth him of all such offices as he bestows upon Mounsieur de
Luynes. I make no question but he daily tormenteth both soul and body, for
that he is not always at his Masters elbow, nor is so ordinarily seen at the
Loouer, as the steps of the great stairs, or the Swisses Hall. Threescore and
ten years of experience have not sufficed to settle his spirit, and he who
should observe his discourse without knowing him, instead of supposing his
beard to be siluerhaired, would rather think he had cast flower on his face;
yet are we to confess, he is one of the rarest Court-peeces, and that it is
no small sport to see him in a chafe against the State, and the age we live
in, which he maliceth more then he does his creditors. Make quiet use of so
pleasing a diuersion, and remember the World could not end, nor Nature be
perfect, if there were not as well such men as there are Apes and Monkies.

The 13. of November, 1623.
To the same from Balzac.
LETTER XII.
SIR,
I Beseech you reserve your counsel for those who are not as yet resolved; and
go persuade the Count Maurice to marry, and beget Captains for another age.
As for me, I love both solitariness and society, but will not be continually
tied to either. If my Father had been of my mind, I had remained where I was
before he got me. I imagine the party you desire to bestow on me, is fair; but
stay awhile, and she will not be so: She is no fool; but happily more witty
then is necessary for an honest woman to be: She is rich, but my liberty is
vnprizeable. So as to make me alter my resolution, there is no other means
then an express commandment from God, with this proposition, either of death,
or a wife. Those creatures at Paris are ordinarily so cunning, and well
practiced, they find nothing strange the first night they are married: and
here, they have not wit enough to give their bodies right motion; but in all
places they make men alike miserable, as do Feauers, War, or Poverty. To
tell you freely how the matter stands, I will not daily disturb my self in
telling my Mistresses hairs, for fear she should bestow them as favors upon
her familiars; or to be jealous lest all the women who come to see her, were
young men disguised. I cannot endure, that in my absence she and her gallant
drink to the health of their Cuckold, and that I be the subject of all their
chatt. And on the other side, it were far worse, were she chaste, yet a
scowld, and to be troubled with an enemy to assault me day and night. J rather
affect a tractable vice, then a tyrannical virtue: But if there be any other
remedy, I will not be reduced to such straights, as to choose the least of
evils; since there is not any of this nature, I esteem not insufferable. In a
word Philander, my neighbors example does not alittle terrify me: he has
begotten so many dumb, blind, and deformed creatures, he is able to furnish a
reasonable Hospital. I will not be bound to love Monsters, because they are
mine, and were I assured not to be defective in this kind, I could well
forbear having children; who if they be wicked, will desire my death; if wise,
expect it; if the honestest living, yet will they now and then reflect upon it.
But it may be (you will say) if my resolution were generally received, the Sea
should be no longer charged with ships, and the Land would become desert. To
this Philander J answer, that since the World is not always to endure, it were
far better to have virtue become its Catastrophe, then any thing else; since
it cannot find a more fair and honest conclusion, then a general abstinence
in this kind.

BALZAC.
The 7 of April, 1625.
To Philander from Balzac.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
SInce these be the particular days appointed for Devotion: we being now in
the season of public Ecclesiastical mourning, and it importing every man to
apply himself in the affairs of his conscience; you must excuse me, if I be
short in my conversation with you in this kind, and keep all my discourse for
my Confessor. It were strange we should herein do less then the Bells, who
are now all dumb, or trouble the commerce contracted between God and man,
only to tell idle Stories. Let us therefore (I pray you) surcease all sorts of
news, and not mingle any profane matter with this holy Week, which desires
to be as pure as a Virgin. The high Feast we are falling upon, will set us at
liberty, after which, instead of three Letters you have written unto me, I am
contented to return you six answers

On Goodfriday, BALZAC.

To the same from Balzac.
LETTER XIIII.
YOur plaints are both right eloquent, and very unjust: I can at least well
assure you, my thoughts are not so often here, as where you are, and if my
Letters come not so far, it is because they can find none to carry them. But
by these presents I purpose rather to rejoice with you for the recovery of your
health, then to afflict my self unseasonably. Things past are to be reckoned
as nothing, and what happened yeasterday, is as far from us as the life of
Charlemaine. Wherefore, I who have a perfect experience of worldly affairs,
would as soon comfort you for the loss you received by the death of your
great Grandfather, (so many years dead before you were borne) as for the late
danger of your Fever, since it is now gone. The best is, the Physicians have
not so far exhausted you, but there yet remains blood sufficient, to bestow
part thereof in your Mistresses service, and to fill the world with your
offenses; so long as the ruins of your head may be repaired, and your beauty
budde again with the next Roses, there is nothing lost hitherto; but indeed
if instead of your former head, you carried the figure of a rusty Murrion or
rotten Pumpian, I should much pity you in such a plight, and would presently
add you to the number of decayed buildings. Now when all is done Philander, it
is but a little water and earth mingled together, we study to conserve with
all the maxims of wisdom, and all the rules of Physic. Let us reflect I
pray you, upon our better part, and hereafter labor as well to cure our selves
of Vice, as of the Fever. It is that image of God we defaced by our own
hands, we ought to repair; and our first innocence is the thing it behooves us
to ask at his hands, rather then our former health. For my part, I am
absolutely resolved to lead a new life, and to take no other care but for my
souls health, and to procure the same for others. And truly it were far
better to consecrate this great Eloquence of ours to his glory, who gave it us,
then to employ it in commending fools, and in making our selves to be praised
among children. The P. E. whom happily you know, and who has one of the best,
and most polite wits of all his company, confirms me all he can in this my
design, and every hour of his company is as much to me, as eight days of
reformation; yet is he not a man who professes that pale virtue which
affrighteth all men, and is incompatible with humane infirmities: but quite
contrary, he flattereth me in reprehending my errors, and instead of the
penance I deserve, he is contented to enjoin me honest recreations. Your
brother will tell you more, about eight days hence, and will give you an
account both of my actions and intentions; believe him as truth it self; and
besides, assure your self further upon my word, he is worth some Doctor and an
half, and has a good wit, without speaking of his zeal and virtue.

BALZAC.
The 17 of January. 1623.
To Olympa from Balzac.
LETTER XV.
I Am much troubled to find the cause of your tears; to impute them to the
death of your Husband, is happily but the bare pretext. It is not to be
imagined that Death which causes the most beautiful things to become
offensive to the days brightness, and affrighteth those who formerly admired
them; should make that man pleasing unto you, who was never so to any. Yet you
seem with him to have lost all, and do so cunningly counterfeit the
afflicted, I can hardly believe what I see: Can it be possible, you should be
thus pestered to support your good fortune with patience, or be really so
sorrowful for the loss of a poor gouty fellow, whose ouer-long living I
should rather have thought it fit to comfort you? But if this be not thus, what
do you with all this great mourning, wherein you plunge your self, and this
midnight never removing from your Chamber? I must confess I was never more
astonished, then to find such an Equipage of sadness about you, accompanied
with such elaborate actions, and so constrained countenances; and without
jesting Olympia, (after this I have seen) there remains nothing for the full
expression of a fained passion, but only to wear black smockes, and to be
attended by Moors. Yet is it time, or never to return to your right senses,
and to conclude your Comedy, let me entreat you to leave off all these sower
faces to fools. Cast off this black veil which hinders me from seeing you,
and consider that five foot of ground, is worth you two thousand pounds by the
year. To raise such a rent, the revenues of half some Kingdom were hardly
sufficient; nor can you tax me for not speaking herein the truth, since I
have it from your own mouth. Is it not almost incredible, so small a corner of
earth, should yield so large a reuenew. I doubt not but diverse will suppose it
bears Pearls or Diamonds. But I had almost forgot the most important
business* J am to impart unto you, and where upon I first intended to write. I
must therefore say, you are to have a special care, never to repair the loss
you have lately received; assuring your self there is no one man in the world
worthy to enjoy you priuatiuely: you shall be answerable for those excellent
qualities Nature and Art have conferred upon you for the commanding of men, if
you say you cannot live without submitting your self to one. Herein Olympa,
you ought not suffer the vain ambition to be wife to a great Signiour to
transport you, or the advantage of entering into the Loouer in Carroch, to cause
you quit the happiness you have to be Queen of your seife* How much gold
soever one bestow in fetters, and how glorious soever the scruitude be, yet
assure your self they are but a couple of bad matters. Of late there was not
any part of your body, whereof another was not master, he would examine your
very Dreams and thoughts: It was not in your power to dispose of one single
hair, nay he robbed you of your very name. See here Olympa, what it is to have
a Husband, and what you torment your self for with such prodigal tears.
Methinkes it were all you could, or ought to do were he revived; or if the
news of his death were doubtful.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 22. of July, 1622.
To Crysolita from Balzac.
LETTER XVI.
I Must needs disabuse you Crysolita, and inform you better in the History of
that old Haxtris, you supposed to be a very Saint. First, you are to
understand, she is extracted out of her mothers sins, nor was ever any
Virginity so britle, as that she brought into this world. It is very likely she
has lost all remembrance of any such matter: But people of those days, stick
not openly to affirm, that the first time she had liberty to go abroad, (at
her coming home) she mist her gloves and Maidenhead. After this, her beauty
augmenting with riper years, she drew the eyes of all Italy upon her; and
sold that fifty times at Court, she had formerly lost at School: But since
then, she is arrived to an experience, far surpassing that of the Lord
Chancellor, or the Popes Datary: and when I shall tell you, she knows
whether there be more pleasure in a circumcised Courtizan, then in a Christian;
and that she has experienced the actiuity of Jndians and Musconites, yet shall
I relate but half the story. So it is, that now after she has filled* Limbo
with her paricidiall leachery, and bin threescore years a Lectoresse in vice,
she would make you confident of her conversion: Yet am I credibly informed,
that not having now any thing worth the losing, she is turned Solicitresse, to
entice others to vice; nor is there any chastity can escape her, if it take not
sanctuary in the Carmolites. She cannot endure there should be one honest
woman in the whole City; this angering her as much, as though the robbed her,
or had declared her self her enemy. Yet is this the Saint you so much talk of
C^^solita, and the very same old Madame, from whom you promised me so many
miracles. Now I, who know her very heart, write unto you, what hereafter you
ought to belecue: for let her make what show she will, yet I know she is as far
from her conversion, as from her youth. The Capuchins themselves could not
cause her to pass her word to turn honest woman the next grand Iubile; for
instead of a better answer, she plainly told them, she had not as yet
dispatched her business, and could well stay till another, which will happen
about eight and twenty years hence.

BALZAC.
From Rome the 5. of February, 1622.
To Clorinda from Balzac.
LETTER XVII.
Clorinda,
FOr that I am not in your conceit sufficiently punished with my Fever, you
belike think it fitting, I should yet be further afflicted with Love; so as
there is nothing wanting to end my good fortune, but only a law-suite and a
quarrel. In this very place, designed for repose and joy, I continually burn,
I tell each hour, and my dreams are full of distractions. Yet after all this,
you suppose you much oblige me in wishing me every night good rest, as though
it were not in your power to give it me. I had once a Master of your humor: he
had means enough to procure my advancement, yet he supposed it sufficient to
wish me well, and that J ought to rest satisfied, so long as he said, I
deserved a good fortune. I know not whether it be your intention to vsemee in
this manner: but howsoever I cannot take it ill, though you mock me, since
you do it so handsomely. Advise me if you think good, to seek for a quiet
life in Germany; cast me headlong down some Cliffe, and then say God guide
me; wish me a good night out of your chamber, all this concerns not me
Clorinda. If I receive injuries from you, I am no longer in state to take
notice of them. Yet I should think you might be somewhat more sensible of my
sorrows, and at least to show your self pitiful toward me, though you
reserve your affections for some other. It is no generous act to kill a sick
person, there is not any so common a Quacke-saluer but can do as much. And in
conclusion Clorinda, all the honor you will attain unto herein after my
death, is only to have had some small force more then my lingering Fever.

BALZAC.
In my Bed the 20. fit of my Fever.
Another Letter to Clorinda, from BALZAC.
LETTER XVIII.
WE are not separated either by Seas or Mountains: your lodging and mine
touch, yet* find I it an impossibility to see you. If you were at Iapan, or in
the Kingdom of China, I would resolve my self for those places, and I should
find some Bark or other bound for that voyage: think not I dissemble, there
is not any shelue in all the Sea, nor hazard to vndergoo in so dangerous a
voyage, whereof I have not less apprehension, then the meeting this little
brother of yours. But it may be it is your self, who make these difficulties,
I suppose, to arise elsewhere. You are glad you want no pretext, on purpose to
vex me when you please. If it be so Clorinda, let me be so much obliged unto
you, as to conceal it. I had far rather be deceived, then know the truth to
my prejudice: Either my company is troublesome unto you, or you reserve your
favors for some other friend. Howsoever, I am contented to believe your Mother
is sick, and that you cannot quit her Chamber: there are no excuses so
counterfeit, I accept not for current, so long as they releive my spirits:
Considering the power you have over me, it is a small matter to satisfy your
self in making me conceive the best. Yet must I thank you Clorinda, for
violating Justice so formerly, and faining reasons with purpose to err
punctually. By this means you will not suffer me so much as to soeme
miserable, and you cozen me so cunningly, I can neither bemoane my self, nor
beshrew you* Yet is it impossible I can for ever conceal my sensibilities:
What violence soever I offer to my humor, it can no longer be contained. To be
short Clorinda, if you loved me as you say, you would not live with me in the
fashion you do; but I should receive from you real favors, not vain
apparances; and say what you will, we shall meet alone once in our lives: I
beseech you, let not this word affright you, for if any should find us in this
manner, none will imagine we conspire against the King, or suspect I read
Magic to you. Innocent actions carry their warrant with them, nor is there
any necessity that two cannot be together without making a third. Believe me
Clorinda, if we shut our selves for three hours into a private chamber, the
most slanderous will only imagine, I either let you see the errors you are
in, or that you administer some medicine unto me for my Fever.

BALZAC.
The 15. of April, 1620.
To Clorinda from Balzac.
LETTER XIX.
I Know not whether I should term it slacknes, or patience, the small
resistance I make against the displeasures you do me; it may be, you are
resolved to see how far my fidelity will extend, and to extort the utmost
proofesthereof: yet is it better Clorinda to endure injustice, then to act it,
and to be rather the Martyr, then the Tyrant. Show your wit, I beseech you, by
inflicting daily new torments upon me, and avoid all occasions of obliging me,
with as much care as I seek those to serve you. J have prepared my spirits
against all the bad occurrents can happen that way. There is nothing I cannot
endure, if it comes from you, your slighting me only excepted: But herein I
must tell you, I am so tender, as I am wounded with the least touch. I would
not purchase the Kings favor, if he afford it me in rough terms; nor would
I accept of his Graces, were J forced to gain them with the forgoing the thing
I affect more then his Kingdom. You understand me suficiently what I mean
hereby, and the just occasion I have to complain; but still you will have me
in the wrong, nor do I doubt, but you will accuse me of your crime: But
speak truly, have you no apprehension, that he whom you have so often
injured, shall at length grow weary of his sufferings, and lest he should lose
all fear, together with his hopes. You might consider Clorinda, that I am not
possessed with slight passions, and how your self has told me ere now; that
if God should arm me with thunder when I am angry, within four and twenty
hours there would be neither Towers nor Pauillions standing in any place:
Wherefore to second your conceit; know (if that were) one while the fire
should fall upon all jealous persons, and by and by burn all the Mothers and
little Brothers in a whole Province. And dou btlesse, if I did you no harm,
yet would I put you into such a fright, you should be forced to hide your self
under ground, and come to meet me in some Cane. But I gain much by these
glorious brags, or by my seeming feuerity: I assure my self, you mock me and
my threats. It is long since I have showed you the way how to catch me, and
you know the means how to reduce me to my former duty: I must confess I am
not of sufficient force to contest with Clorinda: her kisses have power to
expel all spleen, even out of the spirit of an Italian Prince, for the
greatest injury can be offered him. Nay, they would force the Duke de Main to
forsake his Arms in the hottest of his Martial conflicts: Wherefore I pray
you, let us agree upon a business, which of necessity must be concluded: how
disaduantagious soever the peace be, I treat of with you, yet shall I at all
times gain that which otherwise I should lose in your absence. I have
therefore presented my complaints, with purpose to receive satisfactions: I am
angry only to the end you may appease me. I will tell you to morrow, that I
am come to oblige you, to take the pains to receive me.

BALZAC.
The 17. of April 1620.
To Clorinda from Balzac.
LETTER XX.
I See well Clorinda, I do but lose my labor, and that it were an easier
matter to turn ice into coals, then to kindle love in you: All I can say,
makes no impression in your thoughts, you will not so much as hear reason,
because it rests on my side. Well Clorinda, I must resolve my self for the
worst of events, and stay the time till your wrinkles afford me revenge for
all the wrongs you have done me. Think not this tyrannical power of your
beauty, will last to the worlds end. Time which ouerturneth Empires, and
prescribes limits to all things, will use you as it does the rest of fair
workemanships. I pray have patience, if I take upon me to tell you this bad
news; for I am not to day in the humor to flatter any. Though it would raise
choler in you, yet must I say, you will grow stale, and be then no more what
you now are. I doubt not of your sighs when you reflect upon this change, or
that your very imagination is not sensible of some sorrow; yet shall this
happen Clorinda, there is not an hour passes, which impaires not some part of
your face. But the time will come, when your Looking*glasse will more scare
you, then a Judge does a Fellon: your fore*head will fly to the crown of your
head; your cheeks will fall beneath your chinne, and your eyes of those days,
shall turn of the same color your lips are at this hour. I could willingly
wish out of my love unto you, my relation were not so true as it is. But since
I have quitted all complacency, there is no means to make me silent.
Glorinda, the Sun is still beautiful, though ready to set; and the Autumn
agreeable, though sprinkled with some Snow, but we enjoy no happy years, but
the first of youth: And be as careful of your self as is possible, yet can
you not conserve your complexion, and acquire experience. Will you have me say
more, and acquaint you with what I understood by a stranger, with whom I have
conuersed all this day? You are to know there is not any part of the world so
remote, whither his curiosity has not carried him, nor rarity in Nature, he
has not carefully observed: He has seen Mountains which burn perpetually
without diminishing* he has landed in Islands, never resting in one place; he
has seen natural Seamen; but he swore unto me, how among all these
miracles, he never yet saw a beautiful old woman. The Moral hereof is, that
you must make use of your youth, and gather Nose-gayes before the Roses wither.
None knows better then your self, that to be fair, is to reign without
having need either of Guards or Forts. You see you are the worlds ambition, no
man desiring further happiness then Clorinda: but think not to continue this
absolute authority, or this general esteem, by other means then you
compassed them; and assure your self, that when you have no further
attractions then an eloquent tongue, no man will seek for them among the
furrows of your face. A woman had need be perfectly provided of virtue, to
repair the ruins of her beauty. All the wit and experience in the world is
fruitless, when she falls into this state, nor can any thing hinder her from
being hated, but only to change Sex. Remember then Clorinda, not to expect to
live, when you are as good as dead; nor do not spend that time in
deliberating, which should be employed in doing. You are now of years both to
give, and receive contentment, and we are in the Month, wherein each creature
turns amorous; not excepting Lions, Tigers, or Philosophers. I entreat you
therefore, not to show your self the sole insensible creature in the world:
suffer your self to be convinced by reason, since you cannot resist the same
but to your own disadvantage: You have no subject to be suspicious of what I
say; for I advise you to nothing Clorinda, wherein I would not willingly join
with you in the accomplishment.

BALZAC.
The 3. of May, 1620.
Another Letter to Clorinda from Balzac.
LETTER XXI.
CLorinda, your Religion must needs be amiss, otherwise I should see you now
and then at Church: But J think it were an easier matter to convert a whole
Nation, then to dispose you to give me content. The cause why you persist in
your own opinion, is, because it is opposite to mine. Well then, I must depart
without speaking with you, and am barred from affoording to my affection, what
good manners would have exacted ofme, though I had not loved you: Truly I know
not in what manner to suffer so wounding a displeasure, nor am I so well
acquainted with my self, as to pass my word for him I speak of in this
occasion* All I can say unto you Clorinda, is, that the only way to rid me out
of my pain, is to perform the thing I have so often proposed unto you, and to
make your self capable of a strong resolution. Never did any Prince enterprise
a more glorious voyage, then mine shall be, if you will make one: and truly,
I see not why you should make any difficulty herein, the longer youriourney is,
the further shall you be removed from tyranny* It is a Monster you ought to
fly from, even to the worlds end, and with whom to be in peace, is dangerous:
Will you fear to come into the Country of Comedies, Painting, and Music; or
into a place where women are by many as highly esteemed as Saints? with out
flattering you, I must affirm, you shall seem overmuch to neglect your own
quiet, if you let slip so favorable an occasion to procure it. It is time
Clorinda, you make it appear what you are, and that we begin the History of
our adventures. If you love, all things will be easy for you; there is no more
difficulty to pass the Alps, then to go up into your Chamber: Nor doubt you
that the Sea-waters will become sweet, if you be not satisfied in that they be
smooth. But I am much affraide I shall not receive from you the satisfaction I
expect. You will tell me (as you use) we must let Nature work, and that she
will soon revenge us of our enemies* I suppose Clorinda, all this may happen,
but it is no reason we should be obliged to the Tyrants death for our liberty,
but to our own resolutions.

BALZAC.
The 30. of July, 1620.
To Lydia from Mounsieur Balzac.
LETTER XXII.
I Am almost mad to understand thou were seen laugh to day. Is this true
love Lydia to be merry in my absence? and to be the same woman thou art, when I
am with thee? Yet should I have bin satisfied, had thou been contented only
to have made thy self merry with thy lookingglasse, so the man in iron had not
been in my place. I never saw him but once, and surely he is either a Sot, or
else all the rules of Phyhognomy are false: yet because he calls himself
Captain, thou permits him to persecute thee with his Complements, and art at
the point to yield. If he touch thee Lydia, all the water in the Sea is little
enough to purify thee; and if thou allowest him the rest, have a care, least
in his sleep, he take thee for an Enemy, and instead of his embraces, strangle
thee.

To the Baron of Amblouile from BALZAC.
LETTER XXIII,
My LORD.
I Attend you here in the season of Jasmins and Roses, and do send you a taste
of the pleasures of Rome, for fear you be poisoned therewith, upon your first
approach. We are here in the Country of curiosities, and to be happy in this
place, it suffices not to be blind. The Sun has yet heat enough to ripen us
Reasins, and to afford us Flowers: all the Winter falls upon the neighboring
Mountains, to the end we may not want Snow in August. But if you desire I
should divert my Discourse unto more serious matters, and conceal nothing from
you: I must tell you, there is no place under Heaven, where Virtue is so near
a Neighbor to Vice, or where Good is so mingled with Evil: We here behold
miracles on the on side, and monsters on the other; and at the same time when
some Discipline themselves, others run to debauches of all kinds. Besides,
there is as profound a peace here, as in that part of the Air elevated above
the Winds and Storms. Idleness in this place, is an honest man's ordinary
Vocation; and to save half the World, no man will rise hastily from Table, for
fear of troubling digestion. If you chance to see any with skars in their
faces, do not thereupon imagine they have purchased them either in Wars, or
in defense of their honor, for these are only their Mistresses favors; but in
recompense of such refractory humors, you shall see that here, the sanctity
whereof does illustrate the whole Church. It is their fervent prayers which
impetrate all advantages over Enemies: It is their fastings which cause
fruitefulnesse to flow upon the Earth: It is their innocence which conserueth
the culpable from Eternal ruin. In a word, there are here such excellent
examples of Virtue, and so intising allurements to Vice, that I will not
marvel if you turn honest man here, and I will likewise willingly pardon you,
if you do not so. Truly, as new Spain is the Province of gold; and as Affricke
affords Lions, and France soldiers; so is Italy the mother of those things you
best love. When you shall see these Female Creatures in their own Country, and
compare their beauty with the bad fashion of the masculine Italians, I doubt
not, but it will seem to you, as well as to my self, these divine Women to have
been created by themselves, or to be Queens who have married their Grooms.
The most part of those beyond the Mounts, have no more beauty then needs must,
to excuse them from being esteemed ugly; and if there be some one whose face
you could fancy, this shall happily be some desolate Palace, or some well
favored beast. But here (for the most part) they are borne Eloquent; and I
will tell you before hand, that in one and the same person, you shall find both
your Master and Mistress. For my part, I ingeniously confess, I do no longer
live under Clorinda's regency, and all that is permitted me in this place, is
only sometimes to honor her memory. I expect you should at this passage
accuse me of leuity and disloyalty, and that you could willingly revile me.
But do you not think my sighs must needs be surbated, in going every day
four hundred leagues? Besides, being so far from her as I am, what know I,
whether I love a dead body, or an Infidel. I have not received any favors
from her, which are not rather marks of her virtues, then demonstrations of
her love. And had she lost all her liberality in that kind, she could hardly
miss it. I am therefore only obliged to my word, not to her affection. And as
for that, I should ouer-esteeme her, if I made more reckoning thereof, then
some Princes do of theirs, and I should show my self over superstitious, if I
valued what I only whispered in her care, to be of greater efficacy then
Letters Pattents and Edicts. It is a point decided in Onids Theology, that an
hundred false Oaths from an amorous person, amount not to half a deadly
sin, and that it is only the God of Poets whom we offend by our perjury in
that point. Now I will be judged by her self, whether J having bestowed my
service upon her, she should take it ill if another did reward me; or that I
love rather to be happy, then otherwise; or desire rather to possess
Lucretia, then to desire Clorinda. Will she have her tyranny extend even to the
Churches patrimony, and that the Pope share his temporal authority with her? J
do not believe she has any such pretentions. For my part, I would she knew I
can no longer behold any beauty but naked, nor receive any but warm and moist
kisses. I will tell you the rest upon the banks of Tyber, and in these
precious ruins whither I go to muse once a day, and to tread in their steps
who have led Kings in triumph. If there were any means there to find a little
of Sylla's good fortune, or of Pompeis greatness, instead of the Medals we now
and then meet with, I should have a farther subject to inuit you hither.
Notwithstanding, if you be yet your self, and that by solemn vow you have
forsaken the world, and the vanities thereof, assure your self, that it is in
this Country where felicity does attend you: and that being once in this
place, you will esteem all those as banished persons, whom you have left
behind you in France.

BALZAC.
The 25. of December, 1621.
To the Count of Schomberg from BALZAC.
LETTER XXIIII.
My Lord,
I Send you the papers you have formerly seen, and whereto you have attributed
so much, as I should be ashamed to assent thereto, were it not that I hold it
less presumption to believe I have merited the same, then to imagine I can
have a flatterer of your fashion. I had need be elevated to a more sovereign
fortune then the state of Kings, to expect complacency from a man, who could
never be procured to approve evil: and of whose disfavor one can hardly find
other cause, then the only truth he has declared. Howsoever it be, since you
are now in Lymosin, and take not any journey in those parts, without having a
thousand old debates to reconcile, and as many new ones to prevent, it is very
probable, that after so painful an employment, and so great disquiet of mind,
my book will fall into your hands, just at such time as you cannot find any
thing more tedious unto you, then what you come from treating of: For should I
presume that in your pleasant walks of Duretal, where all your minutes are
pleasing, and all your hours precious, there could be any time spare for me,
and my works; it were as much as to be ignorant of the diuersions there
attending you; or not to be acquainted with the great affluence of noble
company, daily repairing thither, to visit you. But were it so, that you had
none with you, save only the memory of your fore-passed actions, your
solitariness has no need of books to make it more pleasing; nay, if all
this were not, yet if you desire to seek contentment out of your self, you
cannot find any more pleasing, then in the presence of your Children, and
particularly of that divine Daughter of yours, from whom I daily learn some
miracle. It is therefore in her absence, and in solitary walks, where I have
the ambition to find entertainment, and to receive gracious acceptance. In
all other places (without presuming either to pass for Orator or Poet:) it
shall highly suffice me in being honored with the assurance that I am

My Lord, Your most humble Servant, BALZAC.
The 25, of May, 1624.
A Letter from the Count of Schomberg, to Mounsieur de Balzac.
LETTER XXV.
SIR,
THe style you travail in, causes the Pens of all such who attempt an
answer, to fall out of their hands, and Eloquence may so properly be called
yours, that it is no marvel though others have but a small share therein. I
would therefore have you know, that if I understand any thing in Letters, yours
do obscure whatsoever has hitherto bin esteemed of in our Language: and that
(without flattering you) there can be no diuersion so pleasing, which ought not
to give place to the perusing of those Lines you sent me. This occupation is
worthy the Cabinets of Kings, and of the richest Ear curtins of France; and
not (as you would have it) of my solitary retirements in Lymosin, from whence I
am ready to be gone, with resolution never to retire from the affection I have
promised you, whence you shall at all times draw effectual proofs, whenever
you please to employ them for your service.

Sir, Your most affectionate servant, SCHOMBERG.
The 1. of June, 1624.
THE LETTERS OF MOVNSIEVR DE BALZAC.
To my Lord Mashall of Schomberg.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
LETTER I.
My LORD:
I Should be insensible of Public good, and an enemy to France, had I not (as
I ought) a true taste of the good news your Footman brought me. I will not
mention the obligations I owe you, being no small ones, if that be not a slight
matter to be esteemed by you: But since I make profession to honor virtue even
in the person of one departed, or an enemy; and at all times to side with the
right, were there only my self and Justice for it, you may please to believe,
I complain in your behalf for the miseries of our times, and that I am most
joyful to see you at this present, where all the world mist you: Certainly
your retirement from Court, has been one of the fairest pieces of your life,
during which, you have made it apparent you are the same in both fortunes:
since I can witness, that no one word then passed from you unsuitable to your
resolution. Yet this rare virtue being there hidden, in one of the remote
corners of the world, having but a very small circuit to dilate it self, must
necessarily be contented with the satisfaction of your conscience and slender
testimonies: In the mean time the authority of your enemies has been
obnoxious to all honest eyes. There was no means to conceal from strangers
the States infirmities, or what reason to afford them for the disgrace of so
irreproachable a Minister; nor was there any who grieved not, that by your
absence the King lost so many hours and services. For my part, (my Lord)
reflecting upon you in that estate, it seemed to me I saw Phidias, or some
other of those ancient Artists, their hands bound, and their costly materials,
as Marble, Gold, or luory, taken from them. But now that better time succeed,
each thing being again reduced to its place, it is time to rejoice with all
good Frenchmen, that you shall no more want matter, and that the King has at
length found how unuseful your absence has been to his affairs: Truly, be
it that he content himselfeto govern his people wisely, or that the
afflictions of his poor neighbors set near his heart, and that his Justice
extend further then his Jurisdiction: No man doubts whatsoever he does, but you
shall be one of the principal instruments of his designs, and that as well
*Peace, as War have equal use of your Conduct. All men have well perceived,
you have not contributed any thing to the administration of the Kings treasure,
save only your pure spirit, to wit, that part of the soul separated from the
terrestrial part, being free from passions, which reasons without either
loving or desiring; and that you have managed the Riches of the State with as
great fidelity, as one ought to govern another man's goods, with as much care
as you conserve your own, and with as great scruple as we ought to touch
sacred things. But in truth it is no great glory for that man to have been
faithful to his Master, who knows not how to deceive any: And did I believe
you were only able to abstain from ill, I would barely commend in you the
Commencements of Virtue. I therefore pass further* and am assured, that
neither the fear of death, which you have slighted in all shapes, and under
the most dreadful aspects it could possibly appear, nor complacency which
often over passes the best Counsels, to transport it self to the most
pleasing ones; nor any private interest which makes us rather regard our
selves, then the Public; shall at all hinder you either from purposing,
undertaking, or executing eminent matters, Posterity which will peradventure
judge of our age upon the report I shall make, will see more elsewhere then I
can here relate, and I shall rest sufficiently satisfied, if you please to do
me the honor, as to remember that mine affection is no Child of your
prosperity, and how in two contrary seasons I have been equally

My Lord, Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.

To the Bishop of Angoulesme.
LETTER II.
SIR,
I Will no longer complain of my poverty, since you have sent me treasures of
Roses, Ambergreece, and Sugar; it being of such pleasing commodities, I pretend
to be rich, leaving necessary wealth to the Vulgar. Two Elements have jointly
contributed the best they have, to furnish matter for your Liberality; and
smally valuing either Cold, or Pearls as I do, I could wish for nothing
either from Sea, or Land, I find not among your presents. You have bestowed
with a full hand what is offered upon Altars, but sparingly, which men reckon
by grains, and whereof none (the King of Tunnis excepted) is so prodigal as
your self. In a Word, this profusion of foreign odours you have cast into
your Comfitures, obliges me to speak as I do, and to tell you if you feed
all your flockeat this rate, there will not be any one in all your Diocese,
who will not cost you more by the day, then the Elephant does his Master. I see
therefore Sir, I am the dearest Child you have under your Conduct, nor should
J receive so delicate and precious nourishment from you, did not your affection
force you to believe, my life to be more worth then ordinary, and consequently,
that it deserves morecarefully to be preserved then any other. But to return
you Complements for such excellent things, were as much as to undervalue their
worth, should J strive to acquit my self that way; our Language is too poor
and unable to lend me wherewith to pay you: And since in Homers judgment the
words of the most Eloquent among the Grecians, were esteemed little better then
Honey, (the food of Shepherds) there is small probability mine should be
comparable to Ambergris and Sugar, the delicacies of Princes. I therefore
fear J shall beforced to be all my life time indebted unto you, for the
favors I have received from you, and that it must be only in my heart, where
I can be as liberal as your self. But I well know, you are so generous, as
to content your self with this secret acknowledgement, and that in me you
affect my naked good-meaning, which must supply the place of those other more
fine, and subtle virtues I cannot learn at Court. Truly, as I expect no
commendations, being the second perfumes you present me, in that I hold
myself unworthy thereof: so do I suppose you cannot refuse me your
affection, since it is a kind of deserving it, to be passionately as I am

Sir, Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 25. of December, 1626.
To Father Garrasso.
LETTER III.
Father,
YOu have found the place whereat I confess I am the most easily surprised,
and to oblige me to yield, your Courtesy has left nothing for your courage
to perform: since therefore you employ all your Muses to require my
Friendship, and have already paid of your own; I can no longer keep it to
myself, but as another man's goods. But if this were not so, my resentments are
not of such value with me, as not often to bestow them upon more slender
considerations then those were which produced them; nor do my passions so
transport me, but that I will at all times remain in the power of Religion and
Philosophy. Hitherto I can defend a just cause, but in farther resisting what
you desire, I should force right it self to be in the wrong, were it on my
side: And out of bare enmity which in some Commonwealths has been
tolerated, I should even pass to Tyranny, a thing odious to all men. Since
our lives are momentary, it is no reason our passions should be immortal, or
that men should glut themselves with revenge, whereof God has as well
forbidden the use, as the excess. It is a thing he has soly reserved to
himself; and since none but he, truly knows how to use this part of
Justice, he would no more put it into the hands of men, then he does Thunder
and Tempests. Let us therefore stop in our first motions, for it is already too
much to have begun. Let us not term the hardness of our hearts, Courage: and
if you have prevented me in the ouerture of the peace we treat of, repent not
your self, since you have thereby bereaved me of all the honor there had
been in acquiring it. Heretofore Magnanimity and Humility might have been
esteemed two contrary things, but since the maxims of Morality have bin
changed by the principles of Divinity, and that Pagan vices are become
Christian virtues, there are even weak actions a man of courage ought to
practice; nor is true glory any longer due to those who have triu^phed over
innocents, but to those Martyrs they have made, and to such persons whom they
have oppressed. But to pass from general considerations, to what is
particular between you and me, it is no way likely, a religious man would
disturb the tranquillity of his thoughts, or quit his conversation with God and
Angels, to intermeddle with wicked Mortals, and to make himself a party in our
disorders. I should likewise have less reason to seek for an enemy out of the
World, wherein there are so many adversaries to dislike, and so many Rebels to
subdue. Now (Father) whatsoever opinion you have had, and notwithstanding any
thing I have said in the beginning of this Letter. I never intended to commence
any real War against you: I have not at all felt the emotion I showed; all
my choler being but artificial, when at any time certain of my speeches
seemed disaduantagious unto you; so as I freely consent, that what was written
to Hydaspe, shall pass as a flash of my brain, and not as any testimony of my
belief, only to let men know, I had a desire to show how able J was to
contest with truth, if I had no mind to side with it. This science having
been sufficiently daring to undertake to persuade, that a Quartan Ague was
better then Health: Rhetoric I say, which has invented praises for Busiris,
made Apologies for Nero, and obliged all the people of Rome to doubt whether
Justice were a good, or bad thing, may yet in these days exercise it self
upon subjects wholly separated from common opinions, and by graceful fictions,
rather excite admiration in men's spirits, then exact any credence. It rayseth
Fantomes with purpose to deface them. It has paintings and disguisements, to
alter the purity of all worldly things: It changes sides without leuity, it
accuses innocence without calumny: And to say truth, Painters and
Stage*players are no way culpable of those murders we see represented in
Pictures, or presented upon Theaters; since therein the most cruel is the most
just. None can justly accuse those of falsity, who make certain glasses which
show one thing for another: Error in some cases being more graceful then
truth. In a word, the life even of the greatest Sages, is not altogether
serious, all their sayings are not Sermons, nor is all they write, either their
last Testament, or the confession of their Faith. What can I say more? Can you
imagine me to be so curious, as to condemn the gust of all that great
multitude, who flock to hear you every morning? Are you persuaded that I and
the people can never be of one mind? That I will oppose my self to the
belief of honest men? to the approbation of Doctors? and to their authority
who are eminent above others? No Father; I allow no such liberty to my spirit:
assure your self, I esteem you as I ought. I commend your zeal and learning,
yea, were it truer then ever it was, that to compose tedious Volumnes, is no
less then to commit great sins: Yet if you oblige me to judge of yours by
that you sent unto me, I say it is very excellent in its kind, and that I will
no way hinder you from obtaining a Rank among the Fathers of these modern
ages. But my testimony will not (I hope) become the only fruit of your
labors; I wish with all my heart the conversion of Turks and Infidels may
crown your endeavors. I am persuaded, all the honor this world can afford,
ought to be esteemed as nothing by those who only seek for the advancement of
Gods glory. I will therefore no farther dilate my self upon this Subject, nor
wrong holy things by profaine praises; my intention is only to let you know, J
assume not so poor a part in the Churches interest, as not to be
extraordinarily well pleased with those who are serviceable thereto, and that I
am right glad besides the propension I have to esteem your amity, so powerful
a persuasion as Religion is, does yet further oblige me.

Yours, BALZAC.

To the Cardinal of Vallete.
LETTER IIII.
My LORD:
THe Letter you pleased to send me from Rome, caused me to forget I was sick,
and I presumed to solace my self after three years of sadness, ever since
news was brought me of Lucidors death, and the success of that fatal
combat, wherein you could not but be a loser, on which side soever the
advantage happened. My Lord, I doubt not but your spirit though altogether
stout and courageous, to support your proper misfortunes, is yet mollified by
the relation of their miseries who love you, and where there is question rather
of showing your good nature, or your constancy, you will quit one virtue to
acquire another. I know well, that in the number of your goods, you reckon your
friends in the first rank, allowing only the second place to your dignities,
and to fifty thousand Crowns rent which accompanies them; and consequently I
assure my self, you believe you are, as it were, grown poor by the loss of
a man who had relation unto you. But I am likewise most certain, how after the
passing certain unpleasant days out of the love you bare him; and having
affoorded him sufficient testimonies of your true affection, he now expecting
no further acknowledgement or service, you will at length call to mind, that
it is the Public to whom you owe your cares and passions, and that you are
not permitted farther to afflict a spirit which is no longer yours. Since the
misery of this age is so general, as it leaves no one house without tears,
nor any one part of Europe without trouble; and since Fortune is not of power
to conserve even her own workemanships, who are many of them fallen to ground:
it must needs so happen (my Lord) that being of the world, you are to taste of
the fruits it produces, and that you purchase at some hard rate, the good
successes daily attending you. But truly, the place where you are, and the
great designs taking you up, may well furnish you with so strong and solid
consolations, as they need leave no work for others; and my Eloquence would
come too late, should I employ it after your reason, which has formerly
persuaded you, there being now neither precept nor Counsel in all humane
wisdom vnproposed to your view; and since neither Seneca, nor Epictetus can
say any thing save only your thoughts* I had much rather send you
diuertisements no way distastefull, then to present you any remedies which
doubtless will prove importunate. These writings (my Lord) here enclosed,
shall not enter as strangers into your Cabinet, they will not talk unto you of
the five Pradicables of Perphirie, nor of Justinians Neuelles, or the numbers
of Algebra* But you may there recreate and repose your spirits at your return
from Audiences, Congregations, and the Consistory. I could well have bestowed
upon them a more eminent title, then what they have. I could out of these
composures have framed Apologies, Accusations, and politic discourses; yea,
had I pleased never so little to have extended some of my Letters, they might
have been called books. But besides, my design, aiming rather to please,
then importune, and that I tend to the highth of conceptions and not at the
abundance of words: When I treat with you, (my Lord) I suppose my self to be
before a full assembly; and do propose to my self never to write any thing
unto you, which Posterity ought not to read. Now if sometimes from your person
I pass to others, or if I commend those whom I conceive are deserving, I
assure my self, I therein performing an act of Justice, and not ofsubiection:
you will be no way displeased with what I do, and well hope, I may conserve
your favors without violating humane Laws, or separating my self from civil
society.

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.
The 15. of July, 1629.
To the Cardinal of Vallete:
LETTER V.
My Lord,
THough innocence be the Felicity of the afflicted, and that I find in my
self the satisfaction, he can expect who has not offended, yet can I not so
easily comfort my self: And the remedien my Philosophy afford me, are for
meaner misfortunes then the loss of your favors. All I can contribute to my
consolation out of the assurance I have of mine innocence, is the liberty I
have taken to tell you so, and to complain of the injustice you have done me,
if you have so much as suffered any to accuse me I need not seek colors to
palliate my actions or words: it is sufficiently known, their principal
objects have ever bin the glory of your name, and the desire to please you: I
befeech you likewise to call to remembrance, that hard times have not hindered
me from imbarking my self where my inclination called me; and that I have
served my Lord your Father, when most of his followers were in danger to become
his Martyrs. It should seem perchance* I stand in need of the memory of what
is past, and that I make my precedent good offices appear, to the end to cause
them to over way my present offenses. No (my Lord) I intend not to make use of
what now is not, for the justification of mine actions, nor am I ignorant that
never any woman was so vicious, who has not heretofore bin a Virgin, nor
criminal, who cannot prescribe some time preceding his bad life. I speak of to
day, as well as of heretofore, and do protest unto you, with all the Oaths
able to make truth appear holy, and inviolable; that I never had one single
temptation against my duty, and that my fidelity is spottlesse, as (if you so
pleased) it might be without suspicion: I must confess that you having
declared your self no way desirous to trench upon my liberty, and that you
left it wholly to my self, I have sometimes made use thereof, imagining that
without wronging that first resolution, I vowed to your service, it might be
lawful for me to have second affections. I will not expect the rack to force
me to confess it; I have loved a man whom the misfortunes of Court, and the
diverse accidents happening in worldly affairs, have separated from some
friends of yours, and have cast him into other interests then theirs. But
besides, that he was extracted from a Father, who did not more desire his own
good, then your contentment; and since I am most assured how amidst all the
fore-passed broiles, he at all times conserved his inclinations for you. I must
needs tell you, I was in such sort obliged unto him, as had he declared War
against my King, and against my Country, J could not have chosen any side which
had not bin unjust: J therefore at this day bewail him with warm tears, and
if ever I take comfort in the loss I have sustained, I shall esteem my self
the most unworthy, and in grateful person living. Your self (my Lord) knowing
(as you do) how much I owe unto his amity, would sooner adiudge me to die with
him, then blame my resentments. I assure my self all my actions are disguised
unto you, on purpose to cause you to dislike them* Howsoever I will not
despair, but the time to come will right me for what is past. You will on day
see the wrong you ofter to my innocence, in admitting false witnesses in
prciudicethereof, and what you now term my fault, you will then be pleased to
say; it was my unhappy fate, or my hard fortune: in the interim, I am resolved
to continue in well doing, and though there were no other but my conscience to
acknowledge my fidelity yet inuiolably to remain

Your most humble and most faithful servant. BALZAC.
The 30. of December, 1626.
To the Lord Bishop of Nantes.
LETTER VI.
SIR,
AS the bearer hereof can testify the obligations I owe you, so may he bear
witness of my perpetual resentments, and will tell you, that were I borne
your son, or subject, you could have but the same power over me, you now
possess: nay, I am persuaded, I yet owe somewhat more to your virtue, then to
the right of Nations, or Nature. If power has made Princes, and chance
Parents, reason well deserves a further kind of Obedience: It was that which
overcome me upon the first conference I had with you, causing me to prostrate
all my presumption at your feet, after having rightly represented to my
thoughts, how impossible it is to esteem my self, and know you: I am sure
this Language is no way pleasing to you; and that you will look awry at my
Letter; but do what you please, I am more a friend to truth, then to your
humor, and my spirits are so replenished with what I have seen, and heard, as
I can no longer conceal my thoughts: I must tell you (Sir) you are the
greatest Tyrant this day living; your authority becomes awful to all souls,
and when you speak, there is no further means to retain private opinions, if
they be not conformable to yours. I speak this seriously, and with my best
sense; you have often reduced me to such extreamities, that coming from you,
without knowing what to answer you, I have been ready to exclaim and say, (in
the rapture wherein I was) Restore me my opinion which you have violently
forced from me, and take not from me the liberty of Conscience the King has
given me. But truly, it is no small pleasure to be constrained to be happy,
and to fall into his hands, who uses no violence; but to their avail who
suffer. For my part, I have at all times departed your presence, fully
persuaded in what I ought to believe: I never gave you a visit which cured me
not of some passion: I never came into your Chamber so honest a man, as I went
foorch: How often with one short speech have you elevated me above my self,
and bereaved me of whatsoever was fleshly* and profane in me: How often
hearing you discourse of the World to come, and of true felicity, have I longed
after it, and would willingly have purchased it at the price of my life? How
often could I have followed you, (would you have conducted me) to a higher
pitch of perfection, then all ancient Philosophers ever attained? So it is,
that you only have bestowed the love of invisible things upon me, causing me
to distaste my first and most violent affections: I should still have been
buried in flesh, had not you drawn me forth, nor had my spirit been other
then a part of my body, had not you taken the pains to unloose it from
sensual objects, and to sever the eternal from the perishable part. You
caused me at the first encounter to become suspicious to the wicked, and to
favor the better side, before I was of it; you have made those remedies
pleasing, which all others affrighted me with, and in the midst of vice, you
have constrained me to confess Virtue to be the most beautiful thing on
Earth. Think not therefore, that either the pomp of the Roman Court, or the
glitter of that of France, can dazell those eyes of my soul, where to you have
showed so many excellent things. It is the beams and lightning of those
eminent Virtues you have discovered unto me, which cast so forceable
reflections upon the eyes of my soul, and which cause me, (though I formerly
resolved to slight all things,) yet at least now to admire something. But yet
(Sir) assure your self, it is not the world I admire, for I rather reflect
upon it, as on that which has deceived me these eight and twenty years I have
bin in it, and wherein I fearce ever saw any thing, but how to do evil, and
counterfeit to be good* In all places on Earth, whether my curiosity has
transported me, beyond Seas, or on the other side the Alps, in free States, or
in Kingdoms of Conquest, I have observed among men only a fare of flatteries,
fools and Cheaters; of Oldmen corrupted by their Ancestors, and who corrupt
their Children: Of slaves who cannot live out of Servitude: of poverty among
virtuous persons, and Ambitious Covetousness in the souls of great persons.
But now that you have broken the bars, through which I could only receive
some light impression of truth, I distinctly see this general corruption, and
do humbly acknowledge the injury I offered to my Creator, when I made Gods of
his Creatures; and what glory I fought to bereave him of, etc.

BALZAC.
The 12. of January, 1626.
To Mounsieur de la Marque.
LETTER VII.
I Know not what right use to make of your praises; if I receive them, I lose
all my humility, and in rejecting them, I give that as granted which I am taxed
for. Upon the edge of these two extreamities, it is more laudable to suffer my
self to fall on my friends side, and to join in opinion with honest men, then
to lean to that of Lysander, since all men agree, that his censure is ever
opposite to the right; and that he is the wisest man in France, who resembles
him the least. There would be some error in the reputation I aim at, were I
not condemned by him. Think it not therefore strange, that injuries are blown
upon me by the same mouth which utters blasphemies against the memory of
rrr, and remember this old Maxim, that fools are more unjust then some
sinners: The best is, that for one Enenemy my Reputation raises against me,
it procures me a thousand protectors; so as without stirring hence, I get
victories at Paris; nor find I any Harmony so pleasing, as what is composed of
one particular murmr, mingled with general acclamations. There are
sufficient in your Letter to cause me to retract the Maxims of my ancient
Philosophy: At the least they oblige me to confess, that all my felicity is
not within my self, things without me entering toward the composition of
perfect happiness. I must freely confess unto you mine infirmity: I should
grow dumb, were I never so short a time to live among deaf persons, and were
there no glory, I should have no Eloquence. But it is time I return to the
task I have undertaken; and that instead of so many excellent words you have
addressed unto me, I only answer you, that I am

Your most humble servant, BALZAC.

To Mounsieur Tissandier:
LETTER VIII.
AT my return from Poiton, I found your packet attending me at my house; but
thinking to peruse your Letters, I perceived I read my Panegyricke; I dare not
tell you, with what transport and excess of joy I was surprised thereupon,
fearing to make it appear, I were more vain then usually women are, and
affect praises with the like intemperance as I do persumes. Without
dissembling, those you sent me, were so exquisite, as be it you deceive me, or
I you, there never issued fairer effects, either from injustice, or error. I
beseech you to continue your fault, or to persevere in your dissimulation: For
my part, J am resolute to make you full payment of what J owe you, and to yield
so public a testimony of the esteem I hold of you, as my reputation
hereafter shall be only serviceable to yours, oblige me so far, as to accept
this Letter, for assurance of what I will perform; and if you find me not so
serviceable as I ought to be, blame those troublesome persons who are always
at my throat, forcing me to tell you sooner then I resolved, that I am

Your most humble and faithful servant, BALZAC
The 5* of August, 1625.
To Mounsieur de Faret.
LETTER IX.
THere is not any acknowledgement answerable to my obligations unto you: If I
owe you any honor, I am farther indebted unto you then my life comes to.
Truly, to be sensible of another man's sufferings sooner then himself, or to
assume a greater share in his interests, then he does? I must confess, is as
much as not to love in fashion, or not to live in this Age. It is likewise a
long time since I have bin acquainted, that the corruption enuironing you, does
not at all infect you; and how among the wicked, you have conserved an
integrity suiting the Reign of Jews the twelfth: Nay, happily we must search
further, and pass beyond the Authenticke History. It is only under the Poets
Charlemaine, where a man of your humor is to be found, and that the combat of
Roger has been the victory of Leon. Without more particularly explaining my
self, you understand what I would say; and I had much rather be indebted to
your support, then to the merit of my cause, or to the favorable censure I
have received from the Public. Certainly, truth it self cannot subsist, or
find defense without assistance; yea even that concerning Religion; and which
more particularly appertains to God then the other, seaseth not on our
souls, but by the entermise of words; and has need to be persuaded to have
it believed. You may hereby judge whether the good offices you affoorded me,
were not useful unto me, or whether or no my just cause happened successefully
into your hands. But I must defer the thanks due unto you upon this
occasion, till our meeting at Paris, to the end, to animate them by my
personal expression. Be confident in the interim; though pity it self would
stay me in my Cell, yet you are of power to cause me to infringe my
heremeticall vow: besides, you have set such a luster upon that great City, and
have punctuated unto me so many remarkable things, and novelties thereof, in
the Letter you pleased to send me, as I should show my self insensible of
rarities, and not possessed with an honest curiosity, had I not a desire to
return thither. I therefore only attend some small portion of health to
strengthen me, to part hence; and to go to enjoy with you our mutual
delights, I mean the conversation of Mounsieur de Vaugelas, who is able to
make me find the Court in a Cottage, and Paris in the Plains of Bordeaux:
Adieu Mounsienr, love me always, since I am with all my soul,

Your most humble and affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 12. of December, 1625.
To Mounsieur Coeffeteau, Bishop of Marseilles.
LETTER X.
IT is now fifteen days since I received any news from you, yet will I
believe the change of air has cured you; and if you (as yet) walk with a
staff, it is rather I hope for some mark of your authority, then for any
support of your infirmity: If this be so, I conjure you to make good use of
this happy season yet remaining, and not to lose these fair days, hastening
away, and which the next Clouds will carry from us. I give you this advice, as
finding it good; and because there is not any thing does more fortify feeble
persons then the Sun of this Month, whose heat is as innocent as its light.
Adamantus has had his share of the unwholesome influence reigning in these
parts. The Fever has not borne him the respect due to a person of his
quality, having so rudely entreated him, as he is scarce to be known: Yet has
he some kind of obligation to his sickness, in having acquainted him with such
pleasures, as were not made for those who are over fortunate, and which
formerly he knew not. At this present he can never be weary in praising the
benefits of Liberty, nor in admiring the beauty of Day, and the diversities of
Nature: so as to hear him speak, you would suppose all things to be Novelties
unto him; and that he is entered into another world, or newborn again in
this. Besides, they pass their time merrily at N. and of two hundred calling
themselves Virgins, I verily think there is not one who speaks truth, if she
have not recovered her Maidenhead. It may be their intention is not ill, and
that in suffering themselves to be courted, they have no other design, then to
raise servants to God. But since godly intentions do not always produce good
effects, if you suffer things to run on in the same course which they do, I
greatly apprehend in your regard, that Antichrist will shortly take his
beginning in your Diocese; and lest you by consequence should be the first
object of his persecution. J suppose you have a greater interest then any man*
to oppose this accident which now threatens us, and that to divert a mischief
which is to be followed by the worlds ruin, you ought not to spare the
fulminations of Rome; nor make use only of half your power. There are not any
will be auerse to this good Work, save only our young Gallants. But you cannot
procure their disaffections upon a better subject then this, nor do greater
service to the iealious God, then to conserve the honor of those creatures he
loves,

I am Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 7. of October, 1618.
To Mounsieur Pouzet.
LETTER XI.
IF you will not return from Court, we are resolved to send Deputies on
purpose to require you of the King, and to beseech him to restore us our good
company: I know well, that in the place where you are, there are prisons both
for the innocent, and most happy; and that no man can blame you for your
ouer-long abode there, without accusing you for being fortunate. But it were
likewise small Justice, your absence should make this City a Village, and that
Paris should usurp all the affections you owe me. As I perfectly love you, so
do I expect to be reciprocally respected by you; nor would you I should herein
have any advantage over you, though I yield unto you in all other things:
Neither of us therefore can enjoy solid contentments, so long as we are
separated; and I pretend you do me wrong, if you take satisfaction where I am
not. Take Post therefore with speed, to be here quickly, grow not old either
by the way, or at your Inn, for by this means I shall get the advantage of
that time, and you shall gain me four days out of the loss of three
Months. I have seen what you willed me concerning lll, But I would you knew,
I have no resentments against forcelesse enemies, nor have I any mind to put
my self into passion, when these petty Doctors please. Should these fellows
speak well of me, I would instantly examine my conscience, to know whether I
were guilty of any fault; and as Hippolitus suspected his own innocence,
because he was esteemed spotless in his stepdames eye: So should not I have
any good opinion of my own sufficiency, were I gracious in their sights, who
can have no other then bad affections. Howsoever, they cause me once a day to
think my self some greater matter then I am, when I reflect upon their
number, and the miracle I work, in interessing in one and the same cause
supersticious persons, Atheists, and evil Monks Adieu.

Yours, BALZAC.
The 14. April, 1625.
An answer to a Letter sent to Balzac, from a learned Old Lady, Mademoiselle de
Gournay.
LETTER XII.
Madam,
I Do here at the first tell you, I have no other opinion of you, then your
self gives me, and I have at all times had a more strong and sound notion of
the inward qualities by the speech, then by the Physiognomy. But if after the
Letter you did me the honor to write unto me, it were necessary to seek any
foreign proofs; the testimony of those two great personages, who have
admired your virtue even in the budde, and left the pourtraite thereof under
their own hands, may well serve as an Antidote* to secure me from the
impressions and the painted shadows of calumny. I who know that Asia,
Affricke, and a great part of the world besides, believe Fables as fundamental
points of Religion, do not at all wonder (if in what concerns your
particular) there be some who side not with the truth, which is sure to find
enemies in all places where there are men. This is an effect of that error,
now grown old in popular opinion; that it is fit an honest woman be ignorant
of many things, and that, to maintain her reputation, it is not requisite all
the world commend her; but that she be unknown to all men. Nay, I say further:
The vulgar does ordinarily cast an injurious eye, and with some tax of
extrauagancy, upon great and Heroical qualities, if they appear in that sex,
to which they conceive it ought not to appertain. Now though to speak
generally, and to reflect rightly upon the order of earthly things, and the
grounds of policy, I must confess, I should lean to the first of these
opinions: Yet will I be well advised, how I think that Nature has not so much
liberty left her, as to pass (upon occasion) the limits she ordinarily
allows her self; or sometimes to exceed her bounds without blame, to the
end, to produce certain things, far surpassing the rest in perfection. It is
no good Argument to auerre, that because you are adorned with the virtues of
our sex, you therefore have not reserved those of your own; or that it is a
sin for a woman to understand the Language which heretofore the Vestals made
use of. I will therefore leave these calumnious persons, who desire to bereave
Lillies of their beauty; and Crystal of its clearenesse, to return to the
Letter I have received from you; where without flattery I will affirm, that
Meaning himself.
this man who has been discribed unto you, for so vain glorious a person;
who despises times past, who mocketh the modern, and preiudicateth the
future; has found out diverse things in your works well pleasing unto him: so
as if my approbation be at this present of any weight with you, you may for
your own advantage, add this Encomion to that of Lipsius and Montagnie, and
boldly affirm you have this advantage over Kings and Emperors, that the
tastes of two different ages have agreed in your favor. Since you were first
commended, the face of Christendom has changed ten times: Neither our
manners, attire, or Court, are cognisible to what you have seen them. Men have
made new laws, yea, and the virtues of our forefathers age, are esteemed the
vices of ours: yet shall it appear, how amidst so many changes and strange
reuolutions, you have brought even to ourtimes one and the same reputation; and
that your beauty (I speak of what enamoreth the Capucins Friars, and old
Philosophers) has not left you, with your youth. I shall in mine own regard
be very glad, the world should take notice how much I honor Virtue, by what
name soever it passes, and under what shape soever it is shrouded: and I
esteem my party stronger by the half, then it has been, since you have
vouchsafed to enter thereinto. But if without offending against Grammatical
rules, and those of Decorum: J durst take you for my second, I assure my self
if we were to denounce war against these petty Authors, who are ingendered by
error, and disclosed out of the corruption of this age, you should not have
over many in taking half a dozen of them to task for your part. At the least,
you would put those Pedants to silence, who brag they have taught me to
speak. Yet will I tell you, before I proceed any further, and to the end they
may know as much (if you please) that my Mother is not resolved to give this
for granted, and how if there be any glory to be gotten in so poor an
exploite, she is determined to dispute the matter against all these
bookemakers. I have ever been hitherto of opinion, that in what concerns the
choice of words, I ought to suffer my self to be governed by the common
acceptance thereof, without adhering to any one man's single example; and that
instead of acknowledging the authority of any particular, I am to follow the
public consent. But howsoever, it is not the praise of a great Orator to
speak our Language well, but rather the mark of a true Frenchman; Nor do I
pretend applause from any, for not being borne in Holland, or Germany. It is
true, I attibute much to Elocution, and know that high things stand in need of
the help of words, and that after those have bin rightly conceived, they are
as happily to be expressed. It only angers me, that out of the poorest part
of Rhetoric received among the ancients, they will needs extract all ours.
And that to please mean spirits, it is sitting (as they think) our works
should resemble those sacrifices, whereout they take the heart, and where, of
all the head, nothing is left save only the tongue. I would make answer to the
other aduertisements you did me the honor to give me, if they had not relation
to a matter I reserve my self fully to treat of in L. being a work I am in
hand with, and which I hope shortly to present unto you at Paris. There it
shall be, where I will make it appear unto you, that reason cannot have an
easier task, then to persuade a spirit of the like making mine is, and that I
equally love the truth, whether I receive it from any other, or that I find it
my self.

BALZAC.
The 3. of August, 1624.
To Mounsieur Berniere, President in the Parliament of Roan.
LETTER XIII.
THe mean compliment I am to offer you, is the first effect of the fuming
Drinks I received from you. I have no means to find out my right senses to
entertain you; they are lost in your excellent liquors, and I had need be
more valiant then I am, to defend my self against Spain and Normandy, with
their united forces: I verily think, that what should have been drunk at
Berniere betwixt this and Easter, is overflowed in my Chamber: If my Friends
come not to my aid, I am in danger to suffer shipwreck, or not to become
sober again till next year: yet will you needs have me even in this plight
wherein I am, to act a sober man's part; and my soul to execute those functions
you have suspended. It is impossible, not being my self, I should speak my
ordinary Language; I cannot give you two words of thanks without taking one
for another; and my head is so full of your Spanish Wine, and Normandy Cider,
that my wits give place; I will therefore content my self, to assure you with
this small portion offense yet left me, that supposing your Friendship
produced nothing, and were as barren, as it is fruitful, I would sue for it
out of a more noble consideration, then that of particular interest, and would
testify unto you, that it is your self I love, and not your fortunes:
Believe, I beseech you, the truest of all men: you gained my heart the first
time I had the honor to see you; I then gave my self wholly as yours, and said
within my self, what I have often since reiterated, that you being rich enough
to purchase a Sovereignty beyond the Alp es, if that should ever happen, I
esteemed you a sufficient worthy person, to deserve to have me live under your
Regency, and that I was

Your most humble servant and subject, BALZAC.
At Paris the 5. of March, 1627.
To Mounsieur de Voiture.
LETTER XIIII.
THough the half of France divide us, yet are you as presentto my spirit, as
the objects I see, and you have part in all my thoughts and dreams. Rivers,
Plains, and Towns may well oppose them selves to my content: they cannot
hinder my memory from taking entertainment with you, or from the frequent taste
of those excellent Discourses wherewith you have graced me, till I be so happy
as again to hear you. Though you should grow proud, yet must I confess* I
conceive not any thing either great or sublime, save only those Seeds you
have scattered in my Soul; and that your company, which at first, was right
pleasing, is now become absolutely necessary for me: You may therefore well
think it is not willingly I leave you thus long in your Mistresses hands, or
that I suffer her to enjoy my goods, without giving me account: Every moment
she obliges you to allow her, are so many usurpations she makes upon me; all
you whisper unto her, are secrets you conceal from me; and to have your
conversation in mine absence, is to enrich her self by my losses. But there is
no reason J should malice so fair a Rival, in that both of you are happy; or
that I frame mine afflictions upon your mutual contents*; provided (at my
coming) I find four months absence notto haueblotted me out of your
remembrance, and that Love has there reserved some place for friendship, I
shall still have for mine advantage the time passing to attend the hour
assigned; and you will come to comfort me sometimes, concerning the miseries of
this Age, and the injustice of men. In the interim, in the place where now I
am, as I have but slender joys, so have I not any great discontents: I am in
equal distance removed from dis-fauour and good fortune, and that unconstant
Goddess, who is ever employed in depopulating Cities, and subuerting States,
has no leisure to work mischief in mean places. I see Shepheardesses who
can only say, yea and nay, and who are too gross witted to be deceived by
understanding persons; yet is painting as little known among them as
Eloquence; and because I am their Master, they would suffer me to show them,
if I so pleased, how small a distance there is between power and tyranny:
instead of the fine words and quaint discourses wherein your Ladies abound,
there issues from their mouths a pure and innocent breath, which incorporates
it self with their kisses* and gives them a taste, you ordinarily find not
among those of the Court. Supposing therefore you make not any better choice
there, then I happen on hereby chance, I make over particular profession, to
rely on your judgment, and of being*

Your most humble servant BALZAC.
The 7. October, 1625,
To Mounsieur de Vaugelas.
LETTER XV.
THe good opinion you have of me, makes up more then half my merit, and you
herein resemble the Poets Epicts, who out of small truths frame incredible
fixions; howsoever, if you loved me not, but according to the rigor of Law and
Reason, I should much fear to be but of indifferent esteem with you. It is
then much better for me, the affection you bear me, appear rather a passion
then a virtue. Extremities in all other things are reprooueable, in this
laudable; and as certain Rivers are never so useful as when they ouerflow: so
has Friendship nothing more excellent in it then excess; and does rather
offend in her moderation, then in her violence. Continue therefore in observing
neither rule, nor measure, in the favors you afford me* and to the end I may
be lawfully ungrateful, being infinitely obliged, leave me not so much as
words wherewith to thank you. Truly your last Letters have taken from me all
the terms I should employ in this occasion* and instead of the good offices I
incessantly receive from you, it seems you will only have new importunies in
payment* Since it is thus, fear not my niceness, or that in matters of great
consequence, I make not use of your affection, and in slight ones I abuse it
not; henceforward it is requisite, you recover all my Law*sutes, compose all my
quarrels, and correct all my errors: For to undertake to cure all my diseases,
I suppose you would not, in prejudice of Mounsieur de Lorime. It shall
therefore suffice, you will be pleased to let him at this passage read how I
requite my life at his hands; and if the only obeying him, will preserve me,
I will place his precepts immediately after Gods Commandments* There is no
receite distastefull, if his Eloquence afford the preparatiue, nor pain
vnasswaged by his words, before it be expelled by his Art: Remotest causes are
as visible to him, as the most ordinary effects; and if Nature should discover
herself naked unto him, he could not thereby receive any further communication
of her secrets, then he has acquired by former experience. Let him therefore
bestow better nights on me, then those I have had this six years, wherein I
have had no sleep; entreat him to make a peace between my Liver and
Stomach, and to compose this civil War, which disturbes the whole inside of
my body, if he desire I should no longer live, but for his glory* and to
persuade the world, he is nothing indebted to those Arabian Princes, who
practiced Physic, or to the gods themselves who invented it. Truly if mere
Humanists, whom diverse of his profession have sometimes scorned, seem of
slight consideration with him; or if he be not contented with a civil
acknowledgement, I am ready to call him my preserver* and to erect Altars, and
offer sacrifice unto him. Yea, to compass this, I will quit the better part of
what I implore; I desire not, he should cure me* It is sufficent he hinder
me from dying, and that he cause my diseases and plaints to endure some
threescore years. I would likewise know (if you please) what his good Cozen
does, that Citizen of all Common wealths, that man who is no more a stranger in
Persia, then in France, and whose knowledge has the same extent, as has all
the Turkish Empire* and all the ancient Roman Monarchy. I have at the least
three hundred questions to ask him, and a whole Volumne of doubts to propose
unto him; I expect at our first meeting, to resolve with him upon the affairs
of former ages, and concerning the different opinions, of Baronius and
Genebrard on the one side, and of Escales and Casaubon on the other. I am in
the mean time resolved to pass ten or twelve days with Mounsieur de Racan,
to the end to see him in that time work miracles, and write things which God
must necessarily reveal unto him. Truly Conquerours have no greater advantage
over Masters of Fence, then he has over Doctors; and he is at this day one
of the great Workemanships of Nature. If all wits were like his, there would
be a great deal of time lost at School* Universities would become the most
unprofitable parts of the Commonwealth, and Latin as well as Millan Parchment,
with other foreign Merchandises, would be rather marks of our vanity, then
any effects of our necessity.

The 10. of October, 1625.
To Mounsieur de Racan.
LETTER XVI.
Were my health better then it is, yet the roughness of the season we are
entering into, and which J hoped to prevent, makes me over apprehensiue, to
stir out of my Chamber, or to hazard my self in a long voyage: A Sunlesse
day, or one night in a bad Hosthouse, were sufficient to finish the work of my
Death; and in the state wherein I am, I should much sooner arrive in the next
world, then at Chastellerant. I must therefore entreat you to hold me excused,
if J keep not promise with you, or if I take some longer time to make
provision of strength, to prepare my self for so hardy an enterprise. At our
return from Court, we are to come to your delicate House, and to see the
places where the Muses have appeared unto you, and dictated the Verses we have
so much admired. Those wherewith you honored me, do overmuch engage me, to
leave my judgment at liberty; I will only content my self, to protest that
you were never so very a Poet, as when you spoke of me; and that you have Art
enough to invent new Fables, as incredible as ancient fictions: it seems
Divinity cost you nothing; and because your Predecessors have furnished Heaven
with all sorts of people, and since Astrologers have there placed Monsters, you
suppose it may be likewise lawful for you* at least, to get entrance there
for some of your Friends. You may do Sir, what you please; nor have I any
cause to blame the height of you affection, since I hold he loves not
sufficiently, who loves not excessiuely. It will only be the good Wits of our
Age who will not pardon you; and will take it impatiently, to see my Name in
your Verses with as great Splendour and Pomp as that of Artemisa and Ydalia.
But as you employ not other men's passions either in matter of have or love; so
I suppose you make less use of their Eyes in judging the truth of things. In
this case, I am sufficiently confident of my Retoricke to assure my self I
shall at all times persuade you, that I am more Estimable then mine Enemies:
and that they have no other advantage over me, who am sick, but only health,
it they enjoy it. Besides, you need not make any Apology, in excuse of your
tediousness: I well perceive by the Excellency of your labors, the time you
have therein employed, and know that perfection is not presently to be
attained. A Crafts-man may easily in a short time finish diverse Statues of
Clay, or Plaster; but these are but for a days use, or to serve as Ornaments
at a Cities triumph, not to continue many Kings reigns: Those who carue in
Brass or Marble wax old upon their Works, and doubtless, matters ever to
endure are long to be meditated: if my Megreme would permit me, I could say
more unto you, but all J can obtain of it, is to sign this Letter, and to
assure you that J am perfectly

Your most humble and affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 20. of November, 1625.
To the Abbot of St. Cyran.
LETTER XVII.
SInce you desire to see in what Style J begun to Write; and how sufficient a
fellow I was at nineteen: I here send you my Errors of that Age, and the
first faults I committed: it were much better to condemn their memory, then to
fall into them a fresh, by renewing them in this place. But you will be
absolutely obeyed, and J have no resistance against your force: See here then
the remainder of many things now lost, and what I have saved from ship-wracke,
being neither valuable to the Diamonds, or lumpes of Ambergreece, the Sea has
lately cast upon upon the Coast of Bayone.

I advise you for your honors sake, not to refresh the memory of what is past,
nor to seek for examples of your fidelity in our Civil wars, since you have
not therein conserved it. You may hereupon say what you please, and try (if you
can) to make things seem to us contrary to what they are; yet am I well
assured, you were engaged in a faction, wherein you have not been useful to
the King, no, nor where you could serve him as an honest man ought; so as if
you desire I should to do you a favor) forget things past; or if you will
allege that the tranquillity we now enjoy, and the good order used in mannaging
Public affairs, were the effects of your prudent conduct; besides, that this
glory is not absolutely due unto you, and there remaining others who suppose
they have as large a share therein as your self. You must not take it ill, if
I freely tell you, there is not any thing therein worthy of admiration. You
entered upon the State*gouernment in a peaceable time, you therein found all
things so well disposed, as they seemed of themselves to work the wished
effects; and the most of the French so inclined to subjection, as it was no
hard matter to bring them to due obedience. And herein you are necessarily to
confess, you owe much to CCC, and that he passed the last years of his life
for your instructions, as he since then, dyed for the general good of this
Kingdom. If there has been any obstacle to remove, which at this present
may be troublesome unto you, he has before his death rid his hands thereof,
with as much good fortune as resolution. If it may be esteemed a benefit, to
understand the nature of the people, thereby to deal with them according to
their humors, he has made it appear unto you, there was not any thing above
his patience; since without resentment, he was able to suffer the loss of his
liberty; and if so it were, that he was forced to make use of some violent act,
which nevertheless was necessary; neither hatred, nor envy, have ever been of
power to hinder his undertakings. In a word, he has tamed the most stubborn
spirits, he has left the parties who most perplexed this poor Kingdom,
either absolutely ruined, or so weakened, as they are utterly unable to rise
again. He has accustomed all men to patience, and has performed so strange
things, as we now find not any thing extraordinary; and (what I most esteem)
he has made the world see, how great things the Kings authority was able to
do, though sometimes he did this for the establishing his own. I therefore
do not at all now wonder, if having found affairs disposed to receive such
impressions, as you pleased to put upon them, you have hitherto caused them to
fall out indifferently well, or if you have not as yet committed any
confiderable errors in the mannaging of State-affaires, as not having any
matter of difficulty to overcome, you have only herein suffered your self to
be guided by common and ordinary presidents. But what is all this? that your
endeavors should deserve to be preferred before all those services the D. and
P. with their Predecessors have performed. Had you any imagination, when you
spoke in so high terms, you could cause us to believe so great
improbabilities; or had you so poor an Opinion of all men's judgments, as to
suppose we more valued your fears and continual distrusts, then so many
generous actions, performed by them in the eye of all Christendom, for the
glory and reputation of this Crown* I will not touch upon the merits of the
living, lest you should impute that to a desire of complacency, or some
particular obligation, which the only interest of truth exacteth of me. I
only require justice for the dead, whom you have dared to wrong in the Kings
presence, against all rules of Piety, obliging you to respect their memory.
Doubt not, but that they are yet sensible of things in this world, and that
amidst the glory and contentments they possess, their care to live in the good
odor of men, does yet continue: You may therefore well imagine, they have just
cause to think, those lives they have lost in their Princes service, and for
the defense of their Country, had been ill employed, and might justly
complain of our ingratitude* should we suffer before our eyes their
reputations to be questioned, without testifying any distaste. In vain had
they triumphed over the most beautiful parts of the earth, and carried their
victorious Arms where the name of France was not yet arrived. To small purpose
had they recluded the power of strangers, wherein the limits Nature prescribed
unto them. In vain likewise, even in our memory had they conserved State and
Religion, when those of your faction did diversely labor the ruin of both*
should you now be suffered to enter into comparison with them; or as though the
possession of that glory wherein they always remained, were unjustly
controuerted in their case. But the mischief herein is, that we have only
right on our side, and that all things are so auerse unto us, as it will be very
hard to cause reason to be so much as regarded, because it favors us; so as I
get nothing by disputing with a man who is above Laws, and in whose behalf,
the King has received so aduantagious impressions, as he may securely exercise
his passions, under pretext of his authority, and confound his particular
enmities, togetherwith the interests of the Commonwealth. I should be very
leath to say you are grown to such extremities, or that out of vanity and
presumption, two imperfections purely humane, you should so suddenly stepped
into Cruelty and tyranny, two Diabolical Errors. Nevertheless, if having
great power in the Kings breast, (as indeed you may do much, you cause a
general diffidence therein of all things, and endeavor to bring his best
servants into suspicion with him, thereby to make them vnvsefull: if you intend
by imaginary iealousies to divert his inclination from that goodness, whereto
at all times it has had an extraordinary propention; or if you hinder him from
the free use of his natural debonarity toward her, who brought him into this
World. Do you not think men willbeginne to say, it is not vanity alone has
spoiled you? and that it will not be generally wished, that the Maxims you
make use of, were somewhat more Christian, and less contrary to Gods
Commandments. I know we have a Prince of such perfection, as Heaven it self
cannot without miracle make farther addition, then Experience. So timely a wise
man, has scarce ever bin; all his inclinations do wholly aim at good, and
Virtue is to him so natural, as I verily believe he would be much troubled to
do ill. But you are not ignorant that one cannot give poison to any man so
easily, as to him who in taking it, supposes he receives wholesome Physic,
and that ill counsels have never so great power over our spirits, as when we
embrace them without distrust. Surely the uttermost of evils is that, whereof
we have neither knowledge nor apprehension; nor is there any fault more
dangerous, then when we make use of reason it self in our errors. I have no
purpose to offend any with my discourse, and do entreat you to believe, I
think it very well you make use of all the means, you suppose, may conduce to
the causing the Kings authority to become more awful to all men, and public
peace further confirmed. These are two so delicate matters, as they cannot be
touched without danger, nor conserved with overmuch care. Yet must you pardon
me, if J say you are to be very circumspect, lest in thinking to strengthen
this authority, you abuse it not to the prejudice of your own Conscience; and
you are withal to consider, that Peace cannot be of any long continuance, if
it be not pleasing to God, who has never suffered without resentment, that the
Laws of Nature should be violated. These Laws the Barbarians themselves allow
of, have not been established either by force, or necessity, as others are:
The first thing we can do, is to follow them, and the obedience we yield
them, can neither be milder, nor more easy: They are not engraven upon Marble,
but are borne with us; they are not peculiar to one people or Country, but are
common to all men: They have not ordained any punishment for those who will not
observe them, so was it not probable, that any could be found so much their
own enemies, as to be inclined to such extreamities. To conclude, they were
not made for the mean and vulgar people only, but for all the world: and
those are the more strictly thereto obliged, who owe most to their extraction.
If this be true (as you cannot but know) should not Heaven be injured? things
both Divine and Moral, should they not be openly despised, would not Nature
her self cry vengeance against you, should you by your crafts and
disguisements animate a young Prince against that person, who of all the world,
ought to be most dear unto him, and deface out of his Royal soul by your
servile fears (ill founded) his first and most innocent affections? I will not
believe for mine own content, and the honor of our age, that this mischief
can happen; but I am much perplexed to know who it is, that causes all honest
men to sigh, who hinders us the perfect feeling of that felicity peace
affords, and which compassionateth even strangers, who are least interessed in
our affairs. Will you have so savage a soul, as to dread the fairest thing
the world affoordeth? or can you be so pusillanimous, as to have any timorous
reflection upon an afflicted person? Can you imagine goodness it self should
do hurt, or that the Court cannot without danger behold what it has
heretofore seen with so great contentment? For my part, if this be thus, I
find no difference between a lost state, and one concerning it self in this
sort; and it must needs be, those miseries you apprehend, are very violent, if
they exceed your remedies. Alas, if we have forgotten we are Christians, shall
we not at least remember we are men? if we be almost insensible, even to
brutality, shall we not yet afford something to appearance? Be satisfied in
being in estimation and favor with the King: Govern alone, (if you can) all
his affairs; administer Justice without any assistant; take all his authority
into your own hands; yet suffer his Mother to see him, give way that he
refuse her not a favor, which he cannot hinder, even his very enemies,
sometimes from enjoying. Afford, since it is in your power, this favor to all
France; appease in time those public complaints ready to rise against you,
and slackning some part of your rigorous counsels, add this only point,
deficient in the felicity of this Kings reign. If you can procure so pious a
thing, and so pleasing to God and Man; this great reputation of Honesty you
have shrewdly hazarded, will return with more glitter, and luster then ever it
had; we will not believe our own eyes, if they show us any thing opposite
thereunto: We will suppose it is some other who had a desire to outstrip the
D. and P. and how there is not any appearance, that a man in whom age ought to
finish, what the study of Wisdom had happily left imperfect, should still be
subject to enter into errors. But if on the other side, you go on in abusing
our good Kings facility, and unprofitably to perplexe his spirits with
perpetual distrusts, if you disguise all things unto him, on purpose to cause
him to perceive nothing, but what you please, not to take notice of ill, being
hidden under the appearance of its contrary; persuade not your self, that God
will long suffer Truth to be unknown. Do not think, but things will shortly
return to the same terms wherein Nature placed them; or that the King having
once discovered the bad designs of his Fauousites, will not easily be induced
once again to amaze the whole world, by a second example of his Justice, and
to satisfy his peoples complaints, by abandoning them to Public vengeance.
Then will you ouer-late reflect upon this worlds vanity: you will then
consider, that when we esteemed you happy, you are mounted to a place from
whence there is not any, who have not fallen, and how Fortune envious of your
felicity, drew you from that sweet and peaceable life, wherein you were
entered; fearing lest thereby you might conserve your Virtue, or therein avoid
your ruin.

To Mounsieur Malherbe.
LETTER XVIII.
AFter I have told you how dear the testimonies I received from your
remembrance, are unto me; I can do no less then thank you for the good
Justice you affoorded me. If the like Jntegrity were to be found among those,
who have the life and fortunes of men in their hands, I should take pleasure in
pleading, and by the same reason Laws punish offenders, I might hope to be
rewarded. It may be I flatter my self, but I suppose my interest is the same
with all honest men, and that they can no longer live in security, since I am
fallen upon, for the virtues I value in them. Surely if the World suffer ill
tongues to touch upon my labors, it is very probable, they will not spare
other men's; and that hereafter there will not be any thing so excellent, which
shall not be hated, nor so holy, some Lysander will not violate. These ill
examples therefore are not to be suffered, nor is it to be tolerated, that one
particular person forsake public belief, to rely upon his own peculiar
sense: and should this disorder continue, Artificers and Farmers would (at
length) prove reformers of State. I pretend not hereby to lessen the favor I
received from you: But on the contrary, I am so easy to oblige, as I suppose
my friends give me all whatsoever they take not from me; you will yet avouch
thus much, that supporting my side, you do in some sort fight in your own
defense: For if to day they say, my Style is not good, to morrow they will
maintain your Rimes to be naught. But it is now time, after I have thanked
you, that I wrangle with you, and complain for having been injured in the
person of Mounsieur de Racan, whom you tax for a disease, whereof I have been
dead this ten years. I doubt not, but that part of us whereby we are men, as
well as by Reason, has heretofore acquired you Honor; and that our History
ought to yield a glorious testimony of your forepassed Virtues in that kind:
But since you can no longer be happy therein, but by memory; and that your
Courage will now stand in need of your Sons assistance; me thinks, it is
unseemly for you to scoff at our weakness; for howsoever in accusing us,
for not having continued young so long as your self, you can only tax us for
arriving at the Haven sooner then you have done. There is none but M. F. who
may boldly laugh at the debility of others, and make lests at our charge; but
he has reason so to do, since his merit herein is generally acknowledged; as
being little less valiant in those feats, then that ancient Heroes, who
subdued Monsters, and in one Night was fifty times Son in law to one of his
Hosts. I infinitely esteem the eminent qualities where with he is adorned,
and find nothing in him which is not perfectly pleasing. But when I consider,
that he is capeable to cause us to be despised by a whole sex, and to make us
ridiculous to the most beautiful part of the World, I have great contestation
within my self, to forbear to wish him ill; and what part soever I take,
touching the glory all men allow him: Yet does it not a little anger me, that
my Eloquence is not so masculine as his.

The 15. of August, 1625.
To Mounsieur de Vaugelas.
LETTER XIX.
Were it not for the Letter you wrote me, I should have stood in need of all
my Philosophy to comfort my self for the loss I have received. But since you
have sent me the counterfeit of that divine company I left at Paris, having
thereby something, representing my forepassed good fortune; take it not ill, I
begin to have less apprehension then formerly I had, of the discomfort I
suffer in being removed from you; or if J say, you have caused your absence to
become thereby the less irksome unto me, which otherwise would have proved
insupportable. Lucidor does overmuch oblige me in retayning me in his memory,
and in desiring my company in his enchanted Palace. J beseech you to tell him,
I shall never forget the happy day we there spent, and that I cannot believe,
there is a more excellent Structure even in the Roman Kingdom, though builded
by the very hands of Tasso, or Ariosto: in sadness my thoughts stayed there,
when I parted thence, I still walk in his Allies; I wander in his Woods, and
slumber upon the banks of the Fairies Fountain, whereof I need only drink a
drop to turn Poet: That infinity of different beauties discovering themselves
to our eyes, at the opening of the gates, caused me instantly to hate Rome,
Paris, and all Cities; and I termed the Duke of Venice miserable, in that he
is condemned never to remove from the place where he is, and consequently never
to see what J there beheld. The Foote-post, who is to carry this Letter, does
much press my dispatch, telling me, he shall hazard, to remain still in this
place, if I make it an longer. This is equally my misery, and your good
fortune; for as I am constrained to deprive my self of the contentment to
entertain time with you, so will this free you from diverse impertinent
speeches, wherewith happily I should otherwise have importuned you.

The 4 of August, 1625.
To the same.
LETTER XX.
I can no longer live without receiving news from you, and understanding from
your self, the good success of your voyage. My Brother writ unto me, they
have done you some kind of justice, wherewith you were reasonable well
pleased; but if this content be not absolute, I am resolved not to rejoice, and
I do already condemn the State, and all those who govern it. It is a shame
to see the bounties of Princes in the hands of such persons who can neither be
useful nor pleasing unto them; and that honest men must still satisfy
themselves with the only testimony of a good conscience, and in the content
they receive in well-doing: For my part, I will not complain of Fortune,
provided, you have occasion to commend her. Now if the Ministers of State
understood my secret, and that for satisfying of two, it were only necessary
to oblige one; by acquitting themselves of what they owe you, they might easily
spare what they have promised me. We have newly received tidings of the
Defeat given to the Enemies nauall Army; but having lost one of my near
friends in that Conflict, I cannot forbear to be a bad Frenchman till to
morrow, and to grieve for the Victory, whereatal others rejoice: Besides, I
being of a profession only exercised in private, and repose; I assure you the
report of Cannons begins to trouble me; for of all Wars, those of Germany
please me best, in that I am thirty days iourneyes off: Our Doctors say no
less then I do: the most zealous among them, longingly expect a more quiet
season, fearing the ruin of the adverse part, for the interest of their
Arguments and Schollership: and in very truth, I cannot conceive what they
should do with their controversies, were there no longer any against whom they
could contend. I write you this from the bank of the most beautiful river of
the world; but being so far from you, I taste all pleasures imperfectly; and
were my Kinsman revived, not seeing you, there would still remain a kind of
affliction upon me, which nothing but your presence is able to ease. Without
playing the Poet, I can assure you, I have taught your name to all the Rocks in
my wilderness: and it is written upon the Banks of all our trees: but you are
no way obliged unto me, in that I love you extraordinarily. It is an action
independent on my will or free election, it being at this present as necessary
for me, as all other things are, without which I cannot subsist: And it is
requisite I suffer my self to be transported by the force of my inclination,
which another would call his Destiny. Be therefore when you please, mine enemy;
you are assured I shall never be but

Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
The 21. of September, 1615.
To the same.
LETTER XXI.
A Lame Foote-man would have made more haste then the Messenger did, who
delivered me your two Letters, fifteen days after the latter of them was
written: Yet notwithstanding was he very welcome, and had it been Lysander
himself, bringing news from you, he had been inviolable to all my Lackies;
and I had received him as my Friend. Truly, there is not any discontent which
is not lost, in the joy I receive to be beloved by you, and if the small
displeasure they have done me, were of power to offend me, I should in your
favors find the remedy others seek for in revenge. I have as vnmouedly read
the Satyr made against me, as I write this Letter; and have only accused my
bad fortune, which has at all times chosen the most infamous of all men for
mine enemies: you cannot imagine how much I am ashamed of this unlucky
accident, and of the wrong I suppose I receive, when at any time they give me
the advantage in a comparison wherein Lysander cannot enter without having the
better of it. Yet Sir, I am resolved to have patience, provided, the War you
raise against me, be only feigned, and that you speak not seriously; for
surely I would burn all my papers, werethey culpable of one single word
displeasing unto you; and my thoughts should be far different from my
intention, had I done any thing disgustfull unto you; howsoever, I crave pardon
for the fault whereof you accuse me, though I suppose I have not done you any
so ill offices to fair Ladies, as it seems you would persuade me: On the
contrary, if my testimony be seconded by their ascents, there will not be
hereafter any among them, who will not look upon you, as at one of their
chiefest felicities; and who will not sell all her Pearls, to purchase one of
your Nights. Queens will come from the remotest parts of the World, to taste
the pleasure of your conversation; and you shall be the third* after Solomon
and Alexander, who shall cause them to come at the report of your Virtue. As
for devout persons, I do not think they will rank Health and Strength in
the number of Vices; for by that reason they should hold all those for Saints,
whom the Courts of Parliament have declared as impotent, and so fill Heaven
with sick folks. To say truth, I cannot deny, but I have given the Alarm to
Married men, and I must say, your visits will be suspicious to those who know
you not: But when they shall understand what I intend to publish in all places,
that you had rather dye, then violate with so much as one single thought, the
laws of true Friendship, and that your fidelity is irreproueable: Insteade of
avoiding you, as an object of scandal, they will propound you to their Wives
as an example of Continency. I could allege diverse other things for my
Justification, but if you think I have been faulty, I will not presume to
imagine J am innocent; and rather then contradict you, I will sign the decree
of my Death with mine own hand.

The 10. of October, 1625.
To the same.
LETTER XXII.
THere is no other means to exceed the hight of what you have written, nor to
answer the ciuilities of your Letter, but only by rendering you all your own
words, I know not your meaning: but to take the most unprofitable of your
Friends, for your benefactor, and to thank me for the ill I do you, is no
less then strangely to abuse the propriety of words, especially for a man so
perfectly acquainted with our language, as your self; or questionless it must
needs be, you suffer my persecutions with the like patience, as good men
receive those afflictions God lays upon them. For as losses and diseases are
presents and favors in terms of Devotion; so do you bestow pompous names
upon poor matters, and you make your self believe, you shall draw some
advantage out of my Amity, though in truth you extract nothing thence but
charge; nor does it produce any better effects, then thorns: And upon the
matter, what else are the pains and affairs, I perpetually put upon you; or
what difference is there between the hatred of an Enemy, and so troublesome an
affection as mine? It is I who disturb your rest, who usurp your liberty, who
will not suffer you to have any leisure, though that be the true possession of
the Wise. It is no want of good will in me, that I change not all your
kindness into choler, and make not a pleader and wrangler of the best
tempered spirit Philosophy ever received from Nature; I lay Ambushes for you at
Paris, at Fontainebleau, and at St. Germans: Yea, should you think to hide
your self at the worlds end, to avoid importunities, I would undertake the
voyage of Magellan, to seek you out there: yet are you well pleased with all
this, and I receive thanks instead of expecting ill words. The care you have
to oblige me, exceedes all I can desire: Good offices come thick upon me, when
they proceed from your side; and they are actions it seems you are pleased to
convert into habitudes. Without entering into infinities, do I not of recent
memory owe to your testimony, all the good opinion your excellent friend can
have of me; and if he imagine I am worthy any estimation, is it not you who
sets a value upon my defects, and who have assisted me in deceiving him? But in
what sort soever you have procured me these favors, be it that therein you
have either committed theft, or made an acquisition, I am still right happy to
be beloved by a man, who has the reputation not to affect ill things, and to
please whom, it is as much as to be reckoned in the number of honest men. The
day before I parted from Court, I had the leisure to observe him at Mounsieur
the Marshall of Schambergs house; but I assure you, I could spy nothing of
slender consideration, either in his words, or aspect; and though I have
always used to be diffident of my first opinion; nor ever to judge without
long deliberation, I have notwithstanding herein, sinned against my own rules;
and was not ashamed to say, that a wit of twenty years had amazed mine: But
the Sermon bell rings, which calls and forceably draws me from you: my
contentment therefore must give place to my duty, which commands me to make an
end, after I have required news from you, concerning a woman, to whom I am
extraordinarily and particularly obliged; of a woman I say, who is more worth
then all our books, and in whose conversation there is sufficient to make one
an honest man, without either the help of Greeks or Romans: How old a
Courtier soever you are, you understand not French, if you understand not
Madame de Desloges.

On Christmas day, 1625.
To the same.
LETTER XXIII.
I Hope very shortly to follow these few lines, and to come to court you with
as much assiduity and subjection, as though you were to be the founder of my
fortunes. I have no other business at Paris, but this; though I frame many
pretexts for that voyage, but I swear seriously you are the only cause. My
melancholy is of late become so black, and my spirits are so beclouded, as I
must of necessity see you, to dissipate them. It is to small purpose to speak
well of me in the place where you are, they do me no good though; this is as
much as to cast incense upon a dead body, and to strew flowers upon his grave,
but this is no reviving of him. I no longer receive any comfort in the news
you send me, and I am well assured my misfortune is constant, what alteration
so ever happen in the World: it remains then, that I seek for my consolation
in your presence, and power forth all my complaynts into your bosom; this I
will do at the first sight of the Sunbeams, beseeching you to believe, that
as in the midst of felicity, I should have need of you to make me happy; so
also having such a friend as your self, I shall never esteem my self
absolutely miserable.

The 20. of November, 1625. BALZAC.

Balzac his Letter to Hidaspe.
LETTER XXIIII.
I Do far more esteem the Carthusians silence, then the Eloquence of such
Writers, and am persuaded, (excepting in Church Service, and for the necessity
of Commerce) the Pope and the King should do well to forbid them Lattin and
French; whereof they seek to make two barbarous languages. I know well, that
French spirits are sworn Enemies to all sorts of bondage, and that twelve
hundred years of Monarchy, has not been of power to make them lose their
liberty, it being as natural to them as life it self. Whatsoever ugly face
they frame to the Inquisition, and how full of Tigers and Serpents soever they
paint the same, yet do I find it right necessary in this Kingdom: For besides
that, it would cause (as in Spain and Italy) even the wicked in some sort, to
resemble the Upright, and vice not at all to offend the public Eye: it would
besides hinder Fools from filling the World with their bastardly Books, and
the faults of School masters from being as frequent as those are of
Magistrates, and Generals of Armies. Truly it is a shame there are Laws
against those who counterfeite Coins and falsify Merchandises; yet that such
are freely permitted who corrupt Philosophy and Eloquence, and who violate
those things, the Vulgar ought no more to meddle with, then with State
government, or Religious Mysteries. The late great Plague was of small
consideration in comparison of this, which checkes all the World: and surely,
if speedy order be not taken, the multiplicity of our Authors, will make a
Lybrary as big as Paris, wherein there shall scarcely be found one good word,
or reasonable conceit. These be the fruits arising out of inordinate
idleness, and the third scourge caused by Peace, sent to afflict this poor
Realm after Duels, and Law-suites. There are hardly any to be found, who are
contented to keep their faults and follies to themselves, or to sin in secret;
but are also doting upon their own follies, as they desire to engraue them in
Marble and Brass, thereby to Eternize their memory, and to make them past
retracting. Now to return to the party of whom you particularly required my
opinion, and who indeed is the first subject of this Letter. I must
ingeniously confess unto you, that next to Beer and Pbysicke, I never found
any thing so distastefull as his works: he wants (almost throughout) even
natural Logic, yea that part thereof which proves men to be reasonable
creatures. In three words he speaks four bad ones, and as he always
strayeth from the subject whereof he treats, so does he ordinarily talk in
an unknown language; though he intend to speak French: Besides ice it self
is not more cold then his conceits, and when he desires to be facetious (as at
every turn he feign would) he had need to be in fee with his Reader, to make
him laugh, as at Funerals in Paris, weepers are usually hired for money. There
is no question but truth were of far more force, and disarmed, then it can be
with the assistance this simple Fellow would strive to afford her: Now
supposing such men were engaged in the right, without any treacherous design,
yet is it as much as to abandon Gods cause, to suffer it to be supported by so
weak and unworthy Pens. The Renegadoes have not so much wronged
Christianity* as those who have not valiantly defended themselves against the
Turks, and such who through defect of conduct and skill, though they wanted
neither zeal, nor affection, suffer themselves to be surprised by the same
advantages, they otherwise might have had over their enemies. Truly the Empire
of the wicked does much more maintain it self by our pusillanimity, then by
its own power or forces; nor does any thing cause* Virtue to be so badly
followed, as does the weak and unskillful teaching and explanation thereof. It
were therefore requisite, some wise man, who had been in this Country, where
there is continual debate, and where there is never either peace or truce,
(called the College of Sarbow;) and who besides had the art to make good
things grateful, and could bring matters to atonement by a sweet hand;
should come to cleanse the Court from those opinions lately introduced, and
cure Souls instead of wounding them with injuries. It was that great Cardinal
who triumphed over all humane spirits, and whose memory shall ever be sacred,
so long as there remain any Alltars* or that oblarion is offered on Earth. It
was I say the Cardinal of Perron, who was able to show Epiourus himself,
something more sublime and transcendent then this life, and cause his fleshy
soul to be capeable of the greatest secrets of Christian Religion. Though this
man had a dignity equal in hight to the greatest Conquerors and Monarchs: Yet
had he (in what concerned Religion) an heart as humble as that of decreped men
and Infants. How often has he (with those two different qualities) imposed
silence upon all Philosophyi, and spoken of Divine matters, with as great
perspicuity as though he had already been in Heaven; or had seen the same
divine verity wholly discovered, whereof here on earth, we have only a confused
understanding, and imperfect knowledge. To tell you in plain terms, but for
the works of this divine person, which I as highly esteem as the victories of
the late King his Master, and wherein I desire always to leave mine eyes,
when I am necessitated to give over reading: I had been much troubled to
retire my self from the tracing the Book you sent me, since any mischief
does so easily catch hold of me, when I come near it, as I can hardly look
upon a beggar without taking the itch, and my imagination is so tender and
delicate, as it is sensible* and afflicted at the sight of any base object; yet
thanks be to God, and the Antidote I continually take, I am the better armed
against the conspiracy you intended against me: and have yet life in me, after
having been under a fools hands longer then I desired. But by what I can
gather, he is notwithstanding in good repute in the place where you are, and
likely enough to find store of such as will follow him, in that he is head of
an evil party. I can hereunto answer you nothing, save only that between
this place and the Pyrenean Mountains, good wits do sometimes stray from
common opinion, as from a thing too vulgar; and do often take counterfeit
virtues, yea, even those who have not any resemblance to the right, for perfect
varities: But when I consider, how there is scarce any kind of beast which has
not heretofore been adored among Idolaters, nor any disease incident either to
the body, or mind of man, whereunto Antiquity has not erected Temples. I do
not as all marvel, why diverse mon do sometimes esteem of those, who are no
way deserving; or why simple people should hold Sots in high reputation, since
they have addressed incense to Apes and Orotadiles. The thing I most ve^e as
herin, is, that both your self and I, are in some sort obliged to the Author
of the book you sent me, and that I have received the beginnings of my studios,
and first tincture of Learning from the last, and least estimable of all men.
For my part, I protest before all the world, I am not for all that guilty,
either of the follies he will fall into, or of any such as he has formerly
committed: and that having had much ado to purify my understanding from the
orders of the College, and to quit my self from perverse studies, I have now
no other pretention, but to follow such as can no way be reproachable vmo me.
How soever, I should not reject Chastity, though my Nurse had died of the Pox;
and it may sometimes happen, that a bungling Mason may lay some few stones in
the building of the Loouer, or at the Queene-mothers Palace.

LETTER XXV.
THe Letter newly delivered unto me from you, is but three Months and an half
old: it is an Age wherein men are yet young, yet some Popes have not reigned so
long, and in the state wherein the Churches* affairs have often stood. You
might have written unto me at the beginning of one Papacy, and I had received
yours at the end of another; howsoever* J can no way better employ my patience,
then in attending my good fortune; and as it was the use to be invited a year
before hand to the Sybarites Feasts, so is it fitting you make me long attend
the most perfect content I enjoy in this world. I doubt not but T. T. seeks
all occasions to do me ill offices, and that my absence affoordeth him much
advantage to wrong me; but on the other side, I cannot think men will more
readily believe mine enemies words, then mine own actions; or that it is
sufficient only to slander an honest man, to make him presently wicked. It is
true what he says, that I am not very useful for Adamantaes service, I will
at all times readily yield that quality to his Coach horses, and to the Mules
that carry his Coffers: Yet am I too well acquainted with the Generosity of
that Signiour, to think he does more esteem the body, then the soul, or to
suppose that a Farmer should be of higher consideration with him, then a man of
worth. What confession of Faith soever R. makes, I will not imagine he can
ever be really altered: I had rather both for mine own contentment and his
honor believe, it is only a voyage he has made into the Adversaries
Country, to the end to bring us some news, and to give us account of what
passes at Charenton: Surely, I suppose, I should not wrong him so much in
holding him for a Spy among Enemies, as to call him a forsaker of his side,
and a Fugitive from that Church, whereto he has at least this obligation, (if
he will confess no other) that it is she who made him a Christian. You may do
me a courtesy, to make me acquainted with the cause moving him to forsake us,
and to go from those Maxims he has so often preached unto me; That a wise
man dies in the Religion of his Mother: That he never alters his opinion: That
he never repents himself of his forepassed life therein: That all Novelties
are to him suspicious.

It is long since J knew, that no man's cause can be bad in the hands of
Mounsieur 'd Andilly, and that he betters all he affects: he interessed
himself in my protection, the first day he saw any works; so as it is not any
more my self whom he commends, but his own Judgment, which he is bound to
defend: Yet will I not desist from being much obliged unto him: For I supposing
one affoords me a favor, when at any time he does me Justice, you may well
thiuke, I have right particular, and most tender sensibilities for those
courtesies I receive, but they are in special regard with me, when they come
from a person of so high estimation in my thoughts as he is, and of whom I
should still have much to say, after I had related, how amidst the corruption
of this age, and in the authority Vice therein has gained, he has
notwithstanding the fortitude, to continue an upright man, and blusheth not at
Christian virtues, nor vanteth of Moral ones. I hope to see him within few
days, and to take possession of some small corner in his House at Pompona,
which he has provided for me, there to breath at mine ease, and to set my
spirits sometimes at liberty. In the interim you must needs know, about what I
busy my self, and that I tell you, I entertain a fool, in whom I find all
the Actors in a Comedy, and all sorts of extrauagancies incident to the spirit
of man. After my books have busied me all the morning, and that I am weary of
their company, I spend some part of the afternoon with him, partly to divert
my thoughts from serious things, which do but nourish my Melancholy. Ever
since I came into this world, I have bin perpetually troublesome to my self, I
have found all the hours of my life tedious unto me; I have done nothing all
day, but seek for night. Wherefore if I desire to be merry, I must necessarily
deceive my self, and my felicity is so dependant upon exterior things, that
without Painting, Music, and diverse other diuertisments, how great a Muser
soever I am, I have not sufficient wherewith to entertain my self, or to be
pleased. Think not therefore, that either my fool, or my books are
sufficient to settle my contentment; nay rather if you have any care of me, or
if you desire I should have no leisure to be sad, make me partaker of all the
news happning in the place where you are; let me fee the whole Court by your
eyes, cause me to assist at all Sermons by your ears, give me account of the
good and bad passages happening this Winter, and that there part not a post,
vncharged with a Gazetto of your style, as there shall not any go hence, who
shall not bring* you some vision of my retiredness*

There runs a rumor in these parts, that Mounsieur de Boudeuille is slain,
but since there are not many more hard atchieuements to be wrought, then that,
it is too great a death to be believed upon the first report.

The 1. of November, 162^
LETTER XXVI.
WEre I not confined to my bed, I should my self have solicited the business
I have recommended unto you; nor should I have suffered you thus far to
oblige me in my absence. But since I cannot possibly part hence, *and am here
constrained to take ill rest, being far more grievous unto me then agitation;
I humbly beseech you, to suffer these Lines to salute you in my stead, and to
put you in remembrance of the request I made unto you. Sir, I am resolved not
to be beholding to any but your self, for the happy success whereof the
goodness of our cause assures us, and in case your Integrity should be
interessed, I would owe the whole to your favor: For besides, that you are
borne perfectly generous, I do not at all doubt, but the commerce you have
with good books, and particularly with Seneca, has taught you the Art, To do
good to all men. But to the end the obligation I desire to owe you, may be
wholly mine own, instead of referring it to the study of Morality, to your
bountiful inclination, or to the Justice of my request: I will rather imagine,
I shall be the sole cause of this effect, and that you will act without any
other assistance, out of the love you bear me, who am passionately

Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
Paris the 2. of May, 1627.
LETTER XXVII.
GX. X. is resolved to leave all worldly affairs in the state he found them,
and these great cares which should have extended themselves over the most
remote parts of Christendom, have not as yet passed the limits of his house:
He preserues his old age, and prolongs his life by all the possible means he
can imagine: But it is thought he will not long make his successor attend, and
that his Death will be the first news in the Gazetto. Physicians and
Astrologers have concluded upon this point, that he shall not see the end of
Autumn. For my part, I never made any great difference between a dead person,
and an unprofitable one; and if things lesle perfect, ought to be post posed to
more excellent ones; it were a mockery to make choice of sick folks, and
cause them to be adored by those who are in health, or to put sovereign power
into their hands, to the end only to have them leave it to others. But it is
not my part to reform all things displeasing me in this World, and I should be
very ungrateful, if I blamed that form of government, wherein I find my
self very well: In effect (Sir) speak no more to me of the North, nor its
neighbors; I declare my self for Rome against Paris, nor can I any longer
imagine, how a man can live happily under your Climate, where Winter takes up
nine Months of the Year, and after that the Sun appears, only to cause
the Plague, and (weak as it is) forbeares not to kill men: There is not any
place (Rome excepted) where life is agreeable, where the body finds its
pleasures, and the spirit his, where men are at the source of singular things.
Rome is the cause you are neither Barbarian, nor Pagan, since she has taught
you the ciuility of Religion: She has given you those Laves which arm you
against error, and those Examples whereto you owe the good actions you
perform. It is from hence Inventions and Arts are come to you, and where you
have received the Science of Peace and War, Painting, Music, and Come dies
are strangers in France, but natural in Italy: that great Virtue it self you
so much admire in your Court, is she not Roman? That Martchionesse, of whom so
many maruells are related, is she not Countrey-woman to the Mother of the
Graches, and to the Wife of Bratus? and in truth, to possess all those
perfections the World acknowledges in her, was it not fitting she should be
borne in a place whereon Heaven defuseth all its Graces? Truly, I never ascend
Mount Palatin, or the Capitole, but I change spirit, and others then my
ordinary cogitations seize upon me. This Air inspireth me with some great and
generous thing I formerly had not; and if I muse but two hours upon the banks
of of Tyber, I am as understanding, as if I had studied eight days. It is a
thing I wonder at, that being so far off, you make so excellent Verses, and
so near the Majesty of Virgils. I suppose therefore, none will blame me, for
having chosen Rome for the place of my abode, or for preferring flowers before
snow and ice. If men choose Popes of threescore and ten years old, and not of
five and twenty, the days are therefore neither sadder nor shorter, nor have
we any subject to complain of our Masters debility, since we are thereto
obliged for our quiet.

From Rome the 25. of March, 1621.
LETTER XXVIII.
IT is not to answer your excellent Letter, I write you this, but only to let
you know, you have so absolutely acquired me to your service, as you have left
me no liberty to do what I desire, when there is any question of performing
your pleasure. Since therefore you and your Printers have conspired against my
quiet, and that you determine to make my infirmities as public, as though you
meant to lead me to the Hospitals or Churchporches; J am co ntented with
closed eyes to obey you, and to put my reputation to adventure, rather then
seem to refuse you a thing you have demanded of me. Mounsieur the Priour of
Chiues, to whom I communicate my most secret thoughts, and in whose person you
shall see that I know how to make good elections, (in delivering you this
Letter) may conclude it, and acquaint you with the power I have given you over
all my desires; truly, it has no other bounds then impossibilities. Since as
for those which are only unjust, I believe I should make small scruple, to
violate the Laws for your sake, and to testify unto you, that virtue it self
is not more dear unto me then your Friendship; this is

Your most humble and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.
The 4. of January 1624.
LETTER XXIX.
BEing now ready to alter my course of life, and part hence to come to Court, I
held my self obliged to advertise you, that herein I do, what I have no mind
unto, and that they have pulled me out from a soil, where I suppose I had
taken root. It much afflicts me, that I must forsake the company of my Trees,
and part from that pleasing solitude my good Fortune had chosen for me, before
I was borne: But since all the World drives me out, and because what I call
repose, my Friends term Pusillanimity; I must suffer my self to be carried
away with the press, and to err with others, since they will not let me do
well by my self. Upon my Conscience it is not out of mine own ambition that J
am high-minded, but out of my Fathers; and if people of his time had not
measured things by the events, and had not belecued those only to be wise, who
are fortunate, I should not have busied my self in searching at Paris, for
what I ought to have found in my self: But truly I have so great obligation
to so good a Father, and the care he has taken to husband the good grain he
has cast into me, and to finish me after he had framed me; have been so
great and passionate, as there is no reason, I should follow my private
inclination, by resisting his intention. I go therefore since it is his
pleasure, to live among wild beasts, and to expose my self to hatred and
calumny, as though the Fever and Scyatica were not sufficient to make me
miserable. At my first approach the Grammarians will call me into question,
because I put not the French word Mensonge into the feminine gender, and do
not believe the Jurisdiction they have over words, is powerful enough, to
cause this word to change Sex. Those who have not as yet written, will set pen
to paper against me, and the new Bridge will echo nothing but my name and
their injuries I shall be much distasted to hear I am become an Author, and
that I perform indifferent good pieces. The meaner sort of spirits will be
much moved, in that I have set so high a rate upon Eloquence, and being unable
to follow me, they will throw stones to stay me. The truth I have not
dissembled, will at once; offend our adversaries and ill Priests; debaucht
persons will never forgive me the P. P. they have seen in my books; and
Hypocrites will wish me ill, because I set upon vice even within the
Sanctuary. See here (my dear friend) the persecution prepared for me, and of
what sorts of people the Army of mine Enemies is composed. In all appearance
there is not any valor able to surmount so great a Multitude; and I should do
much better to enjoy the peace of my Village, and to eat Mellons in security,
then to cast my self into this incensed troop, and to engage my self in an
endless war: yet since all Grammarians are not worth one Philosopher, and in
that the better part has often the advantage over the greater; I am in hope,
Authority and Reason siding with me, I shall easily get the upper hand of
Multitudes and Injustice. To tax me in these times wherein we are, is as much
as to give the lie to his Master, and to condemn the opinion of the prime men
of our Age. Those who govern at Rome, and at Paris, make my labors their
delights; and when at any time they lay aside the weight of the whole World,
they refresh themselves with my Works. But if some bad Monks who in religious
houses, as Rats, and other imperfect creatures may happily have been in the
Arc, seek to gnaw my reputation; Mounsieur de Nantes, and Mounsieur de
Berulle will conserve it; and you know them for two men* whom the Church in
this age beholds, as two Saints dis-interred out of the memory of her Annals,
or two of those Primative Fathers, whose Souls were wholly replenished with
Jesus Christ, and who have established the Truth as well by their Blood, as
Doctrine. I have besides, as an opposite to my Calumniators, one of the most
perfect Religious this day living; I mean Father Joseph, whose great Zeal is
guided by as eminent an understanding, and who has the same passions for the
general good of Christendom, as Courtiers have for their particular
Interests. This irreproachable witness knows, I reverence in others the Piety
I find not in my self; and if I perform not all the actions of a perfectly
virtuous person, yet have I at least all the sensibilities and desires.
Mounsieur the Abbot of St. Cyran, who is not ignorant of any thing falling
within the compass of humane understanding, besides the more sublime gifts and
illuminations where with he is adorned, and who in a right profound
Litterature, has yet a more resigned humility, will answer for me in the same
case; and though all these strange forces should fail me; have I not
sufficient in the protection of the Bishop of Air, and Mounsieur Bouthilier,
who do both of them love me, as though I had the honor to be their Brother;
and who are so sage, so judicious, and so understanding in all things, as it is
not probable, they would begin to err by the good opinion they have of me: I
suppose that hereupon I may venture to go to Court, and that with so powerful
assistance, there are no enemies I need fear. Yet will I once again tell
you, and I beseech you believe me, I would not part hence, were I permitted to
stay; and that it does not a little trouble me, to lose the sight of my paths
and allies wherein I walk, without being enforced to wear Boots, or have any
apprehension of Carroaches.

From Balzac the 18. of October, 1624.
LETTER XXX.
I Am doubtful to believe you speak in earnest in your Letter, and that he,
of all men, who has most cause to be satisfied with himself, should need the
assistance of any other to comfort him. This is as much as to be distasted
amidst the abundance of all things, and to be ungrateful toward your good
fortune, since in the height of those favors you receive, and expectation of
those prepared for you; you notwithstanding seek for foreign pleasures, and
are sensible of petty contentments among great felicities. My writings are no
objects but for sick and sad eyes; yea, of such as will be neither cured, nor
comforted: They may indeed flatter melancholy, and afford a man (in despair)
poison not unpleasing unto him; but to contribute any thing to the satisfaction
of a contented spirit, and to mingle themselves with the pleasures of his life,
without corrupting all the sweetness, is a thing I can hardly be drawn to
believe: And I herein imagine you have rather a design to tell me some good
news, then to write a true History unto me. At the age of ooooo. you are
seated upon Flower-de-luces, and can you lie down upon Roses? You are wise,
and have not acquired the same with loss of your best years; you are borne
the same we desire to be at the best: on what side soever you cast your eyes,
you find present felicities, and certain hopes; and were there neither Loouer
nor Palace to promise you preferments or offices, the house where you are, may
alone make you happy. There it is, where virtue has no cause to complain of
the injustice of Fortune, and where she is more commodiously lodged, then among
Philosophers; without going thence; you possess whatsoever we desire in our
wishes* and what we imagine in our dreams. The days which to me are so long,
and whose each moment J reckon, pasle over swiftly at Villesauin; nor can
Riches annoy you in a society capable to make even poverty pleasing. What
likelihood is it then, this being so, you should be of your Letters opinion,
and that you cannot be without me. It suffices me, you sometimes have me in
your thoughts, as those in Heaven behold what they left on Earth: and that you
receive the votes and prayers I shall hereafter address unto you, after the
solemn protestation I am about to make, to remain whilst I live,

Your most humble and most faithful servant, BALZAC.
From Paris the 15. of September, 1617.
The end of the Fourth and last Book.
A Table of the Letters contained in this Volumne of Mounsieur de Balzac:
wherein the names of all those to whom his Letters have been written, are
contained.
The first Book.
THe Letter of my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu to Mounsieur de Balzac. p. 1.
The answer to my Lord, the Cardinal of Richelieu's Letter. p. 5. The third
Letter, to my Lord the Cardinal of Richelieu. p. 10. Fourth, to the same. p.
13. Fifth, to the same. p. 17. Sixth, to the same. p. 20. Seventh, to the same.
p. 24. Eighth, to the Lord Bishop of Air. p. 34. Nineth, to the same. p. 39.
Tenth, to the same. p. 44. Eleventh, to the same. p. 48. Twelfth, to the same.
p. 58. Thirteenth, to the same. p. 61. Fourteenth, to the same. p. 68.
Fifteenth, to Mounsieur de la Motte. p. 74. Sixeteenth, to Mounsieur de
Bois-Robert. p. 86.
The second Book.
TO my Lord the Cardinal of Vallete. p. 94. Second, to the same. p. 102.
Third, to the same. p. 107. Fourth, to the same. p. 111. Fifth, to the same. p.
116. Sixth, to the same. p. 124. Seventh, to the same. p. 128. Eighth, to the
same. p. 131. Nineth, to the same. p. 135. Tenth, to the same. p. 140.
Eleventh, to the same. p. 144. Twelfth, to Mounsieur de Planty. p. 149.
Thirteenth, to Mounsieur de la Magdelena. p. 152. Fourteenth, to Mounsieur de
Montigny. p. 156. Fifteenth, to my Lord the Duke of Espernon. p. 158.
Sixteenth, from the same Duke to the King. p. 163. Seventeenth, from the same
Duke to the King. p. 165. Eighteenth from the same Duke to the King. p. 175.
The third Book.
TO my Lord the Duke of Valete. p. 191. Second, to Mounsieur de Plelles,
Governor of Talmont, and Marshall of the Field of the Kings armies. p. 197.
Third, to Hydaspe. p. 202. Fourth, to the same. p. 217. Fifth, to Mounsieur de
la Roche, Captain of the Guard. p. 219. Sixth, to Mounsieur de Bois-Robert. p.
222. Seventh, to the same. p. 227. Eighth, to the same. p. 235. Nineth, to the
same. p. 240. Tenth, to the same. p. 245. Eleventh, to Mounsieur Girard,
Secretary to my Lord the Duke of Espernon. p. 253. Twelfth, to the same. p.
257. Thirteenth, to the same. p. 260. Fourteenth, to the same. p. 261.
Fifteenth, to Olympa. p. 265. Sixteenth, to Crysolita. p. 269. Seventeenth to
Clorinda. p. 271. Eighteenth, to the same. p. 273. Nineteenth, to the same. p.
276. Twentieth, to the same. p. 280. Twenty one, to the same. p. 284. Twenty
two, to Lidia. p. 287. Twenty three, to Mounsieur de Ambleuille. p. 288. Twenty
four, to the Lord Marshall of Schomberg. p. 223. Twenty five, the Lord
Marshall of Schombergs answer. p. 296.
The fourth Book.
THe Letter to my Lord the Marshall of Schomberg. p. 298. Second, to the Lord
Bishop of Angoulesme. p. 303. Third, to the Reverend Father Garrasse. 306.
Fourth, to the Lord Cardinal of Valete. p. 312. Fifth, to the same. p. 316.
Sixth, to the Lord Bishop of Nantes. p. 320. Seventh, to Mounsieur de la
Marque. p. 325. Eighth, to Mounsieur Tissandier. p. 327. Nineth, to Mounsieur
Farret. p. 329. Tenth, to Mounsieur Coeffeteau, Bishop of Marselle. p. 331.
Eleventh, to Mounsieur Pouzet. p. 334. Twelfth, to Madamoselle de Gourny. p.
336. Thirteenth, to Mounsieur Berniere, President in the Court of Parliament of
Roan. p. 342. Fourteenth, to Mounsieur de Voiture. p. 344. Fifteenth, to
Mounsieur de Vaugelas. p. 347. Sixteenth, to Mounsieur de Racan. p. 351.
Seventeenth, to the Abbot of S. Cyran. p. 354. Eighteenth, to Mounsieur de
Malherbe. p. 369. Nineteenth, to Mounsieur de Vaugelas. p. 398. Twentieth, to
the same. p. 372. Twenty one, to the same. p. 375. Twenty two, to the same p.
378. Twenty three, to the same. p. 382. Twenty four, to Hydaspe. p. 384.
Twenty five, to Mounsieur de la Estang, Advocate to the Kings privy Counsel.
p. 391. Twenty six, to Mounsieur de Auaux, Master of requests of the Kings
House, and Ambassador for the French King at Venice. p. 396. Twenty seven, to
Mounsieur Borbonius, the Kings Greek Professor. p. 398. Twenty eight, to
Mounsieur de Bois-Robert. p. 401. Twenty nine, to the Prior of Chiues. p. 403.
Thirtieth, to Mounsieur Bouthillier, one of the Kings Counsel, and of his
Council likewise in Parliament. p. 408.
ERRATA.
PAge the 5. for, address, read, write. p. ibid. instead of, or if, read, or
as if. p. 8. for, my favor, read, in my favor. p. 10. for, and that
Artemizaes goodness, read, and I suppose that Artemizaes goodness. p. 48. for
dumble, read, dumb. p. 13. for, address, read, write. p. 32. line 11.
read, and that resolutions. p. 188. for, of chardly, read, clearly. p. 186.
for, variety, read, vanity. p. 265. whose over long living, read, for whose
over long living. p. 160. for, tried, read, tired. p. 348. for, importunies,
read, importunities. p. ^55. for, at the worst, read, at the most. p. 365.
for, concerning, read* conseruing. p. 369. for, you are, read, you were. p.
291. for, orders, read, ordures. p. 394. for any works, read, my works. p.
14^. for, I never die, read, I never dine. p. 133. for Elixa, read, Elixar.

FINIS.

