THE CHARITABLE PHYSICIAN, Showing the manner to make and prepare in the house
with ease and little pains all those remedies which are proper to all sorts of
diseases, according to the advice of the best and ordinariest Physicians.

Serving as well for the rich as the poor.

Together with a Table of all those medicaments as well simple as compounded,
which one ought to have by them both in City and Country.

With a notable and Charitable advertisement to the public: By Philbert
Guibert Esquire, and Physician Regent in Paris.

Translated into English, by I. W.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, 1639.

THE CHARITABLE PHYSICIAN.
The manner to make Clysters.
A Clyster to purge the Belly which you may make at all times.
TAke a handful of French Barley and boil it very well in a pint and a half
of water, then strain this decoction being about three quarters of a pint,
then boil in it half an ounce of good Seen, and two drams of green
Anni-seeds, or Fenill-seeds, then strain it through a linen cloth, or sieve
the decoction being well strained, in which you shall dissolve the honey,
butter, and red sugar as follows:

Having a basin or platter ready, within which you shall put two or three
ounces of good honey and an ounce of red Sugar, This Clyster being very good
comes but to 7. pence.
then pour upon them seven or eight spoonefulls of the decoction being very
hot, with the which dissolve the said Honey and Sugar, and after that add unto
them the rest of the decoction stirring them together a little longer, that
being done strain it again through a white linen cloth or sieve in the which
you shall mix five or six spoonefulls of oil of Olives, or half a quartern
of fresh butter and your clister is done, the which you shall pour into a
bladder or syringe to be given luke warm or something warmer: if you have no
Barley in the house, you may take a quantity of porridge or broth, or laxative
Ptisan, or whey or common milk as shall be written hereafter; and if you will
not use the said clyster you may make it as follows.

In the said decoction (being strained) you shall dissolve the said honey, red
sugar and oil, adding to the same a dram of salt or a little more, being
common white salt.

Note, that when you have dissolved your honey and all other medicaments in any
clisters whatsoever, you must pass or strain them through a sieve or white
cloth, for fear there be some dirt or uncleanness left, that would stop the
pipe, and so hinder the injecting of the clyster.

To make another Clister for the same.
This Clyster comes to 6. pence.
Take French Barley, mallows, Marsh mallows, Pellitory, March Violets, Mercury,
Camomill flowers and Mellilote flowers of each a handful; Fenugreeke and
Linseeds of each two ounces bruised; cut the said herbs and flowers with a
knife, after that wash them and make them clean, then take a little kettle or
an earthen pot, in the which you shall put three pints of water or a little
more, then you shall boil in it three or four walmes the barley; then put in
the herbs, and at the last the flowers and seeds; being all boiled to a pint
and a half or a little more which will serve for three clisters.

Then take half a pint of the said decoction being strained, in the which
being warm you shall infuse for the space of an hour the weight of three
Crowns or half an ounce of good Seen, This Clyster comes to 6. pence.
with two dramms of green Anniseeds, and after the infusion boil them a
little, then pass it, strain it as before, in that which is strained dissolve
that which the Physician shall appoint.

An other Clyster.
TAke a quantity of the said decoction strained, This Clyster comes to 3.
pence.
and put it into a pipkin with half an ounce of Seen, and a dram of green
Anniseeds, then having boild it a walme or two, you shall stir into it four
ounces of good common honey, then letting it have a walme or two you shall
pass or strain it through a cloth, and dissolve in it two ounces of fresh
butter, and then it shall be ready to give being lukewarm.

An other Clyster.
TAke a quantity of milk, boil it a little, This Clyster comes to 2. pence.
then strain it, and dissolve in it two ounces of red sugar and your clyster
is done: you may also take Barley water half a pint, dissolve the red sugar in
it or a quarterne of good honey, or in the place of the milk you may take whay.

To make a detersive Clyster.
This Clyster comes to 4. pence.
TAke a handful of common Barley and two drams of green Fenill, boil them in a
good quantity of water till half be consumed, and at the end put into it a
quarterne of good common honey, and then let it boil a walme or two to
dissolve the said honey, and then strain them, and dissolve in them two ounces
of fresh Butter and your Clyster shall be finished.

A Clyster against the beginning of the Dissentery.
This Clyster 4. pence.
TAke a quantity of good milk being boiled, in the which dissolve three or
four ounces of good common honey, and the yolke of an egg, and your clyster
is done.

A Refreshing and detersive Clyster.
This Clyster 2. pence ob.
TAke a pint of new milk and boil it with three or four Lettices and a
handful or two of purslaine, take a quantity of this decoction strained, in
the which dissolve four ounces of honey and your Clyster is made.

An Emollient Clyster.
This Clyster 4 pence.
TAke a pint of new milk, in the which being a little boiled, you shall
dissolve the yolke of an egg, and then strain it, and in that which is
strained you shall mix two ounces of oil of roses or an ounce and a half of
fresh Butter.

A Clyster with Turpentine against the Stone-Collicke.
This Clyster 3. pence.
TAke two ounces of oil of Olives, or fresh Butter, warm them upon a chafing
dish or upon hot Cinders, then take them from the fire and pour upon them
half an ounce of good venice Turpentine, stirring it together with the oil or
fresh Butter; (which is an easy thing to do) being stirred well together you
shall dissolve them with any of the aforesaid Clysters according to the advice
of the Physician.

An Astringent Clyster.
TAke Plantaine leaves, Shepherds purse of each two handfulls, wash them,
cleanse them, This Clyster 6. pence.
and cut them; a handful of red rose leaves, boil them all in Smiths water in
the beginning the leaves, and toward the end cast in the rose leaves for to
take a walme or two until the decoction comes to a sufficient quantity, then
strain it, and mix with it two ounces of oil of quinces one or two yolks of
eggs, and your Clyster is done.

Another Clyster for the same.
TAke a quantity of good milk, This with the Sugar of Roses 8. pence.
which boiling you shall quench a red hot Iron in it three or four times, then
strain it through a white cloth or searce, in the which you shall mix your
oil of Quinces and yolks of eggs; you may also dissolve in it an ounce of
sugar of roses.

Note, Note.
That to little children you must give half the quantity of the said Clysters:

A Clyster for the Collicke of the Belly.
TAke Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Pellitory, of the wall Isope, Rue, Calamint,
Peneroyall, Origan; of each a handful: Fenill-seeds and Cumin-seeds of each
two drams, Bay Berries half an ounce, Camomill and Mellilote flowers of each
half a handful, boil them all in three pints of water or a little more,
beginning first with the herbs, and then with the seeds being bruised and
boil them until half be consumed, and this decoction will serve for three
Clysters.

Take a quantity of this decoction being strained, in the which you shall
dissolve fix drammes of Dia phaenicum, and as much of Benedict: Laxat: two
ounces of honey of Mercury, and as much of oil of Cammomill or of Rue, and
your clyster is made, which you shall give lukewarm; and if the grief
continue, you shall renew the said Clyster with the Physicians advice.

A Clister for the Apoplexy.
This Clyster 20. pence.
FOr those which are troubled with the Apoplexy, if the disease lingers you
shall take a quantity of the former decoction, in the which you shall dissolve
six drammes of Benedict: Laxat: and as much of Hiera Diacolocynthidos paschij,
with two ounces of honey of Mercury, and as much of oil of Cammomill and so
make the Clyster.

But if the disease be forward or dangerous, you shall take a quantity of
Ptisan common or Laxative, and in the said Ptisan you shall dissolve the said
medicaments.

Another Clyster against the Collicke for the poor.
This Clyster a shilling.
TAke Isope, Sage, Cammomill and Mellilote flowers of each a handful, half an
ounce of Anniseeds bruised, boil them all in three quarters of a pint of good
wine, being boiled to a little more then a quarter of a pint, in the which you
shall mix three ounces of oil of Nutts and as much of good honey.

Another for the poor.
YOu shall infuse upon hot Cinders, This Clystes 10. pence.
or boil in three quarters of a pint of good wine half an ounce of good Seen,
and as much of green Fenil seeds; then strain it and mix with it the said
honey and oil of nuts.

A natritive Clyster.
TAke a quantity of broth or porridge made with the fat of a Capon, a piece of
Veale, and the bloody end of a neck of Mutton boiled together, in the which
you shall dissolve an ounce of fine Sugar and two yolks of Eggs.

Another for the same.
TAke a quantity of Hen or Pullet Broth, and as much Gelle mixed together,
with two yolks of eggs and make your Clyster.

Another for the poor.
TAke a quantity of milk being boiled with two ounces of good Sugar, in the
which you shall dissolve two yolks of eggs.

That before you give any of these nutritive Clysters, Note.
you must purge the excrements of the belly with an Emollient Clyster.

Also that in making of these Clysters before mentioned, Note.
you may make all sorts of Clysters whatsoever.

That for little children you must lesson the dose and quantity of the
decoctions and medicaments with the counsel of the Physician. Note.


The manner to make and prepare Suppositories.
Each suppositorie comes to 2. pence ob.
TAke two ounces of common honey, boil it in a little sauce pan upon a clear
fire until it comes to the thickness of an Electuary solid; that done,
take it from the fire and stir into it two drammes of common salt or a dram
of sal gemme: in powder mix them very well together with a Spatule, and then
pour it on a paper being anointed over with oil and form suppositories, and
when you use them, you must dip them in oil. Those which you make for children
must be but half so big as the other; and if you will keep them by you, you
must put them in suet or in fresh butter, or otherwise the air will dissolve
them.

Other Suppositories which are stronger.
Each suppositorie a half penny.
TAke the said honey being boiled and let it cool a little, then mix in it
very well a Spatule, common salt and sal: gemm: of each a dram and make
suppositories.

Another Suppository.
Each suppositorie a half penny.
WIth the said honey being boiled and a little cooled, you may mix twenty
grains of Coloquintida in powder and as much sal: gem: in powder.

Another Suppository.
Each a half penny.
OR with the said honey being boiled you may mix forty grains of Scammony in
powder.

For little children you may make suppositories with soap, or with the herb
Mercury, or with a little wax candle or fresh butter.

Note.
That in the place of Suppositories you may also put three or four sugar plumbs
of Verdum, without musk anointed with fresh butter one after another.

I would not write any more examples of suppositories, because they are little
in use, and of little effect, Note.
for the former glysters and laxative Ptisans and purging broaths which follow
are far better and of more virtue.

A Certain remedy for to loosen the belly of those which are hard bound, and
will not take neither Clysters nor Suppositories.
BEcause there are certain persons that are so choleric that they will use
neither Clysters nor suppositories for any good in the world: not so much for a
certain shame as they have, as they are afflicted with their Hemerods as well
internal as external and other diseases thereunto belonging, therefore let
them use this remedy following which is excellent.

Take a dram and a half or two drammes of good Seen, half a dram of
green Anniseeds; This Infusion comes to 6. pence.
put them into a porringer, and pour upon them seven or eight spoonefulls of
water, but if the person be not troubled with a Cough, you may put half water
and half and half juice of Lymons, and then cover the said porringer and put
them to infuse upon hot cinders or in some other warm place the space of half
an hour or an hour, then strain and squeeze it through a white linen
cloth, and put it into three or four times as much of clear thin broth or
pottage, and let it be drunk fasting, and some two hours after let the party
eat some warm thing.

But if the aforesaid broth or infusion be disagreeable to some delicates
because of the taste of the Seen, may squeeze into the broth the juice of
another Lymon, but if that cannot please them, then you shall make the Infusion
as follows; in this case you shall not put your Seen and Anniseeds in
Infusion upon hot cinders, but in another place from the fire, the space of
three hours, then strain and squeeze it as before and mix it with the other
broth, putting to it the juice of a Lymon and there shall be no ill taste at
all.

This said Infusion or broth of Seen thus prepared, discha^geth the belly,
dissolveth and emollifieth the excrements of the belly, which are hard and
makes them pass away without any pain or grief to the Hemerods (which is a
good secret.)

But if it happen that the party being long time bound, this broth does not
discharge the belly: (which happens but seldom) you must reiterete it at night
about four or five a clock, or the next morning.

Also if the party refuse to take the broth of Seen, he may in stead thereof
take one good glass full of laxative Ptisan of which I have written hereafter)
taking two hours after some thin warm broth.

For the poor which are solid and hard bound.
THose poor people which have not the Commodity to take Clysters nor broaths
made with Seen as is before written, let them use this remedy following.

Take two pennyworth of Seen, that is two or three drammes with a little
Anniseeds, which they may have at the Apothecaries or drouguists, which they
shall infuse in a porringer with nine or ten spoonefulls of water upon hot
cinders the space of an hour or two, then strain and squeeze it through a
linen cloth, and put it into three or four times as much broth or pottage,
and take it as aforesaid.

The manner to make Iniections.
INjections are made for diverse diseases, as Ulcers wounds in diverse parts of
the body, as also for the diseases of the yard and matrix which are used with
syringes proper for the same, in the which are put waters, decoctions, oils or
other liquors according to the advice of the Physician to be administered to the
sioke.

The which Injections in composing, there is great difference for the remedies
of diverse diseases which the Physician ought to appoint according to the
discase. But I shall write of some few to content the curiosity of some persons.

An Iniection for the Gonorrhea.
YOu shall make an Iniection for the beginning with clear milk or with Barley
water warm, This Iniecton with the syrup 10. pence.
and afterward you shall mix with it syrup of dried Roses, that is to say to
four ounces of liquor, you you shall mix an ounce and a half or two ounces
Syrup.

Or if there be at the beginning any Inflammation you shall make an Injection
in Summer with a decoction of French Barley, Plantaine, Betony, Each Injection
2. pence.
and water Lillies; and in winter with their waters, also against the pain of
the said part, you shall make an Injection with new milk from the Cow.

To make Pessaries.
A Pessiry is bigger then a Suppositorie, and is very proper for the matrix,
the which are made of Cotton silk or Linen cloth, in the which there are put
medicaments; being wrapped in Taffata silk or Linen cloth and well tied;
then being infused in wine, water, juice, or other liquor convenient, is put
into the neck of the matrix.

They are made also with herbs, flowers, seeds, etc. bruised in a mortar and
wrapped in a cloth fast tied, which has a great virtue.

Note.
That you must tie a little ribban at the end of the said Pessarie to tie round
the thigh for fear it goes into the matrix.

A pessary to provoke the monthly courses.
This pessarie 2 pence.
TAke the leaves of 2 or 3 handfulls of the herb Mercury, bruise them in a
mortar with a pestle, then wrap it in a cloth, and bind it fast, and make a
pessary the which you shall infuse a little in the juice of the said herb
being warm and use it.

A Pessary to stay the monthly courses.
This pessarie 3. pence.
TAke the leaves of these herbs following, that is Centorie Mirth, Plantain,
Cinquefoyle or five leaved grass, of each half a handful; after you have
washed them and made them clean beat them together in a mortar, and make
Pessaries as aforesaid, which you shall soake in warm juice of Plantaine.

To make Ptisan Simplex to drink ordinarily.
This Ptisan 3. pence.
TAke a handful of French Barley prepared, that is to say, washed and cleansed;
a dram of Anniseeds, boil them in a pottle of river water or other good
water in a pipkin or other vessel being very clean, being pretty well boiled
you shall put into it half an ounce of good liquorish well scraped and sliced,
then you shall scum it, and when there rises no more scumme, take it from the
fire, and let it cool, and drink it ordinarily.

Th^e are certain persons which love the taste of Licorish, and others that
love it not, therefore you may augment or diminish the said licorish; or in the
place of the Licorish, you may put rasped Hartshorn or Ivory, or other
medicaments according to the advice of the Physician.

To make Barley water.
TAke a handful of French Barley prepared as aforesaid, and boil it in a pint
of fair water until a quarter be consumed, then strain it through a white
cloth and use it.

If it be to drink you may boil with it a few Anniseeds or a little Cinnamon.
The best Bezar 2. pence the grain.


The manner to take Bezoar stone, and what it is worth a grain.
FOrasmuch as we treat of Ptisans simple, we may also show the manner to take
the Bezoar stone. Take four, six, eight, or ten grains, or more of good
Bezoar in powder, the which put in a spoone and power upon it a little Ptisan
or juice of Lymons and mix it together and so take it. Also I give you to
know, that the best Bezoar will cost but two pence the grain; and I council
those that hold the vulgar opinion, that it is good against small Pocks,
Measells, Fevers, Purples, and many other diseases to buy it at the druguists,
two drams or half anounce you may have a dram for seven shillings, and it will
serve for your family and to give to the poor seeing it costs so little.

The manner to make Hydromell Simplex.
This Hydromell 4. pence.
TAke a pottle of River water, or other good water six ounces of good honey,
put them into a pipki^ or other clean vessel, and boil them, and scum i^
always until there rises no more scum, then take it from the fire, and let
it cool, and take a quarter of a pint at a time.

To make compounded Hydromell.
FIrst, boil the medicaments appointed by the Physician, then strain them,
and boil with them as much honey as shall be needful.

To make Laxative Ptisan.
This Ptisan 6. pence.
TAke an ounce of good Licorish prepared, boil it in a quart of water and scum
it very clean, and when there rises no more scum, take it from the fire and
infuse in it all night half an ounce of good Seen, and a dram of Fenill
seeds enclosed and tied in a linen cloth; the morning following you shall
strain it and drink a good glass full, taking two hours after a potringer
of clear thin broth.

If you will have the Ptisan stronger, instead of a quart of water put a pint.

Another Laxative Ptisan.
TAke a handful of French Barley prepared, Rasped Hearts horn and Ivory of each
a pugill, tie the said rasping in a linen cloth, put them in a pint and a
halle of good water and boil them, and in the end put to them an ounce of good
Licorish prepared, then being well scummed put to infuse the Seen and Fenill
seeds as aforesaid.

In summer you shall take a quantity of River water and put it into a pot or
boule with half an ounce of prepared Liquorish, and two drammes of good Seen,
and a dram of Fenill seeds, then pour it out of one pot or boule into
another many times, and then let it settle and so use it.

If you would take this in a morning, it were better to let it infuse all night
and the said Ptisan would be better.

You may also enclose a dram of Rubarbe cut in small slices with a little
Cinnamon, or as much of Agaricke with a little Ginger to infuse with it, but
let it be with the counsel of your Physician.

A Laxative Ptisan, with Seen, Rubarbe, and Agaricke.
TAke three quarters of a pint of good water, in the which boil and scum as is
aforesaid an ounce of Licorish, then take it from the fire and infuse in it all
night a little bag with half an ounce of Seen and Anniseeds, in the which
enclose also the weight of a dram and a half of Rubarbe with a little
Cinnamon, and as much Agaricke with a little Ginger bruised, the morning
following strain it and press it through a linen cloth, and this shall be
for twice taking.

Another Laxative Ptisan with Cassia and Seen.
TAke an ounce of Licorish prepared, the which being boiled in a pint and a
half of water and well scummed until there rises no more scum, then you
shall put into it the Cassia with the seeds, being drawn out of two ounces of
Cassia in the Cane, then take it from the fire, and infuse in it all night the
bag with half an ounce of Seen and Fenill seeds, the morrow morning strain it
and take a good glass full at a time.

Note.
That it was spoken of before concerning this, who could not take neither
Clysters nor Suppositories, and if their bodies be very solid, and that they
take a good glass of this Ptisan and it does not cause them to go to stool,
(which happens but seldom) they may take another glass at night about four
or five a clock, and another the next morning, taking two hours after some
thin warm broth.

Also with the advice of a Physician one might take this Ptisan three days
together morning and evening, take two hours after some warm broth.

The excellency of these Ptisans.
MOreover I certify you that these Ptisans are of most excellent virtue, as
well for the rich as for the poor, for they cost but little as you see, and
they are of great effect serving for purging medicines and for Clysters, being
easy to take because of the Licorish which takes away the ill taste of the
medicaments, without hindering their operation; therefore you ought to pray for
those that invented them, and for those that gives you the knowledge of making
them in your own house with ease, and yet you ought not to make them without
the advice of a Physician.

To make water of Cassia.
Each taking will amount to 2. pence.
TAke half a quartern of Cassia in the Cane, the which you shall open and put
it with the seeds into a pipkin with a pint of fair water, and put to it a
dram and a half of Cinnamon bruised, boil them a little, then strain them,
and let it cool, and take a good glass full at a time; you may also boil
with the said Cassia and ounce of Tamarinds, and a dram or two of Rubarbe cut
in small pieces.

One might easily by this method make the decoctions of Guaicum Sursaparillae,
Note.
and others for those diseases which ought not to be divulged in the curing;
the which for the honor and health of the diseased needs not so many
testifyings, the Physician and Chyrurgion are only those necessaries keeping
silence in their mouths: The difference of these things are only for the
preparation of the medicaments, and the time they ought to be in infusion and
in boiling, which is a small matter and little pain and easily prepared:

To make water of Rubarbe.
TAke half a pint of water, This water 4 pence.
put it into a pipkin or some other clean vessel, and put into it a dram of
Rubarbe cut into small pieces with a little Cinnamon bruised, boil them two or
three walmes and strain them and use it.

You may also boil in the said water the roots of China and Licorish raspd
Hearts horn and Ivory, This water 6. pence.
and being a little boiled take them from the fire, and put into it the Rubarbe
and Cinnamon to infuse.

Also if you will, after the said ingredients are boiled and strained, you may
put in the Rubarbe and Cinnamon to infuse, and take it not out until the water
be very fair and well colored.

To make the said water of Rubarbe more purging, This 6. pence.
you may put into the cloth with the Rubarbe a dram or two of good Seen.

To make a decoction of Seen purgative.
This decoction 6. pence.
TAke half an ounce of good Seen, a dram of Anniseeds, infuse them all night
in a quarter of a pint of water in a porringer near the fire, and in the
morning strain it through a cloth and put into it the juice of a Lymon, and
then put it into as much more pottage or broth, and take it fasting.

There are those that infuses their Seen in verjuyce, but it is better to
infuse it in juice of Lymons, for the verjuyce is astringent and hinders the
working of the Physic, but the juice of Lymons is Laxative.

A purging decoction of Seen for the poor.
THe poor which has not the commodity to prepare it of this fashion, shall
take half an ounce of Seen and a dram of Fenill seed, and infuse it all
night in a little hot water or Ptisan, and in the morning strain it, and with
some pottage drink it.

The manner to make and prepare Laxative and purging medicines of diverse
fashions, and with little trouble.
This medicine 8. pence.
TAke half an ounce of good Seen, a dram of Fenill seeds, put them into a
porringer and pour upon them a quarter of a pint of water, and let them infuse
all night near the fire, and in the morning strain and press them, and when
it is strained mix with it an ounce of syrup of Damask Roses, and take it
lukewarm fasting in the morning, and two hours after take a porringer of
warm broth, and keep your chamber all that day.

Another Laxative medicine.
TAke half an ounce of Seen with the Fenill seeds, This medicine 10 pence.
being infused all night, then strain it and mix with it an ounce and a half
of syrup of Damask Roses; you may also infuse the Seen and Anniseeds in Ptisan
ordinary.

Another medicine Laxative compounded with Syrup of Roses, Seen, Rubarbe and
Agaricke.
TAke half an ounce of Seen, This medicine 18. pence.
a dram of Fenill seeds, infuse them and boil them a little in a quarter of
a pint of Ptisan or Barley water, then strain it and press it hard, in the
which being strained, you shall infuse in it two drammes of Agaricke rasped
with a little Ginger, and a dram and a half of Rubarbe cut in small pieces,
and in the morning boil it a little, and strain it, and in the decoction
which is strained, dissolve an ounce of good Syrup of Damask Roses, the which
you shall take in the morning, and two hours after take a porringer of warm
broth and keep the house all day.

A Laxative medicine made with a decoction of Roots, Herbs, Seen, Cassia,
Rubarb, and Syrup of Damask Roses.
TAke two or three roots of wild Succory, scrape them and take out the pith,
take also three or four roots of Fenill and Parsley and prepare them in the
said fashion, three drammes of Licorish prepared.

Take also Agrimony, Betony, Scolopendry, Buglosse, Burrage, and Purslaine, and
Lettice, of each half a handful.

You may put away the seeds and flowers, and wash them all very well, then
boil them very well in a pipkin or earthen pot in sufficient quantity of
water, boiling first the roots, then put in the herbs, and then the flowers
and seeds with the Licorish, then take a sufficient quantity of this decoction
strained to make this medicine following.

This medicine 2. shill.
Take half an ounce of good Seen and a dram of Anniseeds pu^ them into a
porringer and put with it the Cassia which is taken out of half a quartern of
the Cane, a dram and a half of Rubarbe cut in small pieces, then pour a
quantity of the decoction seething hot upon them, and cover the porringer, and
let it stand all night in the chimney corner, in the morning you shall boil
them a little upon a chaffing dish of coals, and then strain it through a
white linen cloth, and in that which is strained mix an ounce of Syrup of
Damask Roses, and so take it in the morning fasting keeping your chamber as is
aforesaid.

An easier manner to make the said medicine.
TAke the said Seen and Fenill seeds, boil them in the said decoction, or
infuse them in the decoction three or four hours in some warm place; then
strain and squeeze it, and then put in the Rubarbe and Cassia and let them
infuse all night, and then strain it and mix with it the Syrup of Damask
Roses.

You may keep these medicaments to boil in a decoction for a Clyster, and
then strain it, and mix with it red Sugar, Honey, Butter, or other things
proper for the same which is very good.

This medicine above written is better then if there were Diacatholicon double,
Note.
or Syrup of Succorie with Rubarbe.

That if you cannot get the roots and herbs before mentioned, Note.
you may take Barley water or ordinary Ptisan.

Another Laxative medicine.
TAke a dram of Anniseeds, This 6. pence.
and half an ounce of Seen, boil them in a quantity of Ptisan, then strain
it and mix with it half an ounce of Diacatholicon doubled with Rubarbe, a
dram and a half of Diaphaeni^um, and an ounce of Syrup of Damask Roses, and
take it as is before written.

A medicine for those which are strong bodies and rusticke.
TAke half an ounce of Seen, This medicine 14. pence.
a dram of Fenill seeds, infuse them all night in a quantity of Ptisan or
Barley water, then strain it and mix with it three drammes or half an ounce
of Electuarium Diacarthum; with an ounce of Syrup of Roses.

A Laxative medicine for those that are soluble.
TAke half an ounce of Seen and a dram of Fenill seeds, infuse them a in
sufficient quantity of water, then strain it and infuse in that which is
strained all night a dram of Rubarbe cut in small pieces, then strain it and
mix with it two ounces of fine Sugar to make it pleasing, and take it.

A Laxative medicine for little children at nurse.
TAke half an ounce of Syrup of Succory with Rubarb, and let it take it with
twice as much Ptisan. This medicine 2. pence.


This 2. pence.
Also you may infuse all night a dram of Seen in a little Ptisan, and Sugar it
a little, and so let him take it.

This 4. pence.
Otherwise you may infuse all night in a little Ptisan or water sugared, then
strain it in the morning and let them take it as aforesaid.

To make a Bolus of Cassia.
This Bolus 18. pence.
TAke six ounces of Cassia in the Cane, draw it, and extract it with the
decoction of Fenill seeds as follows.

There will be an ounce and half.
Take half an ounce of Fenill seeds, boil them a little and pour them into a
porringer; then lay a searce over the porringer, and so pulpe your Cassia,
through which being done you may take out with a spoone, and then you may wrap
them up in bits with Sugar, and so put them in wafers soaked in water or wine,
and some two hours after take some warm broth or the decoction of Seen,
which follows.

This decoction 2. pence.
The night before you take the Bolus, put in infusion half an ounce of Seen,
and a dram of Fenill seeds in sufficient quantity of water and juice of
Lymons.

The morrow morning two hours after you have taken your Bolus, you shall
strain this decoction and mix with your broth, and so take it keeping your
chamber all day.

Also you may mix with the extracted Cassia a dram of good Rubarbe in powder.

Note.
That when one mundifieth the Cassia upon the breath of the decoction of
Anniseeds or Fenill seeds, it hinders the fuming of the Cassia into the head
which many times causes sickness.

A Bolus of Cassia to purge the reins, and refreshing.
EXtract as much Cassia as is aforesaid, This Bolus 18. pence.
mixing with it a dram of powder of Licorish, and then take it in bits in a
spoone, and two hours after take some warm broth in the which you shall put
the juice of a Lymon.

A Bolus of Cassia with Turpentine for the Gonorrhaea.
TAke as much Cassia extracted as is aforesaid, This Bolus 18. pence.
and mix with it with a knife or Spatule of wood two drammes of Venice
Turpentine not washed, and wrap it up into bits, and so put it into wafers and
swallow it down, and take some broth as is aforesaid.

Another Bolus of Cassiae.
TAke an ounce of extracted Cassia, This Bolus 12. pence.
which being extracted mix with it two drammes of diaprunes, and make it into
bits and take it as is aforesaid.

Another Bolus for children at nurse.
TAke three drammes of extracted Cassia newly extracted, This 4. pence.
and dissolve it in a little broth and then let them swallow it.

A Bolus for the poor.
TAke an ounce and a half of Electuar: Lenetiv: This 8. pence.
and swallow it two hours before you take broth.

Another. This 8. pence.

TAke an ounce of Catholicon doubled with Rubarbe, two drammes of Di^ prun:
Laxat^ mix them together and take them as before mentioned.

Another Bolus for the poor.
This Bolus 8. pence.
TAke an ounce of Electuar: Lenetiv: two drams of Dia pran: Laxat: or as much of
Dia phenic: mix them together with the point of a knife, and then swallow it
down two hours before you take broth.

To make Vomits.
Note.
THat the best time to take vomits is when the stomach is full; that is two say
after you have eaten, for that will cause you to vomit with more case, and to
void the excrements from the bottom of the stomach.

A common Vomit.
This vomit 2. pence.
TAke twelve spoonfulls of warm water, and three or four spoonefulls of oil
of Olives, or two ounces of fresh Butter melted, drink them, and now and then,
put your finger in your mouth that the vomit shall not stay to long upon the
stomach.

Another Vomit.
This 2. pence.
TAke three or four Radishes, wash them and bruise them; half an ounce of
Mallow seeds being bruised also, boil them in a porringer or two of water
until three quarters be consumed, then strain it, and mix with it a little
oil or fresh Butter, and so take it.

A Vomit which is stronger.
This 2. pence.
TAke seven or eight green leaves of Cabaret, beat them, and juice them, and
mix with the juice two or three times as much white wine, and drink it warm.

To make Chewings or Masticatories.
This 1. penny.
THe ordinariest and easiest of all is to take only Masticke and chew it in
your mouth, and you shall feel the rheum fall from your head into your mouth,
which you must spit out and use this fasting.

Another.
INcorporate the said Masticks with a little wax melted, This 4*
and never so little oil with a little powder of pepper, Pellitorie, and
Stafes-acre, and make pills, the which take one fasting as is aforesaid to draw
better the humidities from the head.

Another.
TAke Pepper and Pellitory of each a dram and a half, put them in powder,
This 2. pence
and mix them with honey, and cut them in pieces about the bigness of a
Bean, and let them dry in the shade, and then use them as above.

To make Gargarismes.
TAke ordinary Ptisan as before written, This 1. pen^ half penny.
wash and Gargarize the mouth and throat lukewarm, and if you will you may
mix with it an ounce of honey.

Another Gargarisme.
TAke a quantity of Barley water and mix with it three or four spoonefulls of
Vinegar and use it. This 1. penny


Another.
TAke a handful of Barley well picked and washed: This 4. pence
Agrimony, Plaintaine, dry Roses, wash the herbs and cleanse them, then boil
them in a pint and a half of water; first boil the Barley a little, and then
the herbs until half be consumed, then dissolve in it two or three
spoonfulls of honey, and as much of syrup of Mulberries, and use it.

A Gargarisme to mollify the heart and mouth.
This 3. pence.
TAke thirty sweet Almonds, peele them, and beat them in a mortar, pouring upon
them by little and little as you beat them a quarter of a pint of warm water,
then press them through a cloth, and put that which is pressed into a
porringer, and let it infuse all night in the chimney corner, and then use it
if you will have it more agreeable, you may dissolve some sugar in it.

An Anodine Gargarisme for the poor.
GArgarize your mouth and throat very well with milk hot from the Cow.

A Gargarisme Astringent and Repereussive.
This 9 pence.
TAke a handful of French Barley, Plaintaine, Pencroyall, and bramble tops, of
each a handful, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, until it
comes to half a pint, strain it and mix with it two or three ounces of
Surup of Mulberries and use it.

To make and prepare Emulcions.
An Emulcion for to refresh the reins, and for the sharpness of Urine.
TAke two ounces of sweet Almonds, peele them and put them into a marble
mortar, and beat them with a wooden pestle, pouring by a little and a little
upon them some warm Barley water, then put to them two drammes of each of the
four greater cold seeds, beat them all very well, pouring still upon them a
little warm Barley water until it come to a pint, then strain and press it
very hard through a linen cloth, and in that which is strained dissolve two
or three ounces of fine Sugar, and two ounces of juice of Lymons, and take it
at three times two hours after you have eaten; and if the pain of the reins
continue, you shall beat with the Almonds two drams of white Popie seeds, or a
dram of Lettice seeds, and as much of Poppies.

That when you make your Emulcion, Note.
you must beat your seeds very well with a little warm Barley water, before you
put in your Almonds.

An easier way to make an Emulcion which is ordinary.
TAke half an ounce of Gourd seeds, and as many of Cowcumber seeds, put them
into a marble mortar, (being very well picked) and beat them very well with a
wooden pestle, pouring by little and little some warm Barley water, then beat
two ounces of sweet Almonds peeled, pouring more water as is aforesaid; beating
of them very well, and strain and press them very hard, that there may be
strained the quantity of a pint strained.

To make Almond Milk.
TAke two ounces of sweet Almonds, peele them and beat them in a Marble mortar
as is aforesaid, pouring now and then upon them a little and a little warm
water, until there be a about half a pint, then strain and press it very
hard through a clean white cloth; then take that which is strained and put it
into a little pipkin, and boil it upon a fire without smoke, that it be
neither to thick nor to thin, This 6. pence.
then dissolve in it two ounces of fine Sugar, and a grain or two of salt for
to give it a taste, and take it at night at the hour of sleep about nine or
ten a clock.

There are those that put Ptisan and Barley water in the place of common water,
but it makes the Almonds more rough, so that it will not be pleasing to some
delicates.

There are those also that do beat with the Almonds the crumme of a new white
loase to make it more white and nourishing, which you may do if you please.

Also in great heat of the reins we use to put and beat with the Almonds a
dram of white Poppie seeds, but you must beat them well before you put in
your Almonds.

To make a Hordest or mundified Barley.
TAke two ounces of French Barley, boil it upon a clear fire in three quarters
of a pint of water three or four hours, until that there be but a porringer
of liquor left, then strain it without pressing the Barley; then peele and
beat in the mortar two ounces of sweet Almonds, pouring this liquor upon them
as aforesaid, then strain and press them very hard, and boil it a little,
and dissolve in it two ounces of fine Sugar, and take it when you go to bed.

There are those also that beats their Barley in the mortar with the Almonds,
and press it hard, which you may do if you please.

To make Tablets or Lozinges of Sugar of Roses.
TAke half a pound of fine white Sugar, and four ounces of good Damask Rose
water, put them together into a skillet and boil it very well upon a soft
clear fire, until it come to the consistance; which you shall know by taking
a little upon the end of the Spatule, and let it fall down into the skillet
again, and there will be a long thread; or put a little upon the handle of the
skillet and it will grow hard: Secondly, take a trencher and put a little upon
it, and when it is cold, if it be hard it is enough: Thirdly, drop three or
four drops upon the ground, and if you can take it up that it stick not to the
ground it is enough, then pour it all upon a Marble stone or upon a table well
rubd, strowing upon the table or stone a little starch in powder through a
bolter or linen cloth, and so form your Lozinges to make them red, you may
stir very well in it two drammes of red Rose leaves in powder.

To make a frontall or binding for the pains of the head, caused of cold.
TAke leaves of Sage, Rosemary, Betony, and Balm, This 6. pence.
of each half a handful, boil them very well in white wine, or half wine
and half water, then beat them in a mortar, and put them betwixt two linen
clothes, and bind them hot upon the temples.

A frontall or binding to cause rest.
TAke Betony, red Roses, white Lillies, This Frontall 3. pence.
and Violets, of each a Pugill; white Poppie, and Lettice seeds of each two
drams, beat them all in a mortar to powder; beginning with the Poppie and
Lettice seeds, and then with the herbs and flowers, and this powder you may
incorporate with oxirrhodin; and apply it hot betwixt two clothes as is
aforesaid, you may also incorporate them with ointment of Roses.

Another refreshing to cause rest.
This 2. pence.
TAke a handful of new dry Roses, or of those of Rose Cakes if they be not
burnt, beat them very well in a mortar, and incorporate them with oxicrat:
warm that it may be something thin, then bind it between two clothes warm
upon the forehead and temples as before; if there be any new fresh Lettices or
Purslaine, you may beat half a handful with them.

Another.
This 1. penny.
TAke a piece of Rose Cake which is not burnt, and cut it with a pair of
Scissers just the length and breadth of the forehead, then soake it in a
platter upon the fire with oxicrat: and bind it hot as is aforesaid.

Another.
This 1. penny.
Anoint the forehead and temples with ointment of Populeon; being well anointed
take a cloth and dip it three or four times in oxicrat: hot, and then squeeze
and bind it upon the temples; the oxicrat: is made as follows.

To make Oxicrat.
OXicrat is composed of vinegar and water, but because the vinegar has not
always the same property, for sometimes it is weak, and sometimes to strong,
it is hard to write of the quantity, but you may take upon six parts of water,
one of vinegar, but the ordinary use is to take as much vinegar as water which
is best.

To make Oxirrhodinum.
This oxirrhod 4. pence.
TAke four spoonfulls of good oil of Roses, two spoonfulls of good Rose water,
and a spoonful of vinegar, mix them well together, and your oxirrhod is done,
which when you go to use, warm it well in a porringer, and rub the party with
it, tying upon it a dry cloth, or soake in the said oxirrhod or oxicrat.

Another.
TAke three ounces of oil of Roses, This 4. pence.
and an ounce of vinegar, mix them together, and use them as before written.

To make Hydreleum.
THe said Hydreleum is made, mixing six parts of water and one of oil
together.

To make Epithemes.
An Epitheme refreshing the parts which are tempered with heat.
TAke half a pint of oxicrat before written, This Epithem 1. penny.
put it in a basen and set it upon a chasing dish of coals, being hot dip a
linen cloth into three or four times, and squeeze it, and clap it hot upon
the place affected, and lay another dry cloth upon it, and when that begins to
be cold, be ready with another, and so do half a dozen times.

This Epitheme is of great virtue, and better then those which are made with
distilled water or powders, for they are hot of themselves.

A Corroborant and refreshing Epitheme, for hot bellies in lingering Fevers.
TAke Suckory, Sage, and their roots; Agrimony, Purslaine, Plantaine, and
Endive, of each a handful; red Rose leaves half an handful, boil them all
very well according to order in a pint and a half of water, being first washed
and made clean, boil them to three quarters of a pint of water, then strain
it and mix with it six or seven spoonfulls of vinegar of Roses or common
vinegar, applying it hot with clothes upon all the belly as is aforesaid.

An Epitheme to lay upon the region of the heart in malignant and pestilent
Fevers.
This with the Treacle 18. pence.
TAke a Citron or Lymon peele, cut it in small pieces, and infuse it an hour or
two in a quarter of a pint of good Rose water, then strain it and mix with it
the juice of a Citron or Lymon and it is done; which you shall apply three or
four times a day with linen clothes as is aforesaid; if you mix with the
said Epitheme a dram or two of Venice Treacle it will be very excellent.

Another for the same.
This 16. pence
TAke two handfulls of Medowsweet, and as much of Scabios and Devils bit; seeds
of Citron, Carduus, Benedict, and Alkekeng, of each half an ounce, wash and
cleanse the herbs, and boil them in a pint and a half of water, and a little
after put in the seeds being bruised, then boil them to half a pint, being
strained dissolve in it the juice of a Lymon, and two or three spoonefulls of
vinegar of Roses, and the said Treacle, the which you shall use as before.

An Epitheme against the coldness of the heart.
This 1. penny.
TAke a quarter of a pint of strong wine, that is to say Claret or White wine,
warm it very well upon the fire and use it with linen clothes as before.

You may also instead of Wine use good Aquavitae with the council of a
Physician.

To make Sternatutories or sneesing powder.
TAke a little white Hellibor or Euphorbium in in powder, This 1. penny, or 2.
pence.
snuff it up into your nostrills out of a piece of a pen or quill.

To make Fumes and Perfumes.
An excellent perfume to cast a sent in a chamber and against the ill air.
TAke seven or eight spoonefulls of good Rose water, ten or twelve cloves
bruised, This 4. pence.
four or five little pieces of Lymon or Orange peele, put them all together
upon a chafing dish of coals in a porringer, and put them in the middle of the
chamber, or in any other place, and the vapor will rise and give a good sent
and throw out the evil air.

Another Perfume.
TAke seven or eight spoonefulls of vinegar, This 3. pence.
four or five bits of Lymon or Orange peele, fourteen or fifteen Cloves
bruised, put them together in a platter upon a Chasing-dish of coals as before.

This last perfume is not so odoriferous as the former, but it is very good.

That you must not boil the said medicament, Note.
but put them upon so much fire as will raise the vapor.

There are made diverse perfumes for diverse diseases, Note.
with roots, herbs, seeds, etc. the which the Physician will show you.

To make Fomentations and baggs.
A Fomentation against the Pleurisy.
TAke Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Pellitory, Sage, Isope, March, Violets,
Cammomill and Mellilote flowers, of each a handful; cleanse the said herbs
and wash them, and boil them in sufficient quantity of water, and toward the
latter end pour a quarter of a pint of white wine, then press and strain
them all, putting the decoction into a pipkin, and put into it to soake a
sponge or double linen cloth, with the which you foment and bath the party
affected; then when it begins to be cold squeeze and do as before.

Bags or Cataplasmes for the same.
These two bags 6. pence.
TAke the said herbs and flowers, cut them very small, and put to them an ounce
of Linseeds, and as much Faenugrecke bruised, then put them in an old cloth
white and clean, the length and breadth as shall require, then few it with
thread, and boil it in milk or water, and when the party is well bathed with
the former decoction, apply one of these baggs very hot, and squeeze them upon
the grief, and when that begins to be cold, put one the other.

A Fomentation Resolative and Emollient.
TAke Mallows, Marsh Mallows with their roots, of each a handful, Sage,
Hysope, of each two handfulls, Camomill and Mellilote flowers of each half a
handful, Linseeds, Anniseeds, Fenill seeds, and Faenugrecke, of each half an
ounce bruised; prepare them as is written before, and boil them insufficient
quantity of water to a pint, strain it and put half of it in a hoggs bladder,
and tie it one the top, and apply it one the grief, and when it begins to be
cold, lay the other half being in a bladder upon the same place, putting the
other into a vessel to be hot against that which is on cooles.

And if you have no bladders, then bathe it with sponges or double linen
clothes, and if you will make bags of the ingredients, put them between two
clothes as before.

An Anodine Fomentation.
TAke a pint of new milk, and foment with it as before mentioned.

Baggs for the poor.
TAke three or four handfulls of Bran, This 2. pence.
fry it in a frying pan, putting to it a little wine that it be not to dry;
then put it betwixt two clothes, and apply them one after another as before.

Baggs for the grief of the stomach.
TAke two handfulls of wormwood, cut it in little bits; as much Rose leaves,
and put them betwixt two clothes, and boil them in wine, water, or oxicrate,
and apply them one after another as before: you may also put to them a little
Isope.

A Cataplasme for Apostumes and Tumors.
TAke three or four lilly roots, This Cataplasme 4. pence.
wrappe them in a Colewort leaf, and roast them upon the hot cinders, then take
them and beat them in a mortar, and put to them a piece of fresh Butter.

Take a part of this Cataplasme hot, and spread it upon a linen cloth, and
apply it upon the Tumors if it be either pestilentiall or common.

This Cataplasme is of little price, Note.
but it is an excellent thing against all sorts of pestilentiall and other
Apostumes, changing it twice a day. Note.


If in malignant tumors you will mix with it a dram or two of Venice
Treacle, you will make it very good.

An Emollient and Remolitive Cataplasme.
This 8. pence.
TAke Mallows, Marsh Mallows, with their roots, Pellitory, Violets, Camomill,
and Mellilote flowers, of each a handful; one Lilly root, ^aenugrecke, and
Linseeds of each an ounce; wash and prepare them, and boil them according to
order in three pints of water, until it be almost boyld all away, then strain
it through a sieve, and pulpe the ingredients through as you do your Cassia,
the which being pulpe you shall dissolve in it a piece of fresh Butter or a
little Oil or Suet; if you please you may put to it some Bean meal or Bran,
and then put in your Su^t or Oil.

A Cataplasme for Gangrenes and Pestilent boyles.
This 4. pence.
TAke fresh Butter or oil of Olives an ounce, as much good honey, and the yolke
of an egg, and a little Bean flower, first melt your Butter, or heat your
oil, then mix in it the yolke of a egg and the honey, and afterward the
flower, and your Cataplasme is ready to use.

To make Linements.
This 2. pence.
TAke an ounce of fresh Butter, Cinnamon, or Nutmeg, in powder a dram, melt
the Butter and mix in it the powder, and the Linement is done.

Another.
This 4. pence.
TAke two ounces of oil of Roses, and a dram of Cinnamon, and as much of
Cloves in powder and prepare them as before.

If you will make these Linements into ointments, Note.
you must dissolve in the said oil or butter a piece of yellow wax.

An excellent ointment for a burn, made by a charitable Gentlewoman in France.
TAke a penniworth of yellow wax, and a pennyworth of oil of Olives, cut the
wax very small, and melt it with the Oil, then take it from the fire, and
mix with it two yolks of eggs, and beat it together until it comes to an
ointment.

To use it, you must take a little of the said ointment, and spread it upon a
linen cloth as thin as can be, then lay it upon the place being burnt, and in
little time it will heal any burn, changing of it twice a day.

The said Gentlewoman had always of it ready by her, and gave it to all that
came to demand it of her.

To make a refreshing Cerat, and of a good odor.
TAke an ounce of white virgins wax, This Cerat 9. pence.
and four ounces of oil of Olives, cut the wax in small pieces and melt it
with the Oil, then let it stand till it be cold, then beat and wash it
fifteen or sixteen times with fair water, until the ointment comes as
white as Snow, then after that wash it three or four times with Rose water to
give it a good smell, and put it into an earthen pot or other vessel
convenient with Rose water, that it may be more refreshing and more sweet.

To make Colyrium or Eye-waters.
A Colyrium against gravel or any filth in the eyes:
This Colyrium 2. pence.
TAke three spoonfulls of white wine, and as much water; the weight of a crown
of Aloes hepatic: in powder, mix them together and make a Colyrium, and with
some soft linen clothes wash and bathe the eyes, and soake the clothes in the
said liquor, and lay upon the eyes.

A Colyrium for the pain of the eyes.
This 1. penny.
TAke the quantity of a little Bean of white Vitreol or Copperas in powder, put
it into a saucer with three or four spoonefulls of fair water; the Copperas
being melted you shall use it as follows: Take of this water with the end of
your finger, and drop three or four drops into your eye, stirring your eye,
that it may run about your eye, this do two or three times a day.

A Refrigeretive Colyrium for the beginning of a fluxion or blackness.
This 3. pence.
TAke Plantaine, and rose water, of each three or four spoonfulls, the white of
a new laid egg, beat and malaxe them together in a dish, and it is done; in
the which being warm soake linen rags and bind about the forehead and the
eye round, the same side you may also use Plantaine water alone, or Rose water,
or both together.

To make Vesicatories.
Each Vessicate 1. penny.
TAke a dram of the flies called Cancharides beat them in a mortar to powder
and mix with it the double quantity of Unguent: Basilicon: and use it; take a
little of the said confection and spread it upon a linen cloth or Taffetie
and so apply it.

Another.
TAke half a dram of the said Flies in powder, Each 1. penny.
and beat with it three drams of good Leven and put to it a spoonful or two
of good vinegar, and use it as before.

Another.
TAke a dram of good Mustard, Each 1. penny.
and half a dram of the said Flies in powder, beat them together in a mortar
with half an ounce of leaven and a spoonful of vinegar, and use it as before.

Be sure that after you have made these things in in the mortar, that you wash
the mortar and pestle with hot water.

An excellent preservative against the Plague.
TAke a good Citron or Lymon weighing four ounces, cut it in small slices
round, then put it into a skillet or other clean vessel, with half a pint of
Medow-sweet water, or Cardus, or Scabios water, boil it until all the water
be almost consumed, stirring of it still with a spoone for fear of burning;
then take it and beat it very well in a Marble mortar with a wodden pestle,
beating and adding unto it four ounces of conserves of red Roses, and two
drams of good Venice Treacle, and as much of confection of Hyacinth: all being
well mixed together, put them into a galley-pot, and take every morning the
quantity of a dram upon the point of a knife, fasting two hours after: and
let children take the quantity of half a dram; as soon as you have
swallowed it, drink a good glass of oxicrat, or three parts of water and one
of Wine:

And when you fear you have caught some evil infection, dissolve twenty
grains of the said Treacle in oxicrat, or in wine and water, and keep your
self warm.

Washings for the legs and feet to provoke sleep.
This 6. pence.
TAke ten or twelve Lettices, five or six handfulls of Vine leaves, five or
six Poppie heads; being broken and cut, boil them all together in a
sufficient quantity of water; being boiled take it from the fire and pour them
into a large vessel, where let the party wash and bathe his legs and feet
the space of half an hour, beginning above, and so bathing downwards with the
said ingredients, then let there be warm linen clothes bound about the
parties legs and feet and so put in bed.

Of Bathes.
EVery one knows now adays to make and prepare Bathes, and half Bathes of
hot water; therefore I will not speak of this much, but only this; many times
according to diverse diseases the Physicians prescribe many sorts of Bathes,
made with roots, seeds, herbs, etc. which being well boiled are poured into a
large vessel for the party to bathe with.

Touching the Hot-houses or dry Baths, any Physician will direct you to them.

A Treatise or Catalogue of those Instruments which the rich ought to have in
their houses.
FIrst two syringes or bladders fitted with pipes to give Clysters, the one for
great folks, and the other for children: A little brass pot to keep a Clyster
in, and to warm it in. Another bladder and box pipe to lend charitably to the
poor. Two sieves, one very fine to strain medicines, and the other to strain
decoctions. But in stead of the said sieves you may use white linen clothes
fitting. Two pulping sieves, the one to pulp Cassia, Prunes, Tamarinds, etc.
And the other to pulpt roots, herbs, etc. for Cataplasmes. A set of weights of
sixteen ounces in the pound, and a pair of scales to weigh the medicaments.
Two Spatuls of iron, one bigger then another. One wooden Spatule. A Marble
mortar with a pestle of wood. A brass mortar with an iron pestle or a pestle
of the same. A lesser mortar with a pestle as before. Pots, Pipkins, Skillets,
Basins, etc. To make Ptisans, decoctions, etc.
A Catalogue of those Medicaments which the rich ought to have in their houses.
A Pound of good Seen of Levant. Four ounces of good Rubarbe. Four ounces of
good Agaricke. Two pound of good Cassia. Half a pound of good Tamarinds. A
pound of Electuar: Lenetiv: A pound of good Catholicon. Four ounces of
Diaphaenicum: Four ounces of Benedict: Laxat: Four ounces of Hiera
Diacolocynthid. Four ounces of Diaprun: Laxat: Half a pound of Lozinges of
Diacarthami: A quantity of Pills of three or four sorts. Four pound of good
common honey. A pound of honey of Roses. A pound of honey of Violets. A pound
of honey of Mercury. Two pound of red Sugar. Three or four pound of fine
Sugar. Half a pound of Syrup of Poppies. A pound of Syrup of Violets. A pot of
Syrup of Maidenhaire. Half a pound of Syrup of Quinces. Half a pound of Syrup
of Mulberries. A pound of Syrup of Damask Roses. Half a pound of Syrup of
Succory with Rubarbe. A pecke of French Barley. Four ounces of Anniseeds. Four
ounces of Fenill seeds. A pound of Linseeds. A pound of Faenugrecke. Four
ounces of each of the greater cold seeds. Four ounces of Lettice seeds. Four
ounces of white Poppie seeds. Four ounces of Cardus seeds. An ounce of common
Pepper. Nutmegs and Cloves of each an ounce. Four ounces of Cinnamon. A pound
of sweet Almonds. An ounce of Pellitorie. Four ounces of Azarum root. Four
ounces of Masticke. Half an ounce of Vitriole or Copperas. Four ounces of Sal
gem. Three or four pound of good Licorish. Half a pound of red Rose leaves
and as many Violets. Cammomill and Mellilote flowers of each a sufficient
quantity. Four ounces of raspt Harts-horne. A pint of Rose water: A pint of
Plantaine water: A pint of Carduus water. A pint of vinegar of Roses. Two
ounces of confect: Hyacinth. Two or three ounces of good Treacle. An ounce of
confection Alkermes. A dram of good Bezoar. Four ounces of yellow wax.
Four ounces of white wax. Three ounces of unquen: Populeon. Three ounces of
unguen: Rosat. Four ounces of Venice Turpentine. Two pound of oil of Olives.
A pound of oil of Roses. A pound of oil of Violets. A pound of oil of
Quinces. Oil of Cammomill, Lillies, Rue and Walnuts of each a pound.
A Charitable and notable advertisement to the public.
IT is necessary for all sorts of people to keep by them a syringe or bladder,
and pipe to give Clysters, and to make or cause to be made the said Clysters
in their houses; for what disease soever happens or ariveth there, is nothing
so proper at the first as a Clyster; but if your servant or any other unto you
belonging, should give a Clyster to any one sick of the Plague, Pox,
Measells, Purples, Dissentery, small Pox, Ulcers, Sores, Boyles, or any other
pestiferous disease; or should lend it to any that should do the like, and
come and give you a Clyster with the same pipe without washing and cleansing
any of the said dicases, would be upon you in less then an hour after, and to
all your family; therefore see the pipe well warmed, washed and cleansed,
before you take the said Clyster, and lend your pipe to none but to those that
you know very well.

THE PRICE AND VALVE OF MEDICAments as well Simple as compounded which are used
in PHYSIC
By Philbert Guibert Esquire Doctor Regent in the faculty of Physic in Paris
in France.
The Price of Medicaments Simple as they are sold at the Druguists.
l. s. d. A Cassia the pound 0 4 2 A Corus the pound 0 10 0 Agaricke the pound
0 18 0 Aloes the pound 0 12 0 Roche Alum the pound 0 3 0 Bitter Almonds the
pound 0 1 0 Sweet Almonds the pound 0 0 6 Ambergris the dram 0 10 0 Yellow
Amber the pound 0 2 6 Angelica the pound 0 6 8 Anniseeds the pound 0 0 10
Quicksilver the pound 0 4 0 Aristolochia round the pound 0 1 0 Aristolochia
long the pound 0 1 0 Asarum the pound 0 2 6 Assa faetida the pound 0 4 0
BAyberries the pound 0 0 6 Myrtle Berries the pound 0 1 0 Bdellium the pound 0
6 0 Been Alum the pound 0 1 8 Been Rubr: the pound 0 1 6 Benjamin the pound 0
6 0 Berberis the pound 0 0 8 Bezoar the ounce 2 10 0 Bithumeis Iudaic: the
pound 0 4 0 Lign: Aloes the pound 1 4 0 Bol Armoniacke pound 0 1 4 Borax the
pound 0 6 0 CAlamus Aromat the pound 0 1 0 Campher the pound 0 6 0 Cantharides
the ounce 0 2 6 Cardamom majus the pound 0 4 0 Cardamom minus the pound 0 0 8
Carpobalsamum the ounce 0 0 6 Cassia the pound 0 4 6 Castoreum the ounce 0 1 0
Caeruse the pound 0 0 6 White wax the pound 0 1 4 Yellow wax the pound 0 1 8
China the pound 0 12 0 Colocynthidos the pound 0 6 0 Colophonia the pound 0 0 4
Red Coral the pound 0 4 6 White Coral the pound 0 3 6 Cortex radic: Cappar:
the pound 0 2 6 Cortex radic: Tamarisc the pound 0 2 0 Cortex media fraxin: the
pound 0 1 2 Cortex guaiaci the pound 0 0 8 White Costus the pound 0 6 0 Cremor
tartar the pound 0 8 0 Crystal mineral the pound 0 2 6 Cubebes the pound 0 5
0 Cyperus roots the pound 0 1 4 DAtes the pound 0 1 6 Dictaum: Crets the pound
0 8 0 White Ellebor the pound 0 0 9 Black Ellebor the pound 0 2 0 Olibanum the
pound 0 2 6 Common Frankincense the pound 0 0 4 Epithymum the pound 0 2 6
Candied Citron peele the pound 0 3 6 Euphorbium the pound 0 1 6 FEnill seeds
the pound 0 1 2 Staechados the pound 0 1 8 Folium Indum the ounce 0 1 6
Fragments of precious stones, of Emerauds, Grinads, Saphirs, and Topaz each of
them an ounce 0 1 0 GVaicum the pound 0 0 2 Galbanum a pound 0 6 0 Galingall
the pound 0 6 0 Gum: Armoniacke the pound 0 2 8 Gum: Arabicke the pound 0 0 10
Gum: Dragant the pound 0 0 10 Grana tinctor: i. Kermes the pound 0 6 0
HErmodacti the pound 0 1 4 Hypocystis the pound 0 4 6 IAlap the pound 0 7 10
Ireos of Florence the pound 0 1 8 Iujubes the pound 0 1 4 Iuncus odoratus the
pound 0 6 0 LAbdanum the pound 0 3 6 Gum-Lacke the pound 0 6 0 Lapis
Calaminaris the pound 0 2 0 Lapis hematicis the pound 0 10 0 Lapis Lazuli the
pound 0 1 8 Lapis spongiae the pound 0 0 6 Litarge of gold the pound 0 0 6
Litarge of silver the pound 0 0 6 Lupius the pound 0 1 4 MAnna Calabrin the
pound 0 12 0 Masticke the pound 0 8 0 Mechoachan the pound 0 7 8 Minium the
pound 0 0 10 Mirrhe the pound 0 12 0 Musk the dram 0 15 0 NVx indica the
pound 0 1 6 Cyprus Nuts the pound 0 0 10 Galls the pound 0 0 8 Opium the pound
0 12 0 Opibalsamum the pound 0 6 8 Opoponax the pound 0 10 0 Orpiment the pound
0 1 4 PEnedes the pound 0 1 6 Navell pitch the pound 0 0 3 Burgundy pitch the
pound 0 0 6 Pistaches the pound 0 1 6 Polipodie the pound 0 0 8 Long pepper the
pound 0 5 0 Piretrum the pound 0 2 6 Roots of Esula the pound 0 2 6 Licorish
the pound 0 1 2 Rubarbe the pound 1 8 0 SAffron the pound 1 12 0 Sagapaenum the
pound 0 8 0 Dragons blood the pound 0 2 0 White Sanders the pound 0 1 4 Red
Sanders the pound 0 1 4 Yellow Sanders the pound 0 6 0 Sarsaparilla the pound 0
6 0 Sassafras the pound 0 1 8 Scamonie the pound 0 10 0 Sqults the pound 0 1 3
Sebestens the pound 0 1 4 Sal gem the pound 0 1 4 Sal niter the pound 0 1 2
Seeds of Agnus Castus the ounce 0 0 3 Seeds of Ameos the pound 0 6 0 Seeds of
Bombas the pound 0 1 8 Seeds of daucus Greticus the pound 0 2 0 Seeds of
Levistici the pound 0 0 4 Seeds of Eruca the pound 0 1 0 Seeds of Seseleos the
pound 0 0 6 Wormeseeds the pound 0 6 0 Carthamus seeds the pound 0 1 4
Faenugrecke the pound 0 0 4 Linseeds the pound 0 0 6 Seeds of pearl the ounce
0 5 0 Seen the pound 0 4 6 Brimstone the pound 0 0 4 Styrax Calamit the pound 0
6 8 Styrax liquid the pound 0 3 4 White juice of Licorish the pound 0 2 0
Black juice of Licorish the pound 0 1 8 Sumach the pound 0 0 6 Spica Celtica
the pound 0 6 0 Spica Indica the pound 0 8 0 TAlc of Venice the pound 0 0 10
Venice Turpentine the pound 0 0 6 Common Turpentine the pound 0 0 8 Tamarinds
the pound 0 1 4 Terra Sigillat the pound 0 10 0 Turbith the pound 0 10 0
VErdegrease the pound 0 2 0 Viscus quercin the pound 0 0 8 Xilobalsamum the
pound 0 6 0 Zedoaria the pound 0 10 0

For the value of roots, herbs, and other such like you may have them cheap
at the Herborists.

The price of Medicaments compounded, and first of Syrups.
SYrup of Violets is made diverse ways, but principally in three: The first
which is the best, is made as follows.

Make three infusions of a pound of Violets picked at a time, in four pints and
a half of water, and the last infusion being strained and pressed, dissolve in
it five pound and a half of fine Sugar and it is done; and there will be seven
pound of Syrup.

The three pound of Violet flowers picked comes to six shillings, the Sugar
seven shillings ten pence fire sixteen pence: sum twenty two shillings and
six pence.

The seven pound of Syrup abating for the loss, comes to six pound four
ounces, the ounce comes to two pence three farthings.

The second manner to make Syrup of Violets.
TAke four ounces of juice of Violets for each pound of Sugar, boiled almost
as thick as to make Lozinges, abating the scum and loss there will be
eighteen ounces, which comes to two pence half penny the ounce.

The third manner.
TAke a pound of Sugar boiled to the consistance, and pass it through a linen
cloth upon four ounces of Violets well beaten in a marble mortar, the Violets
lying upon the cloth; and it comes to two pence the ounce.

Syrup of Colts foot.
MAke three infusions one after another of Coltsfoot, each time half a pound
in a quart of water; the last infusion being strained, clarify it, and put
into it a pound and a half of good Sugar, and boil it to the height of a
Syrup: The which Syrup amounts to penny half penny the ounce.

Syrup of Damask Roses.
THere are made nine infusions of Rose leaves, a pound each time, in five pints
of water; the last infusion being strained, clarify with it four pound of
good Sugar and boil it as aforesaid? it amounts to two pence an ounce.

Syrup of Poppies Simple.
MAke an Infusion of seven ounces and a half of white Poppie heads, and as
many black heads; twenty four hours in four pints of water, boil it until
it comes to a pint and a half; Then strain it and boil in it half a pound
of Sugar, and as many Sugar pellets, the ounce penny half penny.

Syrup of red Poppies.
MAke an Infusion of half a pound of red Poppie flowers three times, a quart
of water half a pound each time; the last infusion being strained put to it a
pound and a half of Sugar, and four ounces of Sugar of Roses; the ounce
amounts to three half pence.

Syrup of water Lillies:
MAke three Infusions of water Lilly flowers or leaves a pound at each time in
four pints of water; the last infusion being strained, boil with it four
pound of Sugar to the height. The ounce comes to a penny.

Syrup of Maiden-haire.
IT is made by boiling and infusing the simples in five pints of water, then it
is strained and clarified with four pound of Sugar, the ounce a penny.

Syrup of five Roots.
THere is a decoction made with the roots, cleansed in sufficient quantity of
water, and boyld to four pints, then strained, and with three pound of Sugar
it is made into a Surup: the ounce a penny.

Syrup of Marsh Mallows.
A Decoction is made with the roots, herbs, fruits, and seeds, in sufficient
quantity of water, boiled to four pints, in the which is clarified and boiled
to the height three pound of Sugar; and the Syrup comes to three half pence
the ounce.

Syrup of Succory compounded with Rubarbe.
THe decoction is made of herbs, roots, seeds, etc. according to art, and
strained, in the which is put six pound of Sugar, and being boiled to the
height, there is stirred and tied in it six ounces of Rubarbe and an ounce of
Spikenard or Cinnamon, the which Syrup amounts to three pence an ounce.

Syrup of Succory Simple.
TAke four pints of the said decoction, and boil and clarify with it as much
Sugar, which comes to three half pence the ounce.

Syrup of Endive simple.
Boil with eight pound of the juice of Endive dispumd and clarified five pound
of sugar, the ounce a penny.

Syrup of Femmatorie:
Two pound of the juice clarified and despumed, boyld with as much Sugar makes
the Syrup, which comes to penny the ounce.

Syrup of the juice of Buglosse.
IN six pound of the juice of Buglosse, boil a pound of the flowers, then
strain them, and clarify them, boil with the decoction four pound of Sugar,
and the Syrup comes to two pence the ounce.

Syrup of Vinegar.
Boil four pints of fountain water, with five pound of fine Sugar; and when
it is half consumed, scumme it, and pour in by little and little three pound
or pints of good white Wine vinegar, boiling it to the consistance of a Syrup,
the which amounts to a penny an ounce.

Syrup of Mulberries.
TAke a pound and a half of the juice of Mulberries, and boil with it two
pound of honey, scum it well, and make it into a Surup of one penny the ounce.

Boil four pound of the juice of Quinces, with three pound of Sugar, the
ounce one penny half penny:

Syrup of Apples Simple.
Four pound of the juice of Apples clarified, with three pound of Sugar, which
comes to a penny.

Syrup of Apples compounded.
IN five pound of the juice, there is put to infuse four ounces of Seen, and
half an ounce of Anniseeds twenty four hours, then strained and clarified
with three pound of good Sugar, which comes to two pence the ounce.

Syrup of Mints simple.
THree pound of the juice clarified, and boiled with as much Sugar, the ounce
amounts to six pence.

Syrup of dried Roses.
THere is infused three or four ounces of dry Rose leaves in a pint and a
half of water, the space of twenty four hours, then it is boiled a little
and strained, in the which is boiled a pound of Sugar, the ounce a penny*

Iulep of Roses.
Boil four ounces of good Sugar, with eight ounces of Rose water to the
height of a Iulep which is but a little boiled, the ounce a penny.

Syrup of Wormwood:
AN infusion is made of the simples in two pints and a half of white Wine, and
as much juice of Quinces; the which being boiled and clarified, there is put to
it two pound of Sugar, and made into a Syrup, the ounce two pence half penny.

Syrup of Staechados.
A Decoction made with the simpler in ten pints of water, and boiled to five
pints, then strain it, and clarify it, and boil with it two pound of Sugar,
and as much honey, being well scummed and Aromatized with Cinnamon, Ginger, and
Aromat: Rosat: the ounce two pence.

Syrup of Licorish.
AN Infusion made with the ingredients, mentioned in four pints of water; and
the decoction being boiled to three pints, there is mixed with it Sugar, honey,
and pennedes, or sugar pellets, the ounce amounting to a penny an ounce.

Syrup of Iujubes: Amounts to sixteen pence a pound, or a penny an ounce.
Syrup of Isope to eighteen pence the pound, or three half pence the ounce.
Syrup of Horehound to eighteen pence a pound. Oximell simplex amounts to
eighteen pence a pound. Oximell Squillitic: or honey of Squills: the ounce
three half pence or eighteen pence the pound. Oximell compounded, amounts to
sixteen pence a pound, or a penny an ounce. Vinegar of Squills, amounts to
sixteen pence the pound. Scum'd Honey or dispumd: eight pence the pound. Honey
of Roses, eighteen pence a pound, three half pence an ounce. Honey of Violets
and Mercury, sixteen pence a a pound.
Conserves.
Conserve of Violetts two shillings eight pence the pound, or two pence the
ounce. Conserve of Roses eighteen pence the pound, three half pence the ounce.
Conserves of Buglosse, Burrage, Betony, and Rosemary flowers, each of them two
shillings eight pence a pound, or two pence an ounce.
Electuaries.
Electuar: Diacassia: amounts to six pence the ounce, or eight shillings the
pound. Electuar: Lenitive, amounts to five shillings and a groat a pound,
that is a groat an ounce. Diacatholicon, as the Electuar: Lenetive. Diaprunes,
amounts to four shillings the pound, or three pence an ounce. Electuar:
Diaphaenicon, amounts to four shillings the pound: Benedict: Laxat:
amounts to four shillings the pound, or three pence an ounce. Confect
Hamech, amounts to five shillings four pence the pound, that is a groat an
ounce. Hiera Picra, amounts to six pence an ounce. Hiera Diacolocynthidos
pachij: amounts to three pence an ounce.
Of Electuaries solid.
Diacarthami, amounts to four pence an ounce. Electuar: de succo rosar: or
of juice of roses, amounts to four pence an ounce. Electuar: de Citro
solutiv: amounts to two pence the dram, that is sixteen pence an ounce.
Of Pills.
Stomach pills amounts to ten pence the dram. Pillul: Ruffi: amounts
to sixteen pence the dram. Masticke pills, amounts to eighteen pence a
dram. Pillul: Imperiales, amounts to ten pence a dram. Pillul sine
quibus, amount to fourteen pence a dram. Pillul: Aureae, amount to three
pence a dram. Pillul: Cochiae amount to ten pence a dram. Pillul: Agregativae,
amounts to three pence a dram. Pillul: Alephanginae, amounts to three
pence a dram. Pillul: de Cinoglosso, amounts to two pence a dram.
Of Powders and Lozinges.
Powder of Diamargarit: frigid: amounts to three pence the dram. Lozinges of
Diamargarit. frigid: amounts to four pence an ounce. That to make Lozinges,
you must put an ounce of powder for a pound of Sugar. Manus Christi, amounts
to three pence the ounce. Powder of Elect: Dianthos, amounts to three pence
an ounce. Powder of Elect: pleres Archontic: amounts to two ponce a dram.
Powder of Diatragagant. frig: amounts to six pence a dram. Powder of
Elect: Diacalamint: amounts to four pence a dram. Powder of Elect:
Diambra, amounts to six pence the dram. Powder of Elect: de gemmis, amounts
to eight pence a dram. Powder of Electu. Aromat. Rosat: amouth to three pence
a dram. Powder of Elect: Diarrhodon abbatis, the dram amounts to a penny.
Powder of the three Sanders, amounts to ten pence a dram. Powder of
Electuar: Diamoschum, amounts to three pence the dram.
Antidotes.
Philonium magnum, amounts to six pence an ounce. Requies Nicolai, amounts
to four pence an ounce. Treacle and Mythridat, eight pence an ounce, Confect:
de Alkermes and Hyacinth: each of them two shillings six pence an ounce.
Trochisques.
Trochisque of Vipers, amounts to two shillings eight pence the ounce.
Trochisque Hedicroi: amounts to sixteen pence a dram. Trochisques of
Squills, amounts to three pence an ounce. Trochisches of Cipheos, the ounce
amounts to five pence. Trochisques of Capers, amounts to six pence a
dram. Trochisques of Agrimony, amounts to a penny a dram. Trochisque of
Diarrhod: abbat: amounts to two pence a dram. Trochisque of Alkekengi,
amounts to two pence a dram. The Trochisq: of Myrrh amounts to a penny a
dram. Trochis: of terra Lemnia, amounts to a penny an ounce. Trochis: of
Campher, amounts to a penny a dram. Trochis: of Gallia Moschat: amounts
to a groat a dram. Trochis: of Alipt: Moschat: amounts to three pence a
dram.
Of Distilled Waters.
Rose water sixteen pence a pint. Treacle water an ounce six pence. Cynamom
water an ounce four pence.
Of Roses.
Oil of Roses a penny an ounce. Oil of Violets two pence an ounce. Oil of
white Lillies, dill, Rue, Marjoram; each of them two pence, or a penny an
ounce.
Of Ointments and Plasters.
Ointments and plasters are of diverse prices as sixteen or eighteen pence a
pound, and two shillings and three pence, or four shillings the pound.

FINIS.
THE CHARITABLE APOTHECARIE. SHEVVING TO make Medicaments compounded with great
ease and in little time.

Written in French by Philbert Guibert Doctor Regent in the faculty of Physic
in Paris.

Translated out of French into English, By I. W.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, 1639.

THE CHARITABLE APOTHECARIE. The first Treatise.
CHAP. I. A Catalogue of all Instruments necessary to furnish an Apothecary.
FIrst of all; a great Mortar of Brass weighing fifty or sixty pound or more,
with a pestle of iron: A little Mortar weighing five or six pound, with a
pestle of the same matter. A middle sizd mortar of Marble, with a pestle of
wood, and a stone mortar with the same pestle. A great Bistort with a lesser. A
Rouler to roll Tablets and Lozinges. Two great Spatules of iron, two middle
sizd, and two little ones. A square of wood, with a nail at each corner to
hold the strainers. Two great Copper pannes, one to boil decoctions, Syrups,
etc. and the other for ointments and plasters. Two little Possnets of Copper.
A great Raspe of white Iron, to raspe Apples, Quinces, etc. Two spoones with
holes in them, one great, and the other little. Two presses irond with their
pins of iron. A Refrigetory to distill waters of Coperas, two or three platters
of Iron or Pewter. Seals and Weights. Three or four strainers of a quarter
broad hemmed. Three or four blanchets of Cotton hemmed. One or two Hipocras
baggs. Half a dozen of strong towells, to strain decoctions, Juices, etc. A
hair sieve covered. Two common pulping sieves, to pulpe Tamarinds, Cassia,
prunes, etc. Two other searses or sieves to pass bitter things. An iron
Furnace. Gally pots, or earthen pots, to keep Conserves, Electuaries, Syrups,
Oils, Ointments, etc. Two great Gally pots, and two great earthen pots. Three
pipkins, one bigger then another. Two vessels of earth, or of brass to make
infusions. A Porphyre stone, with a Mule or rubbing stone. Sufficient quantity
of Boxes to put in Medicaments, where one may put diverse in one box. A square
piece of wood, the thickness of one thumb a foot square. A Shoomakers knife.
Vessels of glass to keep Cordial powders in. A great iron spoone to prepare
Lead and other things:
Of any thing else that the Apothecary shall want, the Physician will give him
advice.

Of Clarification. CHAP. II. The manner to clarify Sugar and Honey:
GOod Sugar, which is white, hard, solid, and clear, and of a good smell;
ought not to be clarified, for it will yield little or no scumme; But for sugar
which is not clear, nor hard, shall be clarified as follows.

Take (for example) two pound of Sugar, break it and cut it into small pieces,
put it into a pan, and pour upon it a pint of water decoction or infusion to
melt it, and while it is a melting, take two whites of eggs with the shells,
and beat them very well together in another pan or basin, pouring by little
and little into it another pint of water or decoction, which being well beaten
together with a whiske or little rod; then take the sugar being melted from the
fire, and beat them all together, then put them upon the fire, and when you
see the scumme rise and it begins to boil, then take it from the fire, and
strain it through the blancket made fast to the four corners of the wooden
square, with a basin underneath to receave that which is strained.

If the said sugar being strained seem not to be clarified enough, you may
pass it again through the blanket, and so you may do two or three times, but
it must be done while it is hot.

When the said sugar is fair enough, one need not take the pains to clarify
it for Syrups, etc. but only at the end of their boiling, take them from the
fire and scumme it with a silver spoone, or with a spoone with holes you may
take of the scum.

That if you clarify sugar, you must put for each pound of sugar a pint of
water decoction or infusion, and one white of an egg with the shell; but if
the Sugar be soul, you must put more of the liquor, and more whites of eggs,
according to the dampnesse thereof.

That those syrups which are made of Juices, are made with good white sugar; as
those of Raspas, Quinces, Mulberries, Cherries, and the like: for if they be
often clarified, they loose their strength and virtue.

Also that to make syrup of Lymons, Granates, and others, you must have of the
best sugar, and it must be boiled to the height as you make your sugar of
Roses, but if you cannot get that which is very white, you must first clarify
it, and then boil it and scumme it as is aforesaid.

At the end when your sugar is strained, you must not press and squeeze the
blancket, but let it strain by little and little until it be all dropped into
the rest.

For to clarify Honey, take a pound or two, or the quantity you please of the
best Honey; put it into a pan with as much water or other liquor, and put it
upon the fire, and when it has boyld a walme or two, strain it through a
strong linen cloth; and for every two pound of honey take a white of an egg
with the shell; (as is aforesaid in the clarification of Sugar) and the second
straining shall be boiled to what consistence the Physician shall see fitting.

If the honey be very foul, you must put more liquor and whites of eggs, as
is said of Sugar; Note, that when you strain your honey it must be very hot,
but the sugar ought to cool a little before you pass it.

CHAP. III. The manner to Clarify Decoctions and Infusions a part without
Sugar.
THE decoctions and infusions ought not to be strained boiling, but half cold
before they be passed through the strainer or blancket; as for example, one
puts the white of an egg with the shell upon two pound of decoction or
infusion, doing as follows.

Take a white of an egg with the shell, and put it into the pan or basin, and
beat it very well with the said whiske or little broom; then put to it half
a pint of the said decoction or infusion, beating them very well together; then
pour in by little and little the rest of the said infusion or decoction, then
put it upon the furnace, and when it has boiled a walme or two that you see
the durty scum rise, then let it stand until it be half cold, and then pass
it through the strainer or blancket.

That infusions and decoctions are passed but one time through the blancket,
for if they be passed any more, they loose a part of their virtue.

CHAP. IV. The manner to clarify Apozemes with Syruys and also to clarify
Whey.
THose that are licorish of Apozemes, clarify them in this manner.

Take a pint and a half of the decoction of the simples strained; which being
clarified with the white of an egg and the shell, put it into a pan upon the
furnace, and when it begins to boil, put the Syrups into it, and when the
scumme rises take it from the fire and let it cool a little, then pass it
two or three times through the blancket until it be clear.

If you will have your Apozeme Aromaticke, you may Aromatize it with some
Cordial powder as follows.

Before you pass your Apozeme, put the powder upon the blancket, and pass the
Apozeme three or four times, pouring it upon the powder, and your Apozeme will
be clarified and Aromatized.

Know that upon four ounces of decoction you must put an ounce of Syrup, and
being passed and repassed there will be wanting a quarter or more.

Take twelve pints of Whey, four pound of good Sugar, put them together into a
basin or other vessel convenient, the sugar being melted let it boil a walme
or two; then put into it four ounces of juice of Lymons boiling it a little
longer, then take it from the fire, and being a little cold, pass it three or
four times through a white linen cloth, and it will be clear and agreeable.

If you have no Whey, you may make it with Milk as follows.

Take three or six pints of Milk, put it into a pipkin or earthen vessel,
that done, take a spoonefull of stroakings and mix it with three or four
spoonefulls of the said Milk, then mix it with the Milk and cover the pot with
a cover, and let it stand three or four hours upon the hot Coals or Cinders,
then take away the Cheeze or Curd, and clarify it as aforesaid.

CHAP. V. The manner to draw Juices.
THe juyces of Roots, and of Herbs, of Plantaine, Rue, Smalladge, Purslaine,
Lettice, Betony, Mercury, and other fresh herbs, are drawn as follows.

The Brass or Stone Mortar, being filled with the Roots, or herbs, well
cleansed and washed if need require, then beat them very well with an iron or
wooden pestle; after they are well beaten put them into a strong linen
cloth, tying the cloth on the top with a packthred, and put it into the
press and press it very well, having a basin underneath to receive the juice.

That when you draw the juice of any other root or herb, you must first wash
the mortar, pestle, and press, with hot or cold water, for fear the said root
or herb be different in quality, and so loose his virtue; and you must seek
always to have your herbs, when they are at their best nature.

Also there are certain simples which ought to be beat in the Marble mortar,
as shall be written hereafter.

CHAP. VI. To draw the juice of Quinces.
THe Quinces must be rasped with the raspe of iron one after another, for by
this means you may draw more juice, then if you beat them in a mortar whole,
or in quarters, the^ put that which is rasped into a cloth, and press it in
the press as is showed before:

CHAP. VII. To draw the Juice of Red and Damask Roses.
TAke the flowers of the said Roses, and beat them very well in a Marble
mortar, until they be almost in a paste; then put them in a linen cloth and
press them.

CHAP. VIII. To draw the Juice of Gooseberries.
THe Gooseberries being beat very well in a Marble mortar, put them into a
cloth and press them in the press.

CHAP. IX. To draw the Juice of Barberries.
THey are drawn in the same manner as the Gooseberries.

CHAP. X. To draw the Juice of Mulberries.
TAke a quantity of Mulberries, beat them, and tie them in a cloth, and press
them in the press.

CHAP. XI. To draw the Juice of Cherries.
TAke a quantity of Cherries, and take out the stones and press them as
aforesaid.

CHAP. XII. To draw the Juice of Granates.
TAke the Pomgranates, and take away the peele and keep it; which is called
Malicorium, and all the rest is put in a cloth and pressed as before.

CHAP. XIII: To draw the Juice of Citrons and Lymons.
CVt the Citrons and Lymons in the middle, and take away the peele, and put the
rest in a cloth and press it.

Otherwise cut the said Citrons and Lymons in four quarters, and take away the
skin peele and seeds and so press it; but because the pulpe will never
press so well but there will remain some juice, you may put to it a little
fresh water, and so press it, and you may use it about what you please.

CHAP. XIIII. The manner to Clarify the aforesaid Juices.
WHen you have drawn the aforesaid Juices as is written, you shall put them
severally in a double glass, and set them in the Sun or some other place two
or three days or more, to the end that they may settle, and all the dreggs may
descend to the bottom of the said glass; then take them and pass them
severally, very softly through the blancket, that the dregs do not mix with
them, and trouble the clear which ought only to pass.

And if you will use them presently, you may do as you make Syrups and other
Compositions, but if you will keep them, put them into a double glass,
filling the glass almost to the neck, then fill up the glass with a little
oil of Olives, and stop it, and keep them in a temperate place.

And when you will use the foresaid Juices, you must take a little Cotton, and
put into the mouth of the glass to suck up the oil, and your juice will be
clear and clean, which you may pass through the blancket to make it more
clearer.

The Juice of Mulberries is clarified as follows; being pressed boil it a
little in a pan or basin, and being hot pass it by little and little through
the blancket: and as soon as it is passed, make it into a Syrup with Sugar.

The Juice of Cherries is clarified in the Sun, and strained through the
blancket; and as soon as it is strained, made into a Syrup as it is written in
the Treatise of Syrups.

CHAP. XV. To draw the Juice of Apples and to Clarify it.
RAspe the Apples one after another, as the Quinces, and draw the Juice of the
same fashion; the which being drawn, boil it a little, and strain it through
the blancket, and that which is strained put into a glass, and set it in the
Sun that the dreggs may go to the bottom, and then strain it again
through the blancket, and make Syrup.

If you will keep the said Juice of Apples, put it into a double glass and
put some oil upon it.

Note, that in Winter the said Juices ought to be kept in the Cellar.

CHAP. XVI. The manner to boil Sugar to the consistance; to make Sugar of
Roses.
Boil a pound of Sugar, or what quantity you please, that is to say to a pound
of Sugar, half a pint of water into the consistance or height which you shall
know by these signs following.

First, the sum that rises from the sugar in the skillet or other vessel
will be very little, when the sugar is almost boiled.

Secondly, taking a little up upon the end of the spatule, and throwing it upon
the ground, a little of it will fly away, and that which is one ground does
not cleave thereto: Also you may know by putting a little upon a trencher and
let it cool; also in taking a little upon the end of the spatule or spoone,
and pouring it down, makes a long thread by those signs, you may know when it
is boiled to the consistance, you shall know also when it is half cold by the
thickness of it.

CHAP. XVII. To boil Sugar to make Tablets or Lozinges with powders.
TO make the said Lozinges or Tablets, if you have not of the best Sugar, take
some midling Sugar, and when it is almost boiled, scum it very well; this Sugar
must not be boiled to that height as the Sugar of Roses, you may know when it
is enough by taking a little upon the Spatule or upon a trencher, and it
grows thick and does not run, but yet it sticks to the trencher; also if
you take a little upon the end of the spatule, it makes a thread but not so
long as that of Sugar of Roses.

And to tell you in one word, you must have judgment to judge of the boiling
thereof, for sometimes there is put two drammes of powder, for two ounces of
Sugar, and sometimes a dram for two ounces.

CHAP. XVIII. To boil Sugar and Honey to the height to make Electuaries.
TAke the decoction or infusion with the Sugar, and boil them upon a
char-coale fire well kindled to the height that it ought to be boiled unto.

The which you shall know by taking a little upon the end of the spatule or
silver spoone, and putting it upon a trencher, which being cold, will not
scarce run without you stir it with your fingers, which will be very
glutinous. Also when it stays upon the spoon or spatule, and will not run,
but drop out in little bits as it were.

The honey will be boyld also in the same fashion, preparing it as follows.

The honey being clarified as is written in the first Chapter of this Treatise,
and boiled to the height which you shall know by taking a little and putting it
upon a trencher and it stay upon the trencher being cold and does not run;
then take it from the fire and use it, or if you will keep it, let it be a
little cold, and then put it into a pot fitting, and tie a paper over it being
pricktfull of small holes with a needle, that no dirt nor flies get into it,
and when it is cold tie it over with a double paper, and keep it in a temperate
place, and when you will use it, you need but weigh the quantity you shall need
and heat it in a skillet or vessel fitting for the same.

CHAP. XIX. Infusions to make Syrups.
FOr to make Infusions of Syrups which are made of flowers, you must put for
each pint of water four ounces of flowers, as you shall see written hereafter;
the infusions must be made in pipkins, or vessels of pewter, or silver,
having narrow mouths that they may be covered, and not in vessels of Copper
or Brass.

That the vessel which the infusions are made in ought to be stopped, Note.
that the medicaments loose not their virtue by exhalation.

Also that in making many infusions one after another, as in Syrups, Note.
it is necessary that the first infusion should be made with boiling water
poured upon them, and the others which follow only warmed.

CHAP. XX. To know when Syrups are boiled enough.
NOte that to make Syrups with infusions or decoctions, there is put sometimes
three parts of Sugar to a quantity of infusion or decoction, as for example
three quarterns of Sugar to a pint of infusion or decoction; also there be
those Syrups that are put as much Sugar as decoction, and some not so much,
therefore this is no general rule.

The Syrups ought to be boiled softly upon the furnace upon a charcoale fire,
taking it from the fire when it is boiled, and scumming of it with a pierced
spoone or silver spoone.

When the Syrup begins to boil, the fume will go out very strong; but when
it is boiled or near being boiled, you shall see the fume very well diminished.

To know better, take a little upon the spoone or spatule and let it fall, and
if it make a thread it is boiled.

Also in taking a little between the thumb and one of the fingers it makes a
thread it is enough, or in putting a little upon a trencher, and it runs drop
by drop and makes a thread.

And when it is boiled, take it from the fire and let it cool in the basin,
then put it into a pot and cover it with a paper full of holes made with a
needle, that nothing falls into it, and when it is cold cover it with a
double paper, and keep it in a temperate place.

CHAP. XXI. To Remedy Syrups that are to much boiled, and those which are to
little, and those which are Candied.
IF the Syrups be to much boiled, put a little of the decoction, or infusion,
or juice, the which it is made with, and let it boil a little to come to the
true height.

If they be not boiled enough, you must put them upon the fire and boil them
to their consistance; for those Syrups which are candied, you must warm some
of the decoction or juice that it is made with, and pour it into the Candie,
and so dissolve that which is candied, and boil it to the height.

CHAP. XXII. To draw the pulpe of dates for Electuar: Diaphaenic:
TAke ten ounces of good new Dates, take the skin away with your knife and
the little white skin which is within side and put away the stones, then cut
them into small pieces, and put them into a skillet or other vessel pouring
upon them five ounces of water or more, and let them stand in soake three days
in winter in the chimney corner, but in summer in some place from the fire, and
when they have been in infusion three days take them up, and put them into a
Marble mortar and beat them very well into a paste soluble, then pulpe them
through a sieve as you do your Cassia, with a vessel underneath to receive
that which is pulped or passed:

CHAP. XXIII. To draw the pulps of Cassia, prunes, and Tamarinds, and to
prepare them for molutive Electuaries.
EAch one knows how to pulpe and pass the Cassia by a common sieve.

For to draw the pulps of prunes in their times and seasons; you shall take
sweet Damask prunes, or in their stead sweet plumbs the quantity you please,
boil them in sufficient quantity of water till they be boiled enough.

Then pulpe them through a sieve, and put under them a vessel to receive the
pulpe, putting to them a little liquor, and if you have not of the liquor, take
a little warm water. To draw pulpe of Tamarinds do as follows: take what
quantity of Tamarinds you please, put them into a Marble mortar, and beat them
well with warm water or decoction, then pulpe them through a sieve as
aforesaid.

Note.
That when the said pulpes of Tamarinds and of Prunes are passed, there will
remain some humidity, which has been put to them in the passing of them;
wherefore you must put them several in a pewter dish or platter upon a
chaffing dish of coals, stirring it together until all the humidity be
consumed, so you may do with Cassia, etc. if you put liquor to them, for
otherwise they will spoil the Electuaries which they enter into, and make them
mustie.

That done you may weigh the dose that enters into the Electuary, and keep the
best for another use.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Medicaments which are put into powder, and first of Sennae.
TAke half a pound of the best Sennae, cleanse it from the stalks and naughty
leaves if there be any, and for every ounce of the said Sennae, put a dram of
Fenill or Anniseeds, and beat them to powder as follows.

First, put your Fenill or Anniseeds which be the Correctives into the mortar,
and beat them very well, and when they are well beaten put in your Sennae; and
when they be well beaten together put them into a lawne searse covered, and
searse them, and that which remains put into the mortar and beat it again,
and then searse it, and so do while you have searsed it all, but if there be
half an ounce or so left, you may keep it to make some medicine.

It is good to have five or six ounces in a box ready in powder to use when
there is occasion, as to make pills, powders, Electuaries, or such like, it
will keep half a year together in powder.

That in Electuaries, pills, Note.
etc. it is written hereafter of the quantity of Senae; you must understand the
said Senae with the Correctives.

CHAP. XXIIII. The manner to dry certain Medicaments, which are afterward put
in powder.
ROses, Violets, and Saffron, if they be too moist, and not dry enough, they
shall be dried in the Sun or before the fire enclosed in a paper, and
turning the paper first one side, and then the other, that they may dry one
every side and be not burned, after that beat them easily in powder in the
mortar.

Those herbs and roots which are not dry enough, must be put into the Oven
after the Bread is taken out, laying them that they do not burn.

Otherwise, some certain time before you use them, tie them in little bundles
and hang them in the air in the shade to dry.

CHAP. XXV. How to put in powder, Aloes, Mirrhe, Rubarbe, Saffron, and
Assafaetida.
THese foresaid medicaments are put in powder severally; therefore before you
put them into powder, you must put two or three drops of oil of Olives into
the bottom of the mortar, according to the quantity of the medicament which
you will put in powder, then stir it about with the bottom of the pestle,
and put in the medicament, which you easily put into powder, without either
sticking to pestle or mortar.

For the Rubarbe, before you put it in powder, it is not amiss to cut it into
small pieces, and then it will powder the easier and better, and you need not
pass it through a sieve or searse.

The Assafaetida, if it be dry, is put in powder in the same manner.

If the Aloes be droffie or foul after it is in powder, pass it through the
sieve, which is to pass bitter ingredients, and so you may do by any other
medicament, passing them in sieves proper for the same.

CHAP. XXVI. The manner to powder Scammonie.
IT is made into fine powder, anointing the bottom of the pestle and mortar
with a little oil; but it must not be passed by any sieve or searse, as is
written before of the Rubarbe.

CHAP. XXVII. To put Masticke in powder.
BEfore you put your Mastick in the mortar, pick it, and put into the mortar a
little Rose water or common water, and if there be need, pulse it through a
sieve covered.

CHAP. XXVIII. To put Trochisques of Agaricke in powder.
THey must be put in powder according to the same manner as the Masticke,
wetting the bottom of the mortar with a little Rose water or common water; but
they must not be scarsed.

That the mortar is noynted and wetted with Rose water, common water, or oil,
because the powder shall not stick to the mortar, nor loose by exhalation.

CHAP. XXIX. To put Campher in powder.
TAke a scruple of white starch, which you shall beat into powder, then put to
it a good dram of Campher and beat them easily together into powder. Also
take two or three sweet Almonds, peele them with your knife, and beat them in
the mortar, and put to them a dram of Campher.

CHAP. XXX. To put Cinnamon in powder.
CInnamon is put in powder, by beating two or three Almonds in the mortar
because it should not loose the sent, and being in powder is searsed through a
sieve, as is written in the twenty three Chapter.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Infusion of Oils.
FOr each pound of oil, there is commonly put four ounces of leaves or
flowers as is showed in the Treatise of oils, excepting some which are
compounded.

CHAP. XXXII. To know when Oils are boiled enough.
THe infusion or infusions of oils being made, are put to boil in a vessel
as is spoken of before upon the furnace with the fire well kindled; you shall
know when they are boiled by the humidity, that the oils draw from the virtue
of the simples is all exhaled or vanished away; then take a little of the oil
at the end of the spatule, and drop it into the fire, and if it burns clear
and makes no noise it is boiled enough; then take it from the fire and let it
cool a little, and put it into a pot and cover it with a paper pricked full of
holes, and when it is cold cover it with a double paper, or with a piece of
parchment wetted, and use it.

CHAP. XXXIII. To know when Plasters are boiled enough.
THe perfect boiling of plasters, is known by taking a little of the said
plaster and putting it into a little cold water, and if it rises clean
together without running in the water it is boiled enough, then take it from
the fire and let it stand until it be half cold, and then make it into
magdaleons.

That when you form magdaleons of plaster, Note.
which have oil in them, then wet your hands with fair water, but if there be
no oil in them, then anoint your hands with oil.

CHAP. XXXIV. The manner to wash the Barrow Hogs grease to make unguent:
Rosat.
TAke the cakes of Barrowes grease, and take away the veins and skin, and cut
it into small pieces, and melt it on the fire in a pan, with a little water
stirring of it together with a spatule of wood, then strain it, and press it
through a white linen cloth, then put it into an earthen pot or vessel being
twice too big for it, but just that the grease may fill it half full, and
when it is cold, fill the pot almost full with hot water, stirring of it well
together with the spatule in the Sun, then let it stand until it be all
settled, then pour the water away softly, and do so nine times one after
another, and when you have washed it as aforesaid with hot water, then wash it
as many times with cold water as before, and the two last times wash it with
Rose water; the cause of washing of it so often is to take the smell of the
grease quite away, as shall be written when we speak of the making of
ointment of Roses.

CHAP. XXXV. The manner to wash Ceruse.
TAke a quantity of Ceruse, as a pound or two, or more or less; rub it through
the Laune or hair of a common sieve, putting underneath a white paper to
receive that which is passed, then put it into a pipkin or other vessel, and
pour as much fair water as will cover it upon it, and stir it well together
with a wooden spatule, and then let it settle, and pour the water softly from
it, and pour in it as much more fair water, and do so nine or ten times,
and when you have done, put the Ceruse into a platter and set it in the Sun
or by the fire side to dry, covering of it with a white linen cloth, and when
it is dry, use it or keep it in a box until you have occasion to use it.

CHAP. XXXVI. To wash and prepare Lytharge.
TAke two pound of Lytharge, or what quantity you please, beat it in a mortar,
and searce it all through a searce, and when you have done, put it again into
the mortar, and fill the mortar almost full of fair water, and stir the
Lytharge and the water together with the pestle, and pour the water presently
out of the mortar into a great basin, and then put as much more water into the
mortar and stir it well together and pour it into the basin, and so do
until all the Lytharge be gone out of the mortar with the water into the
basin, then let it stand all night to settle, and when it is settled, pour
away the water, and dry the Lytharge in the Sun, and so use it.

CHAP. XXXVII. The manner to burn Lead, and to powder and wash it for the
unguent Pompholigos.
TAke two or three pound of Lead, or what quantity you please, put it into a
pipkin or great iron ladle, and set it upon a hot charcoale fire, and when it
is melted, stir it together with a spatule or iron rod until it comes into
a powder somewhat yellowish, and that you see no more form of Lead, then take
the said powder from the fire, and let it stand until it be cold, and then
searce it through a sieve, and when you have done wash it in the same manner as
the Ceruse in the thirty five Chapter, and so use it being dried in the Sun
or before the fire.

CHAP. XXXVIII. To prepare Tuttie Stone.
TAke what quantity you please of Tuttie Stone, and put it into a Crucible, and
set it into a furnace of hot fire until it be very well burnt, which you
shall know by the redness of it; for when it is enough it will look very red,
then take it from the fire and let it stand until it be cold, then powder it
in a mortar, and searce it through a searse, and when you have done prepare it
with Rose water or fair common water in this manner, put your powder upon the
stone, and power some water upon it, and stir it together with the mule or
mallet stone until it be very well prepared, which you shall know by putting
it upon your hand and rubbing of it a little, and it does grace nor scratch, as
one does by pearls and precious stones, then form little Trochisques and trio
them, and when you will use them powder them in a mortar.

CHAP. XXXIX. The manner to Calcine Roman Vitrioll.
ROman Vitrioll is dried in the great iron spoone or ladle in a moderate fire,
until it comes all white, stirring of it continually with a spatule or iron
rod, and then augment the fire a little, and it will come all red, and that is
called Colcothar; then take it from the fire, and put it in powder as is said
of the Tuttie, and prepare it upon the stone, for the confection of the
Emplaster Diapalma.

CHAP. XL. To make Cream and Salt of Tartar.
TAke a pound of Tartar, beat it in a mortar and searce it through a course
sieve, then put it into a pipkin, and cover it with water, and make it boil a
walme or two, then pass it two or three times through a hippocras bag with a
basin underneath to receive the liquor, then set it to settle the space of
twenty four hours, at the end of which, you shall take of the Cream which
swimmeth one the top, with a trencher or silver spoone, and pour the water
softly away by inclination, and scrape the salt away which sticks one the
sides with a spoone, and make it fall to the bottom, then wash them, dry them,
and prepare them, and keep them by themselves.

THE CHARITABLE APOTHECARIE. The second Treatise of Syrups.
CHAP. I. The manner to make Syrup of Violets with the Juice.
TAke twelve ounces of Violet leaves picked, put them into a marble Mortar, and
beat them very well, then tie them in a linen cloth and press them in the
press, and you shall have five ounces of Juice, which you shall put into a
violl, then take twenty ounces of good Sugar, and half a pint of fair water,
and boil it almost to the height of the Sugar of Roses, then take it from the
fire, and mix your juice with it and your Syrup is made; the which you shall
put into a pot and cover it with a paper pricked with holes, and when it is cold
cover it with a double paper, and keep it in a temperate place.

CHAP. II. The manner to make Syrup of Violets upon a cloth.
TAke two pound of Sugar, boil it with a pint of water to the height or
consistence as before specified, then take half a pound of Violet leaves,
beat them in a mortar as before, and put them upon a cloth, two holding the
cloth at each end, then pour the Sugar very hot three times upon the said
Violet leaves with a basin underneath to receive the Syrup, pressing of it very
hard with a spatule or silver spoon, and scraping the outside of the cloth very
clean, and making of it fall into the said basin and your Syrup is done, the
which you shall prepare and keep as before.

Note.
That you must not throw away that which has colored the cloth for there is
Sugar amongst it, but dry it in the Sun and keep it, which will be good
conserve and serve for a binding, as shall be written hereafter.

CHAP. III. To make Syrup of Violets of three Infusions.
TAke a pound of Violet leaves picked and cleansed from the green leaves, put
them into an earthen pot or other vessel, and pour upon them four pints of
water being hot, then cover the said vessel and set it to infuse in the
chimney corner for the space of twelve hours, at the end of which warm it
very well, and strain it through a strong linen cloth, and press them in the
press, and through away those flowers, then warm the infusion, and put to it
another pound of fresh Violets, letting them infuse twelve hours as before,
then strain and press them in the press, and put a pound more of fresh
flowers to the infusion, stirring them well together, and let them infuse as
before, then strain and press them in the press, and if you will make it
presently into Syrup, then take four pound two ounces of the infusion, put it
into the Copper pan, and put to it five pound and a half of good Sugar and
boil them together unto a Syrup; the which let stand till it be half cold,
then scumme of the froth or scumme, and put it into a pot and cover it with a
pierced paper until it be quite cold, then cover it with a double paper or
wet parchment.

CHAP. IIII. Mucharon of Violets and Damask Roses.
THe Mucharon of Violets and Damask Roses, is nothing else but the last
infusion strained and pressed, the which will keep a whole year being put
into a glass with a straight neck, then put upon it a little oil of Olives
to keep it from being mustie, and when you will use it, take the oil away with
a little Cotton.

CHAP. V. To make Syrup of Coltsfoot.
THere is made three infusions of the flowers of Coltsfoot with the green that
goes round about them, half a pound at each time in a quart of water; you
shall take the said flowers and put them into a pot or pipkin and heat the
water scalding hot, then pour it upon the flowers, and stir them well
together with a spatule of wood, cover them close, and let them stand in the
chimney corner the space of twelve hours, then strain them and press them,
and put as many more flowers unto the infusion being hot, and let them infuse
twelve hours as before, then strain and press them, and put as many more
flowers, doing as before; then clarify it with the white of an egg and the
shell, as is showed in the second Chapter of the first Treatise, weigh it, and
put to it three parts of Sugar, and boil it to a Syrup.

CHAP. VI. To make Syrup of Damask Roses of nine Infusions.
THere is made nine infusions of a pound at each time of Damask Rose leaves
being picked, and the yellow which is within them taken away also, the green
that goes round about them, in four pints of water; the last infusion being
made, strain them, and let them stand a while to settle, then strain them
softly, and there will be about five pints, then clarify it, and boil with it
as much Sugar, that is, five pound and boil it to the height of a Syrup,
taking away the scum with a spoone and covering of it, and keep it in a
temperate place.

CHAP. VII. To make Syrup of Red Poppies, Rhead:
MAke three infusions of half a pound at each time of red Poppies in two pints
of water, and the last infusion being strained and pressed, put to it as much
Sugar and boil it into a Syrup, scumming of it at the last, and well covering
of it.

CHAP. VIII. To make Syrup of water Lillies.
MAke three infusions of water Lilly flowers in a quart of water, half a
pound at each time, letting them infuse the space of twelve hours as is
aforesaid; the last infusion being strained, boil it into a Syrup with as much
Sugar.

CHAP. IX. To make Syrup of Maidenhaire.
TAke Capill: Veneris, or in his stead Adianthe two handfulls, Pollitric:
Scolopendry, of each a handful and a half, an ounce of Licorish bruised and
scraped, and with Sugar make it into a Syrup as follows.

The herbs being washed and cleansed shall be put in infusion for the space
of twenty four hours in three pints of warm water, then boil them a little
and strain them, and with three parts of Sugar clarify and boil them into a
Syrup.

CHAP. X. The manner to make Syrup of Iujubes simple and compounded, and first
to make the simple.
TAke a hundred good Iujubes, open them in the middle without throwing away any
thing, then boil them in three pints of water until half be consumed, and
with three parts of Sugar boil it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XI. To make Syrup of Iujubes compounded.
TAke French Barley an ounce, good Iujubes threescore, Licorish scraped and
bruised an ounce, Capill: Veneris, politric: of each a handful, Quince seeds,
Poppie, Melon, and Lettice seeds, of each half an ounce, bruised with Sugar,
make them into a Syrup as follows.

Take four pints of water, set it to boil; first with the Barley, and when it
is a little boiled put in the seeds, and afterward the herbs and Licorish,
and boil them until half be consumed, then strain the decoction, and with
three parts of Sage clarify and boil it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XII. To make Syrup of Marsh Mallows.
TAke Marsh Mallow roots prepared, an ounce and a half of Sparagus roots also
prepared, Licorish scraped and bruised, of each half an ounce, tops of Marsh
Mallows, common Mallows, Pellitory, Pimpernell, Adianthos, Politric: of each
half a handful; Mellon, Cucumber, and Citroll seeds of each half an ounce,
sugar a pound and a half, make them into a Syrup as follows.

The roots of Marsh Mallows and Sparagus being bruised and prepared, boil
first in five pints of water, and when it is a little boiled then put in the
seeds being bruised, and then the herbs, and after that the Licorish; boil
them all to a pint, then strain it, and with a pound and a half of Sugar
clarify and boil it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XIII. To make Syrup of Succory with Rubarbe.
TAke French Barley a handful, Sparagus roots, roots of Danderlion, and Succory
roots of each three ounces; Femmaterry, Politric: Agrimon: Adianthos, of each a
handful and a half, Mellon, Cucumber, and Citrole seeds of each half an
ounce, Licorish scraped and bruised an ounce, Sugar two pound, make the Syrup
as follows,

Put eight pints of water into a pan or other vessel, and boil with it very
well the French Barley, then put to it the Succory, Danderlion, and Sparagus
roots prepared, and after that the herbs, and then the seeds, and at last the
Adianth: Politric: and Licorish; and boil the decoction to four pints, then
pour it altogether into an earthen vessel to infuse together twenty four
h^ures, having first strained twelve ounces of the said decoction, and poured
it upon five ounces of good Rubarbe cut into small pieces in a little pipkin,
and set it also in the chimney corner being well covered to infuse twenty four
hours.

At the end of which time strain the other decoction, and clarify it, and
boil with it two pound of Sugar into a Syrup almost as high as your Sugar of
Roses, and in the mean time while that is boiling, strain the decoction with
the Rubarbe and press it well in the press, and when the Syrup is boiled to
the heigh mix it amongst it, and if the Syrup be not thick enough, make it
boil a little more, and cool it, and put it into a pot and keep it in a
temperate place.

CHAP. XIIII. To make Syrup of Rubarbe Laxative.
TAke three pints of the decoction made with Betony, Succory, Sage, with their
roots, and Buglosse; and in this decoction being hot infuse all night in these
medicaments following.

That is two ounces and a half of good Rubarbe cut in small pieces, a handful
of Violets, two drams of Cinnamon bruised in a mortar, as many Fenill seeds,
and half an ounce of Licorish scraped and bruised.

The morning following boil them all two or three boylings, then strain and
press it, and with the said expression boil three parts or Sugar into a
Syrup, and mix with it four ounces of Syrup of Damask Roses.

CHAP. XV. To make Syrup of Poppies simple.
TAke half a pound of white Poppie heads, and as many black Poppie heads,
break them, or cut them with their seeds and put them into a pan or pipkin,
and pour upon them four pints of scalding water, then cover them close, and
set them in infusion in the chimney corner the space of twenty four hours,
then strain and press them, and put to the infusion being hot as many more
Poppie heads, and let them infuse as before, then let them boil a little, and
strain and press them, and put to the decoction three parts of Sugar, and
boil it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XVI. To make Syrup of Lymons.
TAke a pound of good Sugar, and with fair water boil it to the height of
Sugar of Roses, then mix with ^t four ounces of clear juice of Lymons, to
render it into the form of a Syrup.

CHAP. XVII. To make Syrup of Quinces.
TAke two pound of the juice of Quinces, clarify it very well, and with a
pound and a half of good Sugar boil it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XVIII. To make Syrup of Sabor or Apples compounded.
TAke a pint and a half of the Juice of Runnet Apples or Pearemaines, clarify
it very well, and infuse in it twenty four hours two ounces of Seen, and two
drammes of Anniseeds, then boil them a little, and strain and press them,
and with twelve ounces of Sugar make the decoction into a Syrup; if you will
have it more purging, you may put three ounces of Seen, and three drammes of
Anniseeds. Also if you please you may infuse the Seen with half the juice of
Apples, and half juice of Burrage and Buglosse, being well clarified.

CHAP. XIX. To make Syrup of Mulberries.
TAke two pound of juice of Mulberries and Blackberries together, clarify
them, and with a pound and a half of Sugar boil them into a Syrup.

CHAP. XX. To make Syrup of Cherries:
TAke a pound of the Juice of Cherries well clarified, and with twelve ounces
of Sugar boil it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XXI. To make Syrup of dried Roses.
TAke three or four ounces of good red Rose leaves, put them into a pan, and
pour upon them a pint and a half of hot water, and let them infuse being
covered the space of twenty four hours, then strain and press them, and
with a pound of Sugar boil the infusion into a Syrup.

CHAP. XXII. To make Syrup of Wormwood.
TAke half a pound of Roman Wormwood, cut it into small pieces; take also
three drams of Nard: Indic: which cut also, then take two ounces of red Roses,
infuse them altogether the space of twenty four hours hot in two pints of
good old white Wine and as much Juice of Quinces clarified, at the end of which
boil them to two pints, and clarify it, and with as much Sugar boil it into
a Syrup.

CHAP. XXIII. Of Syrups made with Honey. To make Despumd Honey.
TAke a quantity of good honey, prepare and clarify it as is showed in the
first Chapter of the first Treatise; then boil it upon the furnace in a basin
until it be come to the height of honey, which you shall know by taking a
little with the spatule, and put it on a trencher and let it cool, that done,
take it from the fire, and when it is cold set it up among the other Syrups.

CHAP. XXIIII. To make honey of Roses.
THe said Honey of Roses is made diverse ways, but the best and easiest ways
is those which follows.

The first is to make three infusions of a pound of red Roses as you do your
Syrups in four pints of hot water, each infusion the space of twelve hours;
the last infusion being strained, boil with it as much honey until it comes
to the height of a Syrup, and when it is cold scumme it.

The second manner is to make the said three infusions, with half red Rose
leaves, and half Damask Rose leaves mixed together, being both together a
pound in four pints of common water as is said before; the last infusion being
strained and pressed, you shall boil as much honey with it to the consistance
thereof.

CHAP. XXV. To make Honey of Violets.
THe honey of Violets is made like the honey of Roses, making three infusions,
and the last infusion being strained, boil as much honey with it, and at the
last scumme it.

CHAP. XXVI. To make Honey of Mercury.
TAke the juice of Mercury and common honey, of each a like quantity, boil
them a walme or two, and strain them through a linen cloth, and then wash the
pan clean, and put into it again the said juice and honey, and boil it to
the height of a Syrup.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Conserves. To make Conserve of Violets.
TAke half a pound of Violet leaves clean picked, put them into a Marble
mortar and beat them with a wooden pestle until they come into a paste, and
that in handling of them you feel no roughness; then put to them by little
and little a pound of fine Sugar in powder or cut in small pieces, and beat
them very well together, then put it into a pot and set it in the Sun for
thirty days, stirring of it two or three times a week with a spatule.

CHAP. XXVIII. To make Conserve of Roses.
TAke half a pound or a pound of red Rose buds, cutting the white and yellow
away from them, and beat them in the Marble mortar with the double of Sugar.

CHAP. XXIX. To make Conserve of water Lilly flowers.
TAke half a pound of white water Lilly flowers and beat them in the Marble
mortar as before, with the Sugar doubled, and set them in the Sun as before:

CHAP. XXX. To make Conserve of Coltsfoote.
TAke only the yellow of the flower, and make it into Conserve as before.

CHAP. XXXI. To make Conserves of the flowers of Burrage, Buglosse, Rosemary,
and Betony.
THe said Conserves are made and prepared as the Conserves before written; if
you will have the said C^nserves sweeter, you may put for a pound of flowers
three pound of Sugar, and for half a pound of flowers, a pound and a half of
Sugar.

THE CHARITABLE APOTHECARIE. The third Treatise of Ele(...)
CHAP. I. The manner to make Electuary (...)tive for the rich.
TAke Polypodic of the Oak bruised three ounces, Fenill seeds half an ounce,
Betonie, Agrimonie, Adianthos, Politric: Scolopendry, of each two handfulls;
leaves of Seen cleansed two ounces, Anniseeds half an ounce; pulpe of Cassia,
pulpe of Tamarinds, and of Prunes, of each six ounces; Seen in powder with
Anniseeds four ounces and a half, a pound of sugar, make it into an Electuary
as follows.

Boil the said simples cleansed and washed in fair water; first, the
Polypodie with the Fenill seeds the space of a quarter of an hour, then put in
the Betony and the Agrimony, and after that the Politric: Adianthos and
Scolopendry.

Take a pint of the said decoction strained, in the which infuse the space of
twenty four hours the said two ounces of Seen, with the Anniseeds, in the
which time draw the pulps of Tamarinds and prunes, as is showed in the twenty
two Chapter of the first Treatise, a part.

Note.
That after you have drawn your Cassia, those excrements which cannot be pulped
through the sieve, put in infusion with the Seen.

That done, make your infusion boil a little, and then press and strain it,
and with the decoction or infusion boil your Sugar to the height as is written
in the seventeene Chapter of the first Treatise:

The Syrup being done, pour it into a vessel of brass or pewter from the
fire, and mix with it the said pulpes of Tamarinds and prunes, mixing of them
well together with the bistorties, and after that mix with them the pulpe of
Cassia; then stir very well into it the Seen in powder as is showed in the
twenty three Chapter of the said first Treatise, mixing all very well together;
the which being all mixed and incorporated together the Electuary is done* if
in the mixing of them the Syrup should grow cold you must warm it upon the
furnace.

Note.
That you must never mix the pulps with the Syrup boiling hot, for then it will
burn, but when it is almost half cold.

I have written but only one way to make the Syrup, which is very good, and
shall serve for these four following.

CHAP. II. To make Electuar: Lenetive for the poor.
TAke a pint of the former decoction of the simples to infuse with the Seen and
Anniseeds as aforesaid.

Seen cleansed two ounces, Anniseeds half an ounce; Pulpe of Prunes and
Tamarinds of each nine ounces; Seen in powder with his Anniseeds four ounces
and a half; Sugar a pound: make it into an Electuary in the same manner as the
former.

CHAP. III. To make Di^catholic^n.
TAke twenty ounces of the former decoction to infuse with the Seen and
Anniseeds.

Seen cleansed two ounces, Fenill seeds half an ounce, pulpe of Cassia four
ounces, pulpes of Prunes and Tamarinds of each six ounces, Seen in powder with
his Anniseeds two ounces and two drammes, Rubarbe in powder two ounces, sugar a
pound and a half; make it into an Electuary as follows.

First, put in infusion the Seen and the Anniseeds as before.

The Rubarbe must be put in powder as is shown in the twenty five Chapter of
the first Treatise, and is mixed with the powder of Seen and Anniseeds.

The pulpes of Cassia, Tamarinds, and Prunes, being prepared are put asunder,
and when the sugar is boiled with the infusion as is showed before, then when
it is half cold mix the Pulpes in, and after that the powders as before, and
so make it into an Electuary.

CHAP. IIII. To make Diaprunes simple and compounded.
TAke a pint of the said decoction strained of the said simples to infuse with
the Seen and Anniseeds: Seen cleansed two ounces, Anniseeds half an ounce,
pulpe of Prunes half a pound, pulpe of Tamarinds four ounces, red Roses three
drammes, Sugar a pound; make it into an Electuary: This Electuary is made
according to the former, and is called Diaprunes Simple.

Which if you will make compounded; while this said Electuary is hot, mix very
well with it nine drammes of good Scammonie put in powder as is showed in the
twenty six Chapter of the first Treatise; and then it is Diaprunes compounded.

That I have not written here the Catholicon for Clysters, because you may use
for the same any of these former Electuaries which are far better.

CHAP. V. To make Electuary of Dates or Diaphaenicon.
TAke six ounces of the pulpe of Dates, two ounces of Turbith, a few sweet
Almonds peeled, Ginger scraped with a knife, Mace, Fenill seeds of each two
drammes, Scammonie fix drammes, with ten ounces of despumd Honey, as is
written in the seventeene Chapter of the first Treatise; make an Electuary.

The pulpe of Dates being prepared as is showed in the twenty one Chapter of
the first Treatise, and put by it self, you shall make the following powder:

First put the Turbith and the Ginger in the mortar with the Almonds too hinder
their exhalation, and beat them together, and when they are half beaten, put
in the Mace, Fenill and Anniseeds, beating them into powder, and searcing them
in a coverd scarce as is written in the twenty three Chapter of the first
Treatise, speaking of Seen; having drawn three ounces of powder, put it by it
self in a paper; the Scammonie also must be put in powder as is written before.

Then take the pulpe of Dates, put it into a basin, and put some despumd honey
to it stirring them well together, and then mix the powders and the rest of
the honey, and the last of all stir in the Scammony, stirring them altogether
very well and your Electuary is done.

CHAP. VI. To make Benedict: Laxative.
TAke Turbith, Hermodactills sliced of each six drammes, a few sweet Almonds
peeled, red Roses three drammes, Ginger sliced, Mace of each a dram;
Anniseeds, Grummell seeds, Saxifrage, and Smallage feeds of each two drammes,
Scammonie five drammes, despumd honey fifteen ounces, make it into an
Electuary.

First, put in the mortar the Turbith, Ginger, and Hermodacts, and the Almonds
which being half powdered you shall put in the seeds, and at the last the red
Roses and the Mace, beating them all to powder as before, and searcing them in
the scarce, then put your powder in the basin being stirred about with some of
the honey, then put in all the honey, and then put in the Scammony, stirring
them all very well together and the Electuary is made.

CHAP. VII. To make Tablets or Lozinges of Mechoacan.
TAke Mechoacan, Hermodacts sliced, and Turbith of each two drammes, red Roses
a dram, Ginger half a dram, Scammonie two drammes with half a pound of
Sugar dissolved and boiled in common water, make Tablets the weight of half an
ounce each of them.

The Mechoacan bruised in the mortar, put in the Turbith, Hermodacts, and red
Roses, being all powdered and scarced with two or three Almonds to hinder their
exhalation, then powder the Scammonie and mix the other powders with it.

Then boil the Sugar as is showed in the fifteen Chapter of the first
Treatise, and when it is boiled take it from the fire, and let stand until it
be half cold stirring of it together, then mix your powders into it, and
form Tablets as is showed before.

CHAP. VIII. To make Trochisques of Agaricke.
RAspe two ounces of good white Agaricke or what quantity you please with the
great Raspe of iron; put it into a mortar of Marble and beat it very well,
pouring by little and little some Aqua vitae upon it, and beat it into a
paste, then form Trochisques and dry them in the shade, and when they are dry
beat them again, pouring more Aqua vitae upon them and dry them again, and
then beat them the third time doing as before and dry them and use them; you
may also in the place of Aqua vitae take white wine, in which Ginger has been
all night infused.

CHAP. IX. To make Trochisques of Athandal:
FIrst, put into infusion for the space of four or five days three drames of
gum: dragant. in Rose water in a little pipkin well covered, in which time take
Coloquintida purged from the seeds, the which cut into small pieces and put it
into the mortar having first anointed the bottom of the mortar with a little
oil of Olives, which being well powdered, form it into Trochisques with the
gum: dragant: dissolved; then dry them, and powder them the second time, and
make them into Trochisques with the said gum.

CHAP. X. To make Trochisques of Mirrhe:
TAke Cinnamon, seeds of Nigella, Aloes, Mirrhe, of each two drammes, with the
juice of Rue despumd, make them into Trochisques.

The said medicaments being powdered, beginning with the Cinnamon as is showed
in the thirty Chapter of the first Treatise; then the Nigella, and then the
Mirrhe, and afterward the Aloes, which being all well powdered and searced;
then stirring them together in the mortar, power upon them the juice, beating
and malaxing them well together, and form them into Trochisques, the which dry
in the shade and use them.

CHAP. XI. Of Pills. To make stomach Pills or ante Cibum.
TAke Aloes six drammes, Masticke and red Roses of each two drammes, with the
Syrup of Damask Roses, beat and malaxe them into a mass.

First, powder the Mastick, wetting the bottom of the mortar wtih a little
Rose water, then powder the Roses, and after that the Aloes; then mix them
together, and pour the Syrup upon them and make a mass, beating and malaxing
them very well, then wrap it in a paper being anointed with oil and keep it in
a Gally-pot.

CHAP. XII. To make Pills without the which, or sine quibus.
TAke Aloes half an ounce, Rubarbe, Trochisques of Agaricke, Seen in powder,
of each a dram and a half; Scammonie two drammes and a half, with Syrup of
Damask Roses; make them into pills: powder all the medicaments severally, then
mix them altogether and pour to them the Syrup, and beat and malaxe them
into a mass and put them up as the former.

CHAP. XIII. To make Pills of Agaricke.
TAke Aloes and Trochisques of Agaricke of each three drammes, Seen in powder
two drammes, Marmalade a dram, Scammonie two drammes and a half, with Syrup
of Damask Roses, make them into a mass.

The powders being all powdered and mixed together, put the Marmalade into a
porringer and pour a little Syrup upon it and dissolve it, and pour it upon
the powders, and with as much Syrup as shall be fitting, form them into a
mass keeping it as the former.

CHAP. XIIII. To make Pills of Rubarbe.
TAke Rubarbe an ounce, Cinnamon and Licorish in powder of each half a dram;
with Syrup make them into a mass. The Rubarbe being in powder is mixed with
the other powders, and with Syrup of Damask Roses made into a mass as the
others.

CHAP. XV. To make Somniferous Pills.
TAke Myrrh three drams, Olibanum two drams and a half, Henbane seeds and
Opium of each two drammes, Saffron and Castor of each half a dram, and
eighteen grains with Syrup of dried Roses, make them into a mass. The
powders being powdered put the Opium in the mortar, and pour a little Syrup
into it, beating them together, then mix in the powders as before.

CHAP. XVI. Of Powders. Powder of three Saunders, the which one may use in the
place of Diarrhodon: abbatis Diamargarit: frigid: and de Triasuntali.
TAke white, red, and yellow Saunders, wood of Aloes of each two drammes, seeds
of Succory, Endive, Purslaine, and C^rduus; sealed earth of each a dram; of
these medicaments make a powder as follows.

Cut all the Saunders in small bits or pieces and beat them in the mortar with
half the seeds and the wood of Aloes, and when they are well beaten put in the
other half of the seeds and powder them very well, and scarce them through the
scarce, and that which cannot pass, beat it again in the mortar, and scarce
it until you have scarced all as is showed before; then powder the sealed earth
by itself, and mix them all together and keep them in a glass.

CHAP. XVII. To make the powder called Diambra, the which you may use in the
place of Diambra Arematicum Rosatum, and the Trochisques of Gallia Moschata.
TAke good Cinnamon, Mace, red, white, and yellow Saunders; wood of Aloes, red
Roses of each a dram, Ambergreece and Musk of each twelve grains, make them
into a powder.

First, put in the mortar the Saunders and the wood of Aloes, with the Cinnamon
and Mace to hinder their exhalation, or if you please you may sprinkle upon
them a little Rose water being all well powdered and searced as before; put the
Musk and Ambergreece into the mortar, and with a little of the powder, powder
it, and mix the rest of the powder.

CHAP. XVIII. To make the powder Diatragagant.
TAke gum: dragant: and gum: Arabicke of each three drammes, roots of Iris, of
Florence Liccorish, seeds of white Poppie, Purslaine, and Endive, of each two
drammes, of these medicaments make the powder.

When you have picked the white and the best of the gum: Arabicke, and gum:
dragant: you must make a clear fire in the bottom of the mortar, and make the
mortar so hot that you can scarce touch it with your hand, then heat the bottom
of the pestle almost red hot, then wipe it with a clean cloth, and put in your
gummes and cover it with a clean cloth with a hole in the midst to put in the
pestle, and so beat them to powder, and if the mortar cool before you have
powdered and scarced your gummes, warm and heat it again in the same manner
as you did before; then when your gummes are powdered and scarced, beat the
Iris roots and the seeds, mixing them all together and cover them close as
before.

CHAP. XIX. The manner to make powder of Licorish.
BEcause the Physicians often appoint the powder of Licorish to be used, I have
here set down the manner of making it. Take two ounces or what quantity of
Licorish you please; being dry, scrape it and make it very clean, then cut it
into very small pieces, and beat it in the mortar, and searce it into fine
powder, and keep it in a glass as you do the other powders.

CHAP. XX. The manner to make Tablets or Lozinges with the aforesaid Cordial
powders.
FOr an example, take two drammes of the said powders, and mix it with four
ounces of Sugar boiled, as is showed in the sixteen Chapter of the first
Treatise.

Your Sugar being boiled, take it from the fire, and let it stand till it be
half cold, and then mix in your powder and form Lozinges as is showed in the
seventh Chapter of this same Treatise, speaking of the Tablets of Mechoacan;
your Sugar being dissolved first in Rose water or Cordial water and boiled to
the height.

CHAP. XXI. Of Confection Alkermes and Hyacinth: with Venice Treacle.
YOu may find of these Confections at a reasonable rate at the Druguists, and
Venice Treacle at the Apothecaries, which is made and showed to the
principallest Physicians of the City.

THE CHARITABLE APOTHECARIE. The fourth Treatise of Oils.
CHAP. I. To make Oil of Roses three ways.
THE first way is, take a pound of red Rose buds, beat them in a Marble mortar
with a wooden pestle, then put them into an carthen pot, and pour upon them
four pound of oil of Olives, letting them infuse the space of a month in the
Sun of in the chimney corner stirring of them sometimes, then heat it, and
press it, and strain it, and put it into the same pot or other vessel to
keep.

The second is, take half a pound of red Roses, and half a pound of Damask,
beat them together in a marble mortar, and put them into a pot, and pour upon
them four pound of oil, and let them infuse the space of twelve hours, then
pour them all into a pan and boil them two or three boylings, and strain
them, and press them in a strong to well in the press, and in the mean time
put in the pot as many more Roses and pour the oil upon them, and so heat
them and press them, and put Roses to the oil three times, and then boil it
until all the humidity be consumed which is showed in the thirty two and
thirty three Chapters of the first Treatise.

The third is, to take all Damask Roses and no red, and make three infusions
as before.

CHAP. II. To make Oil of Violets.
THe said oil of Violets is made but with one infusion, as the first oil of
Roses, putting to a pound of the flowers, and that part that encloseth them,
four pound of oil of Olives.

CHAP. III. To make Oil of water Lillies.
TAke a pound of water Lilly flowers, and make two infusions in four pound of
oil as is showed before.

CHAP. IIII. To make Oil of Cammomill.
MAke two infusions of a pound of Cammomill beaten in the mortar, in four
pound of oil as before.

CHAP. V. Oil of Lillies.
TAke only the white of the Lillies, taking away the yellow, and make two
infusions as before.

CHAP. VI. To make oil of Dill, Rue, and Marjoram, and Wormwood.
THe said Oils are made with two infusions as the former: many chooses the
lesser leaves of Wormwood, because they are most astringent.

CHAP. VII. To make Oil of Masticke.
TAke three ounces of Mastick, break it in the mortar, and put it into the
pan, with twelve ounces of Oil and four ounces of red Wine, boil it until
all the wine be almost consumed, then strain and press it, and cover it
close in a pot.

CHAP. VIII. To make Oil of Capers.
TAke the Cortex of Caper roots, an ounce Cortex or Barbe of Tamarix seeds of
Agnus Castus and Ceterach of each two drammes, leaves of Rue a dram, good
Wine and Vinegar of each two ounces; oil of Olives twelve ounces; make the
oil: first beat your barks well in the mortar, then the Ceterach and the
Ruc, then stir them with the oil, wine, and vinegar, and let them infuse
fifteen days in the Sun, then boil them until the Wine and Vinegar be
almost consumed as is showed in the thirty two Chapter of the first Treatise,
and strain it and put it in a pot.

CHAP. IX. To make Oil of Castor.
TAke dry Castor grossly powdered an ounce, Wine or Aqua vitae two ounces,
twelve ounces of oil, boil them until half the Wine or water be consumed,
for the Castor will not endure long coction, then strain it and keep it among
the rest.

CHAP. X. To make Oil of Worms.
TAke half a pound of earth worms, wash them very well; first with fair
water, then with white wine, then put them to infuse into a pot, covering them
with wine the space of twelve hours, then throw away that wine, and put the
worms to infuse in the Sun or in the chimney corner in a pound of oil and
three ounces of Claret the space of eight days, then boil them until the
wine be almost consumed and strain them.

CHAP. XI. To draw Oil of sweet and bitter Almonds.
TAke a quantity of Almonds, beat them very well in a Marble mortar with a
wooden pestle without peeling of them, until they be all beaten into a paste;
then press them softly by little and little in the press, in a clean strong
linen cloth, or in a cloth of hair.

The Oil of bitter Almonds is made after the same manner.

CHAP. XII. Of Unguents: or Ointments. To make unguent Basilicon.
TAke Navell or black Pitch, good Rossin, and yellow wax, of each six
ounces; good oil of Olives a pound and a half, make thereof an ointment. Cut
the wax into small pieces, break the Rossin and the Pitch into little bits,
and melt them all together in the oil, and when they are all melted, strain
them through a strong linen cloth, and put it into a pot or other vessel
until it be cold, then tie it up and set it away.

CHAP. XIII. To make unguent: Aureum.
TAke oil of Olives thirty ounces, yellow Wax six ounces, clear I urpentine
two ounces, Rossin and Colophonia of each an ounce and a half; Olibanum,
Masticke, of each an ounce, Saffron a dram, make them into an ointment.

First, put the Olibanum and the Mastick in powder and scarce them.

Note.
That you must put more of the Mastick and Olibanum to powder, because you shall
find the quantity scarced, and the rest may be kept.

Then cut the wax into small pieces, and also break the Rosin and Colophonia
into small bits, then melt them them with the oil, then mix with them the
Turpentine, and when it is half cold put in the powders of Olibanum and
Masticke, stirring them well together with the Spatule, and after that the
Saffron being dry and put in powder, for to color it the better, and the
ointment is made, the which put into a pot fitting.

CHAP. XIIII. To make unguent Aegyptiacum.
TAke common Honey seven ounces, strong Vinegar three ounces and a half, make
an ointment of them as follows.

First, put into the mortar to beat to powder some Verdegrece, in the beating
thereof forget not to stop your nose, then scarce it, and take a quantity of
it, and keep the rest, and pour it into the Honey and Vinegar, and boil them
to an ointment.

That when you have powdered the Verdegrece, Note.
you must wash the mortar pestle and scarce with hot water.

CHAP. XV. To make mundificative of Smalladge.
THis ointment is made at any time, putting into the juice what the Physician
shall think fitting according to the nature and time of the diseased.

CHAP. XVI. To make unguent: Album or white ointment.
TAke white Wax three ounces, Ceruse washed six ounces, oil of Roses twelve
ounces, three whites of eggs, Camphir a dram; make the ointment as follows.

The Ceruse being washed and afterward powdered and searced, then cut the wax
into small pieces, and melt it with the oil, and when it is melted take it
from the fire and stir it well together with a Spatule of wood until it be
half cold, then stir in the Ceruse, and afterward the whites of eggs, and
so make it into an ointment.

CHAP. XVII. To make red Dissicative.
TAke oil of Roses twelve ounces, white Wax five ounces, Lap: Calaminaris,
Bol: Armoniacke of each four ounces, Litarge of gold prepared, and Ceruse of
each three ounces, Camphir a dram; make them into an ointment. Cutting the
Wax into small pieces and melting it with the oil, and mixing the other
things being in powder as is written in the former Chapter.

CHAP. XVIII. To make unguent Pompholigos.
TAke oil of Roses twenty ounces, juice of Nightshade eight ounces, white Wax
five ounces, washed Ceruse four ounces, burnt Lead as is showed in the thirty
eight and thirty nine Chapter of the first Treatise being in powder, Tuttie
prepared of each two ounces, Frankincense an ounce; make the ointment according
to Art as follows.

The Lead and Tuttie being powdered with the Ceruse and the other powders, then
boil the juice of Nightshade with the oil, until the juice be almost
consumed, then strain it through a strong linen cloth, and mix with it the
powders upon the fire, stirring them well together, then take it from the fire
and stir it till it be cold.

CHAP. XIX. To make ointment of Populeon or Poplar buds.
TAke Poplar buds nine ounces, Hogs lard or Barrowes grease eighteen ounces,
good Vinegar and good Rose water of each six ounces, leaves of Nightshade and
Lettice of each four ounces, Houseleeke three ounces; make the ointment as
follows.

In the month of March take the said Poplar buds and beat them very well in a
Marble mortar, then put to them the Hogs grease beating of them very well
together, and put them into an earthen pot and let them stand until June,
until you can get the other herbs, then when you have the other herbs pour
upon the grease and buds the vinegar and Rose water, and let them stand in the
Sun a day or two, then take the herbs, pick them, and cut them very small
and beat them in the mortar and put them into the pot with the grease and
buds, and let them infuse in the Sun the space of eight days, stirring of
them now and then with the Spatule, and then pour them all into a pan and
boil them until the liquor be almost consumed, then strain and press them
through a strong cloth; and if it happen it be not thick enough, boil it a
little upon the fire and make it thicker, and then let it stand until it be
cold, and and put it into a pot and cover it, and set it in a temperate place.

CHAP. XX. To make ointment of Roses.
TAke Hogs grease or Barrowes grease washed as is shown in the thirty five
Chapter of the first Treatise eighteen ounces, as many red Roses new; beat
the said Roses in a mortar, and mix with them the grease, and beat them well
together, then put them into a pot and let them infuse in the Sun the space
of six days, or upon hot cinders three days, then boil them a very little
and press them in the press, and then beat as many more Roses with the said
grease, and let them infuse as before, then strain and press them, and mix
with it six ounces of juice of Roses, and four ounces of oil of sweet
Almonds, and boil them until the juice be almost consumed, then strain it
and keep it.

CHAP. XXI. To make Plasters. To make white Diachilon.
TAke common Oil thirty six ounces, Litarge of gold prepared eighteen
ounces; roots of Marsh Mallows cleansed, Linseeds of each a pound, seeds of
Faenugreeke twelve ounces; make thereof a plaster.

To make this plaster very white, choose a good fair air and clear;
curiously washing and cleansing the Marsh Mallow roots, and taking away the
skin that goes round them, and the pith that is within them, then put the
Linseeds and Faenugreeke into the mortar, and beat them very well with the
roots, and put them into a pipkin covering them with water and cover the
pipkin, and let them infuse in the chimney corner twenty four hours, then
boil them a little and strain them, that there may be two pound four ounces
of Mucilage, a part of which shall be boiled with the Oil and Litarge
prepared, as is shown in the thirty seven Chapter of the first Treatise, upon
a midling fire, stirring them always with a Spatule of wood, or else the
Litarge being heavy will burn to the bottom, and when that part of Mucilage
is almost consumed, which you shall know when it makes no more bubbles, then
put in the rest, and boil them into a plaster, as is showed in the thirty
four Chapter of the first Treatise, then let it stand until it be half cold,
and then make Magdaleons wetting your hands with a little water.

CHAP. XXII. To make Diachalcyteos or Diapalma Plaster.
TAke Roman Vitriol four ounces, Hogs grease a pound and a half, Litarge of
gold prepared, old Oil of each thirty six ounces, make them into a plaster.

The Litarge being prepared shall be boiled with the Oil and the grease,
stirring them well together with a wooden Spatule, and when the plaster is
boiled, mix with it the Vitriol prepared, as is showed in the forty one
Chapter of the first Treatise, and make Magdaleons as before.

CHAP. XXIII. To make Emplastrum Divinum.
TAke Litarge and common Oil of each eighteen ounces, yellow wax eight
ounces, loadstone four ounces, Amoniacke three ounces and three dramms,
Bdellium two ounces, Galbanum, Mirrhe of each two ounces and two drammes,
Frankincense an ounce and a dram, Masticke, Oppoponax, long Aristolochia
root, Verdigreece of each an ounce, make of these medicaments an ointment as
follows.

First, put in infusion the gummes, which are Amoniac, Bdellium, Galbanum, and
Oppopanax, in sufficient quantity of vinegar, that the vinegar may cover them
the space of twenty four hours, or until the gummes be dissolved, then
strain them and boil them upon a chaffing dish till their humidity be
consumed, or until they come to the thickness of Honey: in the mean time
weigh the Lytarge and put it in a paper, and then powder the rest and searce
them severally; that is the Loadstone, Masticke, Frankincense, Aristoloch: and
Verdegrease, then boil your Lytarge and Oil with the Wax cut in small
pieces, stirring it together with a Spatule, and when it is boiled put in the
gummes, and then the powders, and last of all the Verdegrease, stirring them
together, and when it is half cold, form Magdaleons or Roules as before.

CHAP. XXIIII. To make Emplastrum de Ianua sive de Betonica.
TAke the juice of Betony, Plantain and Smalladge, of each twelve ounces,
yellow wax, black pitch, Rosin, and Turpentine, of each six ounces, make the
plaster as follows.

Put the juyces into the pan, with the wax cut in small pieces, and the Pitch
and Rosin broken, and boil them until the juyces be consumed, which you
shall know by taking a little upon the end of the Spatule, and dropping it into
the fire, and it will make no noise, then put in the Turpentine, and make
Magdaleon as before written.

CHAP. XXV. Of the distillation of waters.
FOr the distilling of simple waters, every one has knowledge, as to put the
herbs being bruised or picked into a Still, and covering of it, keeping a
moderate fire; also for the stilling of flowers or herbs in a Limbecke putter
water unto them, and putting cold water in the top, and drawing away the first
water which is the strength, and throwing away the rest, therefore we shall not
need to write any more of this.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Treacle water.
IN the place of Treacle waters described by diverse Authors and diverse ways.

It is better to take a quantity of Venice Treacle and dissolve it in wine if
there be no Fever, or in Scabious or Carduus water; but if there be a Fever,
in Purslaine, water Lilly, or common water, with a little juice of Lymons.

CHAP. XXVII. To make Cinnamon waters.
TAke a pound of fine Cinnamon, beat it and put it to infuse the space of
twenty four hours in a glass vessel, with four pints of good Rose water,
and half a pint of good white wine upon the hot cinders or in some hot place
being well stopped, then still it in a Limbecke or Balneo Mariae, and keep the
water in a strong glass well stopped.

CHAP. XXVIII. Another Cinnamon water.
IN a necessity for to make Cinnamon water, take half an ounce of Cinnamon and
beat it in a mortar, and boil it in a pint of fair water until half be
consumed, then strain it and use it.

CHAP. XXIX To make excellent Hipocras.
TAke a pound of good Sugar, an ounce of fine Cinnamon, two drammes of Ginger,
with three pints of good white wine or Claret; make the Hipocras, cut the Sugar
into small pieces, and beat the Cinnamon and Ginger in the mortar, then put
them together in a pipkin, and pour the wine upon them, and stir them
together with a spoone or spatule, and let them stand all night in the chimney
corner, and in the morning pass them five or six times through the Hipocras
bag.

That if you will have it very clear, pour into it a spoonefull of milk.

CHAP. XXX. Another manner to make Hipocras.
TAke a quart of good Wine, half a pound of good Sugar, and an ounce of
Cinnamon beaten; infuse it all night covered in the chimney corner, and and the
next morning pass it through the Hipocras bag five or six times.

CHAP. XXXI. To make Hipocras of water.
TAke half a pound of good Sugar, two drammes of good Cinnamon beaten, two
quarts of water; infuse them all night as before, and in a morning strain them
as before through the bag.

The end of the Charitable Apothecary.
THE CHARITABLE PHYSICIAN SHEVVING THE manner to Embalme a dead Corpse.

By Philbert Guibert Esquire, Doctor Regent in the faculty of Physic at Paris.

Translated into English, By I. W.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, 1639.

The manner to Embalme a dead Corpse.
FIrst of all let the Chyrurgeon make a long incision from the neck unto the
lower belly; opening the breast, and taking out the heart, lungs, and others,
or leaving of them within; but if they desire to have the heart embalmed by it
self, then make an Incision in the pericard, in which it is enclosed, and
embalme it as shall be shown hereafter.

After that you may show the belly inferior, that is the stomach and the
Epipleon; considering the orifice superior, and inferior, and afterward the
bowels, bladder, and other things.

All the said parts of the the breast and belly inferior being observed, must
be all cut round the Diaphragma, and cut as near as possible can be where
they are tied and taken all out, and put into a large basin or vessel.

Those two bellies being emptied and cleansed, that is all the blood that
comes from the veins and Arteries, dried up with Sponges: then you must come
to the head.

The head or Cranium shall be sawed in two, as you do in an Anatomy, and the
brains and parts shall be put into the vessel with the bowels, together with
the blood that has been drawn out of the three bellies; that is, the head,
breast, and belly inferior, and put them altogether into a barrel, and hoope
it round, to be buried or put into the ground; but if they desire to carry them
far, or to keep them you may embalme them as follows.

Having emptied and squeezed the blood from the excrements, you must wash them
with warm oxicrat, made with four parts of water, and one of vinegar
compounded, as shall be written hereafter: then powder them all about with one
of the balming powders hereafter written, then put them into a barrel pitched
within and without, and hoope the barrel well, and then wrappe it round with
Ceare-cloth and cord it fast, then put it into a bigger barrel also pitched and
hoopt, and send it whither you please.

The head, breast, and belly inferior being also emptied and cleansed, you
shall begin to embalme them: beginning at the head being well washed within
with the said vinegar compounded, then with pieces of Cotton soaked in the said
vinegar and filled with balm, the head shall be filled, and both the pieces of
the skull shall be bound together with thread.

Do also to the breast as you do to the head, piercing the Muscles and flesh
with a bodkin, to make the blood run out, which you must dry up with sponges,
then wash and soake it with the said vinegar, and fill it up with Cotton full
of Balm, do so also to the belly inferior.

The foresaid parts being embalmed, you must make long Incisions in the arms,
legs, thighs, and buttocks, and principally in the great veins and
Arteries, to make the blood run out, and to dry them up with Sponges; then
soake them with the said Vinegar, and stop them full of pieces of Cotton filled
with Balm.

You shall make an Incision from the shoulder to the wrist in the arm,
piercing it with a bodkin to the bone all about, to make way for the blood,
then dry it up with sponges, and wash and soake it well with the said vinegar,
and then filling it with pieces of Cotton soaked in the said vinegar and filled
with Balm, and then sow it up with a needle and thread; so do to the thighs
making an incision from the belly to the knee, piercing of it, and stoping and
sewing of it up as before, and so the knees and others.

You may also stop the holes of the ears and nostrills and mouth, with Cotton
soaked in the vinegar and filled with Balm.

That done turn the Corpse upon the belly and make an Incision about the
Ingular veins in the neck, letting out the blood, and so make an incision
down the reins, piercing the back to let out the blood, taking it away and
washing it with the said vinegar, and filling it with Cotton balmed, and sewing
them up as before.

Also make Incisions in the palms of the hands, and in the soles of the feet,
and wash and fill them as before, sowing them up also, the fingers and toes;
incisions being made and stopped as before.

The Corpse being thus embalmed shall be anointed all over with Venice
Turpentine, dissolved in oil of Roses or oil of Spike, and then it shall be
covered all over with Seare-cloth and put it into a Coffin of Lead, the which
Coffin shall be filled with dry Aromaticke herbs, as Rue, Wormwood, Time,
Scordeum, Marjoram, and others as shall be written hereafter, then cover it and
let it be well sodered.

To Embalme the Heart.
THe Heart being washed with the said Vinegar compounded, shall be put to
infuse in the said Vinegar in a pipkin being plaistered round the lidde, that
the air enters not the space of five or six days, then take it out and make
an incision in it, and fill it with balm and pieces of Cotton balmed, and sow
it up again, then few it well into a little bag made of Scarecloth, and put it
into a case of Lead, Silver, or Pewter, fashioned in the form of a Heart, and
carry it whither you please.

That the Simples which enter into the following Balmes, as roots, herbs,
seeds, etc. if they be not dry they must be dried in the shade or in an Oven
after the Bread is drawn forth, before they be powdered.

A Description of the Vinegar compounded, the which is to wash and soake the
parts being warm, before you apply any of these Balmes following.
TAke Wormwood dry or green five or six handfulls, cut it into small pieces
with a knife oppaire of Cizers; thirty Apples of Coloquintida, cut them into
four quarters without throwing away the seeds, Roch Allom, and common Salt of
each a pound, boil them together in eighteen pints of good Vinegar, until it
comes to fourteen pints; then strain and press it, and use it as is
aforesaid.

If with the said Vinegar compounded, strained, and pressed, you will put three
pints of Life water or Aqua vitae it will be excellent.

To make four sorts of Balmes to powder and put into the parts of the body.
The Description of the first Balm.
TAke dry common salt, Allom of glass, of each a pound, beat them to powder
in a mortar; then take Balm herb, or hoarie Mints, Wormwood, water Mints,
Sage, Rosemary, Origanum, Calamint, Time, Costus Hortensis, the greater and
lesser Centory, and Scordeum of each six handfulls; all these herbs ought to
be dried as I showed before, then put into the great mortar, and beaten to
powder and searced; so beating and searcing them until they be all searced
then mix with them the Alum and Salt, and so use it.

A Description of the second Balm:
TAke Hysope, Time, Sage, Lavender, Rosemary, Wormwood, Marjoram, Rue and
Scordeum of each eight handfulls; Ireos of Florence, Pepper, Ginger, Pellitory,
and dry red Roses, of each half a pound, make them into a powder as follows.

The Salt being dry shall be powdered by it self, then beat the Ireos
pepper, Ginger, Pellitorie, and dry Roses with the other simples, beating and
searcing them all to powder, and when they are all searced mix with them the
Salt and the Balm is made, the which use as before written.

A Description of the third Balm.
TAke Ireos of Florence, Gentian, Orange and Citron peeles; Ginger, Juniper,
Berries, Cyprus Nuts, Benjamin, Frankincense, Aloes, Mirrhe, Cinnamon, Cloves,
of each half a pound, Rosemary, Sage, Lavender, Dill, Origanum, Cyprus,
Wormwood, Balm, Time, Scordeum, of each eight handfulls, make the Balm as
follows.

First, beat well together in the mortar the Ireos Gentian, Orange, and Citron
peeles, Ginger, Juniper Berries, Cyprus Nuts, Cinnamon and Cloves, with the
other simples, beating them all to powder and searcing them, then powder the
Aloes, Mirrhe, Frankincense, and Benjamin, with a little Oil anointing the
bottom of the mortar and mix them altogether, and the Balm is done.

A Description of the fourth Balm in case of necessity.
SOmetimes one has not the commodity to get the simples aforesaid, as in
Armies, Towns, and Castles assieged: when some man of quality dies, and that
his parents or friends will have him preserved for some time, to carry to some
tomb of his Predecessors; then one must make necessity a virtue: for having
emptied the three bellies as is showed before, wash them, and the incisions
with common vinegar, if you have not the commodity to make the compounded; or
if you have not common vinegar, take salt water, that is salt melted in water,
and fill them up with this Balm following.

Take ashes of Willow, and Lime, of each a sufficient quantity, fifth it through
a sieve, and use it, but if you have no Lime take Chalk and do as before,
being thus embalmed, rub and anoint the body over with this Linement following,
and keep him in a temperate place not to hot nor to cold.

A Description of the Linement to anoint the body after it is embalmed.
TAke Oil of Olives, Roses or Spike one part, Venice or common Turpentine two
parts, make thereof a Linement.

Warm the oil upon the fire, then put to it the Turpentine, stirring them
well together, and anoint the body all over with it being warm.

The end of this Treatise:
A Treatise of Ointments.
A Balm or Balsome for all wounds that are newly made.
TAke two ounces of Aqua vitae, put it into two Violls equally divided, and put
into the one two drammes of Mirrhe, and a dram of Aloes in powder, and let it
stand until it has taken the color.

Then put two drammes of Turpentine into the other Violl, and let it stand
until that the Aqua vitae has taken the color of the Turpentine, then put
them both together to use it

Another for an old and new wound.
O Liban. and Masticke of each an ounce, two ounces of Verdegrece, as much
Galbanum, an ounce of Turpentine, and as much Rosin, oil of Olives a pound, and
half a pound of oil of bitter Almonds, and as much oil of poppies, white wax
an ounce, black pitch three ounces; melt your gummes, and heat your oil with
the Verdegrece, and strain them through a strong cloth and keep it in a pot
or box.

An ointment for new and old wounds.
Beat three yolks of eggs with the bigness of a nut of washed Turpentine and
a little Bean meal, it will keep but a month.

Another for Apostumes and Boyles.
Half a pound of Turpentine, four ounces of Virgins wax, as much of Mutton
suet; a little milk from a woman which has a male child, and a little from
one that has a female child, boil them together until they be thick.

For to eat dead flesh.
THree ounces of honey put into a new pan or pipkin, a dram of green
Coppras, and as much of Verdegrece and Allom, and half an ounce of galls, being
all in powder stir them into the honey, and boil them until they become red.

For a burn.
Water of Nightshade and of Plantaine, yolks of Eggs, oil of Roses, and
Virgins wax as much of one as of another, melt them together and anoint the
sore.

For pain in the head.
Beat Plantaine with the urine of the diseased, and make a plaster and bind it
upon the Temples.

For black and blue eyes.
SAlt, honey, and wine boiled together, and the place anointed:

Against the swelling of the throat.
LEaven, honey, and juice of Smalladge mixed together and made into a plaster.

For to stay bleeding in what place soever.
IVyce of Shepherds purse, Masticke, Oliban: Bol^ Armenic: Dragons blood, of
each two drammes to make a plaster.

A washing for a Fistula, upon women's Breasts.
LOng and round Plantaine, Agrimony, C^^ntorie, and Wormwood of each half a
handful, cut them small and boil them in a new pot or pipkin with a quart of
wine, until it comes to a pint, then strain it, and wash the pipkin, and
put into it again that which is strained, and put to it two ounces of honey of
Roses, and as much Syrup of Wormwood, then boil them a little, and when you
will use it, put a little to warm in a saucer and keep the rest in a glass.

Ointment or unguent: Martiatum.
TAke Baye leaves three pound, Rue two pound, Marjoram two pound, Rosemary a
pound and a half, Mirrhe a pound, the tops of Marjoram and water Mints, seeds
of Ocimum, of each six ounces; Butter six drammes, Storax, Hearts grease,
Bears grease, and Cocks grease, of each half an ounce; Masticke three ounces,
Frankincense two ounces and a half, oil of Nard: an ounce, common oil six
pound, Wax four pound; make an ointment according to art.

It is good against cold Goutes, the Palsy, Sciatica, and generally against
all diseases of the Nerves.

A Stomachall ointment.
TAke oil of Wormwood, Masticke, Nard of each an ounce, red Roses, red
Coral, Cloves, Cinnamon, Lign: Aloes, Mastick, Mints, Shaenants of each a
dram; Wax a sufficient quantity, make them into an ointment.

It is very good to strengthen the stomach, and to appease those griefs which
have come of cold, causing an appetite and helping digestion.

Ointment of Marsh Mallows.
TAke Marsh Mallow roots two pound, Faenugreeke and Linseeds of each a pound,
Oil four pound, Wax a pound, Turpentine two ounces, Rosin six ounces; cut
the roots, and beat them with the seeds and make a Mucilage, and take of the
said Mucilage two pound, boil it with the other ingredients until it be all
consumed; this ointment is good to warm and will keep three years.

Galens refreshing Ointment.
TAke white Wax and oil of Roses, of each four ounces, beat them long
together; first with fair water, washing them, then with Vinegar, and then
with Rose water, and if you will keep it any time you must wash it often with
Rose water.

An Astringent Ointment.
TAke Bole Armonick, Dragons blood, and sealed earth, of each an ounce, oil of
Roses six ounces, Wax a pound and a half, and of Vinegar, boil the wax,
oil, and vinegar together, until the vinegar be consumed, then mix the other
ingredients being in powder.

The end of the Treatise.
A Treatis of Precious Stones.
Of the Bezoar stone.
THe Bezoar stone is such an excellent Counter poison, that the Physicians have
given its name to all the most excellent Antidotes, calling them medicaments
Bezoarties: if it be powdered and put upon bitings of venomous beasts it will
heal them; also being strowed upon byles or plague sores, it heals them
also, there is made Lozinges with it, and Rose water against all sorts of
poison.

Of the Emeraud.
THe Emeraud hung about the neck, hinders the accidents and assaults of the
Kings Evil, and heals it also sometimes.

Of another Stone.
THere is found a stone in the belly of old Cocks, or in the Gizard; the which
(as is said) makes him that wears it constant, gracious, hardy, and happy
in love, and the same held upon the tongue appeaseth thirst.

Of the Amethist.
The Amethist hinders a man from drunkenness.

Of the Saphir.
THe true Saphir infused in water, and the eyes being washed therewith, draws
away all filth from the eyes.

Of the Turqui Stone.
THe Turqui Stone grows in Ethiopia and is somewhat of a green color, and
being infused makes a liquor as white as milk, and is very good against any
pain of the eyes or hinderance of the sight.

Of Crystal.
Crystal ingendereth of a pure liquor which hardneth by little and little in
the entrails of the earth; it is found often with other mettles in mines in
Holland and Spain: being powdered and mixed with white wine is good against
dissenteries, and it stays the white flux of women, and causes store of
milk in women's breasts.

Of Alablaster.
ALablaster is well known of those which have visited the Antiquities of Rome,
Alablaster burnt and incorporated with pitch or Rosin melted dissolveth
hardness, and is good against the griefs of the stomach.

Of the Serpentine Stone.
THe Serpentine Stone worn about the neck is good against the pains of the
head.

Of the Stone of Arabia.
IT dries the Hemerods being powdered, and put upon them, and it is good to
make teeth white.

Of the Stone of Judea:
THe bigness of a Nut of this Stone being powdered and drunk in warm water
causes urine, and and breaks the Stone in the bladder.

Of the Chalcedine Stone.
THe Chalcedine hung about the neck hinders melancholy.

Of the Sponge stone.
SPonge Stone being drunk in white wine breaket^ the stone in the bladder.

Of Coral.
THose children which take half a scruple of Coral in powder with their
Nurses milk before they suck, shall never be troubled with the Epilepsie.

The end of this Treatise.
Of the virtue of Fruits
Of Temperate Fruits.
Of Figgs.
OF all the Fruits of Autumn the Figs are the best, for they are very good to
cleanse the breast; also they are good against a cough and the diseases of the
lungs: dry Figgs eaten looseneth the belly, and they are good to dissolve
tumors being mixed with meal and leaven.

Of Raisons.
RAisons of the Sun are very good against the diseases of the stomach, lungs
and head, being eaten by themselves or with a little pepper. Currants are also
good for the breast and causes obstructions.

Of Fruits hot in the first degree.
Of Almonds.
THe best sweet Almonds which are yellow and full and break white, are very
good to avoid gross excrements, also they are good to cause Appetite and for
those which have cold bellies.

Of common Nuts.
COmmon Nuts are hard of digestion and contrary to the stomach, but being
eaten fasting they are very good against the worms of the belly; also being
incorporated with the leaves of Rue, Figs, and a little Salt, are good against
the pestilence and poison being taken fasting.

Of fruits hot in the second degree.
Of Capers.
CApers being taken in broth the quantity of two drammes, and wine the space
of forty days purges away gravel, and brings away by urine all bloody
matter, it is also good against the Sciatica and Palsy, and for women which
have not their flowers.

Of Nutmegs.
NVtmegs are very good to clear the sight, strengthen the stomach, to diminish
gravel, to provoke urine, and to stay the flux of the belly, and is good
against all cold diseases of the matrixe.

Of Fruits hot in the third degree.
Of Juniper Berries.
IVniper Berries taken in broth are very good for the stomach against all
diseases of the breast, against a cough and against stingings of Serpents; also
it is very good against Convulsions, and against the suffocations of the Matrix.

Of Cloves.
CLoves are very good for the stomach and heart, helps digestion, and stays
the flux of the belly, four drammes taken in milk being in powder, makes a
man valiant, and is good to clear the sight.

Of Fruits hot in the fourth degree.
Of Pepper.
PEpper is good against venom, and it is sovereign against the Colic, and
against all cold and gross humors.

Of Fruits cold in the first degree.
Of Citrons.
CItrons are good to fortify and strengthen the stomach, and are very good
against melancholy, and their seeds taken in broth and applied without, are
good against stingings or bitings of Scorpions, and their juice is good against
the pestilence.

Of Quinces.
QVinces are good for the stomach and to provoke urine, and are good against
the dissentery and flux of the belly; their decoction is singular good to
foment the fundament or Matrix that comes forth, and they are good against
the inflammation of women's breasts and against vomitings.

Of Pears.
Pears are good against the stomach and are astringent, and are good against
defluctions.

Of Prunes.
Prunes are very good to loosen the belly.

Of Fruits cold in the second degree.
Of Cucumbers.
CVcumbers are refreshing to the stomach and are good for the bl^dder; the
seeds boiled with milk and wine are goo^ to provoke urine and against all
diseases of the bladder.

The leaves beaten with Wine heals the bitings of dogs.

Of Oranges.
ORanges are refreshing, and are good in Fevers; for to quench thirst the
peele is hot and Cordial.

Of Lymons.
LYmons are very good against hot and pestilent Fevers, and the Syrup is very
good to stay Fevers also, the juice of Lymons kills worms in the bowels.

Of Fruits which refresh the stomach.
Of Cherries.
CHerries are very good to refresh the stomach, and against the pain of the
belly.

Olives.
OLives are also good to comfort and to refresh the stomach.

Respases.
REspases are very good to refresh the stomach, to stay vomitings, and are
good against the flux of the belly.

Of Fruits which engender seeds.
Figs, Pine kernells, Nutmegs, and Pistaches, are good to augment and
engender seeds.

Fruits which are good against Poison.
IVniper berries, common Nuts, Pepper, Citrons, etc. are good against venom
and Poison.

The End of this Treatise.
To make Preserves dry and liquid.
Of Preserves which comfort the Heart.
Preserved Oranges.
CHoose the best Oranges that have the thickest skins, cut them in quarters and
lay them a soake in water five or six days, then boil them in honey syrup or
sugar to the height.

Citron peeles preserved or Candied.
TAke Citrons and peele them, and cut them into slices and infuse them in water
nine or ten days, then take them out of the water, and boil them in fair
water until they be soft, then put them into Iulep or Sugar, and boil them
unto the height of Sugar Candy, you may Aromatize them with a little Musk or
a little Ambergreece.

In this manner you may Candie Oranges, Lymons, or any other rind or peeling.

Of Apples.
TAe Apples and peele them, and cut out the core, and the pippins within them,
and cut them into quarters, boil them in Iulep or Sugar and water well, and
the next day boil them again in Sugar and put them with the Syrup into a pot,

Of Preserves which comfort the Belly.
Of Ginger.
PReserved Ginger or Candied Ginger is very good for the belly and against all
hard humors thereof.

Preserved Quinces.
QVinces preserved and Aromatized, as Apples, are very good for the pains of
the belly, and to stay vomiting also against the flux of the belly, and to
strengthen the stomach and to help digestion.

To make Marmalade.
TAke eight pound of the flesh of Quinces, cleansed from their rind, pippins
and stalks, boil them in water until they come into a paste, then pulpe it
through a sieve and boil it to the height with as much sugar, and put it into
boxes.

There are those which boil it but with half so much sugar; it is very good
for the flux of the belly taking it before meals, and good against vomitings
taken after meals; and for the loss of appetite.

Preserved Pears.
PReserve Pears, as the Quinces and Apples, and they are very good to
strengthen the heart, and against the pains of the belly.

Preserved Wallnuts.
GAther the Wallnuts before they be hard when they are green, pare them as
the Apples, and infuse them in water nine days, changing the water every day,
then pierce them with a needle or bodkin in three or four places, and boil
them in water until they be soft, then take them from the fire and stick them
with Cinnamon and Cloves, and boil them in Sugar and put them into a pot.

Preserved Cherries:
GAther Cherries before they be quite ripe, put them into Sugar and boil them,
and put them into pots or glasses.

Of Dry Comfits or Candies.
TAke the Cortex or Rind of Citrons, Oranges, Lymons, or any other bark or
fruit, boil them first in fair water, having first infused them, then boil
them in Sugar to the height, and then take them and dry them.

The end of this Treatise.
To make all manner of Fumes and Perfumes.
Of Perfumes and Aromatic smells.
PErfumes are certain medicaments simple and compounded, the which without
putting in the fire will alter the head and hinder all ill smells and
corruption of the air.

They are also used diverse ways, sometimes only one simple medicament is used
and held to the nose, as the seed Nigella infused in vinegar, and wrapped in a
cloth or piece of silk; and at another time there is mixed many medicaments
together and sometimes there are made Pomanders, Ointments and Bullets; the
ingredients which ordinarily enter into Perfumes are Musk, Ambergreece,
Nigella, Marjoram, Storax, Cloves, Ocimum, Staechados, Spikenard, Lavender
wood, of Aloes, Labdanum, Roses, Violets, Saunders, water Lillies, Camphor and
the like.

You must observe that in making of Pomanders and Bullets, you must put the
Musk and Ambergreece the last of all the ingredients.

Perfumes or suffumigations for the head:
A Suffumigation to stay and dry Catarhes.
TAke Coriander seeds, Roses, Nigella, infused in Vinegar, of each an ounce and
a half, Masticke, Frankincense, of each half an ounce, gum of Juniper two
ounces, make them into a powder, the which strew upon a chasing dish of coals,
and perfume the cap and clothes for the head you may make them into Trochisques
with Rose water and gum Dragant if you please.

Another Perfume of the same.
TAke Frankincense, Masticke, Labdanum, Storax of each half a dram; beat
them together and make them into Trochisques with gum Dragant dissolved in
Rose water.

A Suffumigation of a good smell to strengthen the head.
TAke Trochis: of Gallia, Muscata a dram, Sage, Marjoram and Rosemary of each
a dram and a half, Cloves and Cinnamon of each a dram, wood of Aloes a
scruple, four grains of Musk, make them into a powder, and use them as
before.

Another Perfume.
TAke Frankincense, Cinnamon and Cloves of each a dram and a half, Citron
peele a dram, wood of Aloes two scruples, Mirrhe and Masticke of each a dram,
Trochis: of Gallia, Muscata two drammes, Labdanum two drammes and a half:
beat them together with oil of Mirrhe, and form them into Trochisques.

Another.
TAke gum of Juniper, Masticke, Roses of each a dram, Cloves, Storax of
each three drammes, make them into Trochisques with Turpentine:

Cordial Perfumes.
A Perfume against the sincopes or failings of the Heart.
TAke Frankincense, Mastick, of each an ounce, dry Citron peele half an ounce,
wood of Aloes, Storax, Cloves, Calamint of each three drammes.

Make a perfume for those that have pains at their heart:

A Perfume to strengthen the animal and vital spirits.
TAke red Roses, Staechaedos, Rosemary of each a dram, Frankincense two
drammes, Cloves, wood of Aloes of each a dram and a half, make them into
powder, and make a Perfume.

A Perfume against the corruption of the Air.
TAke red Roses, Spikenard, wood of Aloes, Costus, Rosemary, Masticke, red
Saunders, Bdellium, Labdanum, Olibanum, Saffron of each a dram and a half,
Dock roots, Pepper, yellow Sanders of each three drammes, Cardamomes, Cubebes,
Camphor, of each half a dram, five grains of Musk, put them into powder,
and make little Trochis: with Rose water.

Suffumigations for the Lungs.
A Perfume against the ulcers of the Lungs.
TAke Coriander seeds, red Roses, Mastick, Frankincense, Mirrhe of each three
drammes, Benjamin, Storax, Labdanum, Hypocistidos of each two drammes;
Auripigmentum a dram, powder them, and make Trochis. with Turpentine, and use
them being a remedy against the ulcers of the nostrills, ears, and matrix.

Another when there is any inflammation.
TAke Coriander seeds prepared, red Roses of each an ounce, Labdanum,
Hypocistidos of each three drammes, white and red Sanders of each two drams,
Poppie heads, Cortex, Mandragora of each two drammes; Storax, Benjamin, of each
a dram, Auripigment: half a dram, make them into Trochis: with gum
dragant dissolved in Rose water:

A Perfume against the Cough:
TAke Masticke, Frankincense of each three drams, all the Sanders of each a
dram, Storax, Labdanum, red Roses of each two drammes, make them into powder
to perfume night and morning the cap, and things for the head.

Suffumigations for the Matrix.
A Perfume against the Suffocation.
THere are made ordinarily perfumes of stinking medicaments against the
suffocation of the Matrix, as Assafaetida, Galbanum, Castor, and old shoes,
because of their smell, they cause the suffocation to descend.

A Perfume for to dry the Matrix.
TAke Aliptae Moschatae, or Gallia Moschat, half an ounce, Benzoin, Calamus
Aromaticus, of each two drammes; make them into Trochis: which put upon a
chafing dish, and receive the fume into the Matrix with a funnell.

A Perfume to help conception.
TAke Labdanum, Mastick, Gall: Moschat, Cloves, Calamus Aromaticus, Galingall,
of each t^ree drammes, red Roses two ounces, Hypocistidos, Castor of each two
drammes, make them into Trochisques with Mucilage of gum: dragant.

Suffumigations for the Joints.
A Perfume against grief and pain.
TAke leaves of Wormwood, Rosemary, Staechados, Cammomill of each two ounces,
Mirrhe, Storax, Benzoin of each three drammes, make them into Trochisques, and
perfume Cotton, and apply the Cotton very warm.

A Perfume against hard Tumors.
TAke Cinnabaris two ounces, Bdellium, Mirrhe, Storax of each half an ounce,
make them into Bullets with Turpentine:

A Perfume to provoke sweat for the Pox.
TAke Cinnabaris two ounces, Storax, Benjamin, and Mirthe, of each an ounce,
make them into Trochisques with Turpentine, and perfume all the body except the
head.

Another for the same.
TAke Cinnabaris half an ounce, Frankincense, Mastick, of each half an ounce,
Calamus, Aromaticus, Zedoarie, of each three drammes; Olibanum, Sandarac, of
each two drammes; Ceruse half an ounce, make them into Trochisques with
Turpentine.

Another Perfume for the Pox.
TAke Frankincense two drammes, Mastick, Juniper, Gum, Hypocistidos, of each
half an ounce, Auripigment, three drammes, Cinnabatis an ounce, make Trochis:
with Turpentine.

Odoriferent Suffumigations.
Trochisques of wood of Aloes.
TAke wood of Aloes, Labdanum, of each two drammes, Benjamin two drammes,
Storax half a dram, Sugar Candy three ounces, Musk three grains, make
them into Trochis: with Rose water.

Trochis: of Gallia Moschata.
TAke wood of Aloes five drammes, Ambergreece three drammes, Musk a dram;
make them into Trochis: with gum: dragant dissolved in Rose water.

An Odoriferent Bag.
TAke Cubebs half a dram, Cloves, Nigella of each a dram and a half,
beat them together, and sow them in a little bag.

Powder of Violets.
TAke Ireos Root of Florence half a pound, Roses four ounces, Ciprus roots,
Marjoram, Cloves of each an ounce, yellow Sanders, Benjamin of each four
ounces, Storax an o^nce, beat them into powder.

Another powder of Violets.
TAke Ireos root of Florence four pound, dry Marjoram four ounces, Calamus
Aromaticus three ounces, Roses and Violets of each five ounces, Cloves half a
dram, Musk a dram, make them into a very fine powder.

A Pomander.
TAke Storax an ounce, Cloves two drammes, Benjamin, half an ounce,
Ambergreece half a dram, Musk fifteen grains, powder of Violets a little;
incorporate them all together with Rose water.

A Pomander against pestilentiall air.
TAke Labdanum, Storax of each a dram, Cloves half a dram, Camphor, Spikenard,
Nutmeg of each seven grains, beat them into fine powder, and make them into
bullets with gum: dragant dissolved in Rose water.

A Pomander which looseneth the belly by the smell.
TAke Scammonie, Mirrhe, Aloes, of each a dram, Esula, Coloquintida, of each a
dram and a half, beat them well together with the juice of Coriander and
make two Balls.

Candles to perfume the air.
TAke Benjamin, Storax, of each four ounces, Frankincense, Olibanum, of each
twelve ounces, Labdanum eighteen ounces, Nigella an ounce, Coriander seeds,
Juniper berries, of each half an ounce; liquid Storax fix ounces, Turpentine
half an ounce; form them into Candles with gum: dragant and Rose water.

Odoriferent Candles against Venom and the plague.
TAke Labdanum three ounces, Storax ten drams, Benjamin six drammes,
Frankincense an ounce and a half, Staechados two ounces, red Roses, Cloves of
each three ounces, Citron peele, yellow Sanders, of each three drammes, Juniper
berries half an ounce, Musk and Ambergreece of each half a scruple, form
them into Candles with gum: dragant dissolved in Rose water.

Musked Soap.
TAke four pound of Castle Soap, cut it into small pieces; then take powder of
Cloves and white Sanders of each two ounces, Benjamin an ounce, Musk twenty
grains; incorporate them all together, and put to them two or three drops of
Oil of Cloves or Nutmegs.

FINIS.
A Table of that which is contained in the first Book.
THe manner to make Clysters. page 1 The manner to prepare suppositories page 8
A certain remedy to loosen the belly of those which are bound, and will not
use Clysters nor suppositories page 9 The manner to make Injections page 11 To
make Pessaries page 12 To make Ptisan simple ibid. To make Barley water page 13
The manner to take Bezoar ibid. To make Hydromell page 14 To make Ptisan
Laxative page 15 To make Laxative medicines of diverse fashions ibid. To make
water of Rubarbe page 17 To make a purging broth page 18 To make a Bolus of
Cassia page 22 The manner to make Vomits page 24 To make Gargarismes page 25 To
make Emulcions page 26 To make Almond milk page 27 To make a Hordeat page 28
To make tablets of Sugar of Roses ibid. To make Frontalls page 29 To make
Oxicrat page 30 To make Oxirrhodin ibid. To make Hydrelium page 31 To make
Epithemes ibid. To make Sternatutories page 33 To make Fumes or Perfumes ibid.
To make Fomentations ibid. To make Cataplasmes page 34 To make Linements page
36 An excellent ointment for a burn page 37 To make a refreshing Cerat ibid.
To make Colyriums page 38 To make Vessicatories ibid. To make washings for the
feet and legs page 40 Of Baths ibid. A Catalogue of those Instruments whith the
rich ought to have in their houses page 41 A Catalogue of those medicaments
which the rich ought to have in their houses ibid. A Charitable and notable
advertisement to the public page 44
The end of the Table.
A Table of Treatises and Chapters in the last Book.
A Catalogue of all the Instruments necessary to furnish an Apothecary page 65
Of Clarification page 67 To clarify decoctions and infusions a part without
Sugar page 69 To Clarify Apozeams with Syrups, and also to make Clarified Whey
page 70 To draw Juices page 71 To draw juice of Quinces page 72 To draw the
juice of Red and Damask Roses ibid. To draw the juice of Mulberries page 73 To
draw the juice of Cherries. ibid. To draw the juice of Citrons and Lymons page
74 To clarify the said juices ibid. To draw the juice of Apples and to
clarify them page 76 To boil Sugar to the height, to make tablets of Sugar of
Roses ibid. Of infusions to make Syrups page 79 To know when Syrups are boiled
enough ibid. For to remedy those Syrups which are to much boiled, or to
little, or candied page 80 To draw the pulpe of Dates page 81 To draw pulpes of
Cassia, Tamarinds, Prunes, etc. ibid. Of medicaments which are put in powder,
and first of Seen page 82 The manner to dry medicaments which are afterward
put in powder page 83 How you must powder Mirrhe, Aloes, Rubarbe, Saffron, and
Assafaetida page 84 How to powder Scammony, and how to powder Mastick page 85
To powder Trochis: of Agarick ibid. To powder Camphor and Cinnamon page 86 Of
the Infusion of Oils ibid. Of the boiling of Oils page 87 Of the boiling of
Plasters ibid. To wash hogs grease for unguent: rosat: page 88 To wash Ceruse
page 89 To wash Litarge ibid. To burn and wash lead page 90 To prepare Tuttie
stone ibid. To Calcine Roman Vitriol page 91 To make Cream and Salt of Tartar
page 92
The second Treatise of Syrups.
TO make Syrup of Violets page 93 Of Infusion of Violets and Damask Roses page
95 To make Syrup of Coltsfoot page 96 To make Syrup of Damask Roses ibid. To
make Syrup of red Poppies page 97 To make Syrup of water Lillies ibid. To make
Syrup of Maidenhaire page 98 To make Syrup of Iujubes ibid. To make Syrup of
Marsh Mallows page 99 To make syrup of Succory with Rubarb page 100 To make
syrup of Poppies page 102 To make syrup of Lymons ibid. To make syrup of
Quinces ibid. To make syrup of Apples page 103 To make syrup of Mulberries
ibid. To make syrup of Cherries page 104 To make syrup of dried Roses ibid. To
make syrup of Wormwood ibid. Of Syrups with honey. To make despumd honey page
105 To make honey of Roses ibid. To make honey of Violets page 106 To make
honey of Mercury ibid.
Of Conserves. To make Conserve of Violets ibid. To make Conserve of Roses page
107 To make Conserve of water Lillies ibid. To make Conserve of Coltsfoot ibid.
To make Conserves of Burrage, Buglosse, Rosemary and Betony flowers. page 108

The third Treatise.
TO make Elect: Lenetive for the rich page 109 To make Elect: Lenetive for the
poor page 111 To make Catholicon ibid. To make Diaprunes page 112 To make
Diaphaenicon page 113 To make Benedict Laxat: page 114 Tablets of Mechoacan
ibid. Of Trochisques. To make Trochis: of Agarick page 115 To make Trochis: of
Athandal page 116 To make Trochis: of Mirrhe ibid.
Of Pills. To make stomach pills or ante Cibum page 117 To make pilul: sine
quibus ibid. To make pills of Agarick page 118 To make pills of Rubarbe ibid.
To make somniferous pills page 119 To make powder of three Sanders ibid. To
make Diambra Aromat: Rosat: page 120 To make Diatragagant ibid. To make powder
of Licorish page 121 Of Confect: Alkermes Hyacinth and Venice Treacle page 122

The fourth Treatise.
To make oil of Roses page 123 To make oil of Violets page 124 To make oil
of water Lillies ibid. To make oil of Cammomill page 125 To make oil of
Lillies ibid. To make oil of Wormwood, Dill, Rue, and Marjoram ibid. To make
oil of Mastick ibid. To make oil of Capers page 126 To make oil of Castor
ibid. To make oil of Worms page 127 To make oil of sweet and bitter Almonds
ibid. Of Ointments. To make unguent Basilicon page 128 To make ungent Aureum
ibid. To make unguent Aegyptiacum page 129 To make muudification of Smalladge
ibid. To make unguent Album page 130 To make Dissicative red ibid. To make
Diapompholigos page 131 To make unguent Populeon ibid. To make ointment of
Roses page 132
Of Plasters. To make Diachilon Plaster page 133 To make Diapalma page 134 To
make Emplast: Divinum ibid. To make plaster of Betony page 135 Of the
distillation of waters page 136 Of Treacle water ibid. Of Cinnamon water page
137 To make Hippocras page 138

FINIS.

