A looking Glass for the Court.

Composed in the Castilian tongue by the Lord Anthony of Gueuarra Bishop of
Mondouent, and Cronicler to the Emperor Charles. And out of ^astilian drawn
into French by Anthony Alaygre. And out of the French tongue into English by
Sir Fraunces Briant Knight one of the privy Chamber, in the raygne of K. Henry
the eight. And now newly printed, corrected and set forth with sundry apt notes
in the margent by T. Tymme Minister.

Imprinted at London, for William Norton. An. 1575.

nor

w

printer's device of William Norton

To the Right honorable, John, Lord Russell, son and heir apparent to the
right Noble Fraunces, Earl of Bedforde, one of the Queens Majesty's privy
Counsel, and Knight of the most honorable order of the Garter.
THe recommending of this learned and pleasant Treatise, the more generally to
have it perused (right Honorable) is the cause why I have dedicated the same to
your Honor. For it being warranted under your protection, (in whom such
virtues have their seat, that in you is expressed the right pattern of true
Nobility) can not but carry great credit, though the matter of it self,
should less deserve the same. It nothing does dismaye me for that I being
unknown to your Honor, have thus far presumed, neither may this seem any
rash attempt for that cause. For such is the alluring force of virtue, that
she constrayneth us to bear singular love and affection, not only to our own
Countrymen by view of face unknown, but also to Aliants, which by Land and
Sea are far severed from us. Wherefore I being caught with the commendation
of your Noble heart, furnished with virtue generally noysed, could not but
take courage to present this Pamphlet unto your Honors hands, as a most meet
Patron for the same. In the which you shall find pleasant matter concerning
the disprayse of the Court, and the commendation of the Rusticall life being
eloquently pende by that Reverend Father in God the Lord Anthony of Gueuarra,
a man of great learning and gravity, whose name may sufficiently warrant the
work to be handled with great discretion: last and least, my willing traueyle
to revive the same lying as dead, and by time worn^ ^lmost clean away.
Therefore accept my good will (Right Honorable) and if opportunity shall
serve, hereafter there shall greater things appear under your Honors name.
For this time, not to trouble your Honor with longer speech, I take my leave,
recommending my poor payns as the needy Wydowes Myte to your Honorable
courtesy, Mar. 12.42.
and courtuouse acceptaunce: beseeching Almighty God to give you increase of
Honor, and to bless you and your most Noble and virtuous Lady, that she may
enjoy to her comfort and yours, that long desired and blessed fruit and with
Anna the Mother of Samuel, 1. Sam. 2.1.
joyfully praise God for the same.

Your Honors most humble Thomas Tymme.

To the Reader.
IF high estate and Noble birth
Adournde with learnings lore,
Deserve high commendacion
And merit praise therefore:
If pearls of greatest price deserve,
Of right in fynest gold
To be coutched and enamelde
For all men to behold:
If wisdom, or authority,
If knowledge, credit, fame,
If haultie courage, courtly grace,
And myldenesse with the same,
May give to book a countenance,
Or make it more regarded:
I say unto this book there ought,
Like praise to be awarded.
Whose Author, Dan Gueuarra, hight
A Phoenix of our age:
To Charles the fyfth, late Emperor,
A Counsayler full sage.
And Preacher eke the same, and eke
A Cronicler of Acts:
Who could by sound of clanging trumpe
Emblazon out his factes.
Who many works to us has left
For which we better fare.
Dyrecting us to virtue, and
Of vices to beware.
Acquaynted well with courtly guyse
In Kaisers favor high,
Yet verdict gyues that Country life
Surmounth it far and nygh.
Whose pithie reasons, fyled speech,
And sugared words did move
A worthy Knight of English Court,
Whom Henry King did love,
First to translate from forrayne phrase
Into our mother tongue,
Inuesting it with English roabe,
As good for old and young.
For pleasure and for profit both
To recreate the mind:
And reaping thence commodity,
Ease for themselves to find.
One not unlike to Xenophon
Whose shape his Country men
Set up with sword in right hand claspt,
In left, a writing pen.
In like sort lyude, this worthy knight
In marshall feats well tryde
With Lance, Spear, Targe: in time of peace
His pen good works descryde.
Whose worthy pains, and learned pens
I do commend to thee:
Whose virtues bryghtly shine, and need
Not to be praysde by me:
That Myte of labor, which my self
Therein bestowed have,
In gentle sort accept, for more
I neither seek ne crave.
And join with me in prayer fyrme
For health, long life, and raygne,
Of our most noble Queen, that she
On earth, may long remain.
To guide the stern of Christian barge
With Oars of sacred lore:
And afterward to raygne with Christ
In bliss for evermore.
FINIS.
T. T.

A Table containing briefly the sum of every Chapter.
CHAPTER. 1. OF certain Courtyers which ought to complain of none but of
themselves. CHAPTER. 2. That none ought to counsel another to go to the
Court, nor when he is there to come from it, but every man to choose the life
that likes him best. CHAPTER. 3. That a Courtyer ought to leave the Court for
not being in favor: but being out of it already, that he ought not to seek
entertainment there again, that he may be more virtuous. CHAPTER. 4. Of the
life that the Courtyer ought to lead, after that he has left the Court.
CHAPTER. 5. That the Rusticall life is more quiet and restfull, and more
beneficial than that of the Court. CHAPTER. 6. That in the Village the days
seem more long, and the air more clear, and the houses more restfull than
in the Court. CHAPTER. 7. That commonly the Inhabitants of the Villages, be
more happy than Courtyers. CHAPTER. 8. That in Prnices Courts the custom and
use is to speak of God, and live after the world. CHAPTER. 9. In the Court
few amend, but many wax worse. CHAPTER. 10. That a man cannot live in the
Court without he trouble himself or some other. CHAPTER. 11. That in the
Court those that be grave are praised and well esteemed, and the other that
do the contrary not regarded. CHAPTER. 12. That in the Court of Princes all
say we will do it, but they do it not. CHAPTER. 13. That there is a small
number of them that be good in the Court, and a great number of good in the
common wealth. CHAPTER. 14. Of many affairs in the Court, and that there be
better husbandmen, than commonly is of courtiers. CHAPTER. 15. That among
Courtyers is neither kept amitye nor faithfulness: and how much the Court is
full of traueyle, of envy, and rancor. CHAPTER. 16. By how much the common
wealths and the Courts of the time past, were more perfect tha^ the Courts
of the time present. CHAPTER. 17. Of diverse Noble and valiant men that left
the Court and the great Cities, and drew them to their proper houses more by
will tha^ by necessity. CHAPTER. 18. The Author complayneth with great reason
of the years that he lost in the Court. CHAPTER. 19. The Author makes
account of the virtues that he lost in the Court. CHAPTER. 20. The Author
takes his leave of the world with great eloquence.
To the right reverend and worthy Prelate my Lord William de Prat, bishop of
Cleremount, Antony Alaygre sends greting.
IT is not many days past since I being retired for a time (my good lord)
into the vilage, and there taking the commodity and pleasure of the fair
sweet fields, a certain friend of mine sent unto me a work in the Castilian
tongue of the lord Antony of Gueuera bishop of Mo^douent, and Chronicler of the
Emperor: in reading whereof I found great pleasure and profit. The title of
the book is the Dispraising of the Court, and the praise of the life
rusticall, dedicate unto the king of Portingall in such sort, that the better
to keep and to hold the wise sentence and erudicio^s therein contained, I
employed certain hours after supper to translate the same into french, not
thinking among mine other simple works ever to put it abrod, but after that I
had communicate the same with some of my friends that have knowledge of the
Spanish tongue, I thought it not good to leave it in a corner to make it meat
for Rats and Mise. Now for truth, the first exe^pler was so evil divided, and
the leaves so out of order that I gave charge to the Scriuener that was my nigh
neighbor to copy the^, and as who should say to write it fair and in order,
the which so evil went about it, although by ignorance he could not ensue the
original, yet for to get a little money he sold where his pleasure was the
copies so vncumly set together that I was sorry and repentant that ever I
consumed the time to translate it, till at the last moved by the persuasion of
Annas Regin Vicar general, and by Peter Cister your advocate, by them twain my
great friends, I thought it better to present to the eyes of all men this evil
translated, then to suffer longer those evil exemplers so corrupted to my
blame in the hands of those that have no right judgment, to know from whom
the fault came: wherefore my good Lord, under your prudent favor and
correction I do adventure herein my name and fame acording to my knowledge,
trustyng assuredly that your only name shall suffice to vanquishe and set aside
this slander, the which slander as enemy to learned men, cease not to
withdraw those that have good will and mind to study: I say this that as
me seems it is well worthy that work of the wise bishop of Spain be
presented to his semblable or superior in learning in France, or rather above
him knowledge and virtuous manners. I will add to this, that the grave
sentences and persuasion to virtuous life contained in this book, deserve to
be offered to you that are accustomed to use them after such sort that every
man have plain opinion of you that ye are sent of God to be protector and
patron of virtue, troubled and despised. Therefore (my singular good Lord, as
one of the chiefest of the best sort) I dedicate to you this my little labor,
not that I think it worthy to come into your hands, but for to be a
perpetual witness that I do owe unto you my service with all reverence, to the
which most humbly I recommend me. From your City of Cleremont this first day
of May. Anno. M.D.xlii.

A dispraise of the life of the Courtier, and a commendacion of the life of the
husbandman, composed in the Castilian toungue, by the reverend father in God,
the Lord Antony of Gueuera, bishop of Mondouent, and Chronicler to the Emperor
Charles. And out of Castilian drawn into French by Anthony Alaygre, and now
out of the French tongue into our maternall language, by sir Fraunces Bryant
knight, one o king Henry the.viii. most honorable chamber.
The first Chapter. Of certain Courtiers which ought to complain of none,
but of them selves.
AFter that the noble prince Philip of Macedony had ouerru^ne the Atheniens,
one a time he being at supper among certain of his Philosophers, asked them
which was the greatest thing in the world? One of them answered, that to his
thinking it was the water, because there was more of that only then of any
other thing under the sky. The greatest thing in the world defined by
Philosophers.
Another said it was the Sun, seeing his only brightness does suffice to give
light to the earth, to the stars, and to the water. Another said it was the
great hill Olympe, whose height passes the clouds. Another said it was the
most renoumed giant Athlas, on whose sepulcre was builded the fear full
mountain Ethna. Another said it was Homer, that in his life was so much
praised and after his death so much bewailed, that vii. great cities made
war among themselves for the recovery of his bones, to keep them as a
relike. The last and most wise Philosopher said, that nothing in this world
ought to be called great, Man's heart is the greatest thing in the world.
but that heart which estemeth no great things. O high and noble sentence,
since there by that it is given us to understand, that as touching the riches
and honor of this world, more is ye glory of him that settes light by them,
then he that has the cast for to get them. Titus Liuius prayseth and never
cease to praise, the good Consul Marcus Curious in the house of whom, came
Ambassadors of the Sannites for to recover certain lands that he had of
theirs, offering to him for the same plenty of Gold and silver: He having in
his hand certain herbs to put in his pot for his dinner, answered them
after this sort, ye should have offered this money to the Capitaynes that
disdain to dress their own dinners, and not to me that desires no greater
riches then to be Lord over their Lords.

Deserved not this Marcus Curious more praise in setting light those talentes of
Gold of the Sannites, than the Consell Lucullus for robbing them of Spartes?
Deserved not the wise Crates more glory for the riches that he cast in to the
Sea than the king Nabugodonezer for the treasure that he robbed from the
temple? To your Judgment, did not they of the Isles of Bariares deserve more
honor, agreing not to have among them neither gould nor silver, than the
couetouse Greeks that took by force and pilled the mines of Spain? was not
the heart of the good Emperor Augustus more great, in setting light the
Empire, than of his uncle Julius Ceasar, that did take possession?

It is needful to have wisdom, experience to order it, cunning to set it
forth, and fortune to bring it to good end: but to vphould and keep it, it
had need of great strength, and for to disprayse it, a good heart, because
that which is seen with the eyes is more easy to dispraise than that thing
which we have already in our hands. It has been seen, that many noble me^
have had fortune so much at their desires, that they have enterprised a thing
almost impossible to attain, ye which after for lack of good discrecio^, were
not able to keep it. Whereby it is to be understand that the greatness of the
heart does not consist so much in obtainyng the thing that we desire to have,
as it is to set light, True fortitude consists in mortefying our affctions.
and contemn that that one loves best. Apolonius Thyaneus, did he not despise
his own proper country and travailed thorowout all Asia for to go to see the
Philosopher Hyarchis in Ynde? Abraham in like manner forsook his own country
and kindred. Genes. 12.1. Moses regarded not in like manner the statelines of
Pharaos court. Exodus 2.15. Exodus 10.28. Ambition is to be avoided as these
examples teach.
Aristotle leauyng the familiarity he had with Alexander, returned to his own
house for to read Philosophy. Nicodius nothing extemed the treasure that ye
great king Cyrus gave him for to follow him in ye wars. The Philosopher
Anatillus refused three times ye principality of Athenes, saying: he had rather
be servant to ye good, then a chastiser of the evil. Cecilius Metellus a
valiant captain Roman, neither would accept the estate of Dictator that to
him was given, nor the office of Consul that to him was offered: saying,
Proverbs Chap. 16.19.
that he would eat in rest that which with great trauail he had gotten in the
war. The Emperor Dyoclesian (as it is manifest) forsook with his free will the
Empire, for no other cause but to flee the brute of the common speech, and to
live in rest at home. Worthy is he to be praised that has the heart to care
little for an Empire or a realm: Proverbs Chap. 16.32.
but yet more is he worthy that can set light by him self and not to be
governed by his own will: for there is no man in this world, but that he is
more in love with that he desires, then with that he has: Covetous me^ never
satisfied
but how covetous or ambicious so ever any man be, if he trauail x. days for
that which he has, he will bestow an hundredth to obtain that which he
desires, Most men mislyke of their estate.
because that we do not bestow our labor as we should, but we bestow it after
our desires. If we do trauaill, if we be troubled, if we cannot sleep, it is
not for necessity, but for to satisfy our will and appetite. And that is worst
of all, we not contenting our selves with that we can do procure to can that
that we desire. O how many have we seen in the court of princes, Will, has
over thrown mighty men, and brought them from princes courts to destruction.
to whom it had been better for them that they had been no lords of their
will, and less of their desires because sythens they did that they might and
desired, begone to do, that they ought not to do? If the man that offendes us
ought to ask pardon, let every man ask pardon to himself before any other,
Men are to them selves the greatest enemies.
for in my life I found never none that hurt me so much as my self, I have
been only the procurer of mine own hurt. Presumption and pride go together.
Dan. 4.30. Envy is the fruit of unbridled affeccions. Genesis 4.5. Genesis 32.5.
and.11.
Who made me fall into pride, but mine only presumpsion and fondnes? Who durst
have prisoned my sorrowful heart with envy, but lack of natural government?
who durst have inflamed mine inwardes with the fire of ire, if it had not been
my great impacience? what is the cause I am so great a gurmander, but that my
bringyng up was to delicate? what is the cause I have not departed with my
goods to the poor and needy, but the excessyue love I had to my riches? who
gave leave to my flesh to rise against my folish desire, if my heart had not
been fixed in voluptuous pleasures? O my soul, of all this damage and open
faults, to whom do you lay the blame, but to mine own sensuality? Great
folly it is, the thief being within the house, to seek for him without: even so
it is with us a manifest fault of experience, when seeing in us the blame, and
yet charge another with the occasion: Reformation of our faults brings
quietness.
by this we ought to perceive that we shall never cease to complain until
the time we begin to amend. Oh, how often and many times has virtue fought
with the bottom of our consciences, This battle is in the children of God,
in the which they overcome: but the wicked are subdued to sin. Romans chap.
7.18. Ephesians. 6.12. Heb. 12.1.
which styrred us to be good, and our sensuality resisted, which is vain
frowardnes, by the which battle followed a dark corrupt judgment: but to
conclude, we of our selves as of our selves are very miserable. The Poet Ovid
reherseth the loving Philis the Rodian complaining of her self and says: Oh
Demophon, if I had not bestowed time to love thee, and silver and ships for
thexpedicio^ of the voyage, thou durst not well to have gone, nor I to have
bewailed thy departing, in such wise that with my own wepons was my body
wounded. If we believe Josephus in that he did write of Maryana, and Homer, in
that he said of Helene, Plutarch in yt he spoke of Cleopatra. Virgil of ye
queen Dydo, Theophrast of Pollysene, Zantippe of Cammilla, Assenarius of
Clodia: Men are by nothing more deceived than by themselves
Al these ladies and excellent princes never found themselves so deceived by
their lovers as they were by believing their own proper counsels, and lightly
consenting to the same.

If to Suetone, Zantippe and Plutarch we will give credit and believe those
things that they declare of Pomp, Pyrrhus, Hannyball, and the Consul Marius,
of the Dictator Caesar, of Mark Antony and many others we shall find they
blamed not fortune so much to be vanquished by others, as in their prosperity
they were ruled by their own advise and counselles. It is true, that often
times the opinion of our kin and friends makes us to enter into business out
of the way of reason, Friends often times seduce from reason.
not caring but for a folishe auauncement of goods and riches. And at the end
when by their setting forth one has enterprised a certain busynes of
importance which does require aid and help, those same be the last that
show them selves helping friends: Many are friends in words, but few are to
be found in deed
which is the occasion many times that men cannot return from enterprisyng
such things as neither shall grow to their honor nor profit. Many men say
that they have enemies, recountyng them often without findyng number: Although
it be true if it be well noted, that none have oftener or a greater enemy than
him self. And the most greatest danger that I see, Clyming causes fallinge.
is that under the shadow to prefer and make better my self, my self is
the cause of my destruction. The Philospher Neotidas on a time being asked
which was the best counsel that a man might take, answered, The counsel of
others with the dispraisyng of his own: We must not stand in our own conceit.
and he shows the cause, for that the corrupcion of man is such, that often
he searches in him self with great pain that which in the head of
another, he fyndeth with great ease. Then it follows, that in the best time
of our life our own life deceives us, the evil comes fourth on every side,
heavy thoughts overtake us, our friends leave us, A lively description of the
miseries of man's life.
persecutors torment us, troubles make an end of us, ambicion burieth us. If
we behold this thing: what we be: whereof we be: and wherefore we be, we
shall find that our beginning is oblivion, our middle age travail, the end
sorrow, and altogether an open error. The^ see how heavy is the courtiers life,
The courtyers life is full of perils.
as also how dangerous the way is, where as be stones to stumble at, myer to
stick fast in, yse for to fall on, pathwayes for to lose him in, water for to
pass through, thieves for to be afraid of, great affairs and business to do,
so that hard it is for any to go there as they would, and more hard to aryue
there as they desire. All these things have we said, to the intent that the
Courtiers may understand that neither I nor they can chose the good way and
leave the evil, void that that hurtes us, and conserve that which profits us,
follow reason and pluck away the occasion: but if by chaunse some good fall to
us, Blind fortune praised for prosperity, and blamed for adversity.
we thank fortune, and if evil come to us, then we do put the fault in her.

The second Chapter How that none ought to counsel a^ other to go to the
Court, nor when he is there to come from it, but every man to chose the life
that best he likes.
ARistarch the great Philosopher of Theban, said, That, time and man was so
diverse, that hard it was for the most wise to choose that to them which was
good, and to keep them from that which to them is evil.

One thing is not pleasant to all men.
There is nothing more true, for we see daily, with the same that one is healed,
another falls sick: with that that one waxes better, another waxes worse:
with that that one is amended, another is put down: and to conclude, with that
little thing that one is content withal another is in despair. The learned
Alchymus was by his Moecoenas king Demetrius, asked wherein specially did
consist the greatest trauail of the world? He answered, there is few things
but in them there is either trauail or suspicion, A mind never satisfied has
excessive trauail.
but above all the most excessive trauail that a man may have, is never to be
satisfied. And that this is true, we perceive that when a little thing
contenteth us, how little soever it be, we make it our paradise with the rest of
our life: which seldom chaunseth to few men, because that living as we live,
not being contented, we would assaie and know if it were good to be a king, a
prince, a knight, a married man, No man contented with his estate.
a religious or a merchant, a laborer, a shepeherd, or of some other estate.
And at the end, when al is proved, it shall be hard to find where we would
rest, so inconstant is the lightness of men. The wise determines that to chose
the best is the mean. A simple creature is lightly contented with a small
thing, The poor co^tente them selves with that which the rich and mighty
contemn.
but he that has a great heart, thynkes that poverty is a grievous life, like
as they that be of high estate fear the fall of fortune. Plato was in his
young years very worldely, as he that had seen much, as well in the wars as
in offices, in which he was used, and also in handy crafts. On a time it was
asked him wherein he had found most quietness and rest? He answered, there is no
estate of life wherein is not mutabilitie, there is no honor where is no peril,
There is no roase without a thorn, nor any pleasure but it is mixte with pain.
no riches where is no trauail, no prosperity but it ends, nor also pleasure
but fails: but when all is said, I never found so much quietness of mind, as
since I left mine offices in Cities, withdrawing me to my books: signifiyng,
yt as long as we live servants of the world, we desire al, we prove all, we
procure all, then all things are well seen and tasted, and all things do
anoye us: the greatest part of our disquietnes comes hereof, that the
abundance we have, seems to us little, and the little of others, seems to
us much. We mislyke all that we have our selves, and commend that which other
enjoy.
We say that our wealth is travail, and that the evil hap of others is
rest: we condemn others acts and we allow our own: we watch to get
somewhat, and sodeinly we sleep to leese it again: we imagine that all men
lives content, and we alone needy: And yet the worst is, we believe that we
dream, and put not our trust in that we see before our eyes. What way one ought
to follow or what estate he ought to chose, none can well know nor
counsel, because the thing is so troublesome and without good judgment, by
which many are deceived. Man's life on earth, full of troubles.
If the sailing on the sea be dangerous, so is the walking on the earth
troubleous.

As touching our life, we see that he that is whole, daily falls sick, the
sick dies, some other scapeth deadly dangers, and some others lyngers forth
to death. Better is he that hal^^^th in the way, then he that runs out of
the way
As touching the waifaryng men, as soon comes he to his lodging that goes
softly, as he that goes hastily and loses his way. He that is in favor,
living in slothful rest, had as much need of upholding, as he that
continually sweates in trauail. Therefore I conclude, The certainty of all
things is, that all things are uncertain.
that there is nothing in this world so certain, as yt all things are
uncertain.

Then let us return to that we spoke of: It is said that it is fearful, to
counsel any to marry, to study, to go to the war, or to take upon him any
other thing, then that he is called to: because in this case none is so apt to
receive, man likes best of that to the which he is inclined.
that which to him is said as he is to receive that which he is naturally
inclyned to. Plutarch greatly praises in his book of commonwealth, the good
Philosopher Plato (and not without cause) for he used a great policy, which
was, that there was no young man entered into his school, Plato proved the
inclination of his scollers before he entertained the^.
but first he would prove him whether he was inclined to lernyng or no, so
that those that he thought not apt to study, he sent them back, causyng them
to use their lives in the commonwealth. Alcibiades the Greek may be a
sufficient witness unto you, which although he was young brought to the
school, and taught of a discrete master, yet notwithstanding his inclinacion
was such, that he professed himself wholly to the wars. The courtier is unfit
to be a shepherde, and the sheperd as unmeet for a courtier.
To him that is borne to wear a sword by his side, it seems him ill to wear
a tippet about his neck and he that loves to keep sheep, the court is
nothing fit for him. To her that desires marriage, it is hard to keep her
chaste: He that loves to be a barber, why should he be made a Paynter. To
counsel our friend to leave a craft for to live by, is but well done: but
especially to appoint him what craft he ought to learn, that me thinks
worthy to be reproved. The Lacedaemonians commanded to all fathers upon great
pains, to put none of their children to any craft till they were.xiiij.
years of age to see that in the age of discretion what their nature was
inclined to. Let us leave this long communication, and speak of that we ought
to advertise the redar of: to counsel any to leave the court, such counsel I
think not best to give, nor yet wisdom for other to take, seeing that there
is doubt to counsel any in that they ought to do: Howbeit mine advice is,
Sage persons should live in a quiet state.
that the sage persons chose to live in a quiet state, and to dwell in such a
place, that they may lead a life without reproach, and christianly to dye.
Oftentimes men do remove from one country to another, from one town to
another, from one street, from one house, from one company to another: but to
conclud, if that he had peine in the one, he does complain himself utterly
of the wrongs of the others: And this is the reason, because he lays the
fault to the nature of the country, which nothing else is but his own evil
nature. What more shall we say, but in Courts, In Courts and in most places
virtue is blamed and vice uncorrected.
in cities, in villages, and in other places, is seen the virtuous and the
discrete corrected, and the vicious not blamed. The wicked with their wickedness
search by all means to make themselves worse. And likewise do ye virtuous
with their virtues, make themselves better in what state soever they be called.
As for ye prelates, there is no charge in ye Church so dangerous but yt a good
conscience can avoid it, but a weak or corrupt conscience may soon be cast
away: Good and evil may be taken from one and the self same thing.
Like as ye wild rose from whence ye Be fetches her honey, and likewise ye
Spider her poison. The prince may do his deuor doing justice and not using
tyranny: The man of arms going to ye war and not hurting the poor people: The
religious may be co^templatiue in their cloister without grudging. The married man
may live well in his house without aduoutry. The rich man gives his goods for
Gods sake without usury: The laborer in working, the shepeherd in keeping his
sheep without hurting his neighbors, and in like case of others. And to prove
that it is true by the Scripture in the state of Kings, David was good, and
Saull evil, to the estate of Priests, Mathias good, and Obnias naught. Of
Prophets, Daniel good, Of all estates some good and some evil.
Balam evil, Of Shepeherdes Abell good, Abimilech evil, Of wydowes Judith
good, Iezabell evil, Of rich, Job good, Naball naught: Likewise of the
Apostles, Saint Peter good, Judas was reproved. Then perceive to what estate
soever a man comes unto, be it good or evil, the estate shows not the man,
Inclination (...) the (...), and not the state.
but the inclination of the parson. If we should counsel any man to live in
the village, he would say he cannot agree with them of the village, if ye
will counsel him to leave the Court, he will say that he has a thousand
businesses to do there: If he be counseled to serve any great Lord: he will
say that he has nothing wherewith to find him: If we advise him to be a
religious, he will say that he cannot rise early: If to marry, he will say it
will grieve him to hear his little children cry and weep: To go to study it
would trouble his brain: If he were counsayled to withdraw him to his house,
he would say he could not live without company. Then presuppose that which is
said, that none ought to counsel any to chose the life he will take concerning
his honor and the wealth of his life, because afterward he will more complain
him, of the counsel that he has taken, then of the evil that he has suffered.

The.iij. Chapter. How that a Courtier ought to leave the Court for not being
in favor, but being out of the Court already that he ought not to seek
entertainment there again that he may be more virtuous.
PVblius Minus says in his Annotacions that we ought to think many days on
that which we entend to do in one day. The king Demetrius, son of Antigonus
was asked by one of his Capitaynes named Patroclus, wherefore he gave not
battle to his enemy Ptolome, seeing his strength, his wit and his number of
men? He answered, Advice and counsel ought to be had before we take any thing
in hand
that a deed once don, is hard to call back again, and before a man begin a
hard enterprise, he had need^ of long counsel.

Agiselaus a wise Capitain of the Lycaoniens, being forced to answer the
Ambassadors of the Thebeans said: Know not you O Thebeans that to determine a
thing of importance, nothing is matter then long study.

Plutarch does greatly praise the life of Sertoreius in that he was not rash
in determinyng, but grave in enterprising. Suetone says that The Emperor
August was never hasty to get friends, but very diligent to keep them when he
had them. Of these ensamples, note what danger he falls in, that is hasty in
businesses and quick in counsels.

None will wear a garment if it be not sowed: nor eat the fruit, if it be not
ripe: nor drink the wine, if it be not clear: nor eat the flesh if it be not
dressed: nor warm him with wood, if it be not dry: Wherefore the^ do we
counsel us with grene counsel, which sooner shall smudder us then warm us.
The wise man ought to have before his eyes a sober deliberacion in his
affairs, for if he think one hour of that which he would say, he had need
think x. of that that he would do: Words may be called back again: but
deeds finished cannot so easily be revoked
words be but words, they may be corrected, but never the unconsidered
deed. The fault of this, is that every man studyeth to speak, to dispute, to
judge, but none to live well, nor yet to dye vertuouslye. Virtuous life not
regarded Stubbornes, wilfulnes, and fickelnes are to be shunned in any
enterprise.
The grave persons that will conserve their authority may not be testie or
stubburn in such things as they enterprise nor wilful in that they take in
hand, nor fickill in that they begin: for one of ye greatest faults that a
man may have, is not to be found true of his word, and inconstant in yt he
has begun. Constancy ought to be in a man of noble hearts.
A noble heart ought to foresee yt which he is charged with, and if it be just and
reasonable sooner to die, the^ not to do it: by ye which noble hearts are known
If it were a thing hard and almost impossible Achilles to flee Hector: Agisalus
to overcome Brantes: to Alexander, Darrius: to Caesar Pompeius: to Augustus,
Marcus Antonius: to Silla, Mithridates: to Scipion Hanniball: and to the good
Troyan Dacebalus: these noble princes had never been so much esteemed as they
be, but that they uttered their noble courage: Then, good advice joined with a
noble heart, ought to govern great enterprises. The^ to our purpose, my
master the courtier says, The courtear mislyketh his estate, often times, and
yet continues therein.
he will leave the cursed life of the court, and go dye at home, saying, that
to live in such trouble is a continual death. O how many and often times have
I hard these fair words, that never were followed, excusing them only by the
destiny of the court, in ye which they were last glued. When that a courtier
lackes money, that any man does him displeasure, or that he has lost his
process: God knows how many oaths he makes that he will forsake all, not to
leave his evil conditions, but because that his business goes backewarde: but
long his purpose lasts not, for if our courtier hap to come to wealth, or
that he be advanced by his prince, ye shall see his former promises to wax
cold, his will and his desire to remain there in such wise that ye would judge
him to be naturally borne there. Favor and covetousness guide the courtier.
Favor and covetousness guide the Courtier, so that one grows with the other,
and at the end converted from the manner of Christians to Courtiers. Wealth and
beggarie are to be had in the court.
For all men know that the court is a place where men may get wealth, and
likewise the place of men's undoing: We have already rehearsed the occasions why
men do withdraw them from the court, some for lack of money, some for
poverty, or not being in favor, or for age, al these things be of necessity
and nothing of free will, nor yet praise to them that so withdraw them for the
causes aforesaid: but the true leuing of the Court, We should forsake that
which is evil before evil forsake us.
and of the world is, when the courtier is young, strong, in favor, rich, and
in health, then with good heart to leave the court, to find in other places
honest rest after his degree is praise worthy. This is said, to the intent yt
he which leaves the court, should leave it merrily and without repenting, for
fear that after his sorrow is past, he would be ashamed to return to the
same, where he may chaunse to have great business.

Deeds require long repentance.
The proud and impatient man does many things in a day which he had need to
mourn for all the days of his life. A colloricke head is nothing meet for
the court for if he will be revenged of the shames, injuries, crafts, More
injuries ar offered in one hour in the court, tha^ a man can revenge in ten
years.
and wrongs, that in the court he shall find, let him trust that he shall
suffer more in one hour, then he shall be able to revenge in ten year: Whosoever
leaves the court let him leave it for euermore-because that if he will return
to it again, and leave his dwelling in the country, he may be likened to him,
that has a continual Ague: He that sins and mendes and after returns
again to sin, that sin is more grievous then ye first. In likewise to leave
the court and after return to it, is so open a fault that it cannot be hid,
except ye will say, he goes to sell virtue and to by riches.

To our purpose, if we should ask of an ancient man, what has been the whole
course of his life, and that he would answer us, he has enterprised much,
wandered, spoken, searched, found and lost. etc. We would say that his life
has been a dissembling folly. The life of a Courtier is dissembling folly.
What shall we say then of our inconstant Courtiers that daily do the same
things? which forgetting themselves, for the obteinyng of a little favor, do
against nature, flatter, and beg. Remember above all things gentle reader
here andels where, That which is spoken in this book, concerning the dispraise
of Courtiers, is spoken against the indiscreet Courtiers. The heart is
unsatisfied when the body is weary*
that I speak not but of ye indiscreet Courtiers that cannot refrain their
appetite with an honest contentacion: which thing most chiefly causes many
sage and discrete persons to give over the Court, because to refrain the will
of the heart, is a greater pain then to content ye body: for ye body is soon
weary of sinning, but the heart is never satysfied in desiryng: One may know
easily the compleccio^ of the body, but the mind of the heart never, and to
contenting less, for the heart at every instaunt requires now one thing now
another, and within a little time after forgets all. O dissembling heart that
under a pretense to be clear and joyful, makes men to judge that hypocrisy is
devotion, ambicion nobility, avarice husbandry, cruelty zeal of justice,
much babbling eloquence, folishnes gravity, and dissolucion diligence: To
conclude, that every man ought to know how much he may do: if a man know him
self to be ambicious, Ambicious impacient and covetous men are meet for the
court. A contented peaceable and quiet man is meet for the town.
impacient, and covetous, let him go hardely to the court: And contrary, if the
courtier feel his nature content, peaceable, and desiring rest and quietness,
let him be dwelling in the village, and he shall well know that he never knew
how to live, till he had drawn him self from the Court.

The.iiii. Chapter. Of the life that the Courtier ought to lead, after that
he has left the Court.
MYronydes a wise and sage Philosopher, Capitain of ye Boheciens said, that the
prudence of a man was as well known by retiring from the evil, as in chosing
of the good, Wisdom consists in choosing the good and shunning the evil.
forasmuch as under the evil commonly the good can not be hid, but under the
pretense of good much evil may be dissembled: even much like as the Antheme
that begins Per signum crucis and ends in Sathanas and Barrabas: In like
manner the great evils have their beginning by some pretense of feigned goodness,
in such sort that they be cou^terfeict much like Maskers, wrapped in swetnes as
purging pills, and gilt as is the Rubarbe. There is no man I think so mad
that keeps not himself in as much as he can from catching evil, and specially
from open evil: but contrariwise, it were wisdom to keep him from that which
is not altogether good.

Alexander the great, causing himself to be healed of certain wounds that he
had received in battle, was reproved of his great minion Parmeno for putting
himself into great hazard in the war: Friends feigned are more perilous than
open enemies
To whom Alexander said, assure me my friend Parmeno of those that be
dissembling friends, for I will be ware of them that be my open enemies.

Alcibyades, Agiselaus, Purrhus, Antigonus, Lentulus, and Julius Caesar, were
so circumspecte in these things that they were always vanquishers, and died
in the hands of their friends, and specially because they chose the good and
left the evil.

Then he that leaves the court ought not only for to see what he leaves, but
also what he takes, considering that as much or more hard it is to content him
having left the court, as it was a fore in the desiryng to be in the court:
what profits it to leave the Court weary and troubled, If thy heart can find
no rest in the place whether thou resortest? Our body fulfilled with meats is
led where one will have it, but the heart is never satisfied with desiryng, An
ambicious heart is never satisfied.
and would (if he might) be in favor with princes of the court, and on the
other side at his ease in the village. If the Courtier daily have mind being
at home, of the passions and afflictions that he had in the Court, it had been
better for him never to have gone from it, because that in remembering them, yt
thinking is more pricking, and the mind weaker to resist them.

In the court of princes chaunses often times that lack of money or other
great business makes a man abstain from doing evil, Want of money makes some
forsake the court.
the which being after in his house does such deeds unseemly in a gentleman,
that they deserve to be corrected, yea, and bitterly punished.

There be also another sort of men that forsakes the Court to be more idle
at home: Idleness makes other some to forsake the court
And such would be rejected from the number of honest men, seeing they chose
that time for their purpose to sin in the village, fearing to be infamed or
dishonored in the court, and yet being in the country lives with shame
forgetting all reason. To exchue these things he that leaves the Court ought
to leave his percialitie that he has followed, and to forget all passions:
otherwise he shall lament the sweet bitterness that he leaves, and bewail the
life that he has begun. This is true, that in ye court are more occasions
given to destroy a man, There are more occasions in the court of destruction
than there are in a private house.
then are at home in his own house to save him. It is a small profit to the
courtier the changing of his dwelling, unless by the same means he change his
conditions. When the courtier says I will withdraw me to my country and go
dye at home, yt is well said: but this shall suffice that he honestly withdraw
him self, without determining there to dye. This mortal life is to us so
appointed, We must amend our lives, and not curse them.
that we ought not to pursue it with sorrow, but that we are bound to amend it.
When Job said Tedet animam meam vite me, it was not for yt his life weried
him, but because he did not amend it.

Whosoever leaves the court may be boulde to say that he goes not to die: but
may well think he has escaped from a fair prison, from a confused life, from
a dangerous sickness, from a suspicious conversation, from a great sepulcher,
Many perils shooned by forsakinge the court. Death is in the court, and life
at home.
and from a meruail without end. The wysest being in the court may say every
day that they dye, and at their houses in the country that they live. And the
reason is: that being in the court, those necessary things that are to be done
in the world, cannot be done as they would, nor when they would, for lack of
liberty. Yet I will not say, There is more good will in the court to do good,
tha^ liberty to perform the same.
but many in the court do their deuor to do as they would, but I dare
affirm that for x. pound weight they have of honest will, they have not half
an ounce of honest liberty.

Likewise, let him that forsakes the Court set a wise order in such business
that he has to do, calling to mind that to go home to his country needs no
long journey, Evil customs gotten in the court are hardly left.
but to dispoyle him self of the evil clothes of the Court needs a wonder
long time. For like as vices increase in a man little and little, so is it meet
to root them out by little and little. This ought the courtier to do ye minds
to rule himself, pluck up by little pieces the most notable faults that are
in him, and so preately dispatch himself of one vice to day, and from another
to morrow, in such sort that when one vice takes his leave and is gone,
straightway a virtue do enter in his stead, so that in process he may go from
good to better. The courtier is in nothing more deceived then in living a wild
and wanton life, parauenture the space of.xx. or xxx. years, thinks in a
year or two to become sage and grave, Virtue is differred until age, by the
Courtier.
as well as though he applied all his life in a sober and sad life, and truly
that happens for lack of good judgment, for it behooves without comparison
a longer time for to learn to cast away vice, the^ to learn virtue: Vices come
merrily: but depart hardly.
considering that vices enter our gates laughing, and goes out from our house
weping and lamenting. O how much greeueth it ye ambicious courtier, when he can
not command as he was wont to do? the^ it may be said, yt to forsake ye court
is requisite to a good heart, and a good wit to obtain rest.

Those that leave the Court for fainte heart, be of that nature that it is more
painful to them to see themselves absent from the Court, the^ their joy was
when they were in the court: which said persons if they would follow mine advice
and counsel should not only leave the court, but forget it utterly for ever.
And farther, the courtier ought to retire in such manner that he may come to
the Court again, if the fear and study in ordering of his householde
constrayne him eftsoon for to desire the voluptuousnes of the court. In the
heart of the prudent courtier that forsakes the court, Courtiers gape after
Bishoprics.
when there falls bishoprics or other great offices, the affections and
desires of the mind ryngeth alarm, when he shall think if I had not come
away so soon, that office or that dignity had been mine: but he again
remembering that many such things has fallen which he had not: so likewise
might he have in the stead of ye, a plain nay, of that which fell when he was
gone. Then, is it not much better to ouersee and travail his own house then
to have such a shameful denial in the court?

Therefore destinies of the courtiers are so prompte and ready that for the most
part one is constrained to despise them more by necessity, then by will, and
in that mean while their purpose is at an end before they them selves beware
thereof, For when the Courtier comes to be at quiet with himself, above all
things it is necessary that he take heed of pesteryng of himself, An
admonition for the retyered courtier
for if he did live in the court evil willed, let him take heed, that in the
village he despair not, by reason of charge, the importunity of his wife, of
his children, and the fautes of his servants, the grudging of his neighbors
may parcase make him astonished: but to think again, that being escaped from the
dangerous golfe of the court, he may repute him self half a God. And besides
this, No place, or state, is free from troubles
none ought to think that he dwelling in a village in the country shall put
away all troubles and displeasures, for it can not be, but he that never fell
in the crooked and rough way may happen to stumble in the plain way and break
his neck: and therefore it is necessary that he retiryng from the court, take
the time as it shall come, that he may the more occupy him self in virtuous
exercise, to the intent that to much rest, and to much business of mind let
him not from the great good that comes of this, Contentacion of mind
brings great profit.
to be well contented with a little. Join unto this also that there is none so
much enemy unto virtue as is idleness, of ye which idleness be taken in the
beginning thoughts superfluous, Idleness is an enemy to virtue.
and consequently the distruccion of men.

To the purpose, has not the courtier cause to complain, The life of the
courtier is epicurisiue.
that occupies himself in nothing but in eating, drinkyng, and sleaping, and
in the mean season his better age, that is to say, his youth consumes away,
as the fume of smoke, which proceeds of idleness in the court and doing nothing?
Time is evil spent in the court.
where contrariwise he might in the village exercise himself to his honor, and
to ye health of his body and profit of his neighbor.

In like manner also, the courtier that withdraws himself should use ye
company of such as be grave, sage and honest, to the intent that in the stead
of liars, Liars, flatterers, and triflers are in the court.
flatterers, and triflers, which he was associate withal in the court, he may
be accompanied in the village with wise and sage friends, or at the hardest
with good books, whereby in the lokyng of them he may virtuously imploye the
residue of his time, In a private house a man may be occupied in many godly
exercises which in the court he cannot use.
and with sobriety entertain every man, that men may say he is come from the
court to please the good, and not to rule. And if parcase one would make him
baylief in the village, or some other public officer, I would counsel him to
take heed thereof as he would of the pestilence, for because there is nothing
so troubleous nor so hard a burden to the mind as to take charge of the rude
and simple. I do not say nay, but that he may and ought to help the poor
commons of the village with such knowledge as he has learned in the court, or
had before he came there, when they shall have need, either for love or for
money. Also if they be at variaunce, help to appeace the^: if they be evil
entreated, defend them. And this doing, he shall be esteemed of the commons and
praised of the wise and prudent. Three things are to be shunned of the ret^red
courtier.
Above all things beware of prodigal apparel, superfluous banquetes, and
delicate meats, and strong or precious wynes. For the absenting from the court
ought to be to none other purpose but to live soberly in ye village, A private
house ought not to be a court.
or else shall he make of the village the court, which should make of the court,
ye village. And ye courtier retired from ye court ought to have in singular
co^me^dacio^ mercy, as to visit Hospitalles, Charitable deeds to be practiced
of all men.
succor the poor, counsel the Orphans, visit the prisoners, read the holy
scripture, and finally that he study to dispose his goods vertuouslye during
his life, for when he shall be dead, every man will claim his goods, Many love
our goods but ^ewe or none care for our soul.
but none will nor can discharge his soul. And most chiefly, let the courtier
that goes from the court occupye himself virtuously to dye. All these things
that I have said, let no man say that they be more easy to read then to do:
for if we will enforce our selves, we are more then our selves, and do not
then well remember our selves.

The.v. Chapter. That the rusticall life is more quiet and restfull and more
beneficial then that of the court.
THe village whereof we speak and the demaines thereof, Put we the case that
it were all free and not subject to any Lord (as certain there be so
preuileged) that every man there lies in his own house, whether it be by
succession, or that he have bought it freely without doing any homage or
service to any man. This I dare say, the courtier has not, nor is not in such
free liberty in respect of such as be of the village, forasmuch as of very
necessity, my master the courtier must win the Marshall or Harbengar of the
lodging, and must receive at his hands the billet to come to his lodging, and
that late enough and weary to his host, break open doors, beat down walls,
Shameful shifts of courtiers.
disorder houses, burn impleme^ts, and sometime beat the good man, and defyle
the wife. O how happy is he that has wherwithal to live in the village with
out troubling both of himself and many sundry places, without seeking of so
many lodginges, without assayes of so many strange occasions of strange men,
without weeping of any person, but is content with a mean estate, and is
delivered of all such breakebraines. Another benefit of the country is this,
that the gentleman or burges that there does inhabit may be one of the chief
or chiefest, either in bou^tie, honor, or authority, Little worship in the
court is great honor in the town.
the which happens seldom in the court and in great cities and towns: for
there he shall see other go before him, more trim and more brave and gorgious
then he, as well in credit as in riches, as well in the house as without the
house. And Julius Caesar said to this purpose that he had rather be the first
in a village, then the second in honor in Rome. For such men as have high
hearts and minds, and base fortune, it should be to them much better to live
in the village with honor, then in the court overthrown and abated, and out of
favor. The difference between the tariyng or abidyng in a little place and a
great place, is that in the little places are found much people poor and
needy, of whom men may take compassion: and in the great place many rich men
whereby envy is norished.

The commodities that come by dwelling in the village.
Another commodity in the village is, that every man enjoys in quiet and
peace such as God has given him, without to have such to come to their houses,
that shall constrayne them to make extraordinary expe^ses, or to have his wife
seduced, or his daughters defiled. The occasions to do evil be put away by
reason that he is occupied in the mainteining of his household, in trayning of
his sons and chastening of his servants. He lives confirmed to reason and
not to his opinion: and lives hopyng to dye and not as he that loves to live
ever. In the village, We ought to live, as dying.
thou shall not care for good lodging, nor for looking to thy Horses and Mules,
nor for the lading of such things as they shall carry. Thou shall not hear the
crying of pages, the plaintes of the stuardes of the house, the babbling of the
Cooks, nor thou shall fear Judges nor Justices, least they should be to sore
against thee. And that which is much better, thou shall have no crafty knaves
to beeguyle thee, nor women to betraye thee.

Another benefit of the village is this, that he shall have time enough to al
things that he will do, so that the time be well spent, time enough to study,
time to visit his friends, time to go a hunting, and layser when he list to
eat his meat: the which layser courtiers commonly have not, Courtiers ^^^dom
leisure to eat their meat.
for as much as they employe the most part of their time in making of shifts
to play the courtier, or to speak more plainly, to weep and lament, in such
sort that one may say of them ye which ye Emperor Augustus said of a Roman a
great busy broker the same day that he dyed. I wonder said he, seeing the
time failed him to chop and to change, how he could now find layser to dye?
Another commodity of the village is this, those that be dwellers there may
go alone from place to place without to be noted to fall from gravity, they
need no Mule nor Horse with a foot clothe, The country life, requires ^o
great train
nor page to wait of my lord, or damsel to wait upon my lady. And that
were scornful to do in the court alone And without danger one may walk from
neighbor to neighbor, and from land to land, and not thereby minish any part of
his honor.

Another benefit is, The rustique life requires no su^ptuous aparrell.
that men may go whether they will, clothed simply with a staff in his hand,
a swearde by his side, or hacbut in his neck, and if he be weary of pounsed
hosen, let h m wear stoppes, if he be a cold let him take his furred gown
for all is one there. A good gentleman dwelling in the village and having a
good coat of cloth, an honest Spanish cloak on his back, a pair of lether
shoes, goes as well trimmed to the church as does my Lord the courtier to the
court with his gown furde with Marters or Sables. A man of the village of what
sort soever he be, is in as good case, that rydeth to market or to the faier
to make provision for his householde upon a mare or a nagge, A poor plowman is
far better than a rich and honorable extorcioner, though he be in the court
as a lord of the court is at Iustes upon a great courser trapped with gold.
And (when all is said) better is the poor ploughman on a poor ass, living as
he should, then the rich man well horsed, pilling and doing extorcio^ to pore
honest men.

The.vj Chapter. That in the village the days seem more long, and the air
more clear and better. And the houses more easy and restful than in the court.
ENsuing still the commodities of the village, we ought not to forget that he
which dwelles there, among other things has commodity of good corn, and
consequently good bread: contrary to this, in the court, and specially in great
towns they have bread for the most part evil baked or evil leauened, or not
leauened at all, and the cause is, forasmuch as in the towns often there
lacks good corn, or good corn milles to grind the corn, and wholesome
water, whereby often has come among them great death.

Another commodity in the village is this, the which I praise much, he that
dwelles there, may practice and labor in mo things and better employ the time
then in the court or in ye great towns: in which places it behooves a man to
disse^ble, to say little, to be full of revenging and enuyous, a treader of
stones and pauemontes, and must use gravity, and seldom to come out of his
house, and incessantly be grave. O half a God, that dwelles in the village
where liberally one may speak what he will, and jest with his neighbors before
his gates and his window. And this may he do without ever to change or to
leese any of his mean authority.

Another commodity is in the village, Health more abounds in villages than
in great towns and courts.
yt those yt dwell there, be without comparion more healthful and less sick
then in the cities and in the court, because in the great towns the houses be
more high, and the streates narower, and more crooked, which is the cause that
the air is corrupt and makes men very evil at ease* In ye village the houses
stand more at large, the men more better disposed, the air better, ye sun
more clear, the earth more sweet, the private goods or commons better ruled
without contencio^, and the exercise more pleasant, and the company much
better: And above all things the thoughts lesser, and the pastyme more great.

Young Phisioians, and old sicknesses are not in villages.
Another commodity in the village is, that there are no young Phisicians, nor
old sickness: And contrary to this, the courtier is constrained there to part
his goods in four parts, the one part to flatterers, the other to men of
law, another to Pottecaries, and the fowerth to the Phisicians. O well
fortunate village, forasmuch as in thee, seldom or never is the French pocks
named, French pocks dwells not in the village as it does in the court.
neither the paucy nor yet the gout: few or none there knows what is a
Iulep, a Pyll, a Sirup, or a Thysan, nor no sudden sickness. What will ye that
I shall say more of the village? And if it were not, but that for necessity,
they are compelled to build there little pretty houses, ye should scant find
one of them that knew what to do with mortar and stones? And sometime they are
very well pleased with cabons made of small sticks well fastened together.

Another commodity of the village is, yt the days there seem to be more
long, and they are better employed, the^ they are either in the court or in the
great towns, forasmuch as the years pass away there or one be ware, and the
days without any enoying of the^. And howbeit that the sportes and pleasures
be more in the village then in the towns, yet so it is that one day shall
seem longer there then shall a month in the court: and the reason is, for
that the village is happy and fortunate, forasmuch as there the Sun seems to
make a more longer day, the morning is ready to show, and the night slow to
come. Time spent in the court sod^nly vanishes away.
Scarcely one can perceive the days slide away in the court: In the village if
it be perceived, it is bestowed with honest business, which cannot be done in
the court.

In the village also is much more plenty of wood then in other places:
Vittailes and all provision is more plentious in the villages than in the court.
hay, straw, Otes much better cheap then in good towns. Also in the village
a man is at liberty to eat his meat where he will, and when he will, and
with whom he will: but in the court they eat late, ye meat evil dressed and
cold, and with out savor, and that which is worst of all, for the most part,
he must eat with his enemies, where as the good fellows of the village live at
their pleasures and without suspicion, keeping their three good fashions that
belongs to good repast, Three good fashions in the country.
that is, first he earneth his meat, next that he eats his meat merely, and
thyrdly he eats with good company.

Another commodity is, that the husbandman of the village has how to occupy
himself and how to be merry, which the courtier, nor the citizen has not, that
has enemies enough to fear, and few friends to company withal. Recreations
of the village.
O recreacion pleasant of the village, to fish with nets, and with hooks,
to catch birds with lyme, to hunt with dogs, to catch Conies with Ferrets,
and hayes, to shoot in ye crosbow and ye hacbut at stockdoues, at Mallardes
and at patriges: and see folks labor in ye vynes, raise diches, amend hedges,
to jest with the ancient laborers, All these pleasures have they of the
villages, whereas the courtiers and citezens desire it, and cannot have it.

The.vij. Chapter. That commonly the inhabitaunts of the villages be more
happy then courtiers.
ANother commodity of the village is, that they do feel the trauayles less
on the working day, and rejoice merely on the holy day: Holidayes ne^^^c^ed of
courtiers.
where the courtier continually vexed with weighty and troubleous affairs,
never knows when it is holiday. O village, it is not so in thee, whereas on
the feastfull day the clerk cease not to toll the bell, to make clean ye
church, to make ready for service, the people honestlye apparelled, the feasts
commanded to be observed, the curate preaches the gospel, and after dinner
they make merry with a thousand honest pastymes. In the great towns the
holidayes are known when the wives go gay, when they sleep long in the
morning, True noates of vanity in Cities and Courts.
when they play after dinner: and generally when they consume the day in
volupteousnes and vanities.

Another commodity is this, that where the courtiers use to eat flesh and
corrupt venison and wild foul that is long kept, they of ye village have
their meat fresh and fresh, tender and wholesome, The diet of the Country.
and as one may say, in good season: that is, housedoues, Partrige, pullettes,
Stockdoues, Woodcockes, Fesauntes, fat Capons, Conyes, Hares, and innumerable
victayl of all sorts. And over and besides this, to their great advantage
they have sheep that bears wol to cloth them, good mutton to eat, dong to
make fat their ground, and Kyddes and Goats also, with Oxen to labor in the
plough, and kyne to milk and make butter and cheese: and hogs to make bacon
of, Coltes for to norish, and Horses for to serve them and for to sell when
need requires. And another priuelege of the village is this, that the good
shall be honored for a good man, and the unthrifty person known as he is,
which is not so in the court, The parciallitie of the court
for there is no man praised for that he deserves to be praised, but because
he has authority and riches.

O how much is the wise man honored in the village for his wisdom and good
counsel? how many times is he thanked and how many presents has be: The
thankefulnes of the husbandman.
If parcase one of his neighbors have any good fruit in his garden, a good
melon, a good pear, or a good muscadell grape, gladlye they will present him
therewith, as to him that has deserved it.

Another preuilege of the village is this, that every man may marrye his
daughters to his equalles and neighbors, that thereby daily he may receive
both pleasure and service, the which the courtiers cannot do that marry his
daughters so far from them, that for the most part they lament them or they
see them. O happy inhabitor in the village that finds at his gate husbands
for his daughters, and wives for his sons. He maryeth them nygh to him that
he may easly see his sons in law, The husbandman has comfort of his
children by their presence.
his little nephues and his posterity: he is beloved of the^, succored in his
affairs, served and norished in his sickness, and great comfort to him in his
age

Another commodity is, that they are not to much careful nor yet ireful or
envious: which commodity they of the court and the citizens little taste or
enjoy: for the courtier many times lacks money, when his great affairs
should be brought to pass. I say therefore O happy man of the village, that
needs not to go at ten of the clock to the palice to beg counsel, to speak
fair to the usher, to wait upon the president, and make flectamus ienua to ye
lawyer, The courtier croucheth and flattereth for advantage.
and flatter the king and his counsel, and the Magistrate: but has in stead
of these Idolatries for a happy solace, the benefits of nature and the
pastimes thereof, to hear the sheep blete ye Bulls to bray, The delights of
the country.
the Horse to neyh, the Nitingales to sing, the Thrushes to warble, the Lynets
to mynse their songs, dogs to run, Lambs to leap, Kyddes to gambolde, and
see the Pekockes set up their tails like a whele, He^s to kecle, kockes to
crow, and a thousand kind of beasts and birds play and sport.

Another commodity is, that in the village one may be there more virtuous and
less vicious then in the court or in the great cities, and the reason is, for
that in great companyes we shall commenly find a M. that keep men from good
doing, and.x.M. that will move us to do evil. And in the village every man
sanctifies the Sabbath day, The Sabbath better hallowed in the country th^n
in the city.
keeps the feasts, hears the sermons, and by this means with great labor
works his soul health assisted by grace. Wherefore the village is to be
praised for yt the occasions of evil, and of our destruction are not so
plentiful and practiced there, as they are in the court and in good towns, no
cooks houses to make them licorous: nor there are no great estates whereby
envy should arise: there is no chopping nor changing by usury: Usury,
whoredom, and other euels, nothing so co^me^ in the country as in the City.
whores to quarrel and fight for, nor courtiers to torney in armure, nor wa^ton
and lewd places to corrupt youth withal: nor Justices to fear them, ye (and
that best of all is) no covetousness which should swalow up and devour them.

Another privilege there is, that their one may well gather some good,
Prugallitie in the country, and prodigallitie in the court.
and spend much less then in the court. For every man knows well what
excessive expenses are accustomed to be wasted in the court, and specially in
these days, that the great apparelling of bankettes is such that they be well
worthy to be reformed. O peaceable peysau^ts which needs not the tapettes of
Flaunders, linen cloth of Holland, silver plate, garments imbrodered,
Parcement lace purfilde, nor yet carriage, Mulettes, varlettes to conduct them,
nor other superfluous attire: but contrary in steed of that, is contented with
a little household well ruled, with a gross table and a few plain stools to
eat his meat upon, with dishes of Peuter, and a mattres for to sleep on, two
gowns, one for summer, another for winter, one gelding in the stable, one
varlet, one chamberer to do him service: As much happy is a gentleman and as
much honored with his little company in his house in the village, as is a rich
Lord in the court with his pride, and ruffling train.

The.viij Chapter. That in princes courts the custom and use is to speak of
God and live after the world.
IN the Court, even as there is no rigorous justice, no father yt chastises
his son, no friend that corrects one the other, none that loves his
neighbor, Liberty to do evil, is in the court.
no bishop nor curate that governs well his sheep, nor teaches them after
the gospel: So he that is by nature good, has great liberty to be naught. In
the court if one will be an adulterer, he shall have fellows. If he will be a
quareller, he shall have help, Fellow furtherers of wickedness in the court.
and that with such as will draw their swords. If he be disposed to
banqueting, every where he shall find gluttons, If he will manifestly and
shamefully lie, he shall find companions ready that will approve his lies: If
he will steal, he shall find them that will instruct him many ways there to: If
he will play, there are so many cards and so many dise, Cards and Dise are
plentiful in the court.
that it is shame to see it: If one will be falsely forsworn, he shall find
them that will give money for forswearing: Finally, if he will utterly give
himself to do evil, in the court he shall see perfect examples. To the court
resorteth men of diverse nations, some for business, some to plead or to serve,
After what manner, strangers come acquainted in the court.
or to show themselves, which persons to bring themselves acquainted are
forced to follow the servants of such as be in authority, to flatter them,
and speak fair to them: and to follow the companyes and fellowship of the
taberers, the Pypers, the Musicians, the flatterers and merry iesters, and at
the end become God knows poor and needy gentlemen, in such wise yt by very
necessity they be compelled to demand rewards, newyeres gifts, and new
apparel. And yet to these evil fellows, they which give any good thing, give
it rather to get themselves a name to be called full of magnificence, then for
any charity at all.

In the Court, fortune is inconstant, Fortune is in constant in the court.
in that she promises, and yet more in that which she gives, for at one
instant, where one ryseth, another falls, one is borne, another dies: he is
auaunced that is unknown, and the faithful servant forgotten, he that will
abide is not received, but he that will run away is taken in: fools are
believed and wisemen belyed, opinions be followed and reason let pass. With
these things and other semblable things that we assaye and see in Courts of
princes, every manne may be assured that fortune will knock at his door,
though for the most part the courtiers find sooner their grave then any good
fortune, and specially such that under color to be disce^ded of a good house,
go to the court to brag, Some Courtiers are meter for the cart than for the
spear.
and yet nevertheless are so foolish and ignorant, that it may be said they
are more meet for the cart then for the spear, so that they serve in
conclusion to be a daliance to the mockers and iesters. And one great mischief
is in the court, that there is ever hatred among the princes, envy among
familiars, Contencion among courtiers.
contencio^ among officers and with their fellows. And among these there never
lacks medlers and busy bodies, which profit more thereby, then some doctor
of divinity does by preaching. In the court all is suffered, All sorts of
men resort to the court.
all is dissembled withal, all is inconstant, and all sorts desire there to
live: and forasmuch as all desire there to live, it is impossible but there
must be liars, players, slaunderers, and a great number of naughty persons.

Every evil parson has his mate.
In the court the evil follows the evil: The brauler finds one to braule
withal: The adulterer one that he may sin withal: The thief a companion and
receiver: The sophister a babbler: and all rekened together, one ready to
deceive another.

In the court every man prayseth and commends himself of holy purposes and
noble thoughts. One says he will withdraw himself from the court. And
another says he will forget his suites. Words without deeds in the court.
Another says he will quench enemitie. And when they have all said, all is
but words, for the heart thinks of nothing else but of the world. None
knows there the one the other: The men of arms go without harnys: The
prelates without their rotchettes: The The priest without his porteaues:
Confusion and disorder in the court.
The daughter without her mother: The wife without her husband: The clerk
without his books: The thief without a spy: The glutton from table to table.
The vacabond from place to place, and the baude from door to door, and from
harlot to harlot. In the court there be bishops to confirm curates, to
baptize and change names: For he that is glorious gay, they name him
honorable, Vice is called virtue.
he that spendes all, full of magnificence, the cowarde wise, the valiant over
hardy, the fool joyous, ye wise an hipocrite, the malicious subtle, ye scoffer
eloque^t, the adulterer Amorous, the covetous mesurable, and he that talks
little, a fool and an ignorant person.

The.ix. Chapter. In the court few amend, but many wax worse.
Wisdom without fortune profits little in the court.
IN the court it profits little, men to be wise, unless they be fortunate,
forasmuch as good service is soon forgotten: friends soon fail, and enemies
augme^t, ye nobility does forget it self, science is forgotten, humility
despised, truth cloked and hid, and good counsel refused. The best mine and
the richest Alcumet that the courtier may have, Favor is the Courtiers staff,
to lean unto.
is to have wind at will to sail with, that is, to be in favor with the^ that
be favored, till fortune laugh upon him: for the conditions and fashions of
entertainment changes daily and hourly. To prove this true, Plato needs not
to speak, nor Cicero to swear, forasmuch as before our eyes we see the fool
become wise, the meek, become proud, the sober a glutton, Wise men
transformed into fools.
the pacient a brauler, and the devout an evil christian man.

In the court it is a great business and travail for to find virtue, Virtue is
hard to find in the court.
and greater danger and peril to keep it. Is not humility lost among them
that be in honor, or patience among wrong dooers, or abstinence among gluttons,
or chastity among women, or rest among business, or charity among evil
willers, or peace among sedicious, or silence amongst bablers, or good
wit: where is so much folly? In the court no man is content, every man
co^plaineth, No man is contented in the court.
either because the king gives him naught, or because the prince helps him
not, or that one or other is ever betwixt him and home: He complaints of the
porter he will not let him in: of the treasurer that he pays him not: of his
crediture which takes away his goods: or of one or other that does him wrong
in the court. If one read a letter of pleasure, he shall read an hundredth of
displeasure. The wife shall write to her husband and pra^ ^im for to come home,
that he may marry his daughters being of age, or that his children be
disobedient, that his friends has forsaken him, and that by ingratitude they
render evil for good, werines does assail her on all sides, that her tenauntes
call her to the law, that his goods be spent? surely he shall hear such
news, so that for two grotes that he gives to the bearer of the letters, he
would gladly have given more to have hard no such news.

Evils inevitable in the court.
In the court a man does many things by necessity, that to dye for it he would
not do in his house: he dynes and suppes with his enemies, he speaks with him
that he never knew nor pleases him not, defendes him that helps him not,
follows him ye honors not him, le^ds to him that pays him not, dissembles
with him that does him injury, and trustes to him that beguiles him.

O unhappy and sorrowful courtier if by chance he grow to be a poor man, The
miseries of the court.
no man will succor him, and if he fall sick no man visites him, and if he
dye he is incontinent forgotten: if he be virtuous no man commendes him, and if
he be out of creadite no man regardes him. In the court there is nothing more
rare nor more dear to recover the^ virtue, nor more easy to find then the
abundance of three manner of people. That is of tale bringers, of flatterers,
and of liers. Three sorts of people plentiful in the court.
The liers deceive the princes. The flatterers the rich men. The tale bringers,
those that be in favor. The women, deceive the men. The covetousness, the old
men. The pomp the prelates The auaricious, the priests. The liberty the
religious, ambicion, the presumptuous, the wise confidence in men, and all they
joined together be deceived by fortune.

In the court men employe the time so evil that from the time the courtier
does arise, News is still inquired for in the court.
till he go to bed, he occupies himself about nothing but in askyng of news,
ietting about the streets, write letters, speak of the wars, entertein them
that be in favor, counsel with baudes, make as he were in love and leese
always the time. In the court more then in any other place the things are
slow. For one rises late, and worst of all amends his life late. All things
there is variable and chaungeable and inconstaunt. Alteration of states.
The estates change, The little assend, the great fall. The widows there be
marde: The married be defamed: The maidens be shamed: The good spirits be
dulled: The valiant becommes cowardes: The prelates wax worse and worse: The
sciences are forgotten: The young leese their time: The old undone: This is
the courtiers life, He is not worthy to be a courtier unless he be in debte
and owethe to the draper for cloth, Debt becomes a courtier.
to the Merser for silk, to the tailor for the making of his apparel, to the
goldsmith for jewels for my Lord ye courtiers lady, to the Judges for the
disputyng of processes, to the servants for wages, to their hosts for their
spence. There is to much evil counsel, even such as is more then the half way
leadyng to damnacion.

The.x. Chapter. That a man cannot live in the court, without to trouble
himself or some other.
A Courtier does many things, Fashion is the rule of the court.
more for to say, I do as other men do, the^ for any need he has so to do.
He bankettes with every man because he will not be called an hypocrite, Plays
because he would not be named a nigard, and companies with many, because he
will not be named a solitarima^ and geues to rascal and naughty persons because
he would not be evil said of the^. All men seek for a name.
A man in the court is full of pensiuenes and passions: For it is truth that
it is appropried to them of nature that follows the court, to be incessantly
tormented. He must praise his fellows, disprayse strangers, and look unto
them that do evil, and blame them that do well, and spend at large with his
fellows, and against the enemies spare not his own proper life: And all this
must he do because he will not be dispraysed. In the court commonly one
professes to wait of one master, A courtier serves many masters.
but for all that, he must serve at the tail of diverse other lords. O broken
heart of the poor courtier that must needs serve such as knows him not, and
make reverence to them that deserve not to have it, and must say to my master
the officer an hundredth times a day, Sir and if it please you. And he shall
answer when I am at leyser: Every officer in the court looks for reverence.
tarry a while at the door. And yet we must call him master yt deserves it no
more then the hangman that strangles a man with a halter. O what pity is it to
see a poor suitor in his needy business follow the king from town to town evil
norished, Suitors which follow after the court have a cold suit.
and worse lodged? The king has business, the counsailer is defe, the Almoner
has no hand, and he that thou know has no eyes: Money makes friends.
And without money and extreme pain, the five wits of nature be lame.

In the court, albeit that one has no enemies which is seldom seen, yet is
it truth yt many times his own friends put him out of quiet, forasmuch as if
the courtier will take rest in his lodgyng, they grunt at him because he will
not go see his friends, and provoke him to go follow the princes in the
court, saying, that the rascal and the varlettes mock at him that he goes
not thither and show himself free and liberal: and when he is arrived at the
court, which is a natural enemy to rest, The court is a natural enemy to rest.
and a desire of nouelles, then must he change, as does the Egipcian, which
every day seeks a new country, a new lodgyng, new apparel, and
conuersacions, business and fashions of men. Lo my friend and the reader of
this: This is the life of the courtier as it is here described: and also of him
that lives in the village the which said life of the peysau^ts shall be much
practiced of many, and chosen of a few, because that every man reads books
enough and the more he reads the less he changes of his evil customs. And
to call to reason why it is so, it follows that the court of princes is good
but for two manner of men, The court is good for two sorts of men.
for them that be in favor, and for the young which be yet of a weak judgment.
And those that be in favor, and do wait daily, see themselves so rich, so
feared, and so well accompanied that they feel not the pain of ye court. And
the pleasure they get thereby makes them for conclusion forget themselves,
yet notwithstanding for all this, The happiest courtiers are not without
trouble.
it is impossible but that their brains must be troubled, because they be to
much occupied, for their houses are to full of people, their ears full of lies,
their toungues to much troubled with answering of every man, their hearts to
much pressed to aid and help them that they would help, and other. And
finally the greater in authority and credit they be, ye shall see them the
more pensive and the more astonished, and for the most part sooner complain then
rejoice: but command who command will, have credit who will, the truth is,
There is no pleasure without rest be joined therewith.
none can take pleasure of his goods, without honest rest. Beside this, those
which be said to be in favor, are ever in fear to be put down from their
authority: And by that means are in continual dread and torment, the which
is an enemy mortal to quiet and rest. And the young in like case (as I have
said) that be with out judgment and blinded in vices, do not know nor see the
incommodities of the court, nor care, neither for favor nor honor, but bounden
and drownde in volupteousnes and vices, pass the better part of their days
in the school that is nothing worth, under the master of pardicion.

The xi. Chapter. That in the court those that be grave are praised and well
esteemed, and the other that do the contrary not regarded.
THe Courtier should not acquaint himself with vain and idle persons, that he
be not reputed to be such as he companieth withal. For it had not been enough
for him to say he must needs do there as other do, and dissemble as other
dissembles. Neither behooves it him not to cloak his naughty doing, in going
secretly to such as be naught, for why? the wits of the courtiers are so
fine, that they know not only what one says but what he thinks. There is
neither little nor great, but men spy him whether he goes, from whence he
comes, and where he abides, with whom he talks, in whom he talks, in
whom he trusts, and what he will do, so well, that the curtens may hyde a
person, but to hyde the vises of the courtiers is impossible. The courtier also
ought not to brag and crake that things shall be as he would, he may not presume
to speak to the king and require audience as he himself lust: for he that
follows the court must be as one that has no mouth to speak, nor hands to
be avenged withal, Little love is in the court.
being well assured that there is no more love in the court, then are clothes
upon a bare horse. For he that is in the court, and is not armed with patience,
it had been much better for him not to have come out of his country, for being
a quareller and sedicious fellow, Patience belongs to a courtier.
in the court he shall be hated, and paradue^ture banished from thence, and the^
his returning shall be to his utter shame.

Malice and displeasures take often an end in the village, but in the court is
always an overplus of them. What is the cause? Fortune I say: which has the
rule over them who count her for a goddess, Fortune is feared more than there
is cause.
which is more feared of a foolish opinion, the^ for any power she has over
men.

The courtier also ought not to co^disce^d to that which his sensuality
requires, but to that which reason does persuade him unto, Reason ought to
rule all men.
forasmuch as ye one demau^des more then needs, and the other contents him
with less then he has. Forasmuch then as in the court, there are so many
tables to glutto^ on, so many new found plays to play at, so many quarelles to
fight for, so many matters to plead, there is no cause to marvel if the sage
be cherished, and the dissolute person blamed. The good man within the court,
is as a nutte within the shale, A good man in the court is as a nut within the
shale.
and mary within the bone, and a perle within the cokle, and a rose among the
thorns. I do not say reader, for the quality and quantity of the malice of
the court, that all be vicious that be there: God forbid that it so should be,
but when I call to remembrance we be all mortal men, I think it in manner
impossible to ariue safe into the port, among so many Sillas and Caribdes. Ye
will say yt the wily and the subtle person there waxes rich, and that the
great sums of money be there: I confess it, and I would say your saying
should be good if they that were of the best knowledge and the most verteous
number were auaunced for their prudence, as the other be by hazard and chance
or by theft, Virtues rewards excel the rewards of fortune.
for the reward of virtue, is not like the reward of fortune.

Ite^ the courtier ought not to give presents, nor lightly take, for why?
Presents and gifts how they ought to be given.
for to give him yt deserves it not, there lackes wisdom. And to receive of
him that one ought not, is a thing but vile.

Who yt will exercise liberality, Liberallitie.
ought to consider what he gives, and to whom he gives: for it should be but
folly to give that which one may not, and that which he himself needs. And one
ought to consider the time and the end and the season, and wherefore he gives.
And if the courtier give somethyng over liberality and without just cause of
reco^pe^ce of him which is out of creadite, and in the time that he begins
to declyne, is not then the gift evil employed? is it not to be lamented that
one geues sooner to the flatterer to tell some feined or lying tales, Gifts
ill bestowed.
or a iester to make them laugh, or to a common liar to make the^ talk, or to
a pleasant fellow to invent a lie, rather then to a trusty servant that has
all the days of his life deserved to have thank for his good service? Yet for
all this, mine entencion is not to persuade great men that they should not give
to all men: but I say the true servants ought to be preferred, because it is
more meet that their service should be rewarded, then the presents of
strangers considered.

When a man gives to strangers, the servants seeing the same draw back:
ye may be assured that they not only murmr at that which is given, but also
accuse him of his vnge^tle deed, and become a mortal enemy to him that the
thing is given unto. Gifts bind the giver.
The gifts makes a man much subject that receives them, for as soon as any
man does take of another an horse or a gown, or often sit with him at his
table, he binds himself thereby to bear him favor, to defend his quarrel, to
keep him company, to take his part, and to love that that he loves. And
reason will, that since one feels profit of another that he be not
unkind, howbeit let a man beware to bind himself so much under the will of
other men, that he thereby forgets his own honesty. Many young children
descended of an honest house go to the court and take with them a good part
of their goods and consume the same playing, eating, and drinking, Prodigal
sons.
and using baudry and adultery under color of learning their behauior: and
resort to the great men's houses, to no other intent, but to be much made of
the^ where they take a great repast, and afterward so play the young wanton
fools, that they spend rent, honor and all. And when the purse is flat, News
hunters.
their office is to go all the day in the streets to the churches and to the
palaice to ask news and tidings, only to pype out lies and fables at the
Lords boordes, and all for to go scot free. And there is a sort of young men
in the court, yea I may say to you, of those that have beardes, that neither
have master nor entertainers, that as soon as a stranger comes to the
court, straightwayes they boorde him, saying that they will show him the
fashions and manners of the court, Fashion teachers.
the pleasures of the palaices, the manner how to keep him from deceiptfull
fellows, and to entertain young gentlewomen. And thus the new come courtier that
is yet a fool, in the mean season shall be handled in such wise that now goes a
gown, now a coat, another time a horse, and sometime purse and all. And there
is another sort of men in the court that busieth themselves with so great
authority and with so little wit, that after they have used ye company of some
great Lord, they will send him a letter by their page, saying they be poor
gentlemen, Poor gentlemen shifters.
kynsfolke to some great men, and that they be there suing for some office, and
that they have a payment in hand, wherefore they require him to lend him a
certain sum of money: And yet are they in no such necessity, but only to get
somewhat, either to buy a gay coat, or a horse, or to keep a whore.

There is another sort of false and beggarly courtiers, the which after they
be once used to the court, they go from church to church to ask for Gods
sake, Roagues.
saying they be poor suitors and that they love better to beg then to rob,
commending themselves to the priests to beg for them on the poor parisheners
when they preach, and so take against reason the good yt poor men should have.

There is another sort of haunters in the court, Table hau^ters
that go from one house to another of the great estates and Lords,
counterfaiting to be diligent seruau^ts, flatteryng the steward, the butler,
and the cook, and live of that which is left of the dinners, and go their
ways with their pockettes and their sleeves full of meat for to suppe
withal. And there is another manner of sort that go two and two, and three and
three together in a morning to spy and see if there be any thing evil kept,
Picking pilseter^.
and with that to look and to prye if a sword or a Spanish cloak, or a purse
be fallen aside, if there be, they sing in a merry note this is pro nobis.
Other there be that for to conduict and defend a whore when the court remoues
(as one may say more the^ ruffians) they live of the gain of the miserable
woman. Apple squeeres
Another has false dise, false marked cards for to deceive the innocents,
win their money, Cogging gamesters.
and leese their own souls. And there lackes not in the court old women and
wrinckled trottes that after their harvest is past, Bawdes.
cloak the sins of other, and beguile those that be chaste and undermine
such as be married, hurt their neighbors, sell mayde^s to whoredom for
luker, and do norishe them therefore, whereof folowes that these old whores
sometime sell wenches better cheap then fishers do lamperyes. O behold the
company of the court, the holiness, the religion, the brotherhed, and finally
the foul disorder of the same. And I say for my part, go to the court who
will and there abide, and triumph who will: as for my self I do remember I am
a christen man, and that I must account for the time I have lost, and therefore
I had much rather to labor and dygge and delue out of the court and be saved,
then to be nigh the king, my conscience not clean nor pure.

The xii. Chapter. That in the court of princes all say we will do it, but
none do it.
BYas the great Philosopher of great renoume among the Grecians, said upon a
time to the great Alexander Quilibet in suo negotio, hebetior est qua^ in
alieno, meaning, that commonly every man is more blinded in his own affairs
then in another man's. And he so said by very good reason, Most men are wisest
in other men's matters
for that there be men, which for to give a wise deliberate and sage cou^sail
for to remedy a sudden mischief, have excellent wits, so that it be in
another man's matter. But in their own affairs they have neither wit to
govern their own houses, nor stable mind to cover their own misery. Cayus
Julius Caesar, Octauus Augustus, Marcus Antonius, Septimius Seuerus, Marcus
Aurelius, and other in great number, that were esteemed in their privy business,
Some can go nerve the common wealth which cannot govern their own houses.
that is to say, in the rulyng of the common wealth were wonders witty: but we
read that they were so negligent in governing their own housholdes, their wives
and their family, ye it is much to their shame and reproach: therefore such be
seen often to be good to rule ye commonwealth, ye be nothing worth to govern
their own, and had need (if it might be honestly said) to have a ruler to rule
the^. Plutarch reports that the noble and valiant capitain Niseas never lost
battle, ^^^lfe likyng h^^^^eth.
but only in trusting to much to his own wit and judgment. And if we believe
Hiarcus ye Philosopher, it is more hurtful to a man to stand in his own
co^ceipt, the^ to pha^sy a woman: for in loving a woman, a man hurts but
himself: but in sticking to much to his own pha^tasy, it may redou^d to ye
hurt of a whole common weal. All this ye is said, shall be to admonish them ye
tarry in ye court, to be co^uersant wc the grave and sage persons: and with such
as be learned, and such as have good experience: For the grave, learnes virtue:
Scilence and experience.
Scilence is a certain guide to a man: and experience, is ye consu^macion of
all. For although ye courtier being young, be never so sage, grave, rich or in
favor, The guides of a young courtier.
he shall need a father to cou^sail him, a brother to persuade him a guide to
teach him ye way, and a master to instruct him, and a corrector to punysh
him, because ye mischifes, crafts, and wickedness does so abou^d in ye court ye
it is impossible yt a man alone may defend him from al, and utterly resist
the^. For in ye court there is none so high away to destruction as for a man to
be governed only by himself, and have his own swing.

A definition of the court.
The court is a perpetual dream, a botomelesse whorlepole, an inchaunted
phantasy, and a mase: when he is in, he cannot get out till be be mor founded.
One of the best remedies that the courtier may get against so many evils, A
faithful friend is a great help to a Courtier.
is to have a faithful friend that flatters him nothing, but that rather will
correct and rebuke him if he go home late, if he walk by night, if he be a
false player or whorehunter. But where shall we find such a friend: For we see
the friendship in the court is commonly used among young courtiers in this sort,
that so soon as two or three are met together, Faithful friends are seldom
found in the court.
strait fall they to quarellyng, fighting, ryoting, so that there is rather
occasion given to do evil, then good cou^sail to refrain. Therefore he that
haunteth the court, it were meet that he had some friend to whom without fear
he might common of his business, and that the multitude be also to him common
friends, but above all one perfect friend.

I would also he should keep himself from the conversation of sedicious
persons, Sedicious persons are to be avoided.
from collericke persons and vacabondes, for the rascal sort will slander
and say, ye king pays naught, yt those which be in favor have all the swing,
that the officers are proud, that men's service is evil recompensed, and the
good unknown: With these words and such other like, the poor courtiers
forgettes to serve and begin to murmr.

Also the good christian man ought not to cease to amend his life, Amendment
or life seldom practiced in the court.
for that he hops to live long: although those that be old there occupy
themselves rather in new pastance, then to correct their old sins. Ye shall
find them that promise every day for to amend themselves in their age, and yet
nevertheless dye there worse then devils: Amendment promised, but not performed
the cause is that they all say we will do and yet never do. There be some old
doting fools, which shall brag of the kings and princes which they have
served, of the chau^ging of offices that they have seen, and of the wars
passed, and of the great mutabilitie and change of fortune. And yet
notwithstanding all that they have seen and endured, Doting courtiers.
they be as greedy of gain, and delight in young and foolysh pastymes as
though they were new to begin to live. Alas miserable men that in perpetual
trauail, and continual sorrow, and infinite trouble have passed their lives,
even from their first time of knowledge (which is, xv. years) to the time of
manhood, and the^ from that time to their doting age, and all to have gained
riches and increase in renoune: not in all this time once remember that in
stead of a true and perfect rest, they prepare for themselves a hell both for
body and soul. The courtier also ought not lightly to complain of
adversities which many times come to him, thinking that oftentimes (though it
be our own fault) we do complain of things which should complain of
us, if they had a toungue.

What time a man sees him self base and is little esteemed, or poor and
forgotten of the rich, and deceived of that he looked surely to have, Fortune
is not the cause of poverty.
incontinent he curses his fortune and lamentes his evil: In the mean while it
is not fortune that has thus served him, but him self that has serched it
and found it. Such a man thinks to be quickelye rich, honored and esteemed,
that shortly after sees himself poor, overthrown, despised, and blamed of
all men, and cannot revenge himself, but only say, he is unfortunate and
unhappy to ye world, and that it is mishap: which is not so, but his own
folly that makes him to leave the surety of his house, and prepares himself
to the hazard of fortune, and therefore has no cause to complain but of
himself which choose the way to it. The best is, after that a man purposes
himself to continue in the court, Pacient dissemblers come to preferment in the
court.
that then patiently he awaite and fary the time of auauncement or auau^tage
that he looks for: or else if he cannot patiently dissemble with the time, let
him not remain there, Contentacion wherein it consists.
for contentacion consists not in the place, but in the ambicious heart, and
troubled mind. And take this for a truth, ye yt be courtiers that if.ij.
or.iij. things succeed to your purpose prosperously, there shall come a
hundredth overthwart the shins, either to you or to your friends. For
notwithstanding that the courtiers doings and desires come to good pass,
there shall be things for his friend or fellow that goes all awrye, whereby often
times he laments the hurt of his friend, and that which is denied him more the^
the pleasure he has of his own hap: wherefore there is always lack or
fault of co^tentacion. Will ye any more? the being in court or out of the court,
ye shall bear no other matter, News is all that is sought for in the court.
then, what news at the court? what does the king? where is he? where is the
counsel? and where lies the officers of the household? and this is most true,
that they which desire to hear such news, are as desirous to see news: And
by this means the poor wene to make themselves rich, the rich the more to
command, and the lords the more to rule. O what a pleasure is it for the^ to
be in ye court hoping that the king may know them, that those yt be in favor
may dye, or that fortune may change, and that they come forward? And it
follows, that in tarying the time, the time deceives them, and then death
takes them unware.

The.xiij. Chapter. That there is a small number of them that be good in the
court, and a great number of good in the common wealth.
PLutarch in the book entitled De exilio tells of the great King Ptolome,
that having on a day at supper with him seven Ambassadors of diverse
provinces, moved a question to the^, which of al their common wealths governed
themselves with best laws and customs? The said Ambassadors, were Romans,
Carthaginiens, Ciciliens, Rhodiens, Atheniens, Lacedemoniens, and Cicioniens:
among whom the question was effectually debated before the king, forasmuch as
every one of them being affectionate to his country aleaged the wisest reason
yt he could. The good king desirous to know ye truth and the resolucion of the
question, commanded that every one of ye Ambassadors should tell of the best
laws or customs that were in their commonwealth three points, and that
thereby it might easilye be seen which was better ruled and deserved more
praise. The^ the Ambassador of the Romans began and said, In Rome the
temples be honored, The government of Rome. The government of Carthage.
the governors obeyed and ye evil chastised. The Ambassador of Carthage said,
in Carthage the noble men never cease to prepare to the war, the poor people
to trauail, and the Philosophers to teach.

The government of Cicill.
The Ambassadors of the Ciciliens said, In Cicill is true justice executed,
troth is beloved, and equality praised. The Ambassador of the Rhodiens said,
The government of the Rhodiens.
In Rhodes the old men are honest, the young men shamefaste, and the women
meek and gentle. The Ambassador of the Atheniens said, The government of the
Atheniens.
the Atheniens do not consent that the rich should be parciall, nor the
mean people idle, nor the governors without learning. The Ambassador of the
Lacedemoniens said, The government of the Lacedemoniens.
in Lacedemony envy raynes not because all are equal, nor covetousness because
all is common, nor idleness because all men trauayl. The Ambassador of
Cicioniens said, The government of the Cicioniens.
in Cicion they receive no strangers, inue^tors of news, nor Phisicions that
kill the whole, nor advocates that makes the processes immortal.

When king Ptolome and his company had heard these so good and holy
obseruaunces, he praised greatly the institucion of every of them, saying, that
he could not judge which was the best. This history is well worthy to be
noted, and better to be followed: And I believe if in our days so many
Ambassadors should meet, disputing as these did of their common wealths,
they should find mo things to blame and speak evil of (and that without
comparison) then to praise and commend. In times passed the kings houses were
so well reformed, Vice was severely punished in old time.
the kings themselves so wise, and the governors so moderate, that little
offenses were chastized, and once to think of great offenses forbidden: to the
intent that the chasticement should be terror to the evil, and the prohibicion
a plain advice unto the good: It is not so in our common welthes, where is done
so much evil, and committed so many bitter offenses and unhappiness, Sin is
less accounted of in our days than in old time.
that those which ye ancients did chastise for deadly sins by death, we
dissemble to be but venial: the truans and wantons be so entertained as
though we lacked them: and not as meet to be chased and driven away. My Lady
the widow, or my maistres that is married, if they fall to leude and wanton
living, ye shall not find one that will say madam or masters ye do naught:
Sin is committed without reproof.
but rather six hundredth that shall procure her dishonor.

This is in our time, such is our fashion and manners which causes evil: so
that he is more to be praised which may be called good in our common wealth,
the^ any of the Consuls of Rome, because that in the old time it was almost a
monstrous thing to find one evil among a hundredth, and now it is a great
chance to find one good amongst a hundredth.

The holy scripture prayseth Abraham that was just in Calde, Loath that was just
in Sodom, Daniel in Babylon, Toby in Niniuie, and Neemyas in Damasco. And
likewise may we among this Cathalog of holy men number the good courtiers if
there be any, A good courtier is a black swanne.
but it cannot be forasmuch as none goes about to move the courtiers to
virtue, but that counsel them to perdicion.

There is in the court so many vacabondes, so many players, blasphemers, and
deceivers, that we may be abashed to see such a multitude: but it were a
novelty to hear of the contrary, for why? the world has nothing in his
rosiers but thorns, and for fruits of trees, The world is replenished with
counterfeite treasure.
but leaves, for vines but briars, and in their garnerdes but straw, and in
their treasures, but Alcumin. O golden world, O world desired, O world
passed: the difference betwixt you and us is, that before you little and little
the world passes, but before us it is quite passed. In thee O world every man
undertakes to invent, to do, to begin and to make an end of that he will: and
that which is worst of all, lives as he will: but the end is right doubtful.
There is little to be trusted in thee O world. The world is not to be trusted.
And contrariwyse little to defend, little to enjoy, and very little to keep.
There are many things to be desired, many things to be amended, and many
things to be lamented. Our aunceters had the Iron world, but our world may
well be called the dirtie world, The world is replenished with filthiness.
because it keeps us continually in a filthy myer, and always we be there in
defiled and rayed.

The.xiiij. Chapter. Of many affairs in the court, and that there be better
husbandmen, then commonly is of courtiers.
THe Poet Homer has written of the travels of Vlixes one of ye princes of the
Greeks: Quintus Curtius of Alexander and Darius: Moses of Joseph, And of them
of Egypt: Samuel of David and of Saul: Titus Liuius, of the Romans: Thucidides
of Jason with ye Minotaure: and Salust of ^ugurth and Cathelyne. I the^ willing
to follow these good auctors, have undertaken to write the unkind trauayles of
the court that the courtiers of our time have which have patience enough for to
suffer them, and no wisdom to avoid them: then it is not without a cause if
I do call the trauayles of the court unkind, Unkind traueils of the court.
for they be accustomed unto it as the old horses are to the packesadle and
to the plough, since that the courtiers themselves do suffer them so much and
have no profit thereof. Some men will say that I am evil advised because I
write ye courtiers have not their ease, seeing that he that may attain to be
in the court is accounted to be fortunate. But he abuses him self, if he
think that all such as are out of the court be beasts and ignorant persons,
and he only wise: they rude and he delicate: he honored and they vile, they
stammering and he eloquent.

If it were so that God would that the most perfect men should be in the court,
it should be to us more then a fault, not incontinently to be a courtier:
knowing that there can be no better time employed, then that which is bestowed
in hearing the wise and sage men: but when all is said, the places do not
better the men, The place bettereth not the man, but the man the place.
but the men the places. God knows (for example) how many gentle and good
honest minds labor in the villages, and how many fools and lubbers brag it in
palaices. God knows how many well ordered wits and judgments is hid in the
villages, Fools in the court have countenance when as wise men in villages, ar
obscure
and how many rude wits and weak brains face and brace in the court. How many
be there in the court the which although they have offices, dignities, estates,
and preeminences, yet in the village (after a manner of speaking) with great
pain they are not able to rule.x. men. How many come out of the court
correcters of other, that themselves in the villages should be corrected? O how
many things is said among ye poor laborers worthy to be noted? And contrary,
spoken before princes worthy to be mocked? O how many is in the court that make
themselves highly to be esteemed, not for to be honest and diligent, but to
come in authority? And how many is there in the village forgotten and not set
by, more for lack of favor then for either lack of wit or diligence: The
princes give the offices: Those that be in favor have the entry: nature, the
good blood: The parents, the patrimony: and the deserving, honor: but to wise
and sage comes only of God, Wisdom and virtue comes of God.
and men have not ye power to take it away. And if it were so ye princes might
give good wit to who^ they would, they should keep it for themselves,
Princes never loose, but for lack of knowledge.
seeing they never leese, but for lack of knowledge. I take it for an evil point
of such as newly come from the court to the village, and being there, rather
use mockyng then taste the benefit thereof. But in the mean time, thou see
their manner of life, that is, to go to bed at midnight and rise at.x. of ye
clock, and in making ready till noone, A Courtiers life.
trimmyng their bushe, or beard, and setting the cap awry. And all the day
after, to talk of his darling that he has in the court, or of the battle of
Granado where he did meruails. ^ragginge ^ourtiers.
And some there be of them that will lie and brag yt they were at the journey
of Pauay with the captain Antony Deleua: at Tunes with the Emperor: or at
Turron with Andrew Doria. And for all his brabling he was no better then a
ruffian or a zacar of Tholydo, or a knave of Cordoua. We have rehearsed these
things before written, to cause our minion friskers to leave mocking of ye
poor inhabitants of the village, esteeming the^ to be but fools and lurdens.
For I believe, if my master the Emperor would banish all the company of fools,
If fools were banished the court the Emperor should be left alone.
I fear me he were like to dwell alone in ye court. Let us say the^, that very
late they of the court know themselves and ye order of their life and
profession, Courtly profession.
I mean ye profession of the religion which they keep straightly, ye which
co^sistes in this: they promise to please ye devil, and to content ye court,
and to follow the world: They promise to be ever pe^sife, sad and full of
suspicion: They promise always to be chopping and chau^ging, full of business,
to bye, to sell, to weep, to sin, and never to reform themselves: They
promise also to be iagged and ragged, an hungered, indebted and despised: they
promise to suffer rebukes of lords, theft of their neighbors, injuries of
colerike me^, mockeries of ye people, reproach of their pare^tes: and finally,
missing and lacking of friends.

Lo this is the profession and rule of the obseruauntes of the court: which I
will not name a rule, Confusion and disorder of the court.
but a confusion: not a order but a disorder, not a monastery, but a hell, and
a religion not of brethren, but of dissolute persons: no poor Hermites but
covetous worldely men. O pity, O lack of good judgment. The Oracle of
Apollo being asked by the Ambassadors of the Romans where lay the point for
one to govern himself well, A rule for a man to govern himself by.
The answer was, for a man to know well his own estate and degree, that thereby
one may rule his desires, and bridle his affections. The courtier desiring all,
and perseueryng in nothing, shall think in his mind, that if he get not in
one year some fee or office, that it is not for lack of knowledge: but as a
person ignorant and foolish blames his fortune, and curses the hour yt ever
he came thither, without calling to mind that the court is as the Palm tree
whose root is a feadome under the ground, before that he show two fingers
bread of leaves above the ground. ^r^^^^sion ^^^loweth long ^e.
In like manner, a man must be long in service before he be promoted: yet so
much rests that the perseuering and abidyng by it, causes a man to hope: For
to say the truth, it is seen, if there be three which deserve more then they
have, there be three hundredth that have more the^ they deserve. O how seldom
times does fortune that she ought for to do? Fortune selldom does give to
men that which they deserve.
And how many times fortunes hazard and chance does better then the assurance
of virtue? because she measures her merits by the evil length of opinion, and
not by reason: she makes the water burn without fire, the knife to cut
without steel, the Candle to light without flame, the Mill to go without water,
Fortune is unconstant.
and the cause is only her inconstancy. If she laugh in the court of any, it
is but with her ears, If she weep, it had been better never for a man to
come out of his house: If she lift any up aloft, it is to throw him down
again lower then he was: If sometime she dissemble, it is to take one in a
trap. Let no man the^ trust of fortune, for she is so varyable, that she
never holds her promise of that she gives, neither by word nor yet by
writing that she makes.

The xv. Chapter. That among courtiers is neither kept amity nor faithfulness:
And how much the Court is full of trauail, of envy and rancour.
ONe of ye most excessive travails among ye courtiers is, that none is
resident there without he be hated or at ye least ye he hate: that is not pursued
or else does pursue, that does not mock or else is mocked.

Courtly dissimulation.
And one unhappy thing is in the court, many there be that will do of their
bonette to you, that gladly would see your heads of by the shoulders: And
such there be that makes reverence unto you that would have his leg broken to
see you dead and carried to your grave: Is it not a great pity to be
conuersaunt all day together, to laugh and make merry one with another, Hatred,
under the coullour of friendship.
and yet have mortal hate? Is not this more then a dissimulacion, to honor him
whom they would be glad to see led to the gallous? One thing for all, it is
ambicion and to much hope of sharp and bitter fortune, and lack of knowledge,
of this, that amity well observed, is much worth to moderate a man.

What life, what fortune, what taste may he take that sees himself daily
present in the court, where is so much theft, bribry, murders, poysoners,
felo^s, and traitors ready to betray and sell a man, and be himself betrayed
and sold? And contrariwise what felicity is it to be in the company of those,
with whom a man may faithfully recreate himself fearyng no man? In the court,
there be gentlemen so rooted in vengeance and hatred that by no mean,
request, nor gentleness a man may direct them from their evil ententes, in such
manner that they be glad to make war with their own houses, to chase peace
from them selves to the houses of their enemies? Whereby one may well
presuppose as is aforesaid, that uneath one may hope to have friends in the
court, and less trust: and the greater men are in authority, the more afraid
they be to fall. What then causes a man there to tarry in such trauail? I have
wonder that any can suffer it or have a heart to disse^ble it. The country man
is happy and the courtier miserable.
O how fortunate is he that leads his life in the village, with the mean
business of his little possession, in comparion of the courtier whose estate is
ever unhappy and of all parts miserable, that never ceases to hope of things
vain, in procuring unjust things and such things that never can be
determined. And if thoughts were wynd, and his desires waters, it should be
greater danger to sail in his heart then in the maine sea. In the court is
one thing I wotte not what, Three things in the court.
and one thing I know not how, and one thing I understand not, which causes
there incessauntlye complaints, and continual choppyng and changing, and
evermore dispyte and envy: and that worst is, there is no liberty to depart
thence.

The yoke of the court is hard, ye bonds fast tied, Courtiers are tied to the
court.
and the plough so tedious that those yt wene to be the first to triumph, are
the first that labor and draw the weighty burde^s. And such as are poor and
ignorant men suffer these intolerable travails, because they would not be as
subjects in their own countries, and to have a greater liberty to do evil.
But God knows what such liberty costeth them, The liberty of the court,
brings perpetual bondage.
that for a short and vain pleasure purchase to themselves, continual
trauail and perpetual bondage. The property of this vicious liberty, or
better to call it, this mischeeuous subjection is, that at the beginning it
seems somewhat pleasant: but in the end all conuertes to a bitterness,
sorrow, and lamentacion, chiefly when a man has experience by little and little
of the vice that this life contains. For if he accompany with women, he must
flatter them, serve them, and entreat them: And if money lack, Shifts are
made for lack of money.
then must there be some deuilish shift made.

For why, when one comes new to the court, my lady dame gorgious, leads him
a train, she entertaines him, she makes much on him, she colles him: but
when she spieth him to lack, she sendes him to pasture in the bare fields.
Money causes entertainment.
And if the time of eating come, the courtier must often times feed with them,
whom he would see eaten without sauce: Now, if his turn be to play, therein is
little profit: if he win, he must liberally depart with the gain to those that
stand by: and if he loose, they restore to him never a penny. And if the
courtiers turn be to jest, and to be merry, therein he finds no fruit, for
the courtiers play begins in fair words, and ends with braulyng,
chidyng, and fighting. And forasmuch as it is the worst life of all other
lives: Let us conclude that there is nothing worse then a vain courtier, A
vain courtier and an idle husbandman are the worst men.
and an idle husbandman.

The.xvi. Chapter. By how much the common wealths and the courts of the time
passed were more perfect then the courts of the time present.
THe king Anchises did lament the destruction of the proud Troy, done by the
princes of Greece: The Queen Rosaine bewailed her husband Darius, when he was
overcome by the great Alexander.

Jeremy the Prophet complained the estate of Babylon, when it was held captive.
King David lamented his son Absolon when Ioab kylde him. The Lady Cleopatra
thought no another but to dye for sorrow when her dear and well-beloved Marcus
Antonius was vanquished by the Emperor Augustus. The Consul Marcus Marcellus
lamented the City of Syracuse when he saw it on fire. Salust, Rome, evil
governed.

The Patriarche Jacob his son Joseph: The king Demetrius his good father
Antigonus, when he found him dead at the battle of Marathone. It shall be also
convenient that among these well renoumed princes we should lament the
miseries of our time, in the which we see things so merueylous, that the
curious auctours of the time passed, never wrote things semblable unto them:
Nor the men in those days never saw the like. Truth it is that the
Chroniclers in those days wrote what they would, In our time scant any man
dare speak.

The Philosopher Ariminius has written of the abundance of Egypt: Demophon
of the fartilitie of Arabia: Thucidides of the treasures of Tyrus: Asclepius of
the Mines of Europe: Dodrillus in the commendacion and praysinges of Greece:
Leonides of the triumphs of Thebes: Eumenides of ye government of Athens:
Thesiphontes of the order that is kept in the court, and of the princely
houses of the Siciomens: Pitheas of the profit that came by the little speaking
of the disciples of Socrates: Apollinus of the continency and abstinence that
was kept in schools of the divine Plato: Myronides of the great exercise, and
of the little rest that was in the house of Hyarcus: Aulus Gelyus of the
temperance and little eating, and of the moderate sleeping of the disciples of
master Fauorimus: Plutarch of the wise women of Greece, and of the chaste
wives of Rome: Dyodorus, how those ye were inhabitants in the Isles of Balyares
cast their treasure into the sea for fear lest the strangers for covetousness
of their riches should make them wars, and to the entente also that no
parcialitie should grow among themselves.

Hearing then all this that I have said, I demand of the reader his advise
what my pen should write of our time? If we should write of bounty and
verity, we should falsely lie: If of riches, men be so greedy that all be
disposed to desire and hunger couetously. Covetousness in all men.
How shall we then praise the men of our time? Shall we say they be hardy and
puissaunt and learned, and we see that they employ their minds to nothing else
but to rob and beguile each one the other? Robbery.
How shall we praise them of prsoperitie and health, seeing that the pestilence
and the French pockes more then common is among them? French pocks a common
disease.
How shall we commend their continency and abstinence, seeing that scant in
fifty years ye shall not find one that will bridle his lust and desire?
Unbridled affections.
Shall we praise them of little rest and of much exercise, when we see that
there is a greater number that give themselves to idleness and thefery, Idleness.
then to honest trauails and pains? How shall we praise the^ of temperate
eating, Surfeyting.
when we see in our days the belly is men's God? How shall we commend them for
having chaste women and obedient, seeing that there is nothing more common among
them then adultery? Adultery.


Shall we say, they be not covetous, seeing that not only men search gold and
silver in deep mines, but men trauail to seek it as far as the Indiens, of
a vyneyarde so frosen, of a tree so dry, of fruit so unripe, of a water so
troubled, of bread so evil baken, of so much false gold, of a world so
suspicious, what shall we hope any other thereof but evil and confusion? Let us
read that is written of the courts of the princes of Siria, of Percia, of
Macedonia, of Crecia, and finally of the Romans: And let us confer these to
our courts, and ye shall see such evils and vicious customs in our common
wealths, that the auncientes did never attain to the knowledge how to commit
such abhominacions, nor yet (I say) to inue^t such evils. In those most happy
times and golden worlds an evil condicioned man scant durst to have showed
himself in any honest company: but now alas (a thing to be lamented) the
world is so replenished with dissolute and corrupt living, that it is counted
but a small fault to be evil, except he be such a one as is past al shame and
grace. The cortiers will not deny me but yt whiles they give atte^da^ce for ye
vprising of their masters, they tell each one the other what pastyme they have
had ye night before, Vain delights of the court.
how they have played, sworn and stared at their game, of their laughinges,
and the companies they have had with the gentle dames: which of them was fairest
and best apparelled? and sometime in secret of those that they have committed
adultery withal.

And thus, as the world is new, the inuencions are new, the plays new, the
garments new, new speaking, new manners, New fangled things.
and every year, every month yea and every day, and every hour: we see vices
so largely delated, and virtue so diminished, yt I am ashamed to write it: And
ye true cause is, yt in ye court virtue has many controllers and enemies,
Virtue controlled: and vice vpholden.
and vice innumerable vpholders and maynteiners. For if there be brought into
the court one laudable custom, it is no sooner come, but forthwith it is
chased away: And on the other part, vice cannot so soon appear, but it is as
soon embrased and entertained. The sage lawyer Lygurgus did defend expressly
by a law that the strangers should not know the secrets of his commonwealth
nor that his citezens should meddle much abroad, for that purpose as is said,
that in meddling with them, they should not learn their vices nor their
barberous conditions.

In the time when Marcus Portius was Consul, An example of a Musician.
there came an excellent Musicia^ out of Greece into Rome, which for because
that he put one string more on his harp then was accustomed to be played
withal, he was by the consent of the people banished from Rome and his harp
burnt: Howbeit in this our time, we could well agree with Music, and would not
pass how many strings ye harp had: so yt me^ might agree and stay themselves.

Plutarch says that he saw once at Rome a priest of Greece stoned to death
in the great place of Campus Marcus, because that he did sacrifice to ye
Goddess Berecinthe in other manner then they were accustomed to be sacrificed
unto. Suetonius that affirms that in.iiij.C.lxiiij. years which was the time
that the temple Vierges Vastales endured, there was never found but iiij.
evil living persons, which were Domicia, Rhea, Albina and Cornelia, the which
for their offenses were openly buried quycke. If at this day one would register
the names of such like, to be so punished, I leave it to your judgment whether
there should lack ha^gmen to do execusion. Threbelius Publius said that ye
Emperor Aurilianus Quintus took a great friend of his from ye office of
Dictator, which was named Rogerius, only because he had daunsed at ye wedding
of Posteria Auia his nigh neighbor saying, Daunsing reproved.
yt the good Judge should not leave his gravity and use such wild and common
plays. But so it is, whatsoever this Emperor said, In our time we will give
license to judges to remove their feet as fast as they will, Bribery finely
reproved.
so that they hold their hands still. It shall make no matter to ye poor
pleader whether his judge sing or dance, so that he minister justice with
expedicion, Expedition of causes in law.
that the poor man come not oftentimes and give to much attendance. In this
case it were very good to raise the Emperor Domitian, which as Suetonius
writes made a law, that whosoever prolonged the process of his clyant more
the^ one year, that he should for ever be banished Rome. If this holy law had
dured to this day, there should have been more banished in Rome and else where,
then there are now citizens.

The.xvij. Chapter. Of diverse noble and valiant men, that left the court and
the great cities and drew them to their proper houses, more by will, then by
necessity.
MArcus Crassus a captain of ye Romans was greatly commended and praised for
that he was valiant in the war, and wise in the business of his household:
This is that Crassus that followed the parcialitie of the Consul Silla against
Marius and Julius Caesar after Dictator. It chaunsed on a time that by the
fortune of the sea, the said Caesar was prisoner to certain Pirates and
robbers of the sea, and he said boldly to two or three of ye best of them that
kept him fast bound, It does (said he) grieve me much, not for that I am taken
prisoner, forasmuch as that is but hazard of the war, but of the pleasure
that mine enemy Crassus will take when he does hear of the news. The court
is utterly renou^ced of Crassus
This Crassus was Master to a Philosopher named Alexandrius, that governed him
as a father, counseled him as a friend, and taught him as a master: And this
did he by the space of.xviij. years, which passed, the^ he demanded license to
return to his country: And going his way, said these words unto Alexander: I
ask of thee none other reward for my pain, nor for my labors in teaching of
thee, then to grant that I shall never return to the court again: and when I
am gone that thou will never write unto me of thine affairs, for that I am so
weary of being a courtier, that I will not only leave the court, but also
forget all that ever I saw or heard in it. Denis of Siracuse, albeit that he
was a cruel tyrant, yet notwithstanding he was a great friend to the
Philosophers, and a honorer of wise men. And he said that he took much
pleasure to hear of the wise and sage men of Greece, but he believed the^ not,
because their teachings were words without deeds.

Seven of the most sagest and best learned of Greece came to Siracuse a City
where the said Denis was resident: that is to say, Plato, Chylo, Demopho^,
Diogenes, Myrtho, Pyllades and Surranus, the which meddled more of the affairs
of Denis then he did of their doctrine. Diogenes dwelled a xi. year with him,
and after returned to his country, where he being and washing of herbs for
his dinner, another Philosopher said to him: If thou had not left the
service of Denis thou need not now to have taken the pain to wash thine
own herbs and make them ready for thy dinner. To whom Dyogines answered: If
thou could have been content to have washed and eaten herbs ye needs not
at this time to have been in the court of Dionisius, Cato the censor of whom
the names of Cato first began, was esteemed for one of the wysest of the
Romans: And he was never seen in.lxviii. years (for so long he lived) not
once to laugh nor to do any thing repugnant to his sage grauitye. Plutarch
says that he was in speking prudent, gentle in conversation, in correcting
sharp and severe, in presents liberal: in eating sober, and in that that he
promised, sure and certain, and in executing justice irreprehensible.

Cato forsook the court to dwell in a village.
After the age of.lv. years he left the court of Rome, and withdrewe himself
to a little village nigh to Picene, which is now at this present ccalled Puzol:
and there he passed ye residue of his years in quiet and rest, accompanied only
with his books, and taking for a singular recreacion for to go twice or thrice
a day to walk in the fair feilds and the vines, and him self often to labor in
them. And it fortuned on a day when he was abse^t from his house that one wrote
with a cole upon his door O felix Cato, tu solus scis viuere, which is to say,
O happy Cato, thou only know how to live.

Lucullus Consul and capitayn, a Romayn, right valiant brought to an end the
war against the Parthes which had continued by the space of.16. years,
whereby he gat great honor of the citezens of Rome, and immortal renoune for
him self and great riches for his family. And it is said of him that he only
of al ye Romans did enjoy peaceablye in his age, the riches that he had
won in his youth in the wars. And after when he came from Asia and saw
that the commonwealth was in division betwixt Marius and Silla, he determined
to leave Rome and make a house in the country nighe to Naples upon the Sea
side (now at this present time called the Castle of Lobo) which he edified and
lived there.xviii. years in great tranquillity. His house was haunted with many
people, specially with great Capitaynes that went into Asia, and with
Ambassadors that came from Rome, which he received very gently and benignly.
One night when his servants had made ready his supper with a less diet the^
he was accustomed to have, they excusing them selves that they ordained the
less because he had no strangers: He said unto them, although said he, that
there be no strangers with me, know not you that Lucullus must suppe with
Lucullus.

Plutarch speaking of this valiant man's exercise that he did after he was
retired to the place aforesaid, says that he delited much in hunting and
hawking, but above all pleasures he most delited in his Library, Reading of
good things is a virtuous exercise.
there readyng and disputing incessantly. Helius Spertianus says that
Dioclesian, after that he had governed the Empire xviij. years, forsook it,
and went to take his pleasure in the fields, there in quiet to end the
residue of his life, saying: that it was time for him to leave the dangerous
estates of the court and get him to a peaceable life in ye village. Two years
after he was thence retired, the Romans sent unto him a solemn Ambassade to
inuit and desire him effectuously that he would take pity of the commonwealth, and return, promising him that so long as they lived there should none
have the name of Emperor but he. Now when the Ambassadors arrived at his
house, they found him in a little garden where he was setting of Lettys and
Onions: And hearing what they said unto him, he answered in this wise: Do you
not think my friends, that it is much better for him that can sow his Lettys,
and afterward pleasantly and merely to eat the same, so still to exercise him
self, then to return and enter into the goulfe of troubles in a commonwealth?
I have assayed both, I know what it is to command in the court, and what it is
to live and labor in the village, wherefore I pray you suffer me here to abide
in patience, for I desire rather here to live with the labor of my hands, then
in the sorrow and cares of an Empire.

The laborers life is more to be desired then the life of a prince
Note by this example that the life of the laborer is more to be desired then
the life of a prince.

Cleo and Pericles succeeded in the ruling of the commonwealth after Solon, a
man excelently learned and well esteemed, and taken among the Grecians for half
a God, by the reason of the wise laws he made among the Atheniens: These two
noble gouernoures were much beloved, because that (as Plutarch tells)
Pericles which xxx. years had the administracion of the business and affairs of
the city, was never seen to come into any man's house but his own, nor yet to
sit in any open place among the common people, such a gravity was in him.

About the years of his age which was lx. he went from Athens to a little
village where he ended the rest of his days, studying and passing the time
in husbandry, he had a little small gate or wicket in the entering of his house,
over which was written Inueni portu^, spes and fortuna valete, That is to say,
forasmuch as now (and before I have knowledge of vanity) I have found the port
of rest, fie of hope, and fortune fare well. By this example, no courtier can
say that he leads a sure life, but only that courtier which does as this
wise captayn did withdraw him self.

Lucius Seneca, was as who should say a right leder to good manners, and a
instructor to good letters to Nero the sixth Emperor of Rome, with whom he
tarried. xxiiii years, and had great doings of things pertaining to the common
wealth as well of private causes as otherwise, because he was sage and of great
experience. And at the last, coming to great age and weryed with the
continual conflictes and business of the court left the court and went and
dwelt in a little mansion he had nigh to Nole Ca^pana, where he lived after a
long time as witnesses his books De offiicis, de Ira, de bono viro, de
aduersa fortuna and other books which were to long to rehearse. At last (fortune
and man's malice did their office) Nero commanded him to be slain, not for
that he had committed any crime worthy to dye, or done any thing otherwise then
an honest man ought to do: but only because the lecherous Domicia hated him:
Note well reader this example, that sometime fortune pursues him that
forsakes the court, as well as the courtier.

Scipio the Affrican was so esteemed among the Romans, that in.xxii. years,
whiles that he was in the wars he never lost battle: And yet made he war
in Asia, Europ, and Africa, and to this, never committed act worthy of
reproach: And yet he wan Africa and put to sack Carthage, brought in bondage
Numance, overcame Hanniball, and restored Rome weakened and nere destroyed by
the loss they had at the battle of Cannes. And yet for all this, being of the
years of.lii. he withdrew him from the court of Rome to a little village
betwixt Puzoll and Capua, where he lived a solitary life, and so content
withal, that whiles he tarried there a xi. years space, he never entered into
Rome nor Capua.

The divine Plato was borne in Liconia, and was norished in Egypt, and learned
in Athens: It is read of him, that he answered the Ambassadors of Cirene that
required of him laws to govern themselves in sure peace, in this wise:
Difficilimum est homines amplissima fortuna ditatos legibus co^tinere. Which is
to understand, that it is hard to bring to pass to make rich men to be subject
to the rigor of the law. To conclude, Plato not willing to abide longer the
clamor and cry of the court, went and dwelt in a little village two miles from
Athens called Academia, where the good old man after he had tarried there.xiiij.
years, teaching and writing many notable doctrines, ended there his most happy
days. After the memory of him, the ancients called the village Academia,
which is to say in English, a schole: The conclusion is, yt all these
honorable sage princes and wise men, left Monarchies, kingdoms, Cities, and
great riches, and went into the vyllages, there to search a poor, an honest,
and a peaceable life.

Not that I will say that some of these left the court, to be there poor and
banished and rebuked, but of their free will and free liberty, minding to live
a quiet and honest life or they dyed.

The xviij. Chapter. The aucthor complayneth with great reason, of the years
that he lost in the court.
I Will demand of mine own self, mine own life, and make accoumpt of the
same, to the intent that I will co^ferre my years to my travails, and my
travails to my years, that it may appear how long I left of to live, and
began to dye.

My life (gentle reader) has not been a life, but a long death: my days a
play new for to begin: my years a very tedious dream: The authors life past.
my pleasures Scorpions: my youth a transitory fantasye. My prosperity has
been no prosperitye: but properly to speak, a painted Castle, and a treasure
of Alcumyn.

I came to the court very young, where I saw diverse manners of offices and
chaunges, even among the princes that I served. And I have assayed to trauail
by sea and by land, and my recompense was much more then I deserved: and that
was this, that sometime I was in favor, and sometime out of favor. I have had
experience of ye somer santes of destines: I have had in the court friends and
enemies: I have had false reports: Inconstant fortune.
I have been even now glad and merry, and forthwith sad and sorry: to day rich,
to morrow poor: now mounted upward, and strait thrown dounewarde: This has
been to me a masking, where I have lost boeth money and time. And now I say to
thee my soul, what have thou gotten of this great journey? The recompense is
this, A Couriers recompense.
that I have gotten there a graye head, feet full of gout: mouth without
teeth: raynes full of grauel: my goods laid to pledge: my body charged with
thought: and my soul little cle^sed from sin. And yet is there more seeing
that I must needs speak, that is, that I have returned my body so weary, my
judgment so dull, my time so lost, the best of my age so passed, and that is
worst of all, I found no taste in any thing that is in the world: so that to
conclude, I am of my self all werye of my self. What should I more tell or
say of the alteracion of my life, and of the chaunges of fortune? I came to the
court innocent, and come from it malicious: I went thither true and meaning
truth, The alteration that comes by the court.
and returned a liar: I went thither humble, and returned presumptuous: I went
thither sober, and returned a gurmand and glutton: I went thither gentle and
humayne, and returned clean contrary. Finally in going thither I marde my self
in all points: And I have no cause to lay the fault in my masters, for the
vices be soon learned without a master, and cannot be forgotten without a
corrector. O miserable that I am, I kept in the court an account of my goods,
to know how they were wasted, and not for to distribute them to the poor: I
took heed of my honor for to increase it, not for to better my self by the
time: I took care of them that should pay me, to know what was owyng me,
and not that I might get to profit the poor withal, but to profit in
riches and not in virtue. I held an accoumpt with my servants, to none other
purpose, then to know how long they had been with me and served me, and not to
enquire what life they led: Finally, I held a coumpt of my life, but it was
more to conserve it, then to correct it.

Lo, behold, this was my accoumpt, this was my calculacion, this was the
Arsmetrique yt I learned in the court.

Let us yet go a little further and see mine exercises. I never was yet in the
court but I found to whom I bare malice, or else that envied me. I was never
yet in the palaice but I found a window open, and a courtier murmur. I never
yet spoke to princes, The misliking of courtiers of their state.
but I went from them not contented in my mind with some part of their
answer. I never yet went to bed without complaynt, nor never did rise without
a sigh. If I went about to do any good thing, my great affairs hindered me.
If I would study, my fellows let me. If I went to take any honest and quiet
pastyme, mine affairs would not permit me. If I kept my self solitary and
from company, my thoughts martyred me: The lack of money a great misery.
Finally there was never any thing that so vexed my heart as the lack of money
in my purse. And yet all this is nothing, remembering that I was ever envious to
such as were mine equalles: a flatterer to my superiors, and without pity to
mine inferiors: and where I phansied one, I bare hate almost to all other. I
found every man worthy of reproof, but against my self I could not suffer a
word to be spoken. O how forgetful have I been, which should forget or a
morsel of meat had been put in my mouth, and have talked aloude to my self
alone, as it had been one that had been mad? O how often has chanced me that
in coming from the counsel weary, or from the palaice thoughtfull, I would not
hear mine own servants speak, nor dispatch such as I had to do withal? O
how many times have I been so drowned in business, that I could not moderate my
pensiuenes, although my friends did counsel me to the contrary? O alas, how
many times has my mind pressed me to leave the court and the world, and to
yield my self to some solitary desert, as an Heremite? because I saw the king
auau^ce him and him, and I put back as a person half desperate.

Moreover to fulfill my travails, always I went asking and serching news of
the affairs of the court: always harkening what one said of another: always
spying and watching: and all this considered, I found by mine account, that I
lived in heauynes, captivity, and state of damnacion.

Let us yet go farther: If I were rich, one or other serched some mean to
devour me: If I were poor, I found none to succor me: my friends cried out
upon me, and mine enemies sought my death. Ouermuche bablyng of the courtiers
brake my brains: and much silence made me to sleep, and the solicitude caused
me to be be sad: And overmuch company oppressed me: much exercise weryed me,
and idleness confounded me.

To conclude, I so burdened and vexed my self in the court with so much trauail
in naughtines, yt I durst not desire death, although I had no desire to live.

The xix. Chapter. The aucthor makes accoumpt of the virtues that he lost in
the court, and of the eull customs that he learned there.
But now to proceed, my fortune passed, my friends died, my force decayed, and
my first fashions failed: O if al my pains had been ended at the first time
when I came to the court, how happy had that been for me? but now al consumed,
I complain singulerly of my traitorous heart, which would never cease to
desire vain things, and the cursed tongue to speak sclaunderous things. O
gentle reader, be not weary, if I tell thee in few words the difference
betwixt him that I was when I went first to the court, and that I am now
since I have been in the court. First and before that I did cast my self into
this perilous labyrinth (which is to say a prison full of snares) I was a good
devout person, gentle and fearful and since I have learned to be a mischiuous
fellow, slow in doing good, and little or nothing regarding the wealth of my
soul. I went thither being very young and of good disposicion, and came from
thence deffe, and more then spurblind, and no more able to go then he that is
full of the gout: And briefly an old grisarde, full of ambition, in such
wise that I am so variable, that skante I know on what ground to set my fete.
My heart was of so depraved a sort, that it desired to be discharged of all
accio^s, and yet for all that found no another but peril and torment.

Sundry times I purposed to leave the court, and suddenly I repented. Sometime I
purposed not to come out of my lodging, and strait ways I was enforced to trot
a trot to the court. Sometime I purposed not to come to the palayce, and or I
were ware I was compelled to go thither sometime or it were day. I purposed to
be no more vexed, and suddenly my passions augmented, And it followed that my
good purposes ceased and went from me: and I did that was leude and naughty.
Behold how I lived of wynd and of fools imaginacions as many a foolish
courtier does, I have phantasied with my self (in the court sometime) that I
governed the King and the Princes, and that I came of a noble house and
aunciente stock, excelent in science, great in favor and beloved of al men,
sage in counsel, moderate in speaking, eloquent in writing, prudent in
service, and comfortable to all. But when I waked out of my folly as from a
dream, and looked to my feet, I knew easly that I had borne false witness to
my self of this golden and pleasant immaginacion, and saw of truth in other,
the which I dreamingly imagyned of my self.

I serched the way how to be esteemed of every man, holy, wise, gentle,
content, and of a good zeal, and a sea of sadness. Lo this fault happyned to
courtiers as it did unto me, that is, to join folish liberty with virtuous
honor, Disordred will is an enemy to virtue and honor.
which be two things that cannot agree, because that disordinate will is enemy
to virtue and honor. But for my part good reder, I give thanks unto god my
affections be so^what wasted and mortified, for I was wont being in service to
desire daily yt ye court might remove And now I care not though seldom or
never I come from my house. I had a special lust to harken for news. And now I
care not for them at all. I saw the time when I loved not to be out of
company, And now I desire nothing more then to be solitary, I was wont to
delight to hear, to see iuglers, daunsers, liars and dalyars: And now so to do,
were to me more then death. In like manner I was wont to solace my self in
Fishing, Hunting, shooting in the hackbut: And now I mind no another but to
bewail and lament the time I have lost: and call to mind the first time that
the Emperor took me into his service, from thence where I was norished from
my tender years in great fere, and not knowing what the world was, but
occupied only in my deuocio^s and learnings: I often rose at midnight I
comforted the sick, I red the Gospel and other good books of good doctrine.
Briefly, every man did help me to be good, and chastised me from evil: If I
did well, I was praised: if I did evil I was corrected: if I were heuye, I was
comforted: if I were angry, I-was appesed: if in any agony, my friends prayed
to God for me: O what cause have I to repent out of mesure, thus to have
forsaken rest and Godly living and to have enjoyed episcopal dignity, in which
the Emperor set me: forasmuch as a virtuous life is the haven of all good, and
the Episcopal dignity the sea of all dangier. Lo how I have passed my good
years without employing my time well, and without knowledge what my fortune
should be I do therefore admonish the reader, to do better then I have done in
ye court, if thou be there, or else to forsake it in a better hour then I have
done: for so doing thou shall declare thy self, that thou have determined to
live sagelye and well advised.

The.xx. Chapter. The Auctour takes his leave of the world with great
eloquence.
FArewell world, forasmuch as one can nor may trust of thee nor in thee For in
thy house O world the passage is past, The world is not to be trusted.
and that which is present goes soon away, and that which is to begin,
comes wondrous late, forasmuch as he that thinks himself most firm, sonest
does fall, the most strongest soonest does break, and perpetuities soonest
decay, in such sort that those which be destinate to live an hundred years,
thou suffer him not of all that time, to live one year in quiet.

The world is unthankful.
Farewell world, for as much as thou take and renderest not again, thou
weriest but comfortest not, thou robbest, but make no restitucion, thou
quarellest but do not pacify, and accusest before thou have cause to
complayn, and geuest sentence before thou herest the parties, even till thou
kill us, and then buriest us before we die. Farewell world forasmuch as in thee,
The pleasures of the world are mixed with pains
nor by thee there is no joy without trouble, no piece without discord, love
without suspision, rest without fear, abundaunce without fault, honor without
spot, riches without hurt of conscience, nor high estate but he has somewhat
that he complains of.

Farewell world forasmuch as in thy palayce promyses are made and never kept,
men serve and have no reward, the world promises and performs not.
they are invited to be deceived, they labor to be troubled, and travail to
take pain, they laugh and are beaten, thou fainest to stay us, to make us fall,
thou lendest, to pull away straight again, thou honor us to defame us, and
correctest without mercy.

Farewell world thou sclaundereste them that are in credit, The world does
unjustly.
and do auaunce the infamed, thou letteste the traitors pass free, and
put true me^ to their raunsoms, thou persecutest the peceable and fauorest
the sedicious, thou robbest the pore and geuest to the rich, deliuerest the
malicious, and condemnest innocents, geuest license to depart to the wise, and
retainest fools: The perverse and blind judgment of the wo^ld.
and to be short, the most part do what they list, but not what they should.
Fare well world forasmuch as in thy palaice no man is caled by his right name,
for why? they call the rash valiant: the proud, cold hearted, ye importune,
dilligent, the sad, peaceable: the prodigal, magnificall: the covetous a good
husband: the babbler, eloquent: the ignorant a little speaker: the wanton,
amorous: the quiet man, a fool: the forbearer, a courtier: the tyrant, noble.
And thus thou world, call the counterfeat, the true substance, and the
truth the counterfeat.

The world deceives.
Farewell world for thou deceiuest all that be in thee: promising to the
ambicious, honors: to the greedy, to come forward: to the brokers, offices: to
the covetous, riches: to the gluttons, bankettes: to the enemies vengeance: to
the thieves, secretnes: to ye vicious, rest: to the young, time: and to all thing
that is false, assurance.

Farewell world, for in thy house fidelity is never kept, nor truth
maintained: and also we may see in thy house, one glad and another afraid: some
ouercharged: some out of the right way: some void of comfort: desperate, sad,
heavy ouerburdened and charged, and more then lost and sometime both.

Farewell world forasmuch as in thy company, he that wenes himself most
assured, is most uncertain, and he that follows thee goes out of the way
and he that serves thee, is evil paid: and he that loves thee, is euel
entreted, and he that contents thee, contenteth an evil master: and he that
haunteth thee is abused.

Farewell world forasmuch as thou have such mishap, that services done and
presents offered to thee, profit nothing, nor the lies that is told thee, nor
ye bankettes made to thee: nor the faithfulness we give to thee: nor the love we
bear to thee. Farewell world, forasmuch as thou deceiuest all, backbytest all,
and slaunderest al, chastisest al, thretest us al, achiuest al, and in the end
forgettest al.

Farewell world, since in thy company all men complayn, al cry out, al weep,
and all men dye living.

Farewell world, since by thee we hate each one the other to the death: To
speak till we lie: to love, till we despair: to eat till we spue: to drink
till we be dronken: to use brokage to robbery: and to sin, till we dye.

Farewell world for being in thee, we forget our infancy, and our green age,
without experience: our youth in vices, our middle age in turmoyling and
business: our old age in lamentacions: and all our time counted together in
vayn hopes.

Farewell world, for in thy scoole we are led till the heir be white: the eyes
blered: the ears defe: the nostrels droppyng: the forehed wrinckled: the feet
goutie: the raynes full of grauel: the stomach full of evil humors: the head
full of migram: the body full of sorrow, and the mind full of passions.

Farewell world for none of thy lovers come to good profit, witness those yt
daily we see, are not false knaves marked in ye face, thieves hanged?
ma^quellers headed? robbers by the hye ways set upon wheles? heretics
brent? false money makers boiled, killers of their parents, torn in pieces,
and other diverse punishments of such as are great in favor with thee?
Farewell world forasmuch as thy servants have no more pastyme, but to trot by
the streates, to mock one another? to seek out we^ches? to send presents: to
beguile young girls: write amorous letters, speak to bands: play at the dice:
plede against their neighbor: tell news: invent lies, and study new vices.
Farewell world for in thy pallayce none will do good to other for the bore
fightes against the Lion: the Unicorn against the Cocodryl: the Eagle against
the Vultur: the Elephant against the Mynotaure: the Sacre, against ehe Kyte:
the mastyf, against the Bull: One man against another: and al together against
death.

Farewell world, All fight against death.
because thou haste nothing, but to our ruin: For often the yearh opens before
our feet: the water drounes us: the fire burns us: the air mistempers us:
the Winter does kill us: the Summer does chafe us, the dogs does byte us, the
Cattes does scrat us: the Serpents does poyso^ us, the flies does prick us: the
Flees does eat us: and above all, worldly business deuoures us:

Farwell world seeing no man can pas thy domynyon in suertie, for in every path
we find stones to stumble at? bridges that breaks under us? Snow that lets
us: Mountains that weary us: Thunders that fears us: Thieves that rob us,
encounters that hurts us, and evil fortune that killes us.

Farewell world, forasmuch as in thy country there is little health: for some
be lippers and some have the french pockes: some the Canker, and some the
gout: and some have the foul evil, and some the Sciatica, and some the
stone, and some Quotidian fevers: some wa^dring fevers: some tercian and
quarten fevers: spasmes, palsies, and the most part sick of fair folly.

Farewell world, forasmuch as there is not a man in thy house but he is noted
with some defaute in his person: For if there be any talle manne, the rest is
lubberlyke. If he have a fair face, his eye shall be too black: If he have a
good forehead, it shall be wrinckeled: If he have a welfauored mouth, he shall
lack teeth: If he have fair hands, he shall lack fair heir, And if he
have fair heir, he shall have a foul skin.

Farewell world, forasmuch as the inhabitauntes in thee are so variable of
manners and conditions, that some will follow the court, some will sail on the
sea: and if one would be a merchant, the other will be a husbandman: If the
one will be a hunter, the other will be a fisher: If one will govern a
Monarchy, the other under pretense of that, will pyll and poll the poor people.

Farewell world, forasmuch as in thy house there are none that prepare
themselves to live, and much less to dye: And yet we see some dye young, and
some in middle age, some in old age, some dye by hanging, and some by
drowning: some dye for hunger, and some in eating, sleping, and resting, and
some or they beware, and for the most part or they look for death.

Farewell world, forasmuch as we can neither know thy disposicion nor
condition: For if one be wise, another is a fool: If one be fine, another is
of a gross wit: If one be valiant, another is a coward: If one be given to
peace, another is sedicious: And if one be of a gentle spirit, another is very
froward.

Farewell world, seeing no man can live with thee: for if a man eat to little,
he becommes weak: if to much, he waxes sick: if a man labor, strait he is
weary: if he be idle, he lives beastly: if he give little, he is called a
nigard: if he give much, he is called prodigal: if a man visit his friends
often, he is called importune: if to seldom, full of disdain: If a man suffer
wrong, he is called false hearted: And if he do revenge, then is he wilful:
If he have friends, he is praised: If enemies, he is pursued: If one tarry to
long in a place, he waxes weary: and if he change to often, he is grudged at.
Finally, I say, that such things as displease me, I am forced to follow, and
that which I would, I cannot come by.

O world unclean, I conjure thee thou filthy world, I pray O thou world, and
protest against thee thou world, that thou never have part in me, for I
demand nor desire nothing yt is in thee, neither hope of any thing in thee,
for I have determined with my self that posui finem curis, spes, et fortuna
valete. I have finished worldly cares, therefore hope and fortune farewell.

FINIS.
nor

w

printer's device of William Norton

Printed by William NORTON.


