THE STAFF of Christian Faith, profitable to all Christians, for to arm
themselves against the enemies of the Gospel: and also for to know the
antiquity of our holy faith, and of the true Church.

Gathered out of the works of the ancient Doctors of the Church, and of the
Councels, and many other Doctors, whose names you shall see here follovving.
Translated out of French into English, by John Brook of Ash next Sandvviche.

With a Table to find out all that which is contained in the book.

EPHESIANS. 6. Put on the whole armor of God, that ye may stand steadfast
against the crafty assaults of the Devil.

Jmprinted at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate.

ANNO. 1577. Cum Priuilegio.

Sr. Richard Newdigate of Arbury in the County of Warwick Baronet 1709
blazon or coat of arms

To the Right honorable and his singular good Lord and master, Edward de
Vere, Lord d'Escales, and Badlesmere, Vicount Bulbecke, Earl of Oxenforde,
and Lord great Chamberlayne of England, John Brook wishes long life, with
the increase of honor. etc.
ALTHOUGH Virtue the root of well doing (Right honorable Lord) has of it
self, sufficient force to withstand, repel, and overthrow, both the open
malice, and secret slanders of evil tongues, yet notwithstanding considering
how dangerous, yea how impossible a thing it is to escape that poisoned
sting of Zoilus, and also that nothing has ever ben so well done, but that
this Scorpion has either openly or privily stong, I need not to doubt, nay I
may be right sure, that these my labors shall come into the hands of some, more
curious than wise, more ready to nippe and tante (yea even without fault) then
friendly to admonish or amend. By occasion whereof (right honorable and my
singular good Lord) I have not only thought it expedient for hope of your
honors favorable patronage, toward these also my labors bestowed in
translation: But also for respect of my particular duty toward your honor,
to offer and dedicate the same likewise to your favorable allowance and well
liking. For if in the opinion of all men, there can be found no one more fit,
for patronage and defense of learning, then the skillful: for that he is both
wise and able to judge and discern truly thereof. I understanding right well
that your honor has continually, even from your tender years, bestowed your
time and travail toward the attayning of the same, as also the university
of Cambridge has acknowledged in granting and giving unto you such
commendation and praise thereof, as verily by right was due unto your
excellent virtue and rare learning. Wherein verily Cambridge the mother of
learning, and learned men, has openly confessed: and in this her confessing
made known unto al men, that your honor being learned and able to judge as a
safe harbor and defense of learning, and therefore one most fit to whose
honorable patronage I might safely commit this my poor and simple labors.
Likewise remembering how much and many ways I am by duty bound unto your
honor, as also how unable I am to discharge the same: I have thought it in
respect also of my behalf and duty, most meet to offer and exhibit, such
trauelles as my ability and skill can reach unto, to your Lordship as pledge
and token of my dutiful and unfeigned good will: To the end that such profyt as
by this my travels may grow to my country and common wealths, may be
received under your Lordshyppes approbation and defense: that all men which do
reap benefyte thereby, should owe thanks unto you in whose duty and good
will I am. Wherefore heartily requiring and humbly beseeching your Lordeshippe
to take on you the patronage and defense of these my labors by translation that
by your approbation and well liking, others may also the rather like thereof.
Craving pardon for this my simple boldness or rather bold symplicitie hoping
also of the continuance of your honors accustomed goodness toward me, and
instantlye praying to God for your prosperous estate, I cease further at this
time to solicit you.

Your honors obedient servant, John Brook.

Unto the Church and congregation of God which is in L. Guido desires grace
and peace, and the mercy of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord: And
perpetually to persevere in the knowledge of the holy Gospel of the son of
God. Amen.
KNOVVING AND CONsidering the war and combat that ye daily suffer to
mayntaine and keep the true and pure Christian doctrine of the ancient and
true Church of God, against a sort and heap of glorious deceivers, which hyde
and boast themselves with false ensigns, of the name and title of the
ancient Church, and of the ancient Doctors: I have dedicated unto you (my
well-beloved friends) this present book, entitled: The Staff of the Faith,
gathered out of the works of the ancient doctors of the church, and of the
counselles, and out of many authors: to the end that thereby you may learn
wholy, to fight against your ennemies, with the same staff with which they
do fight against you, that is to say, the auncientes. I do not tell you how
this staff, shall keep you from the danger of your ennemies only, I will
content my self in speaking but one word, touching the same, (that is to
say) that you shall not only obtain and get victory of your ennemies, but also
send them away with their mouths stopped. Therefore I desire you in Gods
name, that ye be not slothful nor negligent, to study therein often, and to
have those sentences therein alleged readily at your fingers ends, that
thereby the kingdom of Jesus Christ be auaunced, and the dominion of the
deuilles and infidels destroyed and abolished.

I do know very well that many people have accustomed to say, when it is
spoken unto them of the ancients, speaking without either judgment, or
reason, in saying that as touching the Auncientes, they have nothing to do
with them, for they vvvere men as they: but that they content themselves only
with the word of God. I vvoulde not altogether deny or gainesaye them in
that, if they would not reject thereby God and his gifts, by thinking to
reject men and their doctrine. Therefore we ought to take good heed unto men
when they speak of themselves, and also when God speaks by them. The same
we may know, when their doctrine is confirmable and agreeing to the rule of
all right, which is the word of God the doctrine of the prophets and
Apostles. Furthermore, we would not have you ignorant, that the ancient
fathers have ordained and established a great many of ceremonies, and things
in the church respecting the time and persons, and the infirmity of those
that daily come unto the knowledge of the Gospel, asvvell of Jews as of
panims and Idolaters: But they have done that only but for a certain time, to
the end they might dravve to the Gospel all nations, and let and stop the
way of the Heritickes and ennemies of the catholyke faith, from gayning and
vvinning the vveake in faith. For we ought not to maruayle, if the ancient
fathers have done many things in that time, which now can not serve, nor
profit us any thing at all, inasmuch as they have served but only for their
time. For the Apostles have ordained some things which now ought not to be
follovved nor kept. As we do read in the acts of the Apostles, that the
counsel that was celebrated by the Apostles in Jerusalem, Act. 15.
decreed that we should abstain from blood, and from the flesh of beasts
that were strangled: We know well enough that this ordinance now has no
more place, and is not in force among the christians, Titus. 1. 1. Tim. 1. Romans
14.
nor ought to have, because that all things are clean and purified through
the word and prayer. Then we see that that decree, which has been decreed
by the holy spirit and by the Apostles, to have been made, because of the
persons, and to serve only but for that time.

Judge now, if an ordinance made by the Apostles to support the infirmity of
men, has been set forth, and afterward abolished: what ought we to
judge of those which are of less importance which have been ordained by men,
a great deal inferior and of less estimation then the Apostles? There is no
doubt, that forasmuch as they have been ordained to serve only for that time,
that now we may let them alone and forsake them, because that there is
neither Jews nor Turks among us, but christians, at the least as they say.

Also we ought not upon this to hold our peace or hide the vnshamelesse
malice of many, who (nevertheless calling themselves christians) under color
of antiquity, and of the ancient doctors, do forge and invent of their own
wicked and filthye brain, naughty and most detestable errors: and afterward
say that the ancient fathers have written so, and preached so: and by that
means make the poor world being seduced to believe it. And yet the malice is
so great in them, that all they that will not receive and allow, that which
their brain has invented under the name of holy men, they cry after them
with open mouth, to the fire, to the fire with the Heritickes. They reiecte
the doctrine of the fathers. Alas O my God and Lord thou know our hearts:
and the hearts of these liars, that we do not desire but that in all and
through all, be it through life or death, that thy son Jesus Christ, and his
doctrine, may be only received, loved and worshipped: And for this are we
appointed as sheep to be slain: we are naught set by, mocked, beaten,
banished, chased from town to town: To be short we are esteemed and
counted as the most vile and stinking filthynesse of all the world, trodden
down underneath the feet of the vvorldlinges: But for all that we possess
our souls in patience, looking for the righteous Judge which will judge all
the world, not according to the doctrine of men, but according to his holy
word, for which we are had now in such abomination to the world.

Furthermore they which daily accuse us with so great rage and furye,
against the ancient doctrine of the Apostles and Doctors, shall at the last
acknovvledge their malice and living, that they have declared in their books,
corrupting and marring the books of the ancient fathers of the church: If I
durst, I would gladly name one who in that occupation or science has served
out his prentyshyppe, for that cause is called our master, in his book that
he has entitled. The bouckler of the faith: wherein he declares the
subtlety of his intent and craft, alleging the ancient Doctors in Latin,
after translating them into French, and at every place where he found
Sacrificium, or the like manner of speaking, in stead to put in sacrifice, or
holy mystery, he has translated them alvvayes the holy mystery of the Mass,
and so by that means they find that word Mass in the books of those good
fathers, which they never thought nor did. I believe he thought that his book
should not come but only in the hands of young children, or else he thought
that he had to do but with beasts like unto himself. There is no man though
he have but small judgment and understanding, which reading that book, but
that he may see at the first dashe how he lies, and vnsayeth and reuoketh it
again, and nevertheless he is heard and accounted as half a God: not only of
the poorest sort, but of the greatest in the world. In the mean time we
ought not to maruayle at this, that such gallants have been so hardy and
ouerbolde, forasmuch as they were supported and maintained of Kings, Emperors,
Princes, and Magistrates, and that they were the best vvelcome to their Court.

I remember that I have read in the Ecclesiastical histories, that in the
time of the ancient Doctors, Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 22.
there were abusers and seducers of the people, that sowed their pestilent
venim amongst the doctrine of the ancients: Of that Denise bishop of Corinth
complained very much, saying, that many have sovvn in his Epistles much wicked
doctrine. Therefore think, that if they have been so hardy and bold that they
durst corrupt the vvrytinges of the auncientes, yea vvhilest they were yet
alive. What will they do now? at the least they will do as much, as their
ancient fathers, that is to say those Apostates ennemies of the fathers.

Now notvvithstanding their shameless malice they rebuke and check us with
a whores face, that we are ennemies of the fathers, despisers and contemners
of their doctrine, and disturbers of the world. I would to God that they
would permit and suffer us to compare our doctrine openly, and before all
the world with theirs, to the end that all men might know who be the
contemners and ennemies of the fathers: so much it vvantith that we should be
found condemners and ennemies of those good fathers, that altogether it vvoulde
be seen that the same doctrine that we hold and keep at this day, is the
very same for which many of those good fathers have shead their blood: and
would shead it, if they were now alive.

It seems that the same is not true that I have spoken, that if the fathers
were yet alive, that men would put them cruelly to death, as most wicked
Heritickes. Yea they which at this day do boste and brag them selves to be
their obedient children, and make bucklers of their books.

Understand and hold fast in mind (dearly beloved) behold this present book
may serve us for a certain argument, of that which is composed and faithfully
gathered together, out of the very books of the ancient Doctors: That if I
would present this present book (wherein there is nothing in it of mine, but
altogether of the auncientes) for confession of my faith to those enemies of
the fathers, I doubt not but presently I should be as a most wicked Heretic,
condemned to be burned quick into ashes. Now see (dearly beloved) and judge
justly before God according to your own conscience, whether we be the
ennmies of the fathers or they.

The ancient fathers have said that the bread of the supper abides alvvayes
bread, not being transubstantiated or changed: I do demand of you in good
faith, wherefore or what is the cause that they shead daily so abundantly the
blood of the poor children of God? Is it not upon this only point, or for
this cause, that the fathers have believed and mayntayned with a common
consent, as you shall see in that book upon the article of the Lords supper?
I leave it to your own judgment. Furthermore we do read that the ancient
fathers, of whom these here do advance, and bost them selves to keep and
maintain their doctrine, have broken in pieces the images of Jesus Christ,
and of the Saints, that have been set up in the temple of the christians,
saying that it is against the Christian doctrine to have Images in the Church.

What is he that doubts, that if the good fathers were yet living, and that
they should so break the Images as they did in that time, but that they
should be out of hand, or with all speed condemned as heretics to be
burned, yea if they escaped so. For we do see many daily which do not escape
so good cheap, but they have done unto them all the torments and pains that
these worshippers of the fathers can invent or imagine.

Then when you shall read the doctrine of the fathers contained in this
present book, judge whether it may be confessed and maintained openly before
these worshippers of the fathers without danger of life. In the mean time,
I desire you (my dear brethren) that ye fear not to abandon your body and
life, for a doctrine so just, holy, and good: and let us rejoice in this, that
we hold the true ancient doctrine of the Prophets, Apostles and Doctors of
the Church.

And as touching you, O ye Princes, Judges, and Magistrates, betvveene whose
hands this present book shall happen to fall: I desire and require you, in
the name of the living God, and of his son Jesus Christ our Lord which has
shed out all his blood upon the cross for the love of us, that you do give
right judgment upon the poor faithful people, of whom your prisons are at
this time full, through the furor and madness of those worshippers of the
fathers, and be no more the hangmen of that wicked Vermin: for it is not
counted a thing honest nor meet among men, that the Kings, Emperors, Princes,
and Magistrates should be made the hangmen of beggars.

1. Pet. 2. Romans 13. Sapi. 6.
Be ye then more ashamed than ever you were, because that you bear the name of
God, and the power to govern the people is given you from God, not for to
abuse it in punishing the good, and defending the wicked, but to maintain and
aid the good, and to punish the wicked (as the Apostles have taught us.) But
alas my God, into what blindness is the world fallen into, to esteem and
think that they which hold and keep the true ancient doctrine are
heretics.

O you Judges and Magistrates, do you not see daily in your prisons, the poor
children of God, to eat and drink very scarsly bread and water, and to be
cast most vilely and filthily into a low dunge on with the venomous beasts,
lying as the poor beasts upon a little straw having their arms and legs
broken with the rack?

Do you not see (I say) on the other side those goodly masters which bear
such great zeal to the ancient fathers, to have their bellye altogether
stuffed with wine and delicate fare, coming forth from their bankets and
feasts with a face as red as fire, or like to a Butchers boule, coming forth
to pass away the time, for to examine the poor faithful people, which are
not sought for at the table where good cheer is, but in a most filthy and
dark dungeon: they are poor children of God tied and bound with chains,
with a pale face and thin cheeks, brought before those fat bellies and
fiery faces through their ouermuche drinking and quaffing of wine, and the
first words they speak is, come hither thou wicked heretic, away thou
damned seducer of the people, thou have the devil within thee. And as soon as
the pore children of God did think to have spoken for their defense, the fat
bellies quicklye put their hands to their Bible, but it is another Bible than
the old old or nevve testament: For they can do nothing but provide faggots,
and cry to the fire, to the fire with those wicked heretics, I know not
where they have learned to do so. Have they learned that of the Prophets and
Apostles? It appears no. Neither have they learned it of the ancient
fathers. For they shall find within this present book, that they have spoken
and done altogether otherwise: therefore they declare that it is a rage and a
madness that they have conceived against the truth for to extinguishe and
abolishe it utterly, and all those that maintain it: For liberty to speak is
taken from us. Those that would speak, their tongues are cut out of their
heads? and afterward are burned.

In the mean time O ye Judges and Magistrates, which have the public
charge, have regard from henceforth what you do in condemning them to death.
You cannot condemn them to death except ye condemn all the good and ancient
fathers to death with them. What order do you call this to condemn to death
as Heretics the Saints and their doctrine, unto whom they cry and daily
pray unto in their Letanie, saying, O Sancte Augustine, O Sancte Cypriane, O
Sancte Hieronime. etc. Ora pro nobis, that is to say, O Saint Augustine, O
Saint Cyprian, O Saint Jerome, and so consequently of the other, pray for us.
And in the mean time they condemn them, and their writings, and all those
that follow their doctrine to be burned, as the experience does daily teach
us.

Therefore ye that Judge the people have a good respect unto that that you have
to do: for it is not only unto us that you do adresse your selves, but also
to the son of God, which has said unto us, he that touches you, touches
the apple or sight of mine eye. The same has been well shevved to Paul,
When he persecuted the poor faithful, crying from heaven after him, Act. 9.
Saul Saul why persecutest thou me? he did not persecute him in his own
person, but he persecuted him in his members, which are all the faithful that
believe in him.

Even so (my dear brethren) we shall rest in patience, and shall not be
ashamed to be condemned with all those good and ancient fathers of the
church, and not only with them, but also with all the Prophets and Apostles.
Then when you see your selves bound and brought before the Judges, to receive
sentence of death and condemnation against you, behold with you the Prophets,
Apostles and the ancient doctors bound with you to be condemned in the same
torment. Be ye joyful and rejoice to be enrovvled in their band, for to bear
with them, the yoke of Jesus Christ? persevere valiantly in the doctrine that
you have already received, for no man can hurt you. Ought we not greatly to
rejoice of this, that the persecuting tyrants can do our bodies no more hurt,
then a wolf or thief of the vvoods, which can but murder or kill us. Let
us rejoice, for our names are written in heaven. We have yet this good turn
(thanks be unto our good God therefore) that the persecutors can do unto us no
worse then to to put and place us with our good God in the company of
Angels and all the blessed souls in heaven.

What is he that would not desire to go play with so happy a company
eternally and without end? 1. Cor. 2.
Yea to be in glory which the eye has not seen, and ear has not heard,
neither has entered into man's mind, the things which God has prepared to
such as love him.

Again, forasmuch as they esteem and court us so wicked and abominable, and
cry so spitefully after us, as after the vvickedest people of all the world,
to make us and our doctrine odious unto the people: They command them not to
hear or harken unto us, they make the simple people believe, when they have
them under confession, that if they do not accuse us, they shall be damned.

Their craft, subtiltye and envy against the truth is to be maruayled at. In
the mean time I would willingly that they would accord and agree with us
to confer their doctrine with ours, their cross and persecution with ours,
their life with ours, their church with ours: By that means we should
plainly see whether they be the children of God or we. First of all have not
we the baptism purely administered, as we do read that the Apostles have
administered it without any inventions of men, but only according to the word
of God? Let one read the Scriptures, and he shall see who it is that has
added to the Sacraments, either we or they.

Furthermore let men behold the persecutions that they suffer for their
doctrine, the number is soon counted, for there is not one which has suffered
death for their doctrine: nevertheless Jesus Christ has promised that his
church shall have persecution in the world, saying, ye shall be hated of all
men for my name. Mat. 10.
How can they be hated of all men since that they be in all places the best
vvelcome? How comes it that one should think to do sacrifice unto God in
putting them to death? I did never know any.

I do accord and agree in this, that they are often times taken prisoners, but
it is in the good feasts and bankettes, and in the best seats of the table:
and whereas the children of God are burned with fire, they here are burned
through the heat of Wine. Their innocent flesh is hevven and cut in pieces,
but it is at the table upon their treachers. They are rotten and consumed with
the Gout of Naples, insomuch that they fall in pieces.

They are melted and melted again many times in a year. Besides all the
dangers they put them selves into both day and night to run after other men's
wives, in great danger of their life. And yet some will say that they are not
persecuted: It appears that they be, for one shall see a great many more
among them to dye Martyrs, of the pains that we did speak of even now, then
of their natural diseases or sicknesses. They are then Martyrs, no man can
deny, yea, but it is of the devil: and what is he that doubts of it?

And as concerning their life it is known well enough and manyfested unto
all men: Their good works and godly fruits what it brings in all places,
destroying and corrupting all the world, asvvell spiritually as corporally.
This I am sure of, that forasmuch as I have touched and meddled but with the
door of their kitchen, they will say I am a wicked Heretic: But what
then? Should I hold my peace for their menaces and injuries? No, no, God
forbid, but rather I will cry with open mouth after them, because they have
so corrupted and destroyed the Lords Vineyard.

Alas, alas, my God what is he that ought not but to lament and weep with
bloody tears, seeing all the world to be so led into the bottom of hell, so
many poor souls led to perdition. O Lord regard thy poor people, have some
pity and compassion on them, for whom thy son our Lord Jesus Christ has
offered to thee his body and blood in a sacrifice: and suffer not that thy poor
sheep be so put as a pray for to be devoured of al beasts.

For we are daily assaulted with so many enemies, that satan rises against
us, for to make us forsake and abandon our Lord Jesus Christ, and to renounce
his Gospel: One day we have war against the Heretics Anabaptists, an
other day against Libertines, Epicures, Arians, Dauidistes, and against
dissemblers, and consequently, against the worshippers of the fathers, through
whose zeal the children of God are put to death. Have not we then great
need of weapons? It appears yea, if we would not be taken in their
snares, as many at this day are, through the just judgment of God.

Therefore if there be any time to pray, or to vvatch, it is now: Let us then
vvatch and pray, to the end we may avoid all those dangers, and persevere and
continevve to the end.

You have been the first of your city (dearly beloved) I also do hope in the
Lord you shall not be the last: But as you have been until now the example
and myrror of the poor ignorant people, to dravve them to the true light of
the spirit, I do hope through the grace of God, that nothing shall hinder you
to continevve unto the end on so holy a work.

For the poor ignorant people seeing the peace and unity, and the promptness
and good courage that is in you to receive the holy doctrine, are constrained
through your holy life and conversation to come unto the knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and consequently to salvation. Forasmuch then as the Lord does unto you
daily so much good, or shows unto you so much of his grace, shevving unto
you from day to day his maruaylous works, set to so your hands in the work
of the Lord, so long as he gives you time and life, that you do not leave for
your children that shall come after you, an evil example of life: but instruct
them in that holy doctrine that you have received, to the end they may know
after your death, that they had fathers and mothers that feared God, and well
instructed in his word, and that they have not received the gospel in their
mouth only, but also in their hands. And that they were not dissemblers,
but true confessors of the name of God.

Dispose and bestow then vvhilest you have time so well your affairs, and
business according to the means as God has given you, that your successors
may have none occasion to complain, that you have left them an evil example:
That they say not after that you are dead, we have had parents and ancesters,
which have had great knowledge of God, but they feared more to lose the
amytie and freendship of the world then of God.

O how much ought you to fear the same, for it will turn to your great
confusion.

Remember also that which the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 5.
saying, if there be any that provides not for his own, and namely for them
of his household, the same denies the faith, and is worse then an infidel.
Therefore all faithful people ought to take god heed and mark well those
words, for it is a great evil to deny the faith.

Take good heed you be not an offense to any man, I do mean in doing evil,
be gentle courteous and merciful the one to the other, not rendering evil for
evil, 1. These. 5.
but render good for the evil. Live so holy that if men would punish and
persecute you, that they do not punish any thing in you but righteousness, and
good life. And in that doing you shall declare your selves to be the children
of God. VVatch alvvayes, praying that you be made worthy, to avoid al things
that are to come, and that you may stand before the son of God, after the end
of your days.

I beseech our good God and father, which according to his great goodness and
mercy has done so much good for us, to adopt us for his children to the
eternal inheritance of heaven, that it would please him through his goodness
to join and knit you in such sort together (my dearly beloved brethren and
sisters) through the bond of his holy spirit, which by the same will govern
and lead you to eternal life. Amen.

To the Reader.
HOW EASY A THING it is (gentle reader) rashly to disco^mend, each one is
unto himself a witness: but how hard a thing rightly to commend, few, yet the
wyser, can testify. Therefore to make any great or tedious relation of that,
which of it self is worthy, I think a thing vain and superstuous: or to
commend that which in the very show is commendable, should be to bereeue thee
of thy judgment. Notwithstanding, least I should be accused and condemned of
negligence, which I have sought to shun and avoid, I determined privately, to
set thy sight openly, that this book has been out of the Doctors and
Counselles collected carefully, composed by the author pithilye, and by the
same alleged fitly and aptlye: and not only out of the Doctors, but out of
the Popes own Canons culled graciously, whereby he has not brought a Doctor
against a Pope, but a Pope with a Pope conferred learnedlye. This being rightly
wayed and considered. I think there is nothing left for the more envious
(being the motion godly, the matter their own, the order fit and convenient)
as an object to work on their insatiable mind, and desire of reprehension,
except they will seek and run to the manners of the author (common practices
now a days) to search and prye over curiouslye, something to animaduert and
oppugn, and sore agreeued that he has beaten them with their own rod, say
with Zeuxis contending with Parrhasius, when he had seen all, now uncover thy
sheet Parrhasius, that we may see thy work. Yet least there should grow in
their minds some undeserved suspicion, being the author unknown, I will
endeavor not only to remove, but to root it clean out of their entendement:
and plainly affirm that which is credibly and sincerely referred to me, that
he was of manners modest, of life laborious, of countenance sober, and of wit
quick, and willing to profit every one to his power and ability. Therefore
as I judge and esteem, there is no cause for any one, nor yet for the
adversaries to be grieved, seeing to the one it redoundeth to his utility,
and the other may not complain, that in disclosing the verity, he painted
forth that which he has worthelye deserved. Next to this is the cause of the
translatour, whom thou shalt thank, that for thy further benifite, he has
with good zeal learned the author to talk in an other tongue, and showing
that which before was well spoken to a few, to be better spoken to a great
many, rendered it, copied out of the French, into thy English, vulgar and
native speech. Lastly I admonish the to view and read diligently the
cataloge of the doctors and counselles, alleged by the author, which I have
laid down, to the end thou might see for thy emolument what every one
has been, and what he has suffered and written, and the time he flourished,
wishing thee to ponder the same, and look if they have thought any otherwise,
then truth, or fallen into any inextricable error, not redily to condemn them,
as the envious do: but to ascribe it to man's fragilitie, as christians ought:
and to mark and imprint the same in thy mind, not to fall into the like, nor
to stay on man's sayings, seeing as it is usually said: nihil omni part
bea^um. Nothing (meaning mortal things) is blessed or happy on every side but
to boulster and trust wholly to Gods mercyes, who is only the truth, and the
physician for every sore. Thus much I thought good to advertise thee (gentle
re-der) of this present book, being, as it may be said, in sight fair, in
matter good, in effect fructuous and godly, wishing and willing thee to accept
gratefullye that which for thy pleasure has been penned paynefully. Farewell.

Concussus, surgo. C. A.

The Catalogue of the Doctors, and Councels, out of the which we have gathered
together this present book, for the approbation of the Articles of our Faith,
and to show in what time they flourished and were celebrated.
Dionysius Areopagita, a Grecian borne, and judge in the causes of weight at
Athens: was converted by S. Paul, when he disputed with the Stoikes and
Epicures in the same City: and constituted bishop there of the faithful:
Afterward he went into France, and was made bishop of Paris, where he was
also beheaded by the governor Fesceninus, in the year of our Lord, as
Trithemius reports, 96. and Paulus Eberus, Page 327. being the ix. day of
October under the Emperor Domitian in the second persecution. He flourished
chiefly under the two Vespasians father and the son. He was called the
French men's Apostle, and lies buried in a place in France, called after his
name S. Denis, a little distant from Paris, very famous through the
sepulchers of the Kings of that Country, read Act. 17. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 4.
and lib. 4. cap. 22. Martinus Polonus in the life of Domitian. Onuphrius
Panuinus in his Chronology, Page 14. Gregorius Turonicus, page 23. Roffin.
page 365. Pantaleon. page 4. Of his judgment of the Eclipse of the sun in
the passion of our Lord, read the annals of Glycas, page 306. and in his
own Epistle to Polycarpus the martyr.

Clemens, a Grecian, flourished under the two Vespasians, Domitian, and Nerua.
He was the Disciple of Paul, called his fellow labourer, as he himself
witnesses: and as Dorotheus says, one of the 70. disciples. He first preached
the Gospel at Metz in France. Pantaleon, page 7. Mayor, Munster. Afterward
was made Bishop of Sardis now called Triaditza. Dorotheus in the lives of the
70. Disciples. Lastly bishop of Rome the 3. in succession, and was martyred
under Traian, anno. 103. in the third persecution, by tying an anchor about his
neck, and thrown into the sea. He obtained the dignity of the seat 9.
years, 2. months, 10. days. Martinus Polonus in his life. Gregorius
Turonicus, page 21. Platyna in his life.

Ignatius, a Grecian, bishop of Antioch the year of our Lord.99. second in
succession after Peter the disciple of S. John the Evangelist and Apostle:
flourished chieflye under Nerua, and Traian, was martyred, as he testifies of
himself at Rome in the third persecution: the history says, that as Traian
returned from the victory of his enemies, the year 109. and threatened death
to the Christians, Ignatius came toward him, and confessed himself a
Christian, wherefore he was straight apprehended and bound with fetters, and
carried to Rome, and devoured with wild beasts. Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 33. showing
his own Epistle, how he was bound and fettered and guarded with a great
troop of soldiers, and enclosed with ten Leopardes. Gregory of Tours, page
21. Martin the Polonian in the life of Traian. Pantaleon, page 9. Onuphrius
Panuinus, page 16.

Irenaeus a Latin Doctor, the second bishop of Lions in France, and
successor of Pothynus the disciple of Polycarpus the martyr bishop of Smyrna.
Flourished under Commodus the year.175. Pantaleon, page 13. He was sent into
France, by the said Polycarpus, and was commended by the martyrs there unto
Elutherius the 13. bishop of Rome, and confuted there certain heretics.
Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 4. cap. 18. He reprehended sharplye Victor successor of
Elutherius in the sea of Rome, because he had excommunicated the Christians of
Asia and Greece. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. He was martyred at Lions under
Seuerus in the v. persecution, or according to Sulpitius Seuerus, the sixth in
the year. 184. Gregory of Tours, page 22. Martin the Polonian, in the life of
Seuerus. He was present in the Council of Palaestine with Polycarpus,
Theophilus, Narcissus, and Bacchylus the noble and learned Bishops of Asia.
Platyna in the life of Victor the first.

Tertullian Priest, a Latin Doctor, bishop of Carthage in Aphrica, flourished
in the year 202. under Seuerus and Antoninus. He wrate many learned works,
but at length by reason of a schism risen of emulation between him and the
Roman Clergy, he fell from the truth into the Montane heresy. Hieronymus in
cataloge. Nicephorus lib. 4. cap. 34. He wrote an Apology for the Christians
alleged by Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 2.

Origin Priest, a Grecian Doctor, flourished in the year of our Lord 235. the
Disciple of Clement of Alexandria, whom also he succeeded in the school, and
instructed many in the faith, which afterward became martyrs. In his youth his
father was martyred under Seuerus, who being in prison, he often visited, and
therefore was in great danger of his person, and would have suffered martyrdom
if his mother had not hindered him: being grown in age, he gelded himself, to
the intent he might the freelyer be at his study. He wrate many things, of
which there are not all extant. Hieronymus in Catalogo. He lived till the time
of Gallus and Volusianus Emperors, and died in the 69. year of his age, and
lies buried at Tyrus. Suydas. Eusebius. in the whole 6. book.

Cyprianus, a Grecian, Bishop of Carthage, flourished in the year of our Lord
355. under the reign of Decius. Pantaleon page 21. He was a great enemy of
the Arians, and other heretics. His opinion that he held of rebaptizing the
heretics, was the occasion of falling at square with Stephan the first bishop
of Rome. He was present at the first Council of Carthage. Eusebius. lib. 7. cap.
3. Pantaleon, page 22.

Eusebius, a Grecian, Bishop of Caesarea in Palaestine, flourished in the year
of our Lord 325. under the reign of Constantine the great. Pantaleon, page
25. By his familiarity with Pamphilus the martyr, he was surnamed Pamphilus.
He wrate many works, of which certain are extant. Hieronymus in Catalogo.
He was highly esteemed of the great Constantine, as appears by the Epistles
which the Emperor wrate unto him. Socrates, lib. 1. cap. 6.

Lactantius Firmianus, a Latin Rhetorician, flourished in the year of our
Lord 340. under the reygne of Constantine the great. He wrate against the
Gentiles, and confuted their errors. Hieronym. Pantaleon, page 27.

Athanasius the great, a Grecian, Bishop of Alexandria, successor of Alexander,
flourished in the year of our Lord 340. under Constantine the great. He had
much ado with the Arians, and was through them twyce expelled his Bishopric:
once by Constantine. Socrates lib. 2. cap. 13. Another time by Iulianus.
Theodoret, lib. 4. cap. 9. At length he died under the reign of Valens Emperor
of the East.

Hilarious a Latin, Bishop of Poictiers in France, flourished in the year of
our Lord 345. under the reign of the sons of Constantine the great. He was
driven in exyle by the Governor. Socrat. lib. 3. cap. 8. He wrate many goodly
works, of the which many are extant. He lived until the time of Augustine.
Hieronym. Augustine. Epistol. 89.64.

Basile, a Grecian, Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, very familiar with
Gregory Nazianzene, flourished in the year of our Lord 370. under the reign of
Valentinian and Valens. He was a great enemy of the heretics, and confuted
them in many works. Valens after he banished all the true Christians of the
East, for his renoume spared him, yet he went of his own accord into exile.
Camerar. in Catalogo. Pantaleon, page 26.

Gregory, a Grecian, Bishop of Nazanzum, called the divine, flourished in the
year 371. under Valentinian and Valens, although he was elder tha^ Basil.
Camerar. in catalogo. He wrate many goodly works and was a great Orator. He
lived 90. years, a long and quiet life. More of his virtues look in the
aforenamed author.

Epiphanius, a Grecian, Bishop of Cyprus, flourished in the year 375. under
the reygne of Valens. He wrate eight books against the heresies, in the Greek
tongue. He was great enemy of Origin and Chrysostom. He excited the people of
Constantinople against the said Chrysostom. More, look Socrates lib. 6. cap.
11. Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 26.

Ambrose, a Latin, Bishop of Millaine, flourished in the year 376. under the
reygnes of Valens in the East, and Gratian and Valentinian sons of
Valentinian in the West. Pantaleon, page 31. He was a noble man, and governor
of the whole province of Millaine, and made Bishop after the death of
Auxentius. After exiled by Iustina mother of Valentinian, infected with the
heresy of Arius. He sustained great troubles, and wrate many learned works
for the defense of religion. Socrates lib. 4. cap. 25. lib. 5. cap. 11.
Sozomen. lib. 7. cap. 13.

Gregory, a Grecian, Bishop of Nyssa, brother of Basile before named,
flourished in the year of our Lord. 381. under the reygne of Gratianus in the
West. He wrate certain works, and especially one very learned, De anima,
against the Philosophers of the Gentiles. Of Basile his Epistle to him, De
differentia essentiae and substantiae, read the Tripartite in the end of
Theodoret.

Jerome Priest, a Latin, borne at Stridonium in Dalmatia, flourished the year
390. under the reygne of Valentinian the younger. He lived in Bethlehem in
Syria, and was very famous for his works. Pantaleon, page 31. He dyed the
year 422. the 30. of September. Paulus Eberus. page 317. Read his own works.

Augustine, a Latin, disciple of Jerome Bishop of Hippo, now called Bona,
within the realm of Tunes in Aphrick, flourished in the year 395. under
Theodosius the elder. He is so famous by his works, that the reader may
plainly see him in them. He died the year 433. in the 40. year of his
Bishops sea, the 28. of August.

Chrysostom, a Grecian, called John of Antioch, but so surnamed of his
eloquent speech (that is to say, golden mouth) Bishop of Constantinople,
flourished in the year 405. under the reygne of Arcadius and Honorius. He was
the scholar of Libanius the Sophister, afterward left him, and was christened
by Meletius. Lastly made Bishop of Constantinople, whence he was twyce banished
by Eudoxia the Empress, wife of Arcadius, by the means of Epiphanius. In ye
last time of his exile, being at Cucussa in Armenia, he sickened, and was
carried to Potij, and there dyed the year 410. the 14. of September. His works
are extant, being large and learned. Tripartit. page 422. Glycas. 359. Eberus,
page 301.

Cyrillus, a Grecian, Bishop of Alexandria, flourished the year 432. under
Theodosius the second. Theodorit. lib. 5. page 35. Socrates lib. 7. cap. 7. He
was a great enemy of the Jews, and threw them out at Alexandria. Socrates.
lib. 7. cap. 13. Read of him the whole Tripartite.

Primasius, a Latin, a bishop of Aphrick, and disciple of S. Augustine,
flourished the year 435. Pantaleon, page 35. Read more of him in Gesner.

Fulgentius. a Latin, Bishop of Ruspa in Aphricke, flourished the year 456.
under the reygne of Martian. He wrate certain works now extant. But of his
acts read his life prefixed to his works. Read Gesn.

Prosper, a Frenchman, flourished in the year 456. under the reign of
Martianus, read Gennadius in catalogo. He wrate certain sentences, and a
Chronography, read Gesner. Simlerus in catalogo scriptor.

Gelasius, a Latin, borne in Aphricke, first of that name bishop of Rome,
flourished in the time of Zeno and Anastasius Emperors of the East. He wrate
many learned books. Read Platyna in his life.

Justinian the 57. Emperor of Constantinople, son of the sister of Justinius
the Emperor, flourished the year 527. He collected the Codices of the law
into a short volume for the beginners, and called them his Institutions. He
reigned 38. years. Read Iornandes, Pomponius, Laetus, Ignatius, Constantinus
Manasses, page 83. Annals Glycae, page 371.

Cassiodorus, a senator of Constantinople. afterward made a Monk,
flourished the year 575. under Iustinianus the Emperor. But as Pantaleon
accounts 497, before the reygne of Justinian under Anastasius. He wrate being
as yet extant, an History, and abridged the Tripartite, Read Diaconus, lib.
1. cap. 11.

Gregory the first Bishop of Rome, called Gregory the great, flourished in
the year 605. But according to Pantaleon, 586. under Mauritius the Emperor. He
wrate diverse things, but especially his Moralles are most excellent. Read
Bedae histor. Anglosaxon. Platyna in his life.

Theophylactus, a Grecian, constituted Bishop of Antioch, by Marua, chief of
the Saracenes, flourished the year 608. But according to Pantaleon, 761. under
Constantine. 6. He wrate certain works being extant in the Greek tongue.
Gesn. Simlerus. Pantaleon, page 61.

Beda, a Latin, borne in England, and as it seems, about Cambridge. For he
calls himself Beda Giruinus, which Girni or Giruij were Cambridge shyre men,
as appears by the town of Cambridge, called of old Granta Giruiorum. Leland
in Cyenaea cantione. Flourished in the year 732. But as ye truer with
Pantaleon, 704. under Leo the 2. and Justinian Emperors. His works extant
testify what the man has been. He wrate an history of the Saxones. Platyna
in the life of John the sixth.

Druthmarus, a Latin, Monk of the order of Saint Bennet, flourished the year
800. under Irene the Empress. He wrate certain Commentaries upon the
Evangelists.

The Abbot of Augspurg in Germany, a Latin, called Saint Vlrike, or Vldarike,
flourished the year 860. under the reygne of Michael the 3. of the East, and
Lotharius the first in the West.

Barnard, a Latin, borne in Burgoigne, and the first Abbot of Clarenaux in
France, flourished in the year 1111. under Henry the Emperor of the West,
and Alexius the first Emperor of the East. He wrate most flourishingly and
learnedly. His works are extant in one volume. Irenicus, lib. 30. cap. 106.
Volater. Gulielmus Abbas in his life.

Abbot of Vrsperg in Germany, a Latin, by name unknown, flourished the year
of our Lord 1200. under Alexius the first Emperor of the East, and Philip
Emperor of the West. He wrate an history which is extant, of the Emperors,
and other things most notable, from the beginning of the world to his time, to
the which there are added Paraleipomena (or Chronicles not touched) unto our
time. Pantaleon, page 95. Gesner. Pantaleon in his Posopograpie, lib. 2.

Thomas Aquinas, a Latin, borne in Italy, Friar of the order of Preachers,
and descended of a noble house, of the Lords of Aquino. He flourished the year
1271. under Michael Palaeologus the 7. Emperor of the East, and Rodolphus the
first Earl of Augspurge of the West. He made Commentaries upon all Aristotle,
and likewise in Divinity. His works are extant in 14. volumes in Fol. newly
imprinted at Rome. Read his own life set forth in a private book.

Xystus the 4. Bishop of Rome, borne at Cellae in the territory of Genoa in
Italy. named Friar Francis de Rouere, of the order of Minores. He was created
Pope the year 1414. He lived under Sigismond the Emperor. Onuphrius Panuinus
in his life.

Bishop of Panormus in Sicilie, a great Lawyer, called commonly of his
Bishopric, Panormitan. Flourished the year 1415. under Sigismunde the
Emperor of the West. He wrate very large volumes of the law.

John Gerson, a Divine of France, one of ye Chancellors of the University of
Paris, flourished in the same time with the former Bishop, and stoutlye
resisted the decrees of the Counsel of Constance. Peucer. in synodo
Constantiensi.

Platyna, an Italian, Secretary of the sea of Rome, flourished the year 1470.
under Frederick the first, Emperor. He wrate of the lives of the Popes from
Linus unto Xystus the 4. Sabell. Gesner. Simler.

Sanazarius, an Italian Poet, flourished in the time of Maximilian the first,
and Alexander the.6. Pope.

Marcus Antonius Coccius Sabellicus, borne in the dominion of Venice, a bishop,
flourished the year 1501. under Maximilian Emperor, and Pius the 3. Pope. He
wrate a large history from the creation of the world to the year 1504.
which is augmented by Gaspar Hedio. Gesner. Simler.

The order of the Councelles according to Pantaleon.
AT Carthage, once very famous, now ruinous and clean destroyed, a City in
the kingdom of Tunes, under the Turks dominion, were celebrated six
Councelles. The first, in the year, 360. Galienus being Emperor, 32. in
succession, and Stephen the first, Pope. The second, the year 413. Honorius
being Emperor. The third, in the year 429. under Theodosius the 2. The
fourth, fifth, in the year 437. under the same Emperor. The sixth, by 217.
Bishops in the year 459. under Martianus.

At Anticyra in Galatia, was celebrated a Council by Vitalis Bishop of
Antioche the year 295. Diocletian being Emperor.

At Nice a City in Bithynia now called Nichea in Asia the less, under the
Turk, were celebrated two Councels. The first against the Arians, the year
326. under Constantine the great, where was established the Nicene Creed. The
second, the year 781. under Constantine the sixth.

The Council of Gangra, now called Cangri in Asia the less, was celebrated
the year 333. under Constantine the great.

At Elyberis, or Illyberis, now called Granado in Spain, was celebrated a
Counsel in the year 337. under Constantine the great, by xix. Bishops.

At Ariminum now called Rimino in the territory of Flaminia now Romandiola in
Italy, was celebrated a Council the year 362. under Julian the Apostata.

The Council of Laodicea in Syria, was celebrated the year 368. under Julian
the Apostata.

At Constantinople in Thrace, sometime called Byzantium, builded by Constantine
the great, now the chief seat of the Turk, and called in his language
Stambola, were celebrated eight Councelles. The first, the year 383. by 180.
Bishops under Gratian the Emperor. The second, the year 448. under
Theodosius the second. The third, in the year 546. under Justinian the first.
The fourth, the year 576. under Iustine the second. The fifth, the year 681.
by 289. Bishops under Constantine the v. The sixth, the year 695. under
Justinian the second. The seventh, the year 726. by 330. Bishops, under Leo
the third, Emperor. The eight, the year 870. under Basilius Macedo Emperor of
the East, and Jews the second, of the West.

At Toledo in Spain, were celebrated 13. Councelles. The first, the year 393.
under Arcadius and Honorius, by 18. Bishops. The second, the year 470. under
Leo the first. The third, the year 615. under Heraclius, by 62. Bishops.
The fourth, the year 632. under Heraclius. The fifth and sixth, the year 639.
under Constantine the third. The seventh, the year 680. But according to
Phrygio, 640. by 30. Bishops under Constantine the fourth. The eight, the
year 666. by 59. Bishops under Constantine the fourth. The ninth and tenth,
the year 675. by 16. Bishops under Constantine the fourth. The xi. xii.
xiii. the year 692. under Constantine the fourth.

The Council Mileuitan, was celebrated at Mileuita in Aphrica against the
Pelagians, the year 418. under Honorius.

The Council of Ephesus, now called Epheso in Ionia in Asia the less, was
celebrated, the year 430. by 200. Bishops, against the Pelagians and
Nestorians under Theodosius the 2.

At Orange in France, but excepted from the dominion of the French Kings,
having a several Prince, were held two Councelles. The first, the year 451.
under Theodosius the second, and Valentinian. The second, the same year,
under the said Emperors.

The Council of Chalcedon in Bythinia, now called by the Turks Scutari,
situated right over against Constantinople, was held, the year 453. against
the Eutychians, Manichees, and Dioscorus, by 600. Bishops, under the reygne of
Theodosius the 2. and Valentinian the 3.

At Orleans in France were held five Councelles. The first, the year 518.
under Justinius the first, by 33. Bishops. The second, the year 550. under
Justinian the great. The third, the same year under the same Emperor. The
fourth, the year 567. under Justinius the second. The 5. the year 572. under
the said Emperor.

At Bracara, now called Braga in Spain, were held three Councelles. The first,
the year 555. under Justinian the great. The second and third, the year
583. Martianus being Emperor.

The Laterane Councelles were seven. The first, by Stephan the 3. the year
767. under Leo. The second, by Nicolaus the second, the year 1058. under
Constantine the 12. of the East, and Henry the 4. of the West. The third, by
Innocentius the 2. the year 1138. under Caloioannes of the East, and Lotharius
the 2. of the West, Emperors. The fourth, the year 1167. by Alexander the 3.
under Emanuel of the East, and Frederike of the West. The fifth, the year 1205.
by Innocentius the third, in the presence of 7. Archbishoppes, 412. Bishops.
1300. Prelates, under Henry the 6. of the West, and Balduine the first, of the
East. The sixth, the year, 1446. by Eugenius the 4. under Frederike the 3. The
seventh, the year 1510. by Julius the 3. under Maximilian the first.

At Chalons in France, were held two Councelles. The first, the year 670.
under Constantine the 4. The second, the year 805. under Charles the first,
Emperor of the West, and Nicephorus of the East.

At Worms in Germany, were 5. Councelles. The first, the year 868. under
Jews the second of the West, and Basilius of the East, Emperors. The second,
the year 1067. under Romanus the second, of the East, and Henry the fourth, of
the West. The third, the year 1494. under Maximilian the first. The fourth,
the year 1520. under the said Emperor. The fifth, the year 1536. under
Charles the fifte.

FINIS.
The sum of the common places contained in this Book.
OF the Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ. Page 1. Of confession to God, and of
auricular confession. Page 40. Of the power to bind and lose. Page 46. Of free
will. Page 51. Of merits, and of good works, Page 70. and justification by
faith. Page 107.
Of the Law. Page 133. Of Purgatory. Page 147. Of the honoring of Saints.
Page 174. Of one only Mediator. Page 191. Of Images, whether they be lawful
in Churches of Christians or no. Page 201. Of fasting and meat. Page 228. Of
Marriage. Page 243. Of Vows. Page 254. Of the Church, and how it may be
known, and the authority thereof. Page 258. Of holy Scripture, and that it is
lawful for all men to read it. Page 293. Of the assemblies and congregations
of the faithful. Page 340. Of constraining no person to believe. Page 347. Of
persecuting Magistrates, which under shadow of religion, do persecute the
faithful, and their torments of eternal pains. Page 368.
Finis.
The Staff of the Christian Faith.
Of the holy Supper of our Lord Jesus Christ.
I Am that living bread, John. 6.
which came down from heaven: If any man eat of this bread, he shall live
for ever: and the bread that I will give, is my flesh, which I will give for
the life of the world, etc.

That which I delivered unto you, 1. Cor. 11.
I received of the Lord, to wit: That the Lord Jesus the same night in which
he was betrayed, took bread, and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and
said: Take ye, eat ye, Math. 26 Marc. 14. Luke. 22.
this is my body which is broken for you: this do ye in remembrance of me.
After the same manner also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying: Or the
new alliance.
This Cup is the new testament in my blood: this do as often as ye drink it,
in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink
this Cup, ye show the Lords death till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall
eat this bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Let a man therefore examine
himself: and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this Cup.

Is not the Cup of blessing which we bless, 1. Cor. 10.
the Communion of the blood of Christ? Is not the Bread which we break,
the Communion of the body of Christ? Because that we which are many, are one
bread and one body, in as much as we are all partakers of one bread.

Our fathers have all eaten the same spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10. Exodus 17.
Number. 20.
and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they drank of the
spiritual rock that followed them: and that rock was Christ.

John. 6.
I am the bread of life, he that comes to me, shall not hunger, and he that
believes on me shall never thurst. etc. This is that bread which comes down
from heaven, that he which eats of it, should not die.

Augustine in his 2. Quinqua. upon the 96. Psalm. When the Lord commanded
this, John. 6.
he spoke of his flesh, and said: He that eats not my flesh, shall not
have eternal life. And said: The words that I speak unto you, are spirit and
life. We eat not Christ's body carnally.
Understand spiritually that which I have said unto you: you shall not eat
that body which you do see, and you shall not drink the blood which shall be
shed by them which will crucify me.

Augustine upon Saint John, in the 27. treatise upon the 6 Chapter. If ye
should see the son of man ascend up where he was before. John. 6.


What is this? By that he resolves those whom he has known: of that he
manyfested the thing whereby they have been offended. Christ not eaten by
morsels.
For they did think that he would give unto them his body: but he says, that
he will ascend up into heaven all whole, saying: when ye shall see the son
of man ascend up where he was before: at the least you shall see then that he
does not give his body in the same manner as ye think and judge: at the least
you shall then understand that his grace is not consumed by morsels. etc.

Augustine in his Sermon of the Sacraments of the faithful, in the 2. ferie
of Easter. And for this cause (as also the men of God have understood it
before us) our Lord Jesus Christ has recommended his body and his blood to
the things, which of many are reduced and brought into one thing. For also,
the one of many Graynes is confecte and made into one, and the other of many
Grapes is reduced into one: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. Then to eat this meat, and to drink this drink,
is to dwell in Christ, and to have our dwelling in him. The sinner eats
nothing in the supper but the outevvard sign.
And so he that dwells not in Christ, and in whom Christ does not dwell:
without doubt he eats not the flesh, and drinks not the blood: although
that he eat and drink the Sacrament of so great a thing, to his judgment.

Augustine in his.3. book of the christian doctrine. If you eat not (says
he) the flesh of the son of man, and drink not his blood you shall have no
life in you. It seems that he does command an unlawful thing, or a fault.

That is then a figure: commanding that it must be communicated to the passion
of our Lord, and gentlye and profitablye to put in memory that his flesh
has been wounded and crucified for us.

Augustine of the words of the Apostle in his.2. sermon Says: If ye eat not
my flesh, John. 6.
and drink not my blood, ye shall have no life in you. etc. The disciples were
offended, not all truly, but many of them saying within themselves: This is an
hard saying, who can abide ye hearing of it? What does this signify? Does
this offend you? Did you think, that of this body here which you do see, I
ought to make pieces: Christ makes not pieces of his body.
and that I should deuyde in pieces my members for to give them unto you? What
and if you should see the son of man ascend up where he was before? Truly
he which is ascended up all whole, cannot be consumed, etc. What is it to
drink this thing, but to live? Eat the life, drink the life: thou shalt
have life, and thou shall be the whole life. And then this shall be (that is to
say) that the body and blood of Christ shall be the life of every one: if
that which they do take visibly in ye sacrament, be in deed spiritually eaten
and drunk. For we have heard the Lord himself saying: It is the spirit
that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak unto
you, John. 6.
are spirit and life.

Augustine in his Decrees of penance, in the 2. distinction. Chapter of
Charity. To eat the bread, and drink the wine, that is to believe in
Christ, and in loving him, to give our selves unto him.

Bid in his Collection: These are also the words of Saint Augustine in his
sermon made to the children at the altar of the Sacrament. The Cup of
blessing. etc. That which ye see in the Altar, That which we see in the
supper, is bread.
ye have also seen it the night past. But you have not yet understood what it
does signify, and how it conteyneth a Sacrament of a great thing. That then
which ye have seen, is bread, and wine, the which your eyes do demonstrate
unto you. But that which your faith desires to be instructed in: the bread is
the body of Christ: and the wine the blood. And that truly is brefly said, in
as much peradventure that it suffiseth the faith: but the faith desires to be
instructed: for the Prophet says: Esaias. 7.
If ye believe not, you shall not understand. Ye may then say unto me: thou
have commanded that we should believe: expound it, to the end that we may
understand it. For such cogitacion and thought may enter into the minds and
understanding of every one, Luc. 1. Math. 2.
we do know very well from whence our Lord Jesus Christ has taken his flesh:
that is to say of the Virgin Mary, he was nourished up in his infancy, he was
brought up, he became great, and came to the age of a young man. He suffered
persecution by the Jews. He has been hanged on the tree, and dyed on the tree,
Luk, 24. Act. 1.
and was buried, and rose again the third day, and ascended into heaven the
day it pleased him. There he elevated his body, and from thence he shall come
to judge the quick and the dead, there he sits now at the right hand of the
father. How then is the bread his body? And the cup or that which the cup
contains, how is that his blood? My brethren, therefore are these things
here called Sacraments: because that in them, one thing is seen, and an other
thing is understood. That which we see in a corporal likeness: but that
which we understand, to a spiritual fruit. He that receaueth the mystery of
unity, and keeps not the bond of neace, he receives not by him the mystery,
but receaueth a witness against him self. And no man ought in any thing to
doubt, but that then every faithful man is partaker of the body and of the
blood of the Lord: As to baptism he is made a member of Christ: and is not
depryued from the company of that bread and of that cup, also when he which
is constituted in the unity of the body of Christ, shall depart out of this
world, before he do eat that bread, and drink the cup: for also he is not
depryued from the participation and from the benefit of that Sacrament, which
has found that which the Sacrament does signify.

Prosper in his book of sentences. He that abides in Christ, and in whom
Christ dwells, has taken the meat of life, and has drunk the drink of
the eternity. For he which discordeth from Christ, does not eat the flesh
of Christ, nor drinks his blood: Although that he do take every day
indifferently the Sacrament of so great a thing, according to his judgment.

Innocent in his third book of the holy Altar. 4. 13. 14. Chapter. Judas
(says he) has eaten the Lords bread, but he has not eaten the bread,
which was the Lord.

Saint Hilarie in his 8. book of the Trinity. The bread which descended from
heaven, is not received, but of him which has the Lord, and which is the true
member of him.

Augustine in his 49. treatise upon Saint John the 11. Chapter. If faith be in
us, Christ is in us. For what other thing, says the Apostle, Christ dwells
in your hearts through faith, but that through the faith which thou have of
Christ, Christ is in thy heart.

Augustine upon Saint John in his 25. treatise and 6 Chapter. This is then to
eat the meat, not that which perishes, but which abides unto eternal life
Wherefore make ready thou the teeth, and the belly, believe, and thou have
eaten. etc.

Saint Cyprian in his Sermon of the unction of Christ. Our Lord Jesus Christ
has given in the table in the which he has made his last banquet with his
Apostles, the bread and the wine with his own hands, but he has given his
body for to be wounded on the Cross by the hands of the soldiers. etc.

Augustine upon Saint John in the 26. Homely. Says: All we have very well this
day received the visible meat, but it is another thing of the Sacrament, and
of the virtue of the same. From whence comes it that many do come unto the
altar, and take to their condemnation that which they receive? For the morsel
of bread which our Lord gave unto Judas, was poison unto him, not for that it
was evil, but because the man which took it, was evil, he took it evil.
etc. A little after he says: the Sacrament of this (that is to say) the
spiritual unity which we have with Christ, is presented unto us at the
Lords table, to the one to life, to the others to death. John. 6.
A little before he has said: He which shall eat, shall not die: but I do
understand it of him which shall have the verity of the Sacrament, and not
the visible Sacrament: which shall eat him inwardlye, and not outwardly:
which shall eat him in the heart, and not crashe him with the teeth.

In what sense the ancient Doctors of the Church, have understood this place:
Hoc est corpus meum: This is my body.

S. Augustine writing against Adamantius the disciple of Manichaeus in the, 12.
Epistle. Says after this manner: I may interpret, The bread is the sign of
the body of Christ.
that this commandment consists in a sign: for the Lord has made it no
doubt to say: This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. In the same
place he says these three things: The blood is water: Behold my body: And the
rock was Christ. He teaches these things to be said, as though he spoke by
figure in sign and by signification.

Tertullian in his.4. book against Marcion, Hoe est cor pus meum, how to be
understood.
Says after this sort: Jesus Christ after he took the bread, and distributed it
to his disciples, made it his body, in saying: this is my body. That is to say
(says he) the sign of my body.

Chrysostom upon S. Mathewe in the.83. homily the.26. chapter, called the
symbol of the supper and sign of the body of Christ. Augustine in his first
quinquagesima, in his prologue of the 3. psalm, Says: Christ received Judas
unto his supper, in the which he recommended and gave the figure of his body,
and of his blood to his disciples.

Chrysostom upon S. Matthew in the.83. homelye, Says: When the Heritickes say,
how shall it appear that Christ has been offered? We will stop their mouths
thus, if Jesus Christ be not dead, to what end shall that sacrifice be a sign.

Saint Jerome upon the 26. Chapter of S. Mathewe. After that he acomplished the
mystical Passover, or Easter: and had eaten the flesh of the Lamb with his
Apostles: He took the bread which comfort the heart of man, and passed
further to come unto the Sacrament of the true Easter: That even as
Melchisedech the high Priest of the souereygne God has done, Jesus Christ
represents his body by the bread.
in the figure of this, in offering of bread and wine: Even so he represents
the verity of his body, and of his blood.

Saint Ambrose upon the first Epistle to the Corinthians the 11. Chap.
Forasmuch as we are delivered by the death of the Lord, having recordation
thereof, in eating and drinking, we do signify the flesh and the blood,
the which have been offered for us. etc.

Chrysostom upon the 22. psalm. Christ has ordained the table of his holy
Supper, to the end, that in that sacrament, he do show unto us daily, the
bread and the wine, for the similitude of his body and of his blood.

Saint Ambrose in his 6. book of the Sacraments, the first Chapter. The
Priest says: Make this oblation to be acceptable unto us: the which is the
figure of the body and blood of our Lord. etc.

Chrysostom in the 83. Homely upon Saint Mathewe, If thou had been
without a body, he would have given thee all his signs naked and bare: but
because that thy soul is joined to a body, he has given thee in the sensible
things, the things which are comprysed by the spirit.

S. Ambrose in his book of the Sacraments, the 1. Chapter. Note.
Thou do receive the Sacrament, for the similitude of the flesh and of the
blood of Christ: but thou obteynest the grace of his true nature. And in
receiving the bread, in that meat, thou art partaker of his divine substance.
etc. And he says afterward: Even as thou have received at baptism the
similitude of death: so likewise thou have drunk in that Sacrament the
similitude of the precious blood of Christ. etc.

Bid upon the.22. chapter of S. Luke. After he had ended the solemnity of the
ancient Passover: the which he made in remembrance of the ancient
deliverance out of Egypt: he passed forth to the new solemnitye the which
the church desires to celebrate, in remembrance of her redemption: to the
end that putting the Sacrament of his flesh and of his blood, under the
likeness of bread and wine, in steed of the flesh and of the blood of the
Lamb: Note.
he shows himself to be him unto whom the Lord has sworn and will not
repent, thou art a priest for ever. etc. It follows after, because that the
bread does fortefie the flesh, and that the wine causes the blood in the
flesh, the bread is referred mistically to the body of Christ, and the wine to
his blood. etc.

Druthmarus Monk of S. Benet, in his commentary upon Saint Matthew. The wine
refreshes and augmenteth the blood, for that cause the blood of Christ is not
improperly figured by the same: in as much as all that comes unto us from him,
does make us glad with a true joy, and increases all our goodness. etc. A
little before he says. The Lord gave unto his disciples the Sacrament of his
body, in remission of their sins, and for to keep love and charity, to the
end that having remembrance of that deed, he would do always in a figure,
that which he ought to do for them: and should not forget that charytie. This
is my body, that is to say, in Sacrament. etc.

Origin upon Leuiticus in the.7. homely. We must understand many things in the
scriptures spiritually.
Know that these are figures which are written in the holy books: and
therefore they ought to be examined as spiritually and not as carnal: and to
understand the things which are said. For if you do receive those things
here as carnal, 2. Cor. 3.
they do hurt you and not nourish you: for the letter which kills is not
only found in the old testament: but also in the Gospel, in the new testament.
The letter kills him which considers not spiritually the things which are
spoken. For if thou follow according to the letter that which is said, except
that you do not eat my flesh and drink my blood, that letter kills. Wylt
thou that I do aledge unto thee an other letter of the Gospel which kills.
He which has not a sword says he, let him sell his coat and buy one. Do
thou see, that letter is of the Gospel, but it kills truly, if thou receive
it spiritually, it kylleth not: but in the same is the quickening spirit, and
therefore receive spiritually the things which are spoken, be it in the Law,
or in the Gospel. 1. Cor. 2.
For the spiritual man judges all things, but he him self is judged of no
man. etc.

Denis in the ecclesiastical Hierarchia. Says: The Bishop after that he
shall have ended by preaching the heavenly gifts, he consecrateth, and
blesses the holy misteryes, and that which he before has preached, he sets
before every one covert and hid by venerable signs and tokens. And after
that he has showed his heavenly gifts in all reverence, he turns him self
to the holy communion of them, admonishing all other to communycate: and after
that the holy communion is received of every one, rendering thanks unto God, he
makes an end of ye mystery. Obiec. Mat. 26.
Hoc est corpus meu^, this is my body.

Answer. When God gave the circumcision to Abraham, he made his covenant
before the circumcision, and yet he called the circumcision his covenant, or
alliance, saying, Genes. 17.
Hoc est pactum meum. This is my covenant. S. Paul expounds the same saying:
Romans 4.
Abraham has received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the
righteousness of faith. God said to the Prophet Ezechiel: Ezech. 4. and. 5.
thou son of man, take a tyle stone, and lay it before thee, and describe
upon it the city of Jerusalem: after he says, this same is Jerusalem.

Hoc est corpus meum. Augustine upon Leuiticus 9. and.7.57. also he writes
against Adamant. The thing which signifies, has of custom been called of
the name of the thing which is signified. As it is written, the seven ears,
are seven years: Genes. 41.
The Scripture says not that they signify seven years. And the seven kyne
are seven years, and many such things. In like manner says S. Paul, that
the Rock was christ, and not that it signified Christ, 1. Cor. 10.
but as if it had been him in very deed: the which notwithstanding was not
Christ by substance, but by figuration. etc.

Augustine writing to Boniface. Epistle. 23. If the Sacraments have no certain
similitude, or agreeing with the things of which they are sacraments, The
sacraments take oftentimes the name of the things that they represent.
they shall be in no manner of wise Sacraments. For they take oftentimes the
names of the things themselves by reason of that similitude. As the Sacrament
of the body of Christ is after one fashion or manner, the body of Christ, and
the sacrament of the blood of Christ, the blood of Christ. Also the
Sacrament of Faith, is the faith.

Irenaeus against the heretic Valens in his 4. book, and 34. Chapter. The
bread with the which we render thanks unto God, although that it be of the
earth, yet nevertheless when the name of God is inuocated and called upon, it
is not the common bread, but of giving of thanks, having two things in it,
the one earthly, and the other heavenly. etc.

Gelasius writing against Eutyches and Nestorius, and also to the Counsel of
Rome, in the Chapter Comperimus de consecrat. Distin. 2. The substance of
bread and wine is not changed in the supper.
The Sacraments of the body and of the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which we take, they are heavenly things, whereby we are made partakers by them
of the divine nature. And yet nevertheless the substance of the bread and of
the wine remain there still, and truly the image and the similitude of the
body and of the blood of Christ, are celebrated in the doing of the
mysteries. Then that is evidently showed unto us which we must feel in Jesus
Christ our Lord: yea, the same which we protest, celebrate, and are in his
image, to the end that even as the natures are converted and changed into the
divine substance, by the means of the holy spirit, and yet nevertheless
they abide in their natures. Also the same principal ministry (whose
efficacy and virtue is truly represented unto us by the things whereof it
consists, which abide properly in their being) do demonstrate unto us, that
only Christ abides altogether wholly and in his verity.

The Council of Nice. Let us not stay here below on the bread and wine,
which are set on the Lords table: Col. 3.
but let us lift up our spirits on high through faith. Let us consider that
the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world, is in that holy
table, 1. Cor. 6.
the which is not offered in sacrifice by the Priests, after the manner of
beasts. And in taking his precious body and his blood, let us believe that
they are the signs and tokens of our resurrection. And for the same cause we
eat not much, but a little, to the end we may know that the same is not
ordained for to fill our bellye withal, but for to serve to sanctity and
holiness. etc.

Saint Ambrose in his book of those which are dedicated to the mysteries.
Consecration is to dedicate a common thing to a holy use
Before the consecration one kind, or likeness is named, but after the
consecration the body of Christ is signified. Christ says that his blood
before the consecration is called an other thing: but after the consecration is
signified the blood of Christ. etc.

S. Ciprian in his sermon of penitent sinners. Note that he says not the
blood, but the drink sanctified.
Speaking of the maid which did vomit out the Sacrament: The drink sanctified
in the blood of the Lord, issued out of the polluted entrails.

Chrysostom writing to Caesar the Monk. Before the consecration of the
bread, we do call it bread: but when the grace of God has sanctified it by
the priest, it is delivered from the name of bread, and is exalted to the name
of the body of the Lord: although that the nature of the bread abides
always: and is not called two bodies: but one body of the son of GOD.

Augustine upon S. John in his 80. homelye. Jesus Christ says not that you
are clean because of the baptism, The water of baptism does not purge sins
by ye which you have been washed: but he says it because of the word which I
have said unto you. That is for none other cause, but that the word does wash
and cleanse you in the water. If one do take away the word, what shall the
water be but water? Which if the word be joined to the element, it shall be
made a Sacrament: and the word it self is made as visible: from whence comes
so great virtue to the water, that in touching the body it washes the heart,
but by means of the word? Not always, because that the word is pronounced,
but because that one believes. For in the word it self, truly there is a
difference between the sound passing, and the virtue abiding.

The Rubrycke written in read letters, which is called cautela Missae. If the
body of the Lord be found within the armorye or pyxe, to be rotten or mustye,
through to great moystnesse of the armorye, or through to great negligence in
not changing it. If none can be found which will receive it, that the said
body of the Lord be burned, and the ashes put in a certain hallowed place.
Item if the said body of the Lord be found within the said armorye to be eaten
part of it with Myce, or Spiders, if none can be found which will receive it,
that it be burned, and the ashes put in a hallowed place. Item if any that is
sick, Note well and understand.
who having received the said body of the Lord, and through the infirmity of
his stomach is constrained to vomit it up again, The body of the Lord
cannot stink nor be burned, nor vomited.
if none can be found which will take that refection: that the said body of ye
Lord be burned, and the ashes put into an hallowed place.

S. Peter answers to the same in his sermon. Thou shall not suffer thy holy
one to see corruption. Psalm. 15. Act. 2. Ast. 13.
S. Paul says as much, in his sermon that he made to the people of Antioche,
saying: He whom God raised again, saw no corruption, also God has raised
him from death for to return no more to corruption.

How our Lord Jesus Christ according to his Humanite, cannot be but in one
place.
S. Ambrose writing upon S. Luke in his 10. book. We ought not to seek thee
upon earth, nor in the earth, nor according to the flesh, Christ upon the
earth, nor in the corruptible elements is not to be sought. Act. 7. John. 2.
if we will find thee. For we may not know now Jesus Christ after the flesh.
S. Stephen did not seek him upon earth, who did see him at the right hand of
God. But Mary which sought him in the earth, had not the power to touch him.
Stephen has touched him, for he sought him in heaven.

Augustine in his 2. Quinquagesima, psalm. 54. Until such time as the heaven
shall end, The body of Christ but in one place.
the Lord shall be always on high: but the truth of the Lord is here with us.
For it must needs be yt the body with which he rose again, be in one certain
place: but his truth is spread abroad every where.

Augustine writing to Dardanus in the 67. Epistle. Doubt not that Jesus Christ
as touching his manhod, is not there, where we do look for him. And do
remember that which we confess in our creed: That he rose again, Christ shall
come as he ascended, that is, in the same form.
and ascended into heaven, and that he shall come from thence, and not from any
other place, to judge ye quick and the dead. And he shall come according to the
witness of the Angel, as they have seen him ascend in that same visible
form, and in the same substance to the which he has given immortality. But he
has not taken from him his nature: according to the form and substance of his
body, we must not think that he is dispersed every where: for we must take
heed so to affirm his deytie, that we destroy not his humayne nature.
Therefore it follows not that all which is in God, is God.

Augustine upon S. John in his 30. treatise. The body of Christ is raised up
from death, and it must needs be that it is in one place.

2. Colos. 3.
If ye then be risen again with Christ, seek those things which are above,
where Christ sits at the righ hand of God. Think on the things which are
above, but not on those which are on earth.

Jesus Christ says: John. 7.
I am yet a little while with you, and then go I unto him that sent me.

Also the poor ye have always with you, but me ye shall not have always.
John. 12.


My little children, John. 13.
yet a little while am I with you, ye shall seek me, and (as I said unto the
Jews) wheither I go, thither can ye not come.

Again, I go to prepare a place for you: John. 14.
I will return again, and receive you, even unto my self: that you may be
there, where I am also.

I tell you the truth, John. 16.
it is expedient for you that I go away. For if I go not away, that comforter
will not come unto you: But if I depart I will send him unto you.

I came out from my father, John. 16.
and came into the world: Again, I leave the world, and go to my father.

Also the Angel said unto the women, Mat. 28.
I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified: he is not here, for he is
risen, as he said: come and see the place where the Lord was laid.

Behold my hands and my feet: for it is even I my self: Luke 24.
handle me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have.
And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his fete.

Act. 1.
And while they looked steadfastly up to heaven, as he went, behold two men stood
before them in white apparel, which also said, ye men of Galyle, why stand ye
gasing into heaven: This same Jesus which is taken up from you into heaven,
shall so come, even as ye have seen him go into heaven.

Act. 3.
Also whom the heaven must contain until the time that all things be restored.

That we ought not to take from the lay people the wine of the supper.
Gelasius Pope of Rome of consecration in the second distinction, chapter
Comperimus. etc. We have understood that some men receiving only the body of
the Lord, The supper to be received in two kinds, or else not.
do abstain themselves from the Cup, who forasmuch as they sin by
superstition, ought to be constrained and compelled to receive the Sacrament
wholly: or else to reject it altogether. For the division of this mystery
cannot be without great sacrilege. Jesus Christ commanded in his supper, and
said: Drink ye all of this: Mat. 26.
For this is my blood of the new testament.

The Counsel of Basile has ordained that the lay people should communicate
the supper in two kinds. The Counsel of Basil.


Saint Cyprian in his Sermon of penitent sinners. How shall we exhort the
people to shed their blood for the confession of Christ, if we do deny unto
them the blood of him when they ought to fight? Or how can we make our selves
capable to drink the cup of Martyrdom, except yt we suffer our selves
first to drink of the cup of the Lord.

That we ought not to keep the bread of the supper, nor to carry it here and
there.
Saint Clement in his 2. Epistle to James. And of the consecration in the 3.
Distinction. Chapter tribus. etc. The use in the primitive Church of the supper.
So many hosts ought to be offered at the Altar, as shall be sufficient for the
people. And if any remain, we ought not to keep it until the next day: but
through the diligence of the clerks, with fear and trembling ought to be
received, and eaten.

Origin upon the 7. chapter of Leuiticus. The bread not carried in processions.
The Lord has not ordained or commanded, that the bread should be kept,
until the morrow, the which he gave unto his disciples: but said unto them,
take ye and eat. etc. And in this he commanded not to carry the bread by the
ways, it may be, that by the same is contained a mysterye, that is to say,
that always thou ought to bring forth the new bread of the word of God,
which thou bear within thee.

Jesus Christ says: Take and eat. Mat. 26.
In which sense we ought to understand the ancient Doctors: when they have
said, we offer, we sacrifice, in calling the supper a sacrifice.

S. Augustine writing against Faustus, the 8. Chapter. The Hebrews sacrificing
the brute beasts, did exercise themselves in the prophecy of the sacrifice
which Jesus Christ has offered: And now the Christians in the oblation and
communion of the body of Jesus Christ, do celebrate the memory of the
sacrifice already ended.

Chrysostom in his first tome upon the 8. Chapter of Saint Matthew, in the 16.
homily. For this cause these reverend and salutarie mysteries, which we
celebrate in all the congregation of the Church, are called Eucharistiae,
Wherefore the sacrament of the supper is called Eucharistia.
that is to say: a giving of thanks: for they are the remembrance of many
benefits, and do show the very head of the heavenly love toward us, and
do make us always render thanks unto God.

Psalm. 50.
The Prophet David in the 50. Psalm: Offer unto God thanks giving. etc.

Irenaeus in his 4, book against the heresies. Chap. 32. 33, and 34. He has
willed that we should offer often the gift at the altar, and without
intermission. The altar then is in heaven, for thither our prayers and
oblations are addressed, and directed to the temple (as S. John says in his
Apocalips:) And the temple of God was open, Apoc. 11.
and the tabernacle: For behold (says he) the tabernacle of God, in the
which I do dwell with men.

S. Cyprian in his 2. book of Epistles, the 3. Epistle unto Cecill. We must
not, well-beloved brother, that any man think, We ought not to follow custom
but Christ, which is the verity.
that one ought to follow the custom of some men, which have thought or
judged that we must offer the water only in the Lords cup, we must ask of
those, who^ they have for example. For if in the sacrifice which is Christ, we
must follow none but Christ: truly then we must hear and do that which
Christ has done, and commanded to be done: John. 15.
Inasmuch as he says in his Gospel, if you do whatsoever I command you, I
will call you no more servants, but my friends. And that Jesus Christ ought
to be only heard, the father himself does witness it from heaven, saying:
This is my well-beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. Wherefore if
Christ ought to be only heard, we ought not to regard that, which another
before us shall think good to be done: But that he who is before all (that is
to say) Christ, has done first. For we must not follow the custom of man,
but the verity of god: forasmuch as he says by his Prophet Esaias: They
worship me in vain, Esaias. 29.
teaching doctrines which are but men's precepts. And the Lord himself
repeateth the same in the Gospel, saying: Math. 15.
ye do reject the commandment of God, for to establishe your own tradition.
But yet he has said in another place: Whosoever shall break one of these
least commandments, and teaches men so to do, Math. 5.
he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven. Then if it be not
lawful to break the least of all the commandments of God: how much less
shall it be lawful, to break these so great, so excellent, and so properly
appertayning to the Sacrament of the passion of the Lord, and of our
redemption: Or to change it through the ordinance, and tradition of men, to an
other thing than to that to ye which it has been godly instituted? For if Jesus
Christ be the very souereygne Priest of God the father: and if he has been the
first offered sacrifice to God his father: and has commanded to do this in
remembrance of him, he shall do truly the office of Christ, which shall
follow that which Christ has done. And if he do begin to offer in the Church
to God the father, according as he shall see that Christ him self has
offered: then he shall offer unto God a full and whole sacrifice. Furthermore,
if one keep not that faithfullye, which is spirituallye commanded, the
discipline of all religion and truth is overthrown.

S. Augustine in his book of faith unto Peter. Chap. 16. In that sacrifice
which we do use, there is giving of thanks, and remembrance of the flesh of
Christ which he offered for us, and of his blood which he has shed.

Augustine in his 10. book of the City of God. Chap. 5. The visible sacrament
is the testament: that is to say, the holy sign of the invisible sacrifice.

Chrysostom in the 7. homilye upon the Epistle to the Hebrews. We do offer in
deed, The supper is but a remembrance of the sacrifice.
but that which we do offer, we do it in remembrance of his death: for that
which we do, is done in remembrance of that which has been done: For he
says, do this in remembrance of me: we do not make it any other sacrifice,
as the priest does: But we do always the very same: and for to tell you
better, we do the remembrance of the sacrifice which has been done.

The Apostle unto the Hebrews, Heb. 13.
we do by him offer, the sacrifice of laud always unto God: that is to say,
the fruit of those lips which confess his name.

I beseech you therefore brethren, Romans 12.
by the mercifulness of God, that ye make your bodies a quick sacryfice, holy
and acceptable unto God: which is your reasonable serving of God.

Oseas. 14.
The prophet Oseas, O forgive us all our sins, receive us graciouslye, and
then will we offer thee bullockes of our lips unto thee.

Philip. 4.
S. Paul says, I was filled after that I had received of Epaphroditus, the
which came from you, an odor that smells sweet, a sacrifice acceptable and
pleasant to God.

Lactantius Firmianus in his 6. book the.24. and.25. chapters. Jesus Christ
sayt: I have pleasure in mercy and not in offering. Math. 9. Mat. 12. Oseas.6.
and the 1. of Samuel. 15.

Pope Gregory in his.16. decretall the.7. question. Pope Gregory in his
decretals, adiudgeth him culpable of Idolatry, which shall hear the mass of a
priest, that is a whore monger, or which shall communicate at his Sacraments
and Sacrafices.

Francis Maro, in his suffrages for the dead. He which causes a mass to be
said by an unchaste, or whore master priest, or which is in deadly sin, it
profits nothing, neither to the living, nor to the dead.

The Apostle to the Hebrews, Heb. 10.
the law which has but the shadow of good things to come, If then the
sacrifices commanded of God have no power to take away sins, how shall
those do which God has never commanded Heb. 10.
and not things in their own fashion, can never with the sacrifices which they
offer yearly, make the comers thereunto perfect.

Again, it is impossible that the blood of Oxen and of Goats should take away
sins.

Also, Lo I come to do thy will, O God, etc. By the which will, we are
sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.

Moreover: Heb. 10.
This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, sat him down for ever
on the right hand of God.

Likewise, with one offering has he perfected for ever those that are
sanctified.

Again, Heb. 10.
their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. And where remission of
these things is, Hebr. 9. Jesus Christ is no more offered in sacrifice but once
for all.
there is no more offering for sins.

Also he says not that Jesus Christ does offer him self often, as the hie
priest entered into the holy place every year, with strange blood, for then
must he have often suffered sense the world began. etc.

That there is but two Sacraments in the church of Jesus Christ.
Augustine in his.3. book of the christian doctrine the.9. chapter. 1. Pet. 1.
Galat. 3.
But in this time hereafter that the manifest judgment of our liberty is
revealed, by the resurrection of the Lord: we are not overmuch charged
through heavy operacions, The sacraments are two, Baptism, and the Lords
supper.
and workinges of signs, which we already do understand: But the same Lord
has given by the doctrine of the Apostles, a certain little number in steed
of many, which are easy to do, and good to understand, and most chaste to
keep: As is the Sacrament of baptism: and the celebration of the body and
blood of the Lord. And when every one does use them, being instructed to what
end they serve, he shall acknowledge them, not with a carnal servitude and
bondage, but to honor them in the liberty of the spirit. And as it is a
seruyle infirmytie to follow the letter, and to take the signs for the
things, which are signified by them: so is it an evil error, to interpret
unprofitably the signs. etc.

Augustine writing to Ianuarius in the 118. Epistle. I would that thou
should know, that our Lord Jesus (as he him self says in the Gospel)
has submitted us to an easy yoke, and light burden. Saint Augustine names
but two sacraments.
And therefore he has ordained in the christian church, a few Sacraments in
number, easy to be kept, excellent in significacion: as the Baptism,
consecrated in the name of the Trinity: and the communication of the body and
blood of the Lord. And if there be any other thing commanded in the Scripture.
etc.

Augustine upon S. John in the.80. homelye. The word being adjoined to the
Clement, it shall be made a Sacrament.

How we ought to understand this word Sacrament.

Sacrament, Mystery, Secret, is all one, and is understood for an hid and
unknown thing, the which notwithstanding is revealed at a certain time, when
it pleases the goodness of God. Reed Tob. 12. Daniell. 2. Sapien. 2. 1. Cor.
4. Ephe. 5. Ephesians. 1. Ephesians. 3. Collos. 1.1. Timoth. 3. Apocal. 7.

Of confession to God, and of auricular confession.
Psalm. 32. 1. Par. 16. 2. Par. 20
David says in the.32. psalm: I have acknowledged my sin unto thee: and mine
unrighteousness have I not hid. I said I will confess my sins unto the
Lord, and so thou forgauest the wickedness of my sin.

Psalm. 51.
Again, I acknowledge my faults: and my sin is ever before me. Against thee
only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight.

1. John. 1.
If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

James. 5.
Acknowledge your faults one to an other, and pray one for an other. Eccles. 28.
Ephe. 4. Collos. 3.

If thy brother trespass against thee. etc. Mat. 18.
Read Luke. 17. Deuteronomy. 17. 1. Cor. 5.2. Cor. 13.

Augustine in his 10. book of confessions, the 2. chapter. What have I to do
then with men, that they should hear my confessions? As though they should
heal my griefs. That is a curyous kind of people, to know another man's life,
and slow to correct and amend their own, wherefore do they demand of me to
hear what I am, where they will not hear of thee what they are? And how do
they know when they do hear me, wheather I do speak true, when in deed no
man knows that which is done in the man but the spirit of the man which is in
him. etc.

Chrysostom in the 12. chapter to the Hebrews 3. homily, and in the 4. tome
41. homily. I do not say unto thee that thou accuse thy self openly, nor
before others: But I would that thou should obey the Prophet which says,
Psalm. 32. Confesion to God only.
reuele unto ye Lord thy way: acknowledge then thy sins before God, pronounce
thy unrighteousness with prayer to the true Judge, not with the tongue, but by
the memory of thy conscience: and then finally have hope to have mercy.

And upon the.51. psalm, in the.2. Tome. Confess thy sins, Psalm. 50. Mar. 2.
to the end thou do put them away: If thou art ashamed to tell unto an other
that thou have sinned tell it always unto thy soul. I do not say that thou
should confess thy self unto one, like unto thy self, for to rebuke and
check thee of them: tell them to God, which will heal them. Confession to the
Priest rejected by Chrisostom.
But when thou will not tell them, is God ignorant when thou do them? He is
there present when thou committest them, he knows them very well: will not he
that thou should acknowledge them? Thou wast not ashamed to sin, and art
thou ashamed to confess them? Confess them in this world, that you may have
rest in the other.

Chrysostom in his sermon of penance and confession, the.6. Tome. It is not
necessary to confess it before witnesses: only make the acknowledging in thine
heart, this examynation does not require witnesses, it suffiseth that God only
do see and hear thee.

Chrysostom in the 5. homily of the incomprehensible nature of God, against
the Anomians. I do not call thee before men, for to discover thy sins,
unfold thine own conscience before God, show thy wounds and strypes unto the
Lord who is the Physician, and pray him to remedy it: he it is which does not
check, and which gently heals the poor sick persons.

In the history tripartite in the 9. book and 35. Chapter. It is said that
auricular confession was used at Constantinople, Auricular confession abolished
in Constantinople.
until such time that a woman making as though she would be confessed, was
found that she took that cloak, for to lie with one of the Deacons of the
same Church. Because of which evil fact, Nectarius bishop of the said place, a
man renoumed in holiness, and of great learning, abolished that observance of
confession.

The hystories do declare, Ponti. 183
that there was no law or constitution before the time of Innocent the third,
touching auricular confession.

Chrysostom in his 4. Tome, of Lazarus. I would not that thou should
confess thy self unto a man, who afterward may rebuke or check thee, or
defame thee in telling thy faults: but show thy grief unto God, who is the
good physician. Afterward he brings in God speaking in this manner: I do not
compel thee to come in the open assembly, confess to me only thy sins,
that I may make thee whole.

The Church of Rome does command to confess all our sins, not exceptnig
any. Psalm. 19.
Answer. David says: Who can tell how often he offends: O cleanse thou me
from my secret faults.

Saint Ambrose of the repentance of S. Peter, in his.46. sermon. Mat. 26.
Peter poured forth tears, not praying in voice: I do find that he did weep
and lament, but I do not find what he has said: I do read of his tears,
but I read not of satisfaction.

Chrysostom in the 12. homily of the Cananite. Jesus Christ did heal him
that had the Leprosy, and said unto him: Luke 17.
Go show thy self unto the Priest, and offer that which Moses commanded in
the law, Leuit. 14.
for thy healing.

O thing never heard? How we ought to understand: go and shevve thy self
to the Priest.
the Lord healed the disease, yet nevertheless he did send them to the law
of Moses. Wherefore did he so? For none other cause but that the Jews might
not reprove him as a transgressor of the law.

S. Ambrose in his 3. sermon upon the 119. Psalm. Go and show thy self unto
the Priest: Mar. 2.
who is the true Priest, but he which is the everlasting Priest?

S. Cyprian in his 5. sermon of penitent sinners. The servant cannot pardon
that which is committed against the Lord. Man cannot pardon sins.


Ambrose in his book of Cain and Abel. The sins are pardoned by the word of
God, of the which the Leuice is the expositor, and as an executor.

Chrysostom in his 7. Tome in the homily of repentance. This is the place of
healing, not of judgment: Tell unto God only thy sin, who will give no
punishment, but the remission of sins.

Of the power to bind and unbind, or loose.
Augustine in the 50. homily upon S. John. The keys given to the Church, and
not to the person of Peter.
If the figure of the Church had not been in Saint Peter, the Lord would not
have said unto him, I will give unto thee the keys. For if the same be spoken
to Peter only, the Church has not the keys: if the Church has them, it was
figured in the person of S. Peter.

Augustine in the 11. homily, and in the 124. homily. Mat. 16.
Although it be that all were asked, Peter alone answered: thou art Christ, S.
Peter received the keys with all the Apostles.
and it is said unto him, I will give unto thee the keys, as though the power
to bind and loose, had been given unto him only. But as he answered for all,
so he received the keys with all, as bearing the person of unity. He is then
named alone for all, forasmuch as there is between them unity.

Augustine upon S. John in the 124. treatise. Chapter. 21. The rock is not
said of that name Peter, The rock gives name to Peter, and not Peter to the
rock.
but that name Peter is named of the rock. So Christ is not called Christ of a
christian, but the christian is called christian of Christ. And therefore also
the Lord said: Mat. 16.
upon this rock I will build my Church, because that Peter had said, thou art
Christ the son of the living God: upon this rock then (which thou have
confessed) I will build my church, and the rock was Christ, upon the which
foundation also, Peter himself has been builded. 1. Cor. 3.
For other foundation can no man lay, than that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. The church then which is builded upon Christ, has taken the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, of Christ in Peter, (that is to say) the power
to bind and loose.

Theophilact upon Saint John, the 8. Chapter. It belongs to God only to
pardon sins: John. 8.
therefore, says he, whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin, you
are then servants, for you be all sinners.

Saint Hilarie in his 6. book of the Trinity. The father has revealed unto
Peter, who says, thou art the son of GOD: wherefore the building of the
congregation is upon that rock of confession: Mat. 16.
that faith is the foundation of the church: that faith has the keys of the
kingdom of heaven. Collo. 2. 1. John. 5. Philip. 1. 2. Pet. 1.
All that which this faith shall bind and loose in earth, is also bound and
loosed in heaven. This faith is the gift of the fatherly revelation.

Augustine in his first book of retractation, the 22. Chapter. S. Augustine
recanteth.
In the book where I have before time affirmed in a certain place of S. Peter
the Apostle, that in him, as in the rock, the church is builded: The which
sense also is song of many in the verses of Saint Ambrose, there where he
speaks of the cock. But I do know very well, that oftentimes afterward I
have thus expounded it: Thou art Peter, and upon that rock (that is to say)
the rock, affirming thou art Christ the son of the living God:

Origin upon Saint Matthew, the 2. homily. Do thou think that the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, are only given unto Peter, and that none other of the
blessed shall receive them?

Augustine upon the words of the Lord in S. Matthew, in his 13. sermon. Thou
art then Peter, and upon this rock which thou have confessed, upon this rock
which thou have known, saying: thou art Christ the son of the living God,
I will build my church: Upon me I will build thee, and not me upon thee. For
those men which would be builded upon men, do say, I hold of Paul, and I
hold of Apollos, and I hold of Cephas, that is to say, rock: and the other
which will not be builded upon Peter, Jesus Christ has builded his Church upon
him self, and not upon Saint Peter. 1. Cor. 1.
but upon the rock do say: I hold of Christ. etc.

Jesus Christ is the head of the church, read Ephesians. 4. Colos. 1.2. Reg. 22.

Augustine in his 3. book of Baptism, the 3. Chap. And they are the words of
S. Cyprian in the counsel of Carthage. None of us truly is establyshed
Bishop of Bishops, or none shall compel his companions by cruel tyranny
through necessity to come thereunto.

Gregory writing to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria in the 7. book,.3.
Epistle. Behold how you have written to me: you have put this word of pride in
calling me universal Pope: Gregory vvoulde not be called universal Pope.
but I pray your holiness to call me no more so hereafter. For all that which
is given unto an other above reason, is taken from you: Concerning my self I
do not repute that for honor, wherein I do see the honor of my brethren
weakened. For my honor is that the estate of the universal Church, and of my
brethren, be mainteyned in their strength: If your holiness do call me
universal Pope, you confess that you are not in part of that, which you
attribute and give unto me for the whole.

Of free will of the merits of works, and of justification by faith.
Jesus Christ says, John. 8.
whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. Romans 6. 2. Peter. 2.

All have sinned and have need of Gods mercy. Romans 3.


Also Jesus Christ says, John. 15.
without me ye can do nothing.

We are not apt to think any thing, 2. Cor. 3.
as it were of our selves: but our ability comes of God.

The flesh ryseth against the spirit, Galat. 5.
and the spirit against the flesh: and these things are contrary one to an
other, so that ye cannot do the same things that ye would.

Also he which began a good work in you, Philip. 1.
shall go forth with it until the day of Jesus Christ.

Again, Philip. 2.
it is God which works in you both the will and also the deed, according to
his pleasure.

Romans 7.
Likewise I do not that good thing, which I would, but that evil do I, which
I would not.

Augustine in his Enchiridion to Laurence: Chapter.29. This part of mankind
unto whom God has promised deliverance, and the everlasting kingdom can it
be made better by his works? Man cannot be made better by the merit of his
works.
No, no, for what good can he do which is lost, but as much as he shall be
delivered from his perdition? Can he do by his free will the same? the same
also he cannot do. For man ill using his free will, Free will lost.
did lose him self, and his free will: and as he which kills him self,
whiles he is living, kills him self: but in putting him self to death, he
lives no more, and cannot raise him self up again when he is dead: so when
he has sinned by his free will, because that sin has been victoryous, has
free will ben lost. 2. Pet. 2. John. 8.
For of whom soever a man is ouercom, unto the same he is in bondage. This is
truly the sentence of S. Peter: And because that it is true, I pray you what
may be the liberty of a servant that is in bondage, but when he does take
pleasure to sin? For he serves freely which does willingly the will of the
Lord: and therefore he is free to sin which is the servant of sin: and no
man shall be free to do justly, if first being delivered from sin he do not
begin to be the servant of righteousness. This is the true liberty for the
bond of the work that is well done, and also it is the faithful bondage,
because of the obeying of the commandment. Man is sold under sin.
But from whence shall this liberty to do well come unto the man which is
brought under and sold, but by him who has redeemed him: of whom it is said,
John. 8.
if the son make you free, then are ye free in deed.

Augustine unto Paulinus in the.106. Epistle. Let no man stumble against the
stumling stone, R^^^^. 9.
as in defending subtelly free will and nature: We ought not to defend free
will or nature, as the wise men of this world do.
even as the Philosophers of this world have done with great force, for to be
esteemed, or for to think to great the blessed life, by virtue of their own
proper will: Let such people then take heed to make through wisdom of
words, the cross of Christ vain: and that the same be not unto them to
stumble against the stumbling stone. For when humayne nature abides in that
integryte in the which it has been made, yet it cannot in any wise keep it,
if his creator do not aid him. Forasmuch then as it cannot keep the health
and salvation that it has received, without the grace of God. How can it
receive that which it has lost?

S. Augustine in the 107. Epistle unto Vitalis. If we will in deed defend free
will, let us not fight against that whereof it is free: for he which gaynsayeth
the grace, by the which our will is made free, for to decline from evil, and
for to do good: he would that his free will, be yet bond and captyue.

When man was in honor, he did not understand it: Psalm. 49.
he was compared unto the beasts, and was made like unto them.

Augustine in his book of corrections and grace, the 12. Chapter. Liberty
lost thorovv sin.
Now then forasmuch as that great liberty is lost, through the demeryte of
sin, even so does remain and abide the infirmytie for to be aided and helped
with greater gifts in truth. It has pleased God so, to the end cheifely to
quench the pride of man's presumption: that all flesh (that is to say every
man) should not glory in himself before him. etc. Psalm. 148.


The Counsel Mileuitan in two Canons. Free will weakened to the first man, can

The second Canon says: God does No good cogitation can proceed from us but
by the virtue of God in us.
that if there be any godly cogitation, any deliberation tending to the honor
of God, and any motion of good will, all the same proceeds from God. For by
him we may do some good thing, and without him we can do nothing.

Augustine writing to Valentine of grace and free will. Chap. 18. To the end it
should not seem that men should do any thing by free will: Psalm. 95.
It is said in the.95. psalm: harden not your hearts: Ezec. 18.
And in Ezechiel: cast away from you all your ungodliness, that ye have done:
make you new hearts and a new spirit, and obey to all my commandments:
wherefore will ye dye, O ye house of Israel, says the Lord? Seeing I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies, says the Lord God. Turn you then,
and ye shall live. Let us remember what God says: turn you and you shall
live: unto whom notwithstanding we do say: O God turn us. Let us remember
that God says: Cast from you all your ungodliness, and yet it is he that
justifies the wicked. Let us remember that he says: Make you new hearts
and a new spirit: and yet notwithstanding he himself says, I will give unto
you a new heart and a new spirit. How then, that he which says, God
commands that which man cannot, and gives that which he commands.
make you, says again, I will give unto you? wherefore does he command it,
if he himself do give it? wherefore does he give it, if man ought to do it?
Except he give that which he commands, and aydeth, to the end that he to
whom he does command it, do it. For the will is always free in us, but it is
not always good: for either it is free from righteousness, when it serves to
sin, and then it is evil: or it is free from sin, when it serves to
righteousness, and then it is good. But the grace of God is always good, and
by the same it comes to pass, that man is of a good will, who before was of
an evil and wicked will: by the same also it is brought to pass, that the
same good will which has already begun to be in us, does increase, and is made
so great, that it can accomplish and fulfill the commandments of God, which
it will, and when it will, greatly and perfectly. For to the same serves that
which is written: If thou will, thou shall keep the commandments, in such
sort, that the man which would, and can not yet know that he has a full
desire, and shall pray that so great a will be given unto him, then that
suffices for to accomplish the commandments: for he is in this manner aided,
to do that which is commanded him. For the will is then profitable when we
can: for what profits it to will which we cannot: or not to will, that which
we can?

Saint Augustine in his book of the new canticles. Chap. 8. It is well
declared what free will can do which is not aided: it is sufficient of it
self to do evil, but not to do good, if it be not aided of God. For the
first man received free will rightly: he did set before him (as says the
Scripture) fire and water, unto which thou will (says he) put forth thine
hand. He chose the fire, and left the water: behold ye righteous judge: that
which man has chosen, being at his liberty, the same has he received: he
desired the evil, and the evil followed him: behold again that righteous
Judge which is merciful: For when he saw that man through his ill using of
free will, had damned all his posterity in himself Adam has damned all his
posterity in himself.
as in the root, before that any man did entreat him, came down from
heaven, and has healed mankind in destroying the proud through his
humility. He has led those yt wandered out of their way, into the right way,
and has led the strangers into their country. Let not man's nature then
glory in it self: but glory it self in him which has made it.

Augustine in his book of correction and grace. Chapter 11. Without the grace
of God Adam could not be good, yea though he had free will: wherefore God would
not leave him without his grace, although he left him in his free will, because
that free will is sufficient to do evil: Free will to do evil, but not to
do good.
But to good it is but of small valewe, if it be not aided with the goodness
of the Almighty: which aid if man had not forsaken through his free will, he
had been always good: But he did forsake it, wherefore he was also forsaken.

Augustine of the words of the Apostle in the 13. sermon. All those which are
lead by the spirit of God, are the children of God: wherefore then wylt thou
eleuate thy self, Romans 8.
when thou have heard: If you mortify the deeds of the body by the spirit,
you shall live. For thou wast ready to say, my will can do this, my free will
can do that: what can will do? What can free will do? If the holy spirit
do not govern thee, thou shall fall, if he do not govern thee, thou shall
abide and continue overthrown. How then shall he do the same? By his holy
spirit, when thou have heard the Apostle, saying: all those which are
conducted with the spirit of God, which if it be absent, thou can by no
manner of means do any good: Augustine said that man has free will, but he
does understand it, to do evil.
Thou may do some thing by thy free will, although he does not aid thee,
but that is evil: Unto the same thy will is apt, which is called free, and in
doing evil, is made a damnable servant. When I do say unto thee, that thou
do nothing without the aid of God, I speak nothing of goodness: for
without the aid of God, thou have free will to do evil: although that it be
not properly free.

Augustine against the two Epistles of the Pelagians unto Boniface, 2. book.
Chapter. 8. But to the end that the Lord should answer unto the Pelagians
in time to come, he has not said, without me you can hardly do any thing:
But he has said, without me can ye do nothing. It appertains unto man to
purpose a thing in his heart, John. 15. Pro. 16.
but the answer of the tongue comes of the Lord: they are deceived through
evil understanding, and so much as they do think the preparation of the
heart to appertain unto man (that is to say) to begin good without the aid of
the grace of God: God forbid that the sons of the promise should understand it
so. As where they have heard the Lord saying, without me ye can do nothing,
they do com as though they would vanquysh, saying, behold we can without
thee, prepare the heart: when they have heard the Apostle S. Paul, who says,
2. Cor. 3.
not that we are apt of our selves, to think any thing, as it were of our
selves: but our ability comes of God, as also in ouercomming, vanquishing,
and saying: Behold we are apt of our selves to prepare our heart, and thereby
to think any good thing: And who is he that can prepare the heart to goodness
for a good thought? Catholic faith destroyed by free will.
God forbid that they should understand it so: except it be those which defend
their proud free will in destroying the catholic faith: therefore it is truly
written, it appertains to man to prepare his heart, but the answer of the
tongue comes of the Lord, for because that man does prepare himself, not
always without the aid of God. In like manner it is said: Psalm. 81.
Open thy mouth wide, and I shall fill it. And although yt we cannot open the
mouth, except it be through the aid of him, without whom we can do nothing:
Nevertheless, we do open it through his aid, and through our work: but the
Lord does fill it without our work. By and by after he says, God does many
good things in man, which man does not: But man does none, which God does not,
to the end that man does them.

Augustine upon Saint John in the 49. treatise. Chap. 9. Let no man then
flatter himself: for of himself he is a devil: Man naught of himself.
but of God he is blessed. And what is that to be of himself, but of sin?
Cast away the sin which is of thee: thy righteousness, says he, is of me.
1. Cor. 4.
For what have thou, that thou have not received?

Augustine in his contemplations of the soul with God. Chap. 18. O Lord, I
do confess, as thou have taught me, that I am no other thing, but altogether
vanity, and a shadow of death, and but a dark earth, vain and void, the
which without thy blessing, does not increase and bring forth any fruit, but
confusion, sin, and death. If I have had any good thing, I had it of thee.
All that which I have received is from thee, or I had it of thee. If I do any
thing that is right, that is through thee. Genes. 1. James. 1.
But when I am fallen, I am fallen through my self, and had always remained
in the mire, if thou had not lifted me up. I had been always blind, if thou
had not illuminated me. When I did fall down, I should never have been
raised up again, if thou had not given me thy hand: And afterward also
when thou had raised me up, I should have fallen again, if thou had not
sustained me. I had been oftentimes lost, if thou had not governed me. Even
so, O Lord, even so thy mercy has always gone before me, in delivering me
from all evil, keeping me from those that be past, and in keeping me from
those that be present, and in defending and preserving me from those which are
to come, breaking also in pieces before me the snares of sinners, in taking
away the occasions and the causes: for if thou had not done unto me those
things, I had done all the sins of the world. For O Lord, I do know very
well, that there is no sin that ever man has done, but that an other man
does the same, if the creator of whom man is made, be absent. But thou have
done it so, to the end that I do not that which thou have forbidden, and have
shed out in me thy grace, to the end that I may believe in thee. etc.

Augustine in his.2. book of the remission of sins. Chapter. 18. Men do take
pain to find in our will some goodness, which is ours, and not of God: but I
do not know how they can find it.

Saint Barnarde in the first homily of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary. As
touching good works, it is most certain that no man has them of him self:
Good works proceed not of man.
for if the human nature could not continue in his state, when it was whole
and perfect, how much less can it raise it self now in that it is marred and
corrupted? It is most certain that all things draw to their beginning,
as much as is possible for them.

Augustine unto Vitalis in the 107. Epistle. Answer I pray thee: how says
the Apostle in giving thanks to God the father, which has made us fit to be
of the company of Saints in light, Free will delivers not.
if it be not he which does deliver our free will, but that the free will does
deliver it self? We do render then faulsly thanks unto the father, as if he
did that which he does not: and he has erred which has said that he does
make us fit. Answer how we have our free will, for to deliver us from
evil, and for to do good, and when free will was under the power of
darkness? From which darkness if God has delivered us (as says the
Apostle) truly he has made the will free: wherefore it follows that even as
men are not faithful but by free will: Nevertheless they are made faithful
through ye grace of God, which has delivered free will from the power of
darkness: And so the grace of God is not denied, but is declared to be
verytable and true, although no merytes of men preceede it. And free will is so
defended, that it is affirmed by humylitie, and not overthrown by pride. Then
the grace of God is not geauen in the nature of free will, nor in the law, nor
in doctrine, No grace of God by free will, nor by the law.
as the wicked and perverse Pelagian has set forth. But is geiuen to all the
works through the will of him of whom it is written. O Lord God thou do
separate from thy will the soul that is wylfull: for we have lost free will,
for to love God through the greatness of the first sin. etc. Afterward he
says in that we do believe in God, or in that we do live faithfully, it
lies not then in man's will or running, Romans 9.
but in the mercy of God: nor that we ought to will nor run but because that
he does in us both the will and the running: Let us not say then that the grace
is the love: but let us acknoweledge the grace which does cause the doctrine
and learning to profit, for where that grace is absent: we do see that the
same does hinder and let the learning.

Augustine in his first book against Pelagius and Celestine. Whosoever has
heard and learned of the father comes unto me. The will of man is so aided,
not only in this that it does know what it must do, but having known what it
does: And therefore when the Lord does teach through the grace of his spirit,
he does teach in such sort, that not only every one does see that which he
has learned in the knowledge thereof, but of will he does desire it, and of
work fulfill it.

Augustine in the.3. book upon the words of the Apostle.3. sermon. And in his
book of the spirit and the letter. Chapter. 3. How are these wicked men
proud of free will, before they are free, or of their strength if they are
already free, they do not consider, that in this word of free will is
signified a liberty? For where the spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
If then they be the servants of sin, Through sin the free will is lost.
how do they brag and bost to have free will? For of whom soever a man is
overcome, unto the same is he in bondage: If they are already delivered how do
they boste them selves, 2. Pet. 2.
as it were of their proper works? Are they so free, that they would not be
the servants of him which says, without me ye can do nothing? John. 15.


John. 6.
Jesus says: No man can come unto me, except the father which has sent me,
draw him.

Iam. 1.
Saint James: Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above, and
comes down from the father of lights.

2. Cor. 3.
Saint Paul also: We are not able of our selves to think any thing that is
good, as it were of our selves: but our ability comes of God.

Romans 7. Galat. 5.
Again unto the Romans: I know that in me (that is to say) in my flesh,
dwells no good thing. For to will, is present with me: but I find no mean
to perform that which is good: for I do not that good thing which I would,
but that evil do I which I would not.

1. Cor. 2.
Also the natural man is not able to perceive the things of the spirit of
God, for they are but folishnes unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned.

And 1. Cor. 12. 1. Cor. 12. Esaias. 26.
God works all things in every man.

1. Cor. 12.
Again: No man can say, that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy ghost.

Psalm. 39.
Also David: Every man living is altogether vanity.

And in the 8. Chapter of Genesis: Genes. 8.
The heart of man is inclined to evil even from his youth.

To the Ephesians: Ephesians. 2.
We were naturally the children of wrath, even as well as other.

Gregory upon the 7. psalm, upon the versicle, Anima mea. etc. Forasmuch as
freewill is corrupted in our first father, we have not the power to will well,
if we be not aided with the grace of God.

Saint Hierome in his commentary upon Jeremy. Chapter. 23. Forasmuch as the
heretics have accustomed to promise felicity, and to open to sinners the
kingdom of heaven, saying: thou may imitate the majesty of God, so that
thou be without sin, because thou have received the power of free will, and
the intelligence and understanding of the law, by the which thou may obtain
that which thou would: Even so the said heretics do abuse the poor
simple people through fair words: and chieflye the young women charged with
sins, who are carried here and there with every kind of doctrine, deceyuing
through flattery all those which hear them.

Augustine in the 30. book of his homilies. Homily. 41. We ought not to
accord with them which do establish free will.
Let us not consent unto those which through great pride, go about to eleuate
and extol free will: the which so doing, do bring more evil than good, and
seek nothing but to ruinate and destroy man: but let us consider meekely that
which the Apostle speaks: It is God that works in us, Phil. 2.
both the will and also the deed, even of his free benevolence. Let us give
thanks unto the Lord our redeemer, which without any merit preceding, has
healed us of our wounds and sores, and has reconciled us unto God, and
redeemed us from captivity, and reduced and brought us from darkness into
light: and called us from death to life. etc.

Of merit, and of good works.
2. Ephe. 2.
By grace are ye made safe through faith, and not of your selves: it is the
gift of God, not of works, least any manne should boast himself. For we are
his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God ordained,
that we should walk in them.

S. Ambrose in the first book of Cain and Abel. Chap. 7. It is the deed of a
dull and slow heart, Nothing done by our virtue.
to attribute to his proper virtues, that which is good, or that which he does
obtain of God, and not to the author of grace: but to esteem himself to be
the author of his goodness. There is another kind of sin, yea less, but of
equal arrogancy and pride (that is to say) of those which do not deny God
to be the distributer of goodness: but do think the goodness which comes
unto them, is because of their prudence and wisdom, and that the merits of
all other virtues are given unto them of right. And for that cause it is said
against those which have received the heavenly grace, that they do not esteem
themselves in no wise to be unworthy to have such goodness of God: When the
Lord thy God shall begin to consume his people here in thy presence, Deuteronomy. 9.
say not in thine heart, the Lord has brought me in to possess this land
for my righteousness. etc.

S. Barnard in the first sermon of the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary. Believe
not that thou can through any works merit eternal life, except it be
given thee freely. We can through no works merit eternal life. Job. 14.
For who is that which can make him clean being conceived of filthy seed: but
only he which is altogether clean? And so that which is done, cannot be
undone: But because that God does not impute it, it shall be as though it had
never been done. Which the Prophet considering speaks in this sort, blessed
is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin. Psalm. 32.
But as concerning good works it is most certain that none has them of him
self: for if the humayne nature being yet entire and whole, could not hold
it self in his estate: how much less can it raise it self, when it is
already corrupted? But we do know very well concerning this eternal life,
Romans 8.
that the afflictions of this life, are not worthy of the glory that shall be
showed unto us: Yea when man shall suffer them all together. For man's merits,
are not such, as by them eternal life should of right be due unto them, or
that God does injury and wrong unto some men, if he do not give it: For
although I should not say that all merits are the gifts of God, in so much as
man is more bound unto God for those merytes, then God is unto man: yet what
are all the merits, in respect of so great glory?

S. Barnarde of free will. What have thou that thou have not received? art thou
created? art thou healed? art thou saved? We received al things of God.
which of them have thou of thy self? which of them is not impossible for
free will? thou could not create thy self when thou wast not made: nor
justify thy self, when thou waste a sinner. etc.

Again in the same book: But if that will upon which all merits do depend,
was not in Saint Paul, by what means did he presume, that ye crown should
be kept for him, which he calls the crown of righteousness? But it is,
because that which is promised thankfully, is of right demanded as a thing
due. Finallye he says: 2. Tim. 1.
I know him in whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is able to
keep that which I have committed to his keeping. He does call the promise of
God the thing kept: and therefore he has believed him which has promised it:
confidently he does ask again the promise, the promise (I say) done through
mercy, but the which ought now to be restored through righteousness. The
crown then which Saint Paul has striued for, is the crown of
righteousness: but it is of Gods righteousness, and not of his. This is
truly a just thing, that he does restore that which he has said: but he
owes that which he has promised, and that is the righteousness of the
which the Apostle did presume, even the promise of God.

S. Barnarde upon the Canticles, sermon. 47. Wherefore is that? That is to the
end it do try and prove it self more strong, to be full of grace, when it
does attrybute all to the grace, that is the beginning and the end: otherwise
how shall it be full of grace, if it had any thing which was not of the grace?
Grace cannot be where merit has taken place.
There is no place where grace shall enter, where merit already has taken
place. Now then the full confession of grace, does signify the fullness of
the same grace in the soul of the confessor: For if there be any thing of
itself, forasmuch as it is there, it is necessary that grace does give place
unto it: All that which thou imputest unto merit, is taken away from grace: I
will none of the merit which puts out grace, Grace does justify us freely.
I am afraid of all that which is of my self, which does make me to be to my
self, if it be not that peradventure rather it should be I which causes me to
be to my self. Grace does make me justified freely, John. 15.
and so does deliver me from the servitude and bondage of sin. Ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you, and I have not found thy merytes for to
chose thee: but I have prevented thee: even so then I have espoused and married
thee in faith, Oseas. 2.
and not by the works of the law. I have joined thee in righteousness, but
in the righteousness which is through faith, and not of the law: It rests
that you judge right judgment, between thee and me, that is to say, the
judgment in the which I have fianced thee, where it is manifested that thy
merit has not been the mean, but only my pleasure. For behold the
judgment, that thou do not exalt thy merit, that thou do not prefer the
works of the law: that thou do not prefer the charge of the heat of the
day: But that thou do know rather to have all thy hope and trust in faith,
in mercy, and kyndenesse.

Augustine of the predestination of Saints. Man's merits shall keep silence
here, which were lost in Adam, and the grace of God shall reygne as it reigned
by Jesus Christ.

Saint Augustine upon the 139. Psalm. The Saints do attribute nothing to
their merits, but all to the mercy of God.

Augustine in the 2. Quinquagesima. Psalm. 88. When man does see and perceive
that all yt goodness that he has he has it not of himself, but of his God: he
does see yt all that which is praised in him, is not of his merits, but of the
mercy of God.

Chrysostom upon Genesis. Homily. 33. All our works which do follow the
thankful calling of God, We are indebted unto God with all our works.
are as debtes which we do render unto him: but his benefits are of grace,
benevolence, and pure liberality.

S. Hilarie upon S. Matthew, in the 20. Canon, upon this place, called the
laborers. Truly no hyre is not of gift, for it is due for the work. But God
has given unto all men grace freelye, in justification of faith.

Augustine in his Quinquagesima psalm. 137. I do not say unto the Lord that
he should d^^pise the work of my hands: We ought not to esteem our works.
It is very true, that I do seek the Lord with my hands, and am not
deceived: but I do not esteem the works of my hands, for I do fear that
if God behold them, that he should find more sin then merit. This only do
I say, pray, and desire that he do not despise the work of his hands. O
Lord then see and behold thy work in me, and not mine: for if thou do see
mine, thou wylt condemn it, if thou see thine thou wylt reward and crown
it, and in deed all the good works which I have, are come from thee.

S. Barnard upon the canticles sermon. 61. Safety in the vvounds of our Lord.
Where shall those that are weak find true rest and saftye but in the wounds
of our savior? I do dwell there so much the more safely, for that he is
puyssant to save. The world is nigh unto me, to trouble me, my body does
molest and griue me, the devil also lies in wayght to catch me: I will not
fall because that I am stayed upon a sure rock. If I have grievously sinned, my
conscience is troubled, but it shall not be confounded, when I shall remember
the wounds of the Lord. etc. Afterward he concludes, saying, my merit is
the mercy of the Lord, I am not poor of merytes, whilst that the Lord is
rich in mercy. Our merit is of the mercy of the Lord.
So much the more as the mercyes of ye Lord are great: so much the more do I
abound in merits. Shall I sing my righteousness O Lord? I will remember thine
only righteousness, for the same is mine, forasmuch as thou have been made
for me the righteousness of God thy father. 1. Cor. 1.


S. Barnarde upon the psalm: Who so dwells. etc. sermon. 15. psalm. 91.
Behold all the merytes of man, is to put all his hope and trust in him which
does save man wholly.

Augustine upon the.88. psalm, in his first treatise. I might despair because
of my great sin, The son of God has taken our proper flesh, vvherby we
have firm assurance.
and through my infinite negligences, if the son of God had not taken our
flesh. Afterward he says: all my hope, all the assurance of my confidence,
is put in his precious blood, the which has been shed for us, and for our
salvation. In him my poor heart does take breath. And trusting altogether in
him, I desire to come unto thee O father, having not my righteousness, but
that of thy son Jesus Christ.

Augustine writing unto Boniface the.3. book. Chapter. 5. All the faithful
people which do sigh and groan under the burden of their corruptible flesh,
Jesus Christ has satisfied for our sins.
and enclosed with this present life, have this only hope, that we have a
mediator (to say Jesus Christ) which has satisfied for our sins.

Augustine upon the.32. psalm. and the.109. psalm. The Lord is faithful who
made him self debtor unto us, not in taking any thing of us, but in promising
us all things freely.

Augustine in the first Quinquagesima. psalm. 31. The proud rejoice in their
own strength.
O what are you which secretly do take pleasure or delight in your own
virtue? O proud infidells which do rejoice your selves in your strengthes? If
you do believe hereafter in him which does justify the wicked, your faith
shall be compted for righteousness: Rejoice you righteous in God, and be merry:
and wherefore? Because you are righteous: and whereof are ye righteous? The
same is not through your merytes, but through the grace of God: whereof are you
righteous? But for because he has justified you by faith, and knowledge, the
which without your merytes, he has given unto you?

Also in the same book. Unto him says the Apostle, which does the works,
the higher is not imputed according to grace, To boast upon merits is to be
separate from grace.
but according to the debt: If thou will separate thy self from grace, boste
thy self of thy merytes: Truly God does know very well what thou art, and
what thing he ought to give unto every one. And he which does not good
works, and which after many evils that he has done believes in God, who
justifies the sinner, which believes in him his faith will justify him:
Even as David says: Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man whom the Lord accepts, and justifies without works:
and how is he justified? But forasmuch as he receives of God righteousness:
and what righteousness? the righteousness of faith the which God gives
without any good works preceding, but not without good works following
after: for righteousness of faith profits not, James. 2.
if after the faith received man does not exercise him self in all good works.

In the same. I do not account thy works good, Good works are the fruit of
faith.
what soever they be, if they do not proceed from the good root of faith.

In the same. God does not give unto thee the pain and punishment which thou
have well deserved: but he does give unto thee the grace not deserved nor due.
He owes unto thee punishment, and he gives unto thee mercy, and does pardon
thee. Begin then to be in faith through the forgiveness of thy sins.

Gregory upon Ezechiel, the first book, homily. 7. Romans 8.
Then our just advocate does defend us for just at the judgment, because that
we should acknowledge our selves, and accuse our selves as unjust: Let us not
then trust in our weepings, nor in our works, but in the allegation of our
advocate.

Augustine in his book of meditations. Chap. 14. John. 17.
This is life eternal, that they know thee to be the only very God, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ, through a right faith, and through works worthy
of faith. For thy inestimable love exceeds all knowledge, the which thou have
showed unto us through thy piety and goodness, unto us which are unworthy.
For thy son our God in no sort took the Angels: Heb. 2.
but he took the seed of Abraham, being made like in all things unto us,
without sin. This is verily all my hope, and all my trust: for the portion of
every one of us is to ye same Jesus Christ our Lord, that is to say, Our
proper flesh and our proper blud is in Jesus Christ, and there where he does
reygne, we do reygne with him.
the flesh and the blood, and so where my portion does reygne, there I do
believe that I shall reygne: there where my flesh is glorified, there I do
know my self to be glorified: there where my blood does bear rule, there I
do know that I shall rule. Although I be a sinner, yet I do not distrust of
the communication of this grace: and if my sins do hinder or let it, my
substance does require and ask it. And if my offenses do shut me out, the
communion of the nature does not drive me back: but our Lord God is meek and
lowly, Math. 11.
and loves his flesh and his members, and his bowels in himself, which is
God, and in Jesus Christ our Lord, most meek and loving and gentle, in whom
we are raised up, and are already ascended into heaven, and already sitting in
the celestial place. Our flesh does love us, and we have in him the
prerogative of our blood: Ephesians. 5.
for we are his members and his flesh, and finally he is our head, of whom
all the body does depend (as it is written) bone of my bones, Genes. 2.
and flesh of my flesh, and they shall be two in one flesh: this mystery
here is great, I say in Christ and in the congregation, says the Apostle.

Augustine in his manuel. Chap. 22. The death of Jesus Christ is our merit.
All my trust and hope is in the death of my Lord: his death is my merit, my
refuge, my health, my life, and my resurrection: my merit is the mercy of God.
I am not poor of merit, so long as the Lord of mercy shall be in being: and
if the mercies of the Lord are great, I am great in merits: the more puissant
he is for to save, so much the more am I assured.

Augustine in his manuel. Chap. 23. I have committed a great sin, and do
feel my self culpable of a great many of sins, and yet I will not despair.
For where sins have abounded, grace has more abounded. He which hops not
to have pardon of his sins, he denies that God is merciful: he does great
injury unto God, which distrusteth of his mercy, as much as he can, he denies
that God has love, truth, and strength, in which things consists all my
hope, that is, in the love that he has toward me, to make me his adoptiue
son, in the verity of his promise, and in the puissaunce of his redemption.
Let my foolish thought now think, and murmr as long as it will, saying:
but what art thou? and what is this glory? and by what merits think thou
to have it? Then I do answer: in good faith I do know very well unto whom
I submit my self, and that through great love he has made me his adoptiue
son, and is true in his promises, and of power to fulfill them, and it is
lawful for him to do all that pleases him. I cannot then be afraid of the
multitude of my sins, if I do remember the Lords death.

S. Ambrose in the book of Jacob. and of blessed life. Even as Jacob having
not of his meat the eldershippe, Genes. 27.
hid him self under the habit of his brother, and apparayled him self with
his coat, the which did give a most sweet savor: and in this manner
presented him self unto his father, to receive to his profit the blessing
under the person of another: so it is necessary that we do cloth our selves,
and put on the righteousness of Jesus Christ through faith, and that we do
hide our selves under the divine purite of our eldest brother, if we will be
accepted and taken for righteous before God: And truly the same is the true
verytie: for if we do appear before God, not clothed with the righteousness
of Jesus Christ, without doubt we shall be judged worthy of eternal damnation.

S. Ambrose upon the.4. chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. Psalm. 32. Romans
4.
They are manifestly blessed, unto whom without labor, or without any works
iniquities and wickedness are pardoned and the sins covered, not requiring
of them any works of penance, but that they do believe only.

Ambrose upon the 3. Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans. Romans 3.
They are justified freelye through his grace, because that not doing any
thing, and not rendering the like, by only faith, they are justified through
the gift of God.

Augustine in his book of 50. homilies. Homily. 14. The Lord will give unto me
the crown as a just and righteous judge. 2. Tim. 4.
For he which beholds, after that he has beheld the work, cannot deny the
reward. I have fought a good fight, that is a work: I have fulfilled my
course, that is a work: I have kept the faith, that is a work: There
remains for me the crown of righteousness, that is the reward. But thou
do nothing to the reward, and in the work thou have not wrought alone:
thou have the crown of him, but the work is of thee: and yet it is not but
through the aid of him. I have fought, I have ended and fulfilled my course,
I have kept the faith. He does reward the goodness, but what goodness? Such
as he has given. Has not he given unto thee to fight a good fight? If he has
not given it, what is that that thou say in another place: 1. Cor. 15. 2.
Tim. 2.
I have labored more abundantly than they all: yet not I, but the grace of God
which is in me? In that then that he has aided thee, and that he has given
unto thee, thou have fought a good fight, and have fulfilled thy course, and
have kept the faith. Pardon me (Apostle) I do know nothing of thine own,
but the evils. Pardon me (Apostle) we do speak it because yt thou have taught
it: I do hear him which confesses himself, and I do not find that he is
unthankful. Truly in all that thou art instructed of thy self, we can know
nothing but evil. Then when God does crown thy merits, he crowns nothing
but his gifts, to the end, that none be waxen proud of such faith, or of
such purity in good works through his free will.

Augustine upon the words of the Apostle sermon.15. Thou shall do the work
of God, not only because thou art a man, but also because thou art just and
righteous: for it is better to be righteous then to be a man: if God has made
thee a man, and that thou make thy self righteous, He which makes him
self righteous, does more than if he made himself a man.
thou do a better thing then God has done: But God has made thee without
thy self, for thou have given no consent unto God for to make thee: how
should thou consent, which wast not then borne? He then which has made thee
without thy self, does he not justify thee without thy self? He has then
made him which gives not his consent: but he justifies him which gives
thereunto his will and consent, yet he does justify thee, to the end it
should not be thine own righteousness, and that thou should not turn thy
self to hurt, detryment, and unto filthynesse: And should be found in him,
Phil. 3.
not having thy own righteousness, which is by the law: but that which is of
God, through the faith of Jesus Christ, (that is to say) the righteousness of
faith, for to know it, and also to know the virtue of his resurrection, and
the fellowshippe of his afflictions, and that same virtue, shall be the
fellowshippe of the afflictions of Christ that shall be thy virtue.

Augustine in the first Quinquagesima: in the Prologue of the.31. psalm. Who be
those that are blessed? Are not those they in whom God did find no sin? No,
for he did find it in all men, Psalm. 32.
for all have sinned and are destitute of the glory of God. Romans 3.
If then sin be found in all, it follows that none are found blessed, Romans
4.
but those whose sins are pardoned: Therefore has he even so praised the
same. Abraham believed God and it was rekened unto him for righteousness: but
unto him which does the work, that is to say which does presume of works, and
which by the merit of the same says, that the grace of faith is given unto
him: The reward is not imputed according to the grace, but according to the
debt. What is this but that our reward is called grace? if that be grace, If
GOD should reward our works, he should find them altogether wicked, and
would condemn us.
it is given freely? What is this that is given freely? It is that thou have
done no good thing, and yet the forgiveness of thy sins, is given unto thee,
if thy works be considered, they shall be found all wicked and evil: if God
should render that which is due to such works, truly he should condemn
them: God does not render unto thee the punishment due, but he does give thee
grace, which is not due unto thee.

Augustine in the first Quinquagesima, upon the.31. psalm: verse: Lord I have
hoped in thee. O Lord deliver me, and redeem me through thy righteousness.
For if thou do consider my righteousness, thou condemnest me, deliver me
through thy righteousness: for the righteousness of God is ours, when it is
given us: Gods righteousness given us is ours.
but it is called the righteousness of God, to the end that man do not
esteem or think to have righteousness of him self. For as the Apostle
says, unto him which believes in him, which justifies the infidel or
unbelieving man: What is he that justifies the infidel? He which makes the
infidel righteous. What is he that is not saved freely? Is it he unto whom
the savior does find nothing for to crown him, but for to condemn him. He
does not find the merytes of goodness, but he finds the merits of evil:
if he do as most truly it is purposed and set forth by the rule of the law,
Man has no righteousness.
the sinner ought to be damned: if he do after that rule, whom shall he
deliver? For he has found them all sinners: he is come alone without sin,
who has found us sinners. The same the Apostle speaks, saying: all men have
sinned and are destitute of the glory of God, Romans 3.
he does deliver thee and not thou thy self, because thou can not deliver
thy self: whereof do thou vaunte and boste thy self? Wherefore do thou
presume of the law, and of righteousness? Do thou not see that which shall
heal thee inwardly, Romans 7.
is against thee? Do thou not hear the rebel and the confesser, and him
which desires aid and help in the battle, saying: O wreatched man that I
am, who shall deliver me from this body of death, the grace of God through our
Lord Jesus Christ: wherefore ye grace because that it is given freely without
merytes preceding, but the benefits of God have prevented it.

S. Ambrose upon the Epistle unto the Romans chapter. 34. Because that without
the works of the law, faith is reputed for righteousness, unto him which
believes, that is to say unto the gentill which believes in Christ, as it was
reputed unto Abraham: how then do the Jews think to be justified by the
works of the law, of the justification of Abraham: Abraham justified thorovv
faith only before the law.
seeing Abraham to be justified, not through the works of the law, but only
through faith? The law then takes no place, when the infidel is justified
only through faith, before God: according to the purpose of the grace of God.
Only faith does save us.
Even so ought it to be ordained, to the end that the law do cease and that
we demand only faith, of the grace of God for our health and salvation. As
also David says, confirming the same, by the example of the Prophet: Psalm. 32.
The blessedness of man, is in him, unto whom God, imputes righteousness
without works. He calls those blessed, unto whom God has confirmed the
same, yt without labor and without any observations, through faith only they
are justified with God: he declares then the blessedness of the time, in
which Christ was borne: as also the Lord did, saying: Mat. 13.
That many Prophets and just men have desired to see those things which ye
see, and have not seen them: and to hear those things which ye hear, and
have not heard them.

Augustine upon the words of the Lord in the mountain. Sermon. 7. O thou
Christian take heed, take heed (I say) of pride: for although that thou be a
follower of the Saints, yet repute always every thing to the grace of God:
for the grace of God has done it in thee, and not thy merit which has had
any abiding in thee. etc.

Augustine upon the Apostles words. Ser. 15. Ephe. 2.
By grace are ye made safe through faith, and not of your selves: but it is
the gift of God, not of works, least peradventure thou do say: I have
deserved it, and therefore I have received it: do not think that thou have
received it in deserving it, thou which should not deserve it, if thou did
not receive it. Grace has gone before thy merit, grace comes not of merit,
but merit comes of grace: God gives his grace freely, because he can find
nothing for to save.
for if thou have bought grace through thy merit, then thou have not received
it freely? thou will save the^ (says he) freely, thou do find nothing in
the^, for to save the^, and yet nevertheless thou do save them. Thou give
freely, thou sauest frelye, thou precedest all merits, to the end that
merits do follow thy gifts: thou give altogether freely, for thou find
nothing for to save, but many things to condemn.

Augustine upon the words of the Lord in the mountain. Sermon. 7. In this
time the remnant have been saved through the election of grace. But if it be
through grace (says he) then it is not through works: that is to say, do
not now eleuate nor exalt thy self upon thy merit, otherwise grace shall be
no more grace. For if thou presumest upon thy works, then the reward is
given thee, and grace is not given thee: but if it be grace, it is then given
freely: 2. Cor. 11.
I do now demand of thee thou sinner, do thou believe in Christ? I do
believe. And what do thou believe? that thy sins generally may be
pardoned through him freely. Thou have that that thou have believed. O grace
thankfullye given: The righteous cannot abide in righteousness if he be not
helped.
Thou righteous person what do thou believe? That thou can not keep
without God his righteousness. Then impute unto faith all that of which thou
art righteous, and in yt thou art a sinner, impute it to thy infidelity. Be
thou thine own accuser, and he shall be thy forgiuer. But every crime, all
evil, and all sin comes of our negligence, and all virtue and holiness
is of the indulgence of God.

Augustine upon the 43. psalm, upon the verse, And redeem us for thy names
sake. That is to say freely, because of thy name, not for my merit,
forasmuch as thou have vouchsafed to do it, because that it pleased thee to
do it, not that I am worthy that thou do it. For in as much as we have not
forgotten thee, and that our heart is not retired and plucked back from thee.
And that we have not stretched out our hands unto another God: how have we
power to do the same? but through thy aid, but through thy word, speaking
inwardlye and exhorting us: and thereby also thou do not leave of, or cease
to help and aid us: of whom we have the power. Then be it that we are
pacient in tribulation, or be it that we be joyful in prosperity, redeem us
not through our merit, but because of thy holy name.

S. Hilarie upon S. Matthew, in the 9. Canon. The same moved the Scribes that
sin should be pardoned by a man, Math. 9.
for they regarded and beheld nothing in Jesus Christ but manhood, and that
the law could not release that which was pardoned of him, for only faith
justifies: Romans 3.
and afterward the Lord beheld inwardly their murmuring and said that it
was easy for the son of man to pardon sins in earth: He which does pardon
sins is god
but nevertheless none can pardon sins but God only: wherefore he which
does pardon them is God, for none does pardon but God.

Augustine upon the words of the Apostle. Sermon. 2. By grace are we made
safe through faith and not of our selves, Ephe. 2.
but it is the gift of God. Truly there are men that are unthankful to
grace, which do attrybute much to the poor and wounded nature: It is true
that when man was made that he received great force of free will, Free will
lost by sin.
but he lost it in committing sin, he faynted in death, and was made feeble.
etc.

Again in the same Sermon. We are very much constrained to complain of our
brethren which gainsay and speak against the grace of God, not against the
secret, but against the clear and manifest grace, he is to pardon the Jews:
but what shall be done to the christians? Wherefore are they enemies of yt grace
of Christ? Wherefore do they presume of them selves? Wherefore are they
unthankful? For wherefore is Christ come? Was not nature here? Was not
nature she which has deceived you in praising? Gala. 2.
was not she the law? But the Apostle says if righteousness came by the
law, If the strength of our nature could justify us, then Christ dyed in
vain. Romans 10.
it follows then that Christ dyed in vain: That which the Apostle said of
the law unto the Jews, the same say we of nature unto those here. Then if
righteousness is by nature, Christ died in vain. The same then which was
said to the Jews, we see in those here. They have a fervent mind to
Godwarde, but not according to knowledge. For they, being ignorant of the
righteousness of God, and going about to establishe their own righteousness,
have not been obedient to the righteousness of God. My brethren bear with me,
where you shall find such, do not conceal nor hyde them. Let not perverse
and wicked mercy be in you, where you shall find such, in no case hide them:
rebuke those that speak against it, and those that do resist the same, bring
them unto us.

Augustine upon the Apostles words. Ser. 11. He has made us, Psalm. 100.
and not we our selves. The holy spirit has foreseen that some shall say,
that God has made them men. But that they should make themselves righteous,
he has foreseen them, he has admonished and warned them, and has called
them back again from that pride, saying: That it is he that has made us, and
not we our selves. For to what purpose has he added, and not we our selves, in
as much as it suffices to say, that it is he that has made us. What is the
same? But that he would admonish us of that doing, of which men say, that
we are made of our selves (that is to say) that we have been righteous, we are
made righteous of our free will: when we were created, we received free will:
then where we are righteous, we do the same of our free will. Wherefore do we
yet invoke and call upon God, yt he do make us righteous, in as much as we
have ye power of our selves to make our selves righteous? Gene. 2.
Behold, behold him that has made us both righteous and unrighteous, and not
we our selves. If we have power to justify our selves, we need not pray
unto God to justify and make us clean.
The first man was created of nature without fault, without vices, he was
created right. But that which he did, is most evident, that in falling from the
hand of the potter, he was broken. Afterward he says: Then God did show unto
man how much worth fre will may be without God, we have proved how auayleable
it is without God: therefore have we been made miserable, because that we have
proved what power we have without God. Behold man was made good, and through
free will he was made evil. Then when shall the wicked man be a good man, in
forsaking God through free will. He being good, could not keep himself good.
Now he being evil, can he make himself good? When he was good, he could
not keep himself good. And when he is evil, he says, I do make my self
good. What do thou being evil, when thou art lost being good, except that
he which continues always good, do not repair and amend thee?

Augustine writing unto Paulinus. 106. Epistle. What is he which shall separate
us from that mass or burden of perdition, and from that fight, but only he
which is come to save that which was lost? Mat. 18. Luke 19.
Of whom also the Apostle being asked, say: who is he that does judge or
discern thee? where if man say, it is my faith, it is my will, it is my good
work: It may be answered him again: 1. Cor. 4.
and what have thou that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why
reioycest thou as though thou had not received it? And yet nevertheless all
this is said, not that man should rejoice: but he that rejoices, 1. Cor. 1.
2. Cor. 10. Ierem. 9.
should rejoice in the Lord, and not of works, to the end that none do
exalte himself: not that good works are frustrate through that faithful
cogitation. How is it that God will reward every man according to his deeds?
Romans 2. Psalm. 62. Mat. 16.
And yt unto every man which does good, shall be rendered praise, Apoca. 22.
Galat. 5. Romans 5.
honor and peace: but because that works are of grace and not grace of works:
for faith which works by love is nothing worth, if the love of God be not
spread abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost, Romans 12. Ephe. 4. 1. Cor. 12.
which is given unto us: yea we have not that faith, if God do not deal to
every man the measure of faith. etc.

Augustine writing to Valentin 46. Epistle. Iam. 1.
Every good gift and every perfect is from above, and comes down from the
father of lights: and let no man say that the grace of God is given unto him
either by the merits of works, or by the merit of his prayer, or by the
merits of his faith: And that he do not esteem that to be true, The grace of
God not given unto us by our works.
which the Heritickes say, that the grace of God is given unto us according to
our merits, the which is altogether false: But the grace and mercy of God
does convert man, of whom the Psalmist says. Psalm. 59.
The mercy of my God shall go before me, to the end that he that is an
infidel be justified, that is to say, that of an infidel he be made a
righteous man: and that he do begin to have good merits, the which God shall
crown when the world shall be judged.

Augustine in his book of the true definition of faith. There is neither Saint
nor righteous man which is without sin, There is no Saint which is without
sin.
and yet nevertheless he leaves not of nor cease therefore to be holy and
just, inasmuche as through affection he holds sanctification: Psalm. 143.
Job. 9.
for we are not holy through the force and strength of man's nature: but we do
obtain sanctification through the grace of God, which does aid and help
our purpose. And therefore all the Saints truly do declare them selves to be
sinners, for truly they have enough for to lament and bewail. And although
that their consciences do not rebuk them, yet they have to lament, because of
the nobility and inconstancy of nature subject to preuarication.

S. Jerome against the Pelagians. A certain man of our writers has very well
affirmed, the Philosophers to be the Patriarchs of Heriticks, and to have
defiled the purity of the Church through perverse doctrine, insomuch as that
they do not know that, which they speak of man's fragilitie or weakness.
Whereof should earth and ashes bost them selves? In as much cheifely as of them
the Apostle speaks, Romans 7.
saying: I see another law in my members. etc. And again, I do not that good
thing, which I would, but that evil do I, which I would not. If he do not
that which he would, how can that be true, which is said, that man may be
without sin if he will? By what reason may he be that which he will, The end
of virtue is but a beginning.
when the Apostle affirms that he cannot accomplish and fulfill that which
he desires? When I shall think my self to be come to the end of virtues,
then shall I but begin: the only perfection of men is to acknowledge them
selves imperfect.

Chrysostom in his imperfect work. Chapter. 6. If every one do consider the
motions, or mouinges of his flesh, he shall be found to do no goodness: for
all goodness is accomplished of us, in gainesaying and speaking against our
selves, because that the nature of the flesh is contrary to goodness. Galat.
5.


S. Jerome against the Pelagians first book. Then are we righteous when we
do confess our selves to be sinners, Our righteousness is only of the mercy
of God.
and our righteousness is not of our own proper mertie, but consists in the
mercy of God: for the Scripture says, the righteous man is an accuser of him
self, in the beginning of the word.

S. Barnard in his.5. Sermon of dedication Who shall be saved? Luke 18.
Say the Apostles to the Savior? And he said unto them, things which are
impossible with men, are possible with God. This is all our trust, this is all
our consolation, this is all the reason of our hope: but we which are already
certain and sure of the possibility, what do we determine of the will? Who
knows whither he be worthy of love or hatred? Romans 11. Esaias. 40. 1. Cor. 2.
Sap. 9. It behooves that faith do aid our debilitie.
Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who was his counselor? Now it is
here necessary for us that faith do help us: It behooves here that the truth
do aid us, insomuche as that which is hid from us in the heart of the father,
be reveled unto us by his holy spirit: and that his spirit in giving
witness, does persuade our spirits and minds that we are the children of
God, that he does persuade us in calling, in justifying us freely through
faith. etc.

Gregory in his morales.22. book. 6. Chapter. There are also some men, who in
doing any good thing, do forget incontinently their sins, and do fasten the
eye of the heart in the consideration of the good works that they do, and
thereby do esteem and think themselves already holy: wherefore among ye
goodness that they do, they take away ye remembrance of their faults: We are
debtors to God.
in the which peradventure they are yet still wrapped: who if they did consider
diligently the rigours of the Judge, they would more fear their evils, then
they would rejoice of their imperfect goodness: They ought to regard rather
that they are debtors of things yt they ought to do, that they have not paid
by their good works the part already due. And so after the manner of the
trauayler, we ought by no manner of means to regard or mark what way we have
walked in, but what way we have yet to walk in: we ought then rather to behold
the goodness which we have not yet done, then those of which we do rejoice
our selves to have already done: and the elect are often times tempted with
such vices, and oftentimes it is risen in their hearts to bring them in
remembrance of all the goodness that they have done, and to rejoice
themselves of the band of assurance. But if they be truly elected, they will
turn away their eyes from thinking of the same, wherein they do please
themselves, and keep back in them all the joy of the goodness which is
already done, and be sorry for those which they know to be by no manner of
means done. They do esteem themselves unworthy, and they only do not see
their goodness which are of all men seen by good example. etc.

Of justification of Faith.
Augustine in the first Quinquagesima, in the prologue of the 31. psalm. TRuly
the Apostle Saint James in Lam. 2.
his Epistles has praised the works of Abraham, against those which would not
do any good, and which presume them selves of faith: of which Abraham, Saint
Paul has praised his faith, and yet the Apostles are not contrary the one to
the other: S. Paul and S. James are not contrary the one to the other.
but he speaks of the work which is known to all men (that is to say) that
Abraham did offer his son unto God, for to do sacrifice. That is a great
work, but that is of faith. I do praise the buylding of the work made upon
the foundation, but I do behold the foundation of faith. I do praise the
fruit of the good and just work, but I acknowledge the root in faith. For if
Abraham did those things without right faith, nothing would have profited him,
whatsoever work it had been. Furthermore, if Abraham did keep so the faith,
that when God commanded him to offer his son for sacrifice, he thought in
himself, I will not do it, and yet nevertheless I do believe that God will
deliver me, although that I do contemn and despise his commandments. Faith
without works should be dead, and should abide as a dry root, barren, and
without fruit. What then? we ought not to prefer works before faith: that
is to say, nothing is said to be well done before faith: although that they
are esteemed of men praise worthy, yet notwithstanding they are vain. And me
thinks that they are like unto great strengths, and unto the easy course out
of the way. Let none then esteem his works. etc. Afterward he says: Let
us not then object the Apostle Saint James to Paul, but the same Paul to
himself, and let us say unto him by this word: thou do suffer us somewhat
to sin without punishment, when thou say: we do esteem man to be
justified through faith without works: but thou will say to the same, Romans
4. Galat. 5.
faith works by love. How am I so much assured by the same, if I do nothing?
yea, I shall not be counted by the same to have trust in the good faith, if I
do not work by love. O Apostle I do hear thee, will thou here praise unto
me faith without works? But love is the work of faith, which love cannot be
idle, that it do forsake all evil, and do all the good Love cannot be idle,
for it forsakes evil, and does good.
that it can. And what makes love? Declyne from evil and do good. Praysest
thou then faith without works? 1. Cor. 13.
And thou say in another place: If I had all faith, so that I could move
mountains out of their places, and yet had not love, I were nothing: then if
faith do not profit any without love, and that there where love shall be, it
behooves that it work (for faith works by love) how then is man justified
without works? The Apostle answers: O thou man, therefore have I said this
thing unto thee, that thou do not presume of thy works, and that thou do not
think to have received the grace of faith through the merit of thy works:
Presume not then of works before faith, acknowledge that faith has found
thee a sinner, and if the faith which has found thee a sinner, has made thee
righteous, then it does find him an infidel which it has made righteous.
Romans 4.
The faith (says he) is counted for righteousness unto him, which believes
on him that justifies the ungodly.

Augustine in his book of the 83. questions. 76. Chapter. If any man do
depart out of this life immediately after yt he has believed the justification
of faith abides with him: and comes not to him by any works precedent, or
going before (for it is not given through merit but through grace nor through
works following, because that he is not permitted to be in this life:) and
therefore the two sentences of the two Apostles, Paul and James, Romans 4. Iame.
2. The meaning of S. Paul, and of S. James, and how we ought to understand
them.
are not contrary the one to the other: For the one says that man is justified
through faith without works: And the other says that faith is dead without
works: for Paul speaks of works which go before faith, and James
speaks of works which do follow faith.

Origene upon the Epistle to the Romans. 3. book. 3. Chapter. The only
justification of God, suffices so, that he which believes only is justified,
when in deed no works shall be done by him. For the thief was justified
through faith without the works of the law: and upon that faith the Lord did
not demand what that is that he had done before, and did not tarry after that
he had believed what work he should do, but received him as justified
through the only faith for to enter with him into paradise. Also that woman
which is receited by the Evangelist the which did hear at Jesus feet, thy
sins are forgiven thee: And again, Luc. 7.
thy faith has saved thee, go in peace: But also in many places of the
gospel, The works of the law serve nothing for justification.
Jesus Christ has used such words, where he says, that the cause of
salvation is the faith of him which believes. Man then is justified through
faith, unto whom the works of faith serve nothing at all for justification.
But where faith is not, which justifies the believing man, when any one shall
have the works of the law, nevertheless because they are not builded upon the
foundation of faith, although that in appearance they are good, yet they cannot
justify the work, if it be without faith: the which is the mark and token of
those which are justified of God. And what shall he be which will boste him
self of his righteousness, when he hears God and the Prophet saying: all
our righteousness are as a menstruous cloth, Esaias. 64.
wherefore the only right glory is in the faith of Christ.

Augustine in his.50. homilies. homily. 17. Peace be unto the brethren, and
love with the faith of God our Father, and of our Lord Jesus Christ. What have
thou, 1. Cor. 4.
that thou have not received? If thou have received it, why reioysest thou, as
though thou had not received it? Did Abraham so rejoice? He reioysed of
faith, what is the full and perfect faith? The same which believes that all
our goodness are of God, yea faith it self. 1. Tim. 1.
Again the Apostle says, I have obtained mercy. O true confession? He does
not say I have obtained mercy because that I was faithful: but to the end that
I should be faithful, I have obtained mercy. Gala. 1. Act. 9.
Let us come unto the first works of Paul: Let us behold Saul which did wax
mad, let us behold him in his cruelty: let us behold him breathing out his
threatenings, and thirsty after blood. This was the way of Paul, Christ was
not yet his way: what had he in his heart? What had he but evil? Give me his
merits? Which if we do search his merits, they shall be merits of
damnation and not of deliverance.

Augustine upon the words of the Lord. Sermon. 40. The medecin of the soul,
is the only propitiation for the sins of all, that is to believe in Christ.
etc. Afterward he says: wherefore do the children of God which believe in
him live: for they are borne of God, by the adoption of grace, which is
through the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore, well-beloved, it is
not without cause that our Lord and Savior says, John. 6. Mat. 9. Mat. 5.
that same to be the only sin of which the holy Ghost rebukes the world, to
wete because they have not believed in him. All sins pardoned by faith.
He would then that the world should be reproved only of that sin, that they
do not believe only in him, to wete because that in believing in him all
sins are pardoned: he would that to be imputed, by which all the other are
assembled. And therefore in believing they are borne of God, and are made the
children of God, for he has given unto them the power (says he) to be the
sons of God, John. 1.
even to them that believe in his name. etc.

Chrysostom upon the.25. chapter of Saint Mathewe, 2. Tome.2. homilye. Come ye
blessed of my father inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from before the
beginning of the world: Mat. 25.
because that you have given that which you cannot have: receive that which you
shall possess eternally: Mat. 19.
for one grain that you have sown upon earth, you shall have an hundredth
fold as much in heaven. The kingdom of heaven not created as man could merit,
but as God might prepare it.
For the kingdom of heaven has not been created such as the righteousness
of man could merit it, but such as the power of God might prepare it: for if
he would have created the kingdom of heaven according to the merits of man's
righteousness: Truly he would have created it after man's works: but because
that now he has not ordained the reward of Saints according to the reward of
men, but according to his greatness: therefore has he prepared the kingdom
of heaven in heaven, before that he created the saints in heaven.

S. Barnarde upon the first sermon of the Annunciation of the virgin Marie. 2.
Cor. 1. Luke 18.
The testimony of our conscience is our rejoicing, says the Apostle: not such
testimony as the proud Pharisey had in his wicked thought, and seducing his
master which bare witness of him self, which witness is true, which the
spirit does witness unto our spirit. For I do believe that this witness
consists in three things. First, and above all things, it is necessary to
believe that thou can not have remission and forgiveness of thy sins, No
remission of sins, but of God.
but through the indulgencie of God. Secondly, thou can not have any good
works, except he himself do give them unto thee. Finallye, that thou can
not merit eternal life for any works, and it must be given thee freely. etc.
Afterward he says: Romans 8.
For we do well know, that as for eternal life, the afflictions of this life
are not worthy of the glory which shall be showed upon us, although that one
only man does abide and suffer al. For man's merits are not such, that for
them eternal life should be due of right, or that we should say that God
does us wrong, if he do not give them us by reason of them. For though I
should hold my peace, that all merits are the gifts of God, insomuch that
for them man is more indebted to God, than God is to man. What is that that all
the merits do in respect of so great glory; To conclude what is he that is
more excellent than the Prophet, unto whom the Lord does give so excellent a
witness, saying: 1. Reg. 16.
I have found a man according to mine own heart. And yet he had need to say
unto God: Psalm. 143.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant. etc. Let no man then deceive
himself, for if he will think well, he shall find without all doubt that he
can not with ten thousand men go to meet him which comes against him with
xx. thousand. But these things which we have now spoken of, are not yet
altogether sufficient, but we must the rather hold them for a beginning and
foundation of faith. Therefore if thou believe that thy sins cannot be put or
blotted out but by him against whom only thou have sinned, thou do well.
But add yet one thing more, to wete, that thou believe also that thy sins by
him are pardoned: Behold the testimonies and witnesses which the holy ghost
does give into our hearts, saying: thy sins are pardoned thee. For even so
does the Apostle think, that man is justified freely through faith. In like
manner as touching merits, Luc. 7. Romans 3.
if thou believe that one cannot have them but by him, it suffices not until
such time as the spirit of faith does witness that thou have them through
him: Let us assure our selves to come to heaven through the gift of God.
Even so it is necessary that thou have also witness, to wete, that thou
do come thereunto through Gods liberality. For it is he which pardons
sins, which gives merits: and yet nevertheless does give again the
reward. For all his testimonies are most assured. For as to the remission of
sins, I do hold the passion of our Lord for a most strong argument. For the
cry of his blood has had greater force than the blood of Abel: Heb. 12.
in as much as he does cry in the hearts of the elect, remission of all
sins. For he was delivered to death for our sins. And there is Romans 4.
no doubt but that his death is more puissant and of greater force to do good,
Remission of sins is through the blood of Christ.
than our sins are to do evil. As touching good works, his resurrection is
an argument for me which has no less virtue. For as much as he is risen again
for our justification: as touching the hope of reward, his ascension serves
for a witness, for he is ascended for our gloryfication. Ephe. 4.
Thou have these three things in the psalm saying: Psalm. 32.
Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes no sin. And in another
place, Psalm. 84.
blessed are the men whose strength is in thee: Also in an other place? Psalm.
65.
Blessed is the man whom thou have chosen and receiuest unto thee, that he may
dwell in thy court: such is the true glory (I say) which is within, for that
does depart from him which dwells in our hearts through faith. But the
sons of Adam seeking the glory which comes from man, will not have that
which comes from one only God: and therefore in seeking it outwardly, they
have no glory in them selves, but rather in an other.

Sixtus Pope of Rome, in his Epistle to the first tome of the Councels. He that
is doubtful in the faith, James. 1.
is an infidel: wherefore let us esteem and judge those which do command us
to doubt of the favor of God toward us, not only to contend and strive
against the sentence of the true Catholic church, but also to give evil
counsel to the health and salvation of the church.

S Barnard in his.5. Sermon in Quadragesima. The trusting to works, avails
nothing to seek eternal life.
It may be that some do not seek, through humility everlasting life, but as
in the trust and confidence of their works and merits, and I do not say this,
that grace received does not give boldness to pray, but it must not be
therefore that in the same they have their hope and trust to obtain it: for
that only does give the gifts promised, to the end that of the mercy of God
which gives those things, we may hope yet for greater things. Let then those
things which do belong to our only necessities be restrained, the prayer
which is made for the temporal things, and that which is made for the virtues
of the soul, sequestered from all impurite and uncleanness, be only attentife
toward the good will of God. And that which is made because of eternal
life, let it be made or done in all humility, presuming (as he must) of the
only divine mercy.

Grace be with you and peace, Romans 1. 1. Cor. 1. Colos. 1.
from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.

O wretched man that I am, Romans 7.
who shall deliver me from this body of death? The grace of God through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Even so at this time, Romans 11. Romans 9.
the remnante is left through the election of grace: if it be of grace, then
it is not of works: or else were grace no more grace. But if it be of works,
then is it no more grace: or else were works no longer works.

By grace are ye made safe through faith: and that not of your selves: Ephesians.
2.
it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast of himself.

Also: Titus. 3.
That we being justified by his grace, should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life.

Saint Peter says: why tempt ye God, Act. 15. 2. Par. 10.
to lay a yoke on the Disciples necks, which neither our fathers, nor we,
were able to bear? but we believe that through the grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ we shall be saved, even as they do.

Titus. 3.
God does not save us of the deeds of righteousness which we wrought, but of
his mercy.

Philip. 1.
He which began a good work in you, shall go forth with it until the day of
Jesus Christ.

Philip. 1.
Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only ye should believe on him, but
also suffer for his sake.

Philip. 3.
He says again: And as touching the righteousness which is in the law, I
was without reproach. But the things which were vauntage to me, I counted
loss for Christ's sake: yea doubtless I think all things but loss for that
excellent knowledge sake of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have counted all
things loss, and do judge them but dung, that I might win Christ, and might
be found in him, that is, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, I mean the
righteousness which comes of God through faith. etc.

Romans 8.
I am now ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at hand: Esaias.
50. Psalm. 3. Psalm. 73.44.102.
I have fought a good fight, and have fulfilled my course, and have kept the
faith. From henceforth is laid up for me a crown of righteousness which the
Lord that is a righteous judge shall give me at that day: not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his coming.

But now in Christ Jesus ye which once were far of, Ephe. 2. 1. Pet. 2.
are made nigh by the blood I say of Christ.

It is God which works in us both the will, and also the deed, Philip. 1.
even of his free benevolence.

To as many as received him, John. 1.
to them he gave power to be the sons of God, even to them which believe in
his name, which are borne not of blood, nor of the lusts of the flesh, nor
of the lust of man, but of God.

In thy light shall we see light. Psalm. 36. Deuteronomy. 29.


Your eyes have seen great miracles and wonders: and yet the Lord has not
given you an heart to perceive, nor eyes to see, nor ears to hear.

O Lord give me understanding, Psalm. 119.
open mine eyes for to behold the wondrous things of thy law.

Ezech. 36
Gzechiel speaking in the person of God, says: A new heart will I give you,
and a new spirit will I put into you: as for that stony heart I will take it
out of your body, and give you a fleshie heart. I will give my spirit among
you, and cause you to walk in my commandments, to keep my laws, and to
fulfill them.

Psalm. 62.
As for men, they are but vain: if they be put in the ballaunce, they are
lighter than vanity it self.

Ierem. 31.
Convert thou me, and I shall be converted, for thou art my Lord God: yea, as
soon as thou turnest me, I shall reform my self.

Romans 3.
Therefore we gather that a man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the
law.

Romans 4. Genes. 15. Galat. 3. Iam. 2.
Again, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness. To
him that works, the reward is not reckened of favor but of duty. But to
him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness. Also. for if they which are of the law,
Romans 4.
be heirs, then is faith but vain, and the promise of none effect. etc.
Therefore by faith is the inheritance given, that it might come of favor, and
the promise might be sure to all the seed (that is) not to them only which
are of the law: but also to them which are of the faith of Abraham. Romans 5.
Then being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom also we have access through faith, unto this grace, wherein we
stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Because of unbelief they are broken of and thou stand steadfast by faith.
Romans 11.


Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin. Romans 14.


We know that a man is not justified by the deeds of the law, Galat. 2.
but by the faith of Jesus Christ: even we I say have believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Jesus Christ, and not by the deeds
of the law: because that by the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be justified.

I do not abrogate the grace of God, Galat. 2.
for if righteousness comes of the law, then Christ dyed without a cause.

So ye know, Galat. 3.
that they which are of faith, are the children of Abraham: for the Scripture
saw before hand, Genes. 15.
that God would justify the Gentiles through faith: and therefore preached
before hand the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, in thee shall all the Gentiles
be blessed: so then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham.
For as many as are under the deeds of the law, are under the curse. Deuteronomy. 27.
For it is written: Cursed is every man that continues not in all things that
are written in the book of the law, to fulfill them. And that no man is
justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: Abac. 2. Romans 1. Heb.
10. Leuit. 18.
For the just shall live by faith: and the law is not of faith: but the man
that shall fulfill those things, shall live in them. Now Christ has redeemed
us from the curse of the law, when he was made accursed for us. Deuteronomy. 21.
For it is written: Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. That the
blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, and that
we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith.

Galat. 3.
But the Scripture has concluded all things under sin, that the promise by
the faith of Jesus Christ should be given to them that believe. etc. For ye
are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Galat. 3. De poenitentia,
Distinction. 3. chap. which begins, Totam. etc.

And we are justified freely by his grace, Romans 3.
through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth to be
a pacification through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness, in
that he forgiueth the sins that are passed.

Without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.


In whom even now, 1. Pet. 1.
though ye see him not, yet do ye believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable
and glorious, receiving the end of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
etc. Act. 15.
And God which knows the hearts, bare them witness, in giving unto them the
holy Ghost, even as he did unto us: and he put no difference between them and
us, seeing that with faith he purified their hearts.

S. Jerome upon Sophon. Chapter. 3. They do seek the righteousness, the
which is not but Christ alone.

Jesus Christ says: Math. 9.
Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole.

Math. 9.
Again: Believe ye that I am able to do this? And they said unto him, yea
Lord. Then touched he their eyes, saying: according to your faith be it unto
you.

Luke 8.
Also: Daughter, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, go in
peace.

John. 6.
Also: What shall we do, that we might work the works of God? Jesus
answered and said unto them. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him,
whom he has sent.

Mar. 9.
Likewise: all things are possible to him that believes.

Romans 6.
The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God, is eternal life through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

Romans 10.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God raised him up from death thou shall be saved. For the
belief of the heart justifies, and to confess with the mouth, saves a man.

Romans 10.
Who soever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. Esaias. 28.


But ye are of him in Jesus Christ, who of God is made unto us wisdom, 1.
Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 10. Ierem. 9.
and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption: that according as it
is written: He that rejoices, should rejoice in the Lord.

This is the name that they shall call him, Iere. 23. and 33.
even the Lord our righteous maker.

To him give all the Prophets witness, Act. 10. Ierem. 31. Mich. 7.
that through his name all that believe in him, shall receive remission of
sins.

For among men there is given none other name under heaven, Act. 4.
whereby we must be saved.

Ye are gone quite from Christ as many as are justified by the law, Galat. 5.
and are fallen from grace.

Let no man esteem of himself, Romans 12.
more then it becomes him to esteem: but that he discretely judge of
himself, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of faith.

How should I then answer him: Job. 9.
or what words should I find out against him? yea, though I be righteous,
yet will I not give him one word again, but meekely submit my self to my
Judge. If I will justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me. If I
will put forth my self for a perfect man, he shall prove me a wicked doer:
for that I should be an innocent, my conscience knows it not: yea, I my
self am weary of my life.

Job. 10.
Thou have granted me life, and done me good: and the diligent heed that thou
tookest upon me, has preserved my spirit. etc. If I do wickedly, woe is me
therefore. If I be righteous, yet dare I not lift up my head: so full am I of
confusion, and see mine own misery.

Job. 15.
What is man that he should be clean? what has he (which is born of a woman)
whereby he might be known to be righteous? Behold there is no trust in his
Saints: yea, the very heavens are not clear in his sight. How much more then
an abominable and vile man, which drinks wickedness like water?

Job. 25.
But how may a man compared unto God be justified? Or how can he be clean that
is borne of a woman?

Esaias. 64.
We are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness are as the clothes
stained or a menstruous cloth.

There is not one just upon earth that does good, and sins not. Eccle. 7.3.
Reg. 8. 2. Cor. 6. 1. John. 1. Esaias. 45.


Verily in the Lord is my righteousness and strength. To him shall men come:
but all they that think scorn of him, shall be confounded. And the whole seed
of Israel shall be justified, and praised in the Lord.

The Lord helps me, Esaias. 50.
therefore shall I not be confounded. I have hardened my face like a flint
stone, for I am sure that I shall not come to confusion. Mine advocate speaks
for me, who will then go with me to law?

My righteous servant shall with his wisdom justify and deliver the
multitude, Esaias. 53.
for he shall bear away their sins. etc.

We being justified by his grace should be amde heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. Titus. 3.


Yet dare thou say, I am giltlesse: Ierem. 2.
Tushe, his wrath cannot come upon me: behold I will reason with thee because
thou dare say: I have not offended. O how evil will it be for thee, to
abide it: when it shall be known, how often thou have gone backwarde?

Ierem. 14.
Doubtless our own wickedness reward us, but Lord do thou according to thy
name, though our transgressions and sins be many, and have sinned against
thee.

Esaias. 57.
They that put their trust in me, shall inherit the land, and have my holy hill
in possession.

Act. 13.
Be it known unto you therefore men and brethren, that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and that from all sins, from
which you could not be justified by the law of Moses: by him every one that
believes is justified.

John. 1.
And of his fullness have all we received, even grace for grace.

Romans 8.
Which he predestined before, them also he called, and who^ he called, them
also he justified, and whom he justified, them he also gloryfied. What shall
we then say to these things, if God be on our side, who can be against us?

Romans 8.
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? It is God that
justifies. Who then shall condemn? It is Christ which is dead, yea rather
which is risen again: which is also at the right hand of God, and makes
intercession for us.

O Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant, Psalm. 143.
for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.

A just man falls seven times, Prou. 24.
and ryseth up again.

If thou O Lord wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss, Psalm. 130.
oh Lord who may abide it. But there is mercy with thee, that thou may be
feared.

Of the law.
The law is not given unto a righteous man, 1. Tim. 1.
but unto the lawelesse and disobedient.

Augustine of free will and grace. Chapter. 6. The Pelagians do think them
selves to know great things, when they say, What we ought to demand.
the Lord will not command that, which he knows man cannot do: who is he
which knows not that thing? But therefore he commands some things which
we cannot do, to the end that we may know that which we ought to demand of
him: and that is faith, which in praying obtayneth that the law commands.
Finally he which has said, if thou will thou shall keep the commandments.
Set a watch O lord before my mouth. Psalm. 141.
etc. This is a most sure and certain thing that if we will we may keep the
commandments: But because the Lord prepares and makes the will ready, we
must demand the will which suffiseth to do it willingly: it is certain that
we will when we have the will: but it is he that causes that we desire and will
the good, of whom it is said: Psalm. 37.
The Lord orders a good man's goinges, and has pleasure in his way: and it
is God which works in us, both the will, Philip. 2.
and also the deed, yea, even of his free benevolence. It is certain that we
do it, God gives will, that we may do that which he commands.
when we do give the virtue of most greatest efficacy and strength to the
will, the which says: I will cause you to walk in my iustifications, and that
you shall keep my judgments, and do them.

Augustine upon the 31. psalm. Without the grace of God, without the love of
eternity, the law and the commandments of God are a great and importable
charge.

Augustine upon the words of the Apostle. Sermon. 6. O death where is thy
sting? 1. Cor. 15.
Grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin: and the strength of
sin is the law. For by forbidding, sin is augmented, and not put out, the
law has given power to sin, in commanding only by the letter, and not in
helping by the spirit. For the law commands, and does not accomplish it,
The law weakened thorovv the flesh. Romans 7.
because yt the flesh does resist it inuincibly where there is no grace. And
the law was weakened through the flesh, because that the law is spiritual,
but I am carnal. How then shall the law aid and help me, in commanding by
the letter, the which gives nothing by the spirit? It was made weak through
the flesh. What is that that God has done, considering that it was a thing
impossible to the law, and that it was weakened through the flesh? God sent
his son, wherefore was the law weakened, and wherefore was that impossible
to the law? It was weakened through the flesh. What is that then that God has
done, he has sent the flesh against the flesh: for he has killed the sin
of the flesh, and has delivered the substance of the flesh. God has sent
his son in the similitude and likeness of the flesh of sin: yea verilye in
flesh, but not in flesh of sin. That then which was impossible to the law,
which caused preuarication, because the thought being vanquished, has not yet
found out the savior, wherein it was weakened through the flesh. God has
sent his son in the likeness of the flesh of sin, and has condemned the
sin in the flesh. How then had he no sin, if sin has condemned sin?
(...). ^5. (...) Christ (...) ^hou^ (...) and (...) we (...) to v^^^^st^nde
(...) ^ne.
The sacrifice for sin was in the law called sin, the law does remember
that thing, not once or twyce, but very oftentimes. The sacrifices for sins
were called sins, such sin was Christ, for what shall we say, had he any
sin? no, no he had no sin, but he was the sin, he was (I say) the sin,
according to the intelligence and understanding, because that he was the
sacrifice for sins.

For what the law could not do, Romans 8.
in as much as it was weak, because of the flesh: God sending his own son
in the similitude of sinful flesh, and that for sin, condemned sin in the
flesh: That the righteousness of the law, might be fulfilled in us, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.

Jesus Christ is come to redeem them which were under the law, Galat. 4.
that we might receive the adoption that belongs unto the natural sons.

Jesus Christ is the end of the law, Romans 10.
to justify all that believe.

They being ignorant of the righteousness of God, Romans 10.
and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not been obedient
unto the righteousness of God.

Is the law then against the promise of God? God forbide: Galat. 3.
For if there had been a law given which could have given life, then no doubt
righteousness should have come by the law.

The law was our schole master to bring us to Christ, Galat. 3.
that we might be made righteous by faith. But after that faith is come, now
are we no longer under a schole master.

Galat. 5.
Ye are gone quite from Christ as many as are justified by the law, and are
fallen from grace.

Galat. 3.
And this I say: That the law which began afterward, four hundred and thirtye
years, cannot disanull the covenant, that was confirmed before of God in
respect of Christ, to make the promise of none effect: for if the inheritance
come of the law, it comes not then of promise, but God gave it unto Abraham
by promise.

Galat. 3. Abac. 2. Romans 1.
No man is justified by the law in the sight of God, it is evident: For the
just shall live by faith.

And the law is not of faith: But the man that shall fulfill those things,
Galat. 3.
shall live in them.

Galat. 3. Deuteronomy. 27.
For as many as are under the deeds of the law, are under the curse. For it is
written: Cursed is every man that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the law to fulfill them.

James. 2.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet fails in one point, he is
gyltie in all.

The just man falls seven times in a day. Pro. 24.


S. Paul propounding the similitude of the infant that is an heir, Gala. 4.
and the allegory of the children of Sara and Agar, declares that the law
has ceased.

The fulfilling of the law, Romans 13. Mat. 22. Galat. 5. Ephe. 2.
is love toward our neighbor.

In abrogating through his flesh the hatred (that is to say) the law of the
commandments which stands in ceremonies, for to make of twain, one new man
in himself, so making peace.

Christ has put out the hand writing of ceremonies that was against us, Col.
2.
which I say, was contrary unto us: he took it out of the way, and has
fastened it on his cross.

For by the law comes the knowledge of sin. Romans 3.


Law entered in, that offense should increase. Romans 5.


I had not known what lust had meant, Romans 7.
except the law had said: Thou shalt not lust.

We know that the law is spiritual, Romans 7.
but I am carnal, sold under sin.

Augustine in his. 9. book of confessions. Chapter. 13. Woe be unto man's life,
although it be praised never so much, if the mercy of God drawn from it, thou will examine or discuss it.

Augustine in his first book of Retractions. Chapter. 19. All the
commandments of God are reputed to be done, when that which is not done is
pardoned.

Augustine in his book of the spirit and of the letter. Chap. 36. To love god
with all our heart, and our neighbor as our self, cannot be accomplished in
this life.
This first commandment of righteousness, by the which it is commanded us to
love God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our thought, the
which is following the other, which is to love our neighbor in this life,
then we shall fulfill them when we shall see thee face to face. But therefore it
is commanded us in this world, that we may be admonished and warned of that
which we ought to ask through faith: afterward and by that same as far as
I can perceive, he profits much in this life in righteousness which ought
to be ended, who in profiting knows how much he is far from the perfection
of righteousness.

Ambrose upon the.3. Chapter of the Romans. He that believes in Christ,
keeps the law.

The similitude of the creditor: Mat. 18. It is asked again of him which has
not vvherevvith to pay, as also God demands that which we cannot do. Romans
8. Romans 8.
the goodman of the house willing to take account of his servants, one was
brought unto him which ought him ten thousand talentes, and had not wherewith
to pay, and yet notwithstanding would be paid. etc.

We are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh, but to the
spirit.

Ye have not received the spirit of bondage to fear any more: but ye have
received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, that is to say, father.

There is no fear in love, 1. John. 4.
but perfect love casts out fear, for fear has painfulnesse: and he that
fears is not perfect in love. We love him, because he loved us first.

Augustine of free will and grace. Chapter. 19. John says: God is love. And
the Pelagians also do say, The Pelagians say that they have love of them
selves.
that they have God, not of God, but of themselves. And where they confess
that the law is given us of God, they will have the love of themselves, and do
give no ear unto the Apostle, which says: 1. Cor. 8.
Knowledge makes a man swell, but love edifieth. Also the Scripture says,
that true faith and holy doctrine are both of God. For it is written: From his
face proceeds wisdom and understanding. And it is written: Love comes of
God. 1. John. 4.


Augustine upon the exposition to the Galat. 3. Chap. Galat. 3. Leuit. 18. Romans
10. Ezec. 20.
The law is not of faith: but the man that shall fulfill those things, shall
live in them. He does not say: he which shall do the law, shall live in it:
insomuche that thou do understand, that the law in that place is put for the
works themselves. But those who do live in their works, do fear, that if
they had not done them, they had been stoned, or crucified, or suffered some
other kind of pain. Wherefore he says: he which shall do those things,
shall live in them, that is to say, he shall have the reward, to the end not
to be punished with such death.

Saint Barnarde upon the Canticles. Sermon. 50. He which has commanded, the
commandments was not ignorant that the burden of the commandment exceeds
the strength of men: God knovveth very well that we cannot do that that he
commands, but to keep us in humility.
but by that means has judged that it is profitable to admonish them that
they are not able, and that they may plainly know to what end of
righteousness they must endeavor them selves with all their virtues: then in
commanding impossible things, God has not made men transgressors of the law:
but has made them humble, that every mouth might be stopped, and that all
the world be made subject to God. For no flesh shall be justified before him
through the works of the law: Even so when we have received the
commandment, and that we do feel our default, we cry unto heaven, and God
has mercy on us: and know in that time, that he has saved us, Titus. 3. 2.
Tim. 1.
not of the deeds of righteousness which we wrought: but of his mercy.

Augustine against the adversary of the law and of the Prophets 2. book. 7.
Chapter. It was very needful, that the law in the old Testament should be
set forth unto the proud, and unto those which did trust in the virtue of
their own will: the which law does not give justice, but it does command it:
The law does not give righteousness.
and even as those being wrapped in, through the death of preuarication, or
transgressio^, ought to have their refuge to grace, the which only does not
command, but also helps.

The blasphemers, of the heavenly words, do think that the law which was
given by Moses was evil, because that it was called the administration of
death, figured in letters of stone, not regarding that it is said, for those
which do think that the law was sufficient for their free will. etc.

John. 1.
The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.

John. 7.
Did not Moses give you a law, and yet none of you keeps the law?

Augustine upon Saint John. 3. Treatise. 1. Chapter. The law was given by
Moses, The law given to the end that sin abound.
which held them guilty. For what says the Apostle? The law entered in,
that offense should increase. This is heavy unto the proud, that is, that he
says, Romans 5.
to the end that sin may increase. For they do attribute much to
themselves, and do assign much to their strengths. And cannot accomplish
righteousness, if he which has commanded it, help them not. God willing to
tame their pride, gave the law. As if he had said: behold, accomplish it, to
the end that you do not think your selves to be without him which commands:
you are not without a commander, but there is no fulfiller.

Augustine of the spirit and the letter. 2. Cor. 3. The law by the which we
cannot be justified, is the law of the two tables, and not the ceremonial
law. Deuteronomy. 5.
Chapter. 14. Does not S. Paul call that law written in his two tables,
killing letters? When he says: the letter kills: speaks he only of the
law of Circumcision, and of other old Sacraments already abolished? How
shall we esteem it so, in as much as it is put in this law, thou shall not
covet? By the which commandment (although that it be holy, just and good) he
says that sin has deceived it, and thereby killed: And what is that the
letter kills and the spirit quickens, but that the law cannot justify.
etc. Immediately afterward he says, these my commandments if they are well
kept as they are written, we must think that it appertains not to the law
of works, by the which none is justified: but to the law of faith, by which
the righteous man lives. Who shall be of so wicked opinion to think that the
administration of death figured in the tables of stone, is not said of all the
ten commandments, but only of one, which appertains to the saboth? Where
shall we put then this place, Romans 4.
the law ingendreth wrath? For where no law is, there is no transgression,
and sin has been in the world even until the law, and sin was not
imputed when there was no law. etc. Read the chapter all at length. Read also
the same book the.31. chapter.

Of purgatory.
It is written in the Hebrews the first chapter: Heb. 1.
which son being the brightness of the glory, and the ingraued form of his
person, bearing up all things with the word of his power, has by him self
purged our sins, and sits at the right hand of that most high majesty.

Through Jesus Christ we have redemption through his blood, Ephe. 1.
even the forgiveness of sins, of his rich grace.

In whom we have redemption through his blood, that is to say, Col. 1.
the forgiveness of sins, to reconcile all things unto him self, and to
set at peace through the blood of his cross, both things in earth and things
in heaven.

For as much as ye know how that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things as
silver and gold, 1. Pet. 1.
from your vain conversation, which ye received by the traditions of the
fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and
without spot.

1. John. 1.
And the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin.

Apoc. 1.
Unto him that loved us and washed us from our sins in his blood.

Heb. 9.
If the blood of bulls, and of goats and the ashes of an heyfar sprinkled,
sanctifies them that are unclean, as touching the purifying of the flesh: how
much more shall the blood of Christ which through the eternal spirit offered
him self without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works, for to
serve the living God?

Esaias Esaias. 43.
speaking in the person of God says, it is I, it is I only that for mine own
self sake do away thine offenses and forget thy sins.

Romans 8.
For I confirm, that the afflictions of this life are not worthy of the glory
which shall be showed unto us.

Titus. 3. We are saved by gods mercy, and not by the fire of purgatory.
Esaias. 1.
After that the kindness and love of our savior God to manward appeared, not
of the deeds of righteousness which we wrought: but of his mercy he saved
us, by the fountain of the new birth, and with the renewing of the holy Ghost.

Now go to (says the Lord) we will talk together. Is it not so? Though your
sins be as red as scarlet, shall they not be whyter then snow? And though
they were like purple shall they not by like white wool?

And he put no difference between them and us, Act. 15.
seeing that with faith he purified their hearts.

There is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. We cannot
go into purgatory uncondemned. John. 5.


Jesus Christ says, verily verily I say unto you, he that hears my words,
and believes on him that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not come
into damnation, but is escaped from death unto life.

Again, Mar. 16.
he that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved.

Also enter in at the strait gate, Mat. 7. There is but two vvayes.
for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction: and
many there be which go in there at.

Objection. Agree with thine adversary quicklye, Math. 5. Luc. 12.
whiles thou art in the way with him, least thine adversary deliver thee to
the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the sergeant, and then thou be cast
into prison. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou
have paid the utmost farthing.

Answer. Saint Ambrose says upon these words of Saint Mathewe: When thou
shall go unto the magistrate. etc. Chrysostom upon S. Mathewe. 5. Homely.
10. Does expound it of the reconciliation. And Theophilact upon the same
place, says as much. Likewise S. Hilarie understands it so in his Canons.

Objection. Verily I say unto thee, thou shall not come out thence, till thou
have paid the utmost farthing.

Answer. Mat. 1.
In the first of S. Mathewe it is said, that Joseph knew not his wife, till
she had brought forth her first borne son.

S. Augustine expounds that place by the Raven that Noe did send forth: and
says that the Raven did never return again: even so Joseph never knew the
virgin Marie, Psalm. 110. Act. 2. Heb. 1.
for she is a virgin.

Also: Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footestoole.

Objection. Whosoever shall speak against the son of man, it shall be
forgiven him: Mat. 12. Mar. 3.
but whosoever shall speak against the holy ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

Answer. Chrysostom in the 12. of S. Mathewe, Homely 24. expounds it thus:
Forasmuch as this sin is not venial, you shall be grievously punished, both
in this life, and in the life to come.

Saint Augustine upon Genesis. 10. book. It is better to doubt of secret
things, Secret things not to be revealed.
than to plead of incertayne things. I do not doubt but that we must
understand that the rich man was in most cruel torments, and that poor
Lazarus in joy. etc. Luc. 16. Sapien. 4.


Though the righteous be overtaken with death, yet shall he be in rest.

The souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, Sapien. 3. Deuteronomy. 33.
and the pain of death shall not touch them. In the sight of the unwise they
appear to die, and their end is taken for very destruction. The way of the
righteous is judged to be utter destruction, but they are in rest.

Luc. 8.
Our Lord said unto the woman: Daughter be of good comfort, thy faith has
made thee whole, go in peace.

Luc. 23.
Again unto the thief: Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me
in paradyse.

Eccles. 12.
Man after his death, goes to his long home. Also the body shall return
again unto the earth from whence it came, and the spirit shall return unto
God which gave it.

Psalm. 146.
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man, for there is no help
in them. For when the breath of man goes forth, he shall turn again to his
earth, and so all his thoughts perish.

1. These. 4. S. Paul speaking of the dead, makes no mention of purgatory.
I would not brethren have you ignorant concerning them which are fallen a
sleep, that ye sorrow not as other do which have no hope. For if we believe
that Jesus died, and rose again: even so they also which sleep in Jesus, God
will bring with him.

Augustine of the City of God.13. book. 9. Chapter. The souls of ye good men
being separated from the body are at rest, and we must nothing at all doubt of
it. But those of the wicked are punished until that the body of those shall
rise again to eternal life, and of those here to eternal death, which is
called the second death.

Irenaeus says as much, writing against the heretic Valentine.

Augustine against the Pelagians. 5. book. There is but two ways, that is,
one to damnation, and one to salvation.

Augustine in his Enchiridion. 108. Chapter. The time then which is between ye
death of man, and the latter resurrection, The gloser Gratian upon those
words, says as much.
the souls are received into secret receptacles, even as every one is worthy,
either of rest, or of misery, according to that that he has deserved when it
lived in the flesh.

Augustine of the City of God.10. book. 24. Chapter. Speaking unto Porphyrius
a Platonist: Jesus Christ is our purgatory.
He has not known Jesus Christ to be the beginning, through whose incarnation
we are purged.

In the same book. Chapter. 22. We have then victory in his name, who has
taken man's flesh, and has lived without sin, to the end that he being the
Priest and the sacrifice, was made the forgiveness of sins, that is to say:
by the mediator of God and men, 1. Tim. 2.
the man Jesus Christ, through whom the purgation of our sins is made and we
are restored again with God. For men are not separated from God but through
sin: Men are not separated from God but through sin.
of which the purgation is not done in our life through our virtue, but through
Gods divine mercy, through his clemency, not through our power, for the same
virtue which is called ours, whatsoever it be, is granted unto us through his
goodness.

Read Lactantius Firmianus 6. book 3. Chapter of the institutions against the
Gentiles and Idolaters: There is but two ways, the one of virtue, the other of
sin, which leads unto hell.

Augustine of the Trinity.4. book. 13. Chapter. By his death, that is to
say, through one only and most true sacrifice which has been offered for
us, he has purged, and has abolished and put out all the faults, for the
which the principalities and powers do detayne us, for to be punished: and
has called us through his resurrection unto a new life, Romans 8.
we which are predestined: he has justified those whom he called, and has
glorified them whom he justified.

Augustine in his Enchiridion unto Laurence. Chapter. 66. Some men believe,
that those also which have not abandoned the name of Christ, Sins not purged
in the fire of purgatory.
and which have been baptized in his Church, and have not been cut of from
the same through any schism or heresies, that in whatsoever sins they have
lived, the which they have not defaced and blotted out through penance, nor
redeemed through alms, but shall persevere and continue in them continually
until the last day of this life, shall be saved through the fire. Although that
according to the greatness of their sins and misdeedes, that fire shall be
diuturnall, not eternal. But me thinks that those which believe that, and
notwithstanding are catholics, are deceived through man's benevolence. For the
holy Scripture, if one do look in it, answers an other thing.

S. Jerome upon the Prophet Esaias. 65. Chapter. He which shall not obtain
pardon of his sins whilst that he lives in this body, and shall so depart
out of this life, he perishes to God, and leaves to be, although yt he rise
unto himself in pains.

Augustine writing unto Macedonius. 54. Epistle. There is no other place for to
correct the manners then in this life, for after this life every one shall
have that he has here gotten.

Again, in this world the mercy of God helps those which do repent, but in
the world to come repentance profits not, but we must render and give account
of our works.

Repentance has no place but in this life.
Liberty of repentance is only given unto us in this life: after the death
there is no license of correction, now is the time of mercy, afterward shall
be the time of judgment.

Augustine upon S. John. 12. treatise. Expounding the words of Christ, he
which believes not is already judged: Also the judgment is not yet appeared,
2. Tim. 2.
but the judgment is already done. And the Lord knows those which are his:
and knows those which shall abide, looking for the crown of glory, and
those which abide looking for the fire.

S. Chrysostom in the.2. sermon of Lazarus. Make ready the works for the
end, and prepare thy self to the way: And if thou have taken by violence
any thing from any man restore it and make restitution, and say with
Zachaeus, Luke 19.
if I have taken any thing from any man by forged cauillation, I restore it him
four double: While we be here in this life, we have good hope, but after
there is no place for to vvash and purge sins
And if thou art angry with any man, reconcile thy self before that thou
cummest to judgment: pay here all things, to the end that without trouble
or molestation thou may see that judgment: All the while that we be here in
this life, we have a most fair and shining hope: but when we shall be departed
and dead, we shall no more repent, nor do penance, nor wash and cleanse the
sins that we have committed. Afterward he says, truly he which shall not
in this life wash and cleanse his sins, in the other life he shall find no
consolation.

Saint Cyprian against Demetrian. 1. Treatise. Believe, and ye shall live, and
ye which do persecute us for a certain time, be joyful with us for ever.
When one shall depart from hence, he shall have no more place of repentance,
nor no more effect of satisf^^tion: Here is the life lost or won. Here is
conquered the eternal health, through the veneration of God, and through the
fruit of faith: and so long as one shall abide in this life, no repentance is
to late. etc.

S. Jerome in his.7. Tome upon Ecclesiastes. 9. Chapter. Eccle. 9.
Because that before he has said, that the hearts of men are full of
wickedness and shame, and after that all these things do end when they do
die: now he makes an end of the same, and repeateth, that as long as men do
live, As long man liu^ he may profit, but not after he is dead.
they may be made righteous, but no occasion of good works is given after
death. For the sinner that is alive, may be better than the righteous which
is dead. If he will pass into the virtues of him: or verily he may be better
than he which rejoices in his wickedness, and in his strength and shame, the
which is dead: and may be better than he, how poor or base soever he be.
Wherefore? Because that those that be living, for fear of death, may do good
works. But the dead can nothing add to that that they have once carried away
with them from this life. etc.

Chrysostom unto the people homily.69. and.70. and upon S. John. 11. Chap. and
upon the Hebrews. 2. chapter. 4. Homelye. Let us not bewail without reason
those that are dead, but let us bewail those which are dead in sin. Those
are worthy of sorrow and of tears. For what hope has he to be gone with his
sins, where it is not given him to put of the sins? There is no hope to be
gone from this life, where it is not given to put of sins


Ambrose in the first Tome of the goodness of the dead. chap. 2. The holy man
David, hasted him self to go out of the place of his pilgrimage, saying I am
a stranger and a pilgrimme with thee, Psalm. 39. Philip. 1.
as all my forefathers were: and therefore as a pilgrimme he hastes him to go
to that country common to all the Saints, in asking (because of the
filthynesse of that tarying) that his sins should be pardoned him before that
he did depart from this life: for he that shall not receive here forgiveness
of his sins: he shall not have it in the other life. And he shall not have it,
for he cannot come to eternal life, because that eternal life is the
forgiveness of sins: Job. 10.
and therefore he says, pardon me that I may be comforted before that I go,
and that I be no more: wherefore then do we desire so greatly this life? In
the which the longer that any one shall be in it, so much the more is he
charged with the more sins. etc.

S. Jerome in the Epistle of the Galatians. 6. Chapter. This little sentence
does declare unto us (although that it be somewhat obscure) a new doctrine and
hid, that is when we be in this world we may help our selves together,
as well through prayers as through counsel, when notwithstanding when we shall
come before the consistorye and judgment of God, neither Daniell, no nor yet
Job, can pray for any one, for every one shall bear his burden.

The Canon of the.3. council of Toledo. Chapter. 22. and.23.2. chap. which
begins, Qui diu. We do command that those which depart out of this life,
The counsel of Toledo does forbid prayer for the dead.
through Gods calling, should be carried to the earth with psalms only, and
not the song of those which do sing: for we do forbid altogether that prayer
of the funeralles which they have accustomed to sing commonly for the dead.
That it suffiseth that they do give unto the bodies of the christians the
service of the heavenly songs, in hope of the resurrection.

Epiphanius in his.2. book Tome.1. Heresy.59. Upon that place of the songs.
Canti. 2.
O my Dove come out of the caves of the rocks, which touches the wall, out of
the holes of the rock, in the love of Christ, and in the mercy of the Lord:
These are yt caves of the rocks of faith, of hope and verity, touching the
wall. That is to say before that the gate be shut, before that the King being
within the wall receives no person unto him, after the departing from hence
and death, when the gates are no more, touching the wall, but are shut, and it
is no more lawful to correct. And afterward he says, there is neither fasting
nor alms nor penance nor righteousness neither good nor evil, Nothing can
profit after death.
which does profit or hurt after that one is dead. For Lazarus did not come
unto the rich man, nor the rich man unto Lazarus: And the rich did not
receive that that he demanded, Luke. 16.
although that he demanded it through great prayer of the merciful Abraham:
for the garners and cellers are shut up, and the time is accomplished, and the
combat ended, and those which have fought, do rest themselves. etc.

S. Cyprian in his sermon of mortality. We must not think that the death of
the wicked is of such form and condition as is of the good men. The good men
are called to rest and solace, the wicked and unjust to pains and torments:
safegarde and defense is sodainlye given unto the faithful, and torments unto
the unfaithful. We are very much unthankful for the heavenly benefits, not
acknowledging that which is given unto us. etc. Afterward he says: we ought
not to mourn for our brethren delivered from this world, through Gods
vocation: Forasmuch as I do know very well that they are not utterly lost,
but are only sent before, preceding those which depart, and that we ought to
desire their company, Black vvedes not to be worn in funerals.
and not to bewail them, even as those do which go by land or by sea, and
that we must not here take black robes, in as much as they have already taken
upon them white vestures. etc.

Augustine of the City of God.1. book, 12. and 13. Chapters, and in the 4. of
his sentences, 45. Distinction. It is also written in the Decretals, and also
by the Master of the sentences. The diligence and labor that some take about
funerals, the ornament and decking of burials, the pomp of obsequies and
burials, are more for to comfort the living, than for to aid the dead. If
the costly burying does profit any thing unto the wicked, the vile and
contemptible sepulture shall hurt the good, or if they remain unburied. etc.

Gregory Neocaesarian upon Eccles. Chapter. 9. Nothing common with the dead.
Those which are departed out of this world, have no more any thing common
with our affairs.

And it was so that the beggar dyed, and was carried by the angels into Abraham's
bosom. Luc. 16.
The rich man also dyed, and was buried. etc.

Chrysostom upon the Epistle unto the Hebrews. Chap. 13. No place for burial
ought to be sought.
In what place soever we be buried, the earth is the Lords, and all that
therein is, that which a man ought to do, let him do it. But to bewail,
weep, and lament for those which depart out of this life, comes of
weakness, and for lack of courage, and we cannot understand it, but that it
comes of none other thing, but of a despair of the resurrection to come. 1.
These. 4.
etc.

David prayed for his child that was sick, he fasted lying upon the ground:
2. Sam. 12.
But when they told him that he was dead, he rose up and ceased. Now the
child dyed without Circumcision, the which Circumcision was unto them, 1. Cor.
7.
as Baptism is unto us, yet David did not despair of the salvation of the
child.

Objection. The Priests say that we must offer for the dead.

S. Cyprian in the.4. book of Epistles. 5. Epistle. Writing of Celerin which
has had almost all his houshoulde martyred and put to death for ye name of
Jesus Christ, says thus: It is already a long time sithence that Celerin his
grandmother has been crowned for a martyr, his uncle by the father, and
Laurence his uncle by the mother, and Ignatius which once have fought, and have
been men of arms in worldly affairs: but being true and tried men of arms
to fight in Gods quarrel, having vanquished the devil through the confession
of Christ, The devil is overcome through the confession of Christ.
have obtained of the Lord rewards and crowns through a glorious suffering:
To offer is here taken for giving of thanks.
We do offer always (as you do remember well enough) sacrifice for them, as
often as we do celebrate the passions of the martyrs: and that we do make
commemorations of their days yearly.

See diligently the commemoration that the priests do make for the dead,
which is the.10. part of the Canon. Memento etiam domine, famulorum,
famularumque tuarum, N. qui nos praecesseru^t cum signo fidei, and dormiunt in
somno pacis: ipsis domine, and omnibus in Christo quiescentibus, locum
refrigerij, lucis and pacis, vt indulgeas deprecamur per eundem dominum
nostrum. The Priests do here against their doctrine, in praying for the virgin
Marie, and for all the Apostles and Martyrs which are departed with the sign
of faith.
Amen.

That is to say, remember O Lord thy menseruauntes and maydseruauntes N. which
have gone before us with the sign of faith, and do sleep in peace: unto them
O Lord, and unto all those which do rest in Christ, we desire thee that
thou wylt give them place of comfort, through the same Christ our Lord amen.

Answer. In the 4. of the sentences, Distinction 45. and the 13. gloss.
Iniuriam facit martyri, qui or at pro martyr That is to say, he which prays
for a Martyr does injury and wrong unto the Martyr.

S. Cyprian in his.4. book of baptism. and the master of the sentences 4.
distinct.4. Chapter. If all the deaths and all the torments, that all men the
Patryarckes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and confessors have ever suffered
should be put together: they shall not be sufficient to put out the least
sin of the world.

Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God: 1.
Cor. 6.
Be not deceived: neither fornicators, neither idolaters, neither aduouterers,
neither wantons, neither abusers of them selves with the mankind, neither
thieves, neither covetous, neither dronkardes, neither evil speakers, neither
extorcioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. And such were some of you, but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God.

Christ loved the church, Ephe. 5.
and gave him self for it, to sanctify it, and cleansed it in the washing of
water through the word. To make it unto him self a glorious church, without
spot or wrincle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy and without
blame.

John. 3. Mark well he says not of fire.
Jesus Christ says, verily verily I do say unto you, except that a man be
begotten of water and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Math. 3. Jesus Christ purges his, and not the fire.
Saint John Baptist said of Jesus Christ, he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire, which has his fan in his hand, and will make clean
his flower, and gather the wheat into his garner, but will burn the chafe
with unquenchable fire.

John. 15.
Jesus Christ says, now are ye clean through the words which I have spoken
unto you.

John. 13.
Also Peter said unto Jesus: thou shall never wash my feet. Jesus said unto
him, if I do not wash thee, thou shall not have part with me: Peter said
unto him Lord not my feet only, but also my hands and my head. Jesus said unto
him, he that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet but is clean every
whit.

He shall put down our wickedness, Mich. 7.
and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.

Raymonde says: Gratia magna dei veniamnon dimidiabit,
Aut nihil aut totum propitiando dabit.


That is to say, God does not pardon the moytie or half: but his great mercy
pardons all or nothing.

Moses and Saint Paul do say, Heb. 12. Deuteronomy. 4.
our God is a consuming fire.

The Pope in his Canons in the Gloss of Baptism and of his effect. Chap. which
begins, maiores Causas. Larga dei pietas veniam non dimidiabit.
Nam nihil aut totu^ te lachrymante dabit.
That is to say: the great goodness of God will not give pardon for the moyte:
The Pope says that God does not give pardon to the moytie, and so there is no
purgatory.
for when thou come unto him with tears and weepings, he will give thee all
or nothing.

Moses says, Deuteronomy. 32.
The works of God are perfect.

O Lord thou forgiuest all our sins. Oseas. 14.


Chrysostom in the.2. homily upon the 50. psalm. When one demands mercy,
that is that he might not be examined of his sin, to the end he should not be
handled according to the rigor of righteousness, and to the end that all
punishment may cease: for where there is mercy, there is no more hell fire,
neither rigor nor pain. Where there is mercy, there is no more hell fire,
rigor, nor pain.


Chrysostom in his sermon of penance and confession. The Lord does punish us
for our sins, not for to take any recompense of our sins, but for to
advise us of things to come.

S. Ambrose upon S. Luke, of repentance, first distinction, Chapter which
begins Petrus. Peter was sorrowful and did lament, for he has transgressed
as man. I do not find what he said, I do know very well that he has
wept, I do read of his tears, and not of his satisfaction.

The Priests do sing in the beginning, or prose of those that be dead, such
words. Rex tremendae maiestatis, qui saluandos saluas gratis, salua me fons
pietatis. The Priests vvoulde be saved thorovve grace according to their song.
Apoc. 14.
That is to say: O redoubtable king in majesty, which do save freely
those which ought to be saved, save me O fountain of goodness.

Blessed are the dead, which hereafter die in the Lord, even so says the
spirit. For because they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

Of a truth he only takes away our infirmity, and bears our pain: Esaias.
53.
yet we shall judge him as though he were plaged and cast down of God, Jesus
Christ takes away our infirmities, he pardons then the fault and the pain.
where as he (notwithstanding) shall be wondered at for our offenses, and
smitten for our wickedness. For the pain of our punishment shall be laid
upon him, and with his wounds shall we be healed.

As concerning the place of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 3. 1. Cor. 3.
That every one shall be saved, as it were by the fire, How saint Augustine
expounds this place, the 1. of the Cor. 3.
S. Augustine (in his book of the City of God, the 21. book, Chapter.26. And
in his treatise of faith and of works, Chapter.16. And in his Enchiridion,
Chapter 28.) expounds it of the fire of tribulation, and of the cross, and
persecutions of this world, by the which the Lord examineth those that be his.

Gregory upon Job the.29. Chapter. And in his morals the.28. book the.17.
chap. And in the.16. distinct. Chap. whith begins Canones glossae atque. As
touching the books of the Machabees the church does not hold them for
canonical, Gregory says that the books of the Machabees are not canonical.
saying: we do nothing unorderly if we bring in the examples of the books,
which although that they be not canonical yet nevertheless do serve for the
edification of the church.

S. Augustine of the city of God..18. book. 36. Chapter. And of christian
doctrine.2. book.8. chapter. Speaking of the number of the times which have
been sithence the return from Babylon, until the coming of Jesus Christ:
the count and computation of them are not found in the holy Scripturs, which
are called canonical but in the other among whom are the books of the
Machabees.

S. Jerome in the Epistle written unto Chromatius and Heliodorus bishops. And
also in the Bible before the book of the Proverbs. The Church does read the
books of the Machabees: but it does not receive them as canonical. Also,
although that the Church does read the books of Judith, Tobie, and of the
Machabees: yet nevertheless the Church does not receive them as Canonical
scripture. And so the Church may read these two books for the edification of
the people, but not for to confirm ecclesiastical doctrine.

Jerome in his Prologue Galeatus which is set before the book of the Kings.
Says, that he has never found the second book of the Machabees in the
Hebue tongue, but he has found it in the Greek tongue.

And writing against the Pelagians. The second book of the Machabees is
written by Josephus the Historiographer.

Jerome unto Chromatius in the 5. Distinct. Chapter which begins, Sancta.
The Council of Laodicea, the 59. chap. does not name them in the roll of the
canonical Scriptures, and recites that which is of other canonical books
amongst his other Decretals.

The author of the book of ye Machabees in the end of the said book, does
pray that if he have said any thing which is not good, to pardon him: Let us
then willingly pardon his faults.

Of honoring and worshipping of Saints.
S. Augustine of true religion. The last Chapter. Let us not love the outward
and visible spectacles, for fear that in erring and straying from the truth,
and in loving the shadows, we be cast into darkness. That our religion be
not after our fantasies. That our religion be not after our fantasy.
For whatsoever truth it be, it is better than all that our will can feyne and
invent. That our religion be not the worshipping of dead men. Our religion is
not the veneration of dead men.
For if they have lived faithfully, they are not such to demand and ask
such honor, but they would that we should honor him, by whom they being
illuminated, are glad that we shall be servant with them, of their holy
life. We ought then to honor them because of their imitation, and not to adore
and worship them because of their religion. For the same was done through
temporal dispensation for our health, that the virtue of God, and the immutable
wisdom of God which is of one substance, which is coeternall to the father,
took on him man's nature, by the which he would teach us that man ought to honor
the thing which ought to be honored of all creatures, The Aungelles, the Saints
would not that we should honor them, but God.
having understanding and reason. And let us also believe that the varye
Angels them selves the most good and excellent administrators of God, would
it so, to wete that we should honor one only God with them, through whose
contemplation they are blessed. For we are not blessed in seeing and beholding
the Angels, but in beholding the verytie, by the which we do love the
Angels, and do rejoice of them: wherefore we do honor them through love and
charytie and not through service. etc. And let us not build any temples for
them, for they would not be so honored of us: for that they do know when
we be good, we are the temples of the sovereign God: And so it is rightly
written, that it was forbidden to men by the Angels, Apoc. 19.
that they should not worship them, but one only God, under whom they all
were together servants.

Esther. 13
I do greatly fear least that I should set the honor of a man in the steed
of the glory of God, and that I would worship none but only thee my God.

Act. 10.
Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, and worshipped him: But Peter took him
up saying, stand up, for even I my self am a man.

Act. 14. We ought not to do sacrifice unto the saints, nor to offer unto
them, for they are but men.
Barnabas and Paul said unto the people which would have done sacrifice unto
them. O men, why do ye these things: we are mortal men like unto you, and
preach unto you, that ye should turn from these vain Idols unto the living
God, which made heaven and earth and the sea, and all things that are in them.

Chrysostom upon S. Mathewe.45. homilye.23. Chapter. How should ye escape
the damnation of hell? shall that be in buylding the sepulchers of Saints? or
rather in making clean your hearts from malice? does God judge as man does?
man judges man in works, but God judges the heart. But what is that
righteousness to honor the Saints, and to contemn their holiness? The first
degree of fidelity is to love sanctite, afterward the Saints, for the
Saints have not been before holiness, but holiness has been before the
Saints. He then without cause does honor the righteous, which despises
righteousness. Shall the Saints whose sepulcres ye deck and beutifie deliver
you? The Saints give no aid where God hates.
The Saints cannot be the friends of those to whom God is an enemy? Can the
household be in peace and quietness, when the Lord is an aduersarye? How can
ye do it? will the bare name deliver you? for as much as possible ye think,
that ye are the people of God? What profits it the harlot if she have the
name of a chaste woman? Even so does it not profit the sinner, to be called the
servant of God. In the same toward the end he says how can ye escape the
damnation of hell? In buylding of churches, The judgment of god cannot be
avoided in building of Churches.
and not holding the end of the ecclesiastical verity? In reading the
Scriptures, and not believing them? In naming the Prophets Apostls and Martyrs
and not following the works of the Martyrs nor their confession. etc.

Augustine upon Saint John.23. Treatise.5. Chapter. This is the Christian
religion, that one God only be adored and worshipped, and not many Gods. For
nothing makes the soul blessed, but one only God. It is made blessed through
the participation of God, and the soul being feeble, is not made blessed
through the participation of an holy soul, and also the holy soul is not made
blessed through the participation of an angel: but if the weak and feeble soul
requires to be made blessed, We cannot be made blessed by Saints nor by
Angels.
it must demand that whereof the holy soul is made blessed. For thou shall
not be made blessed by an angel, but thou shall be made blessed by him of whom
also the angel is made blessed.

Augustine of the City of God. 10. book. They which are constituted immortal
and blessed in the heavenly places, who together do rejoice themselves of the
participation of their creator, the which are made strong through his
eternity, by good reason would not that we should make any sacrifice unto
them, but only unto him of whom they do acknowledge themselves with us to be
the sacrifice. For with them we are together the City of God, of the which it
is said in the Psalm: Psalm. 87.
Very excellent things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God. etc.

Augustine in his 10. book of the City of God. 16. Chapter. Then if there be
any angels which desire that any should offer unto them sacrifice, Read
Lactantius Firmianus of his heavenly institutions. 2. book, 7. chapter.
truly we ought to prefer those which do not desire that one should
sacrifice unto them, but unto God the creator of all, unto whom they serve. For
thereby they show how entire the love is that they do bear unto us: for they
pretend not to make us subject unto them through sacrifice, but unto him,
through whose contemplation they are also blessed, and they do go about to
lead us unto him from whom they themselves are not turned.

Augustine of the City of God.8. book. Chapter.27. We do not ordain for the
Martyrs, temples, neither sacrifices of divine service: for they are not our
God, but their God is ours. Truly we will honor their memorials, as of the
holy men of God which have fought for the truth, even unto death, that true
religion might be known, and that false religions might be vanquished.

Epiphanius against the Colliridians. We ought not to worship the virgin
Marie.
The body of the virgin Marie was in deed holy, nevertheless she was not God.
Of truth the virgin was a virgin, and honored, nevertheless she was not put
forth to be worshipped, but she hirselfe worshipped him, who according to the
flesh proceeded and was borne of her.

Augustine in his book of the care and sorowfulnesse that men ought to have
for the dead. Chap. 13. If the souls of the dead were present with those of
the living, The saints which are in heaven, have no knowledge of our affairs.
when we do see them in dreams, they would speak unto us. And without
speaking of others, my holy mother, who has followed me by sea and by land
for to live with me, would not forsake me one night. God forbydde that through
the most blessed life in which she is, it should chance that she would not
comfort her sorrowful son (when I have any anguishe in mine heart) whom she
loved dearly, whom she would never see sorrowful. But truly that which holy
David says, is true: Psalm. 27.
My father and mother have forsaken me, but the Lord has taken me up. If then
our fathers have forsaken us, how are they present at our affairs or doings?
And if our parents are not present, who are they among the dead which do know
what we do or suffer? The Prophet Esaias Esaias. 63.
says: Thou art our father, for Abraham knew not us, neither is Israel
acquainted with us. If the worthy Patriarchs were ignorant, or knew not the
things which the people of the world did which were engendered and begotten of
them, unto whom that people were promised, that he would come of their line and
stock, because they have believed in God, and was promised that the people
themselves should come of their root or stock. How is it possible that the
dead should know and help the affairs of the living? It is not possible
that the dead can in any thing help the living.
How do we say that it happened well unto them which are departed, to die
before that the euilles should come which are come after their decease, if it
be so that after their death they perceive all things which shall happen in the
calamity of man's life? Shall it be possible that we can err in saying and
thinking those to be in rest, which are tormented with the life of the living,
which is full of ingratitude? What is that then that God promised unto the
most holiest king Josias for a great benefit? That is, that he should die
before the evils which should happen unto that place, and unto that people
should come, and that to ye end he should not see them. The words of the Lord
are these: 2. Reg. 22
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, as touching the words which thou
heardest: because thine heart did melt, and thou did humble thy self before
the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place, and the
inhabiters of the same, how it should be destroyed and made accursed, and
tarest thy clothes and did weep before me: of that also I have heard, says
the Lord. And therefore see I will receive thee unto thy fathers, and will fet
thee unto thy grave in peace, thine eyes shall see none of the evil which I
will bring upon this place. Josias being afraid of Gods threatenings, did weep,
and rent his clothes, and believed all the euilles to come, by the death which
should come, because that by that means he should rest in peace: in such
sort that he shall not see all those things. Then the souls of the dead are
in one place, where they see not the things which are done or chanced in the
life of men. The souls departed, see not the things which are done in this
life.


S. Jerome in his commentary upon Ezechiel.16. Chapter. The righteousness of
the righteous, shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the wicked shall dwell
upon him: every one shall die in his own sin, and shall be saved through his
righteousness. And the Jews do say in vain, Abraham is our father,
forasmuch as they have not the works of Abraham: We ought to put our trust in
no Saints, but in God only Ierem. 17.
and if there be any thing whereon we must put our trust, let us have our hope
and trust in the Lord only: for the man is cursed which puts his trust in
man, yea though he be holy yea and also a Prophet. We do read in the
Scripture: Psalm. 146.
put not your trust in Princes nor in the sons of men. And again: It is
good to trust in the Lord rather then in Princes, not only in the Princes of
the world, but also in the Prelates of the church, who if they be righteous,
will save only their souls.

Genes. 22.
God said unto Abraham, in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be
blessed. S. Paul says that the seed is Christ. Galat. 3.


Act. 4.
Among men there is given none other name under heaven whereby we must be
saved, but by the name of Christ,

Esaias. 55.
Seek the Lord, while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nie.

The time shall come: Joel. 2. Romans 10.
that whosoever that calls on the name of the Lord shall be saved.

He is ritche unto all that call on him. Romans 10.


Augustine in his manuell.22. chapter. And of the words of the Lord 40.
Sermon. All my hope is in the death of my Lord, his death is my merit, my
refuge my health, my life and my resurrection.

Epiphanius in his.3. book the 2. commentarye. Speaking of the Christians
which committed Idolatrye with the dead bodies says, In the old time there
were christians which committed idolatry to the dead bodies, as also now
in our time.
many things and the like unto this have been done in the world for the
seduction of the deceived, not that the Saints are a cause of offense to any
man. But because that the thoughts of men cannot be kept quiet, but are
perverted and turned into evil. For although that the Virgin Marye be dead and
buried: her sleep is in honor, and the death in chastity, and the crown in
Virginity: or be it that she has been killed (as it is written the sword
shall pearce through thy soul) among the Martyrs, that is her glory and the
holy body of her, Luc. 2.
by whom the light is come into the world in praises: or be it that she do
continewe. For it is not impossible to God to do all that he will: for the
end of her is not known of any man, we must not honor the Saints besides the
deutye, but we must honor the Lord of them. Then let that error of the seduced
cease: for Marye is not God, and has another body from heaven, but of
conception of man and of woman, disposed nevertheless according to the
promise, as the body of Isaac.

Chrysostom of the seven Machabees 2. homilye. Speaking of the seven
Machabees. Stay not upon the ashes of the bodies of Saints, and of the
relikes of their flesh, and to all the bones which are consumed by the time.
But open the eyes of faith, and behold the hidden things of the heavenly
virtue and of the grace of the holy spirit, and shining of the clerenesse of
the heavenly light.

Jude. 1.
Yet Michael the Archangell when he strove against the devil, and disputed
about the body of Moses, durst not blame him with cursed speaking, but says
the Lord rebuke thee.

Moses the servant of the Lord dyed there in the land of Moab at the
commandment of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 34. The sepulcher of Moses is unknown.
And was buried in a valley in the land of Moab besides Beth Pheor: but no man
wist of his sepulcher unto this day.

John was beheaded of Herod, Mat. 14. John was not put in a reliqu^rie, but
in a sepulcher. Act. 8. Genes. 3.
and after his disciples came, and took up his body, and buried it. And
certain men fearing God, carried Stephen among them, to be buried and made
great lamentation over him.

God said unto Adam, earth thou art, and unto earth shall thou return.

Eusebius in the ecclesiastical history 4. book.15. Chapter. The devil
inuyted Niceta the father of Herodes and brother of Alces, to obtain of the
judge that he would not suffer the body of Saint Policarpe to be buried,
fearing (says he) least the Christians should leave and forsake him which
has been crucified, and would begin to worship him here. etc. The
faithful will answer: The miserable men do not know that we can never
forsake Jesus Christ, The faithful cannot forsake Jesus Christ and adore
saints.
who has suffered death and passion for us, and that we cannot adore or
worshipe any other then he whom we do know to be the true God. And
afterward they gathered the bones of the Martyr, which were burned, and have
put them in a sepulcher. etc.

Chrysostom in his imperfect work upon Saint Mathewe. 23. Chapter. Mat. 23.
They make their Phylactaries broad. etc. O ignorante priests (says he) is
not the Gospel read every day in the church, The Gospel profits no thing to
be hanged about our neck, nor written in a book, but in the heart.
that is to say in the congregation, and heard of all? And if the Gospel put
into the ears of many do not profit them any thing at all to salvation, do
thou think that it will profit them any thing to hang it about their necks?
Furthermore I do ask thee, wherein consists the truth of the Gospel, in
the figures of the letters, or in the understanding of the same? If the virtue
of the Gospel does consiste in the figures of letters written, thou do
well to carry them hanging about thy neck: But if the virtue of the Gospel
consists in the true sense and true understanding (as thou must believe) thou
shall then do better to bear and carye them in thy heart than about thy
neck. But other which would show themselves to be more holy, add with the
letters of the Gospel, one part of the hemme or of the hears, to wete, of
Jesus Christ, and do hang them about their neck. O wickedness, they would
show that there is greater holiness in the robes than in the proper body of
Jesus Christ. And seeing that they are not healed in receiving the body of
Jesus Christ, they think to be through the holiness of the hemmes: they
despair of the mercy of God, and put their trust only in the robe of man.
And thou will say unto me: Act. 19.
Did not S. Paul give his partlets and napkins for to heal those that were
diseased? How we must understand that Paul gave his partlets for to heal
the diseased.
I do confess the same, but that was before that men had knowledge of the
true God, whom he declared and showed forth. And it was good reason, and to the
same had Saint Paul respect, to the end that through the holiness of the men
which do declare the true God, they should acknowledge his virtue and power:
but now it is folly. For sithence that we have the power of God, what does it
profit to know the puissance and strength of men.

Act. 3.
Ye men of Israel, why maruayle ye at this? or why look ye so steadfastly on us,
as though we by our own power or godliness had made this man go? The God of
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers has glorified his son
Jesus. etc.

Esaias. 42.
I my self, whose name is the Lord, which give my power to none other, neither
mine honor to the Gods.

Epiphanius in the 2. Tome. 3. book, Heresy. 79. God which is the word, has
taken flesh of the virgin, nevertheless, not to the end that the virgin
should be worshipped, God has taken flesh of the holy virgin, not to the
end that the virgin should be worshipped.
or that we should make her God, or to that end that we should offer in her
name. And again he says: that the father, the son, and the holy ghost
should be worshipped, that none do worship Marie, nor any woman, nor any
man. That mystery is due unto God. The angels themselves are not capable of
such glory. Anon after he says: Let not the women say, we will honor the
Queen of heaven. etc.

Of one only mediator.
S. Augustine upon the first Epistle of S. John, the first treatise. THis manne
here has not said, 1. John. 2.
ye have an advocate with the father: but if any man have sin, we have an
advocate with the father. He has not said, ye have: nor has said, ye have
me. And also he has not said, ye have also very Christ: S. John did put
himself in the number of sinners, that he may have Christ for an advocate.
but he has put Christ, and not himself: and has said, we have, and not ye
have. He had rather to put himself in the number of sinners, for to have Christ
for an advocate, than to put himself an advocate for Christ, and to be found
amongst the proud damned creatures. My brethren we have an advocate with the
father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he it is yt obtayneth grace for our
sins. He yt holds this doctrine, holds no heresy, nor does any schism.
For from whence come the schisms or divisions, but when men say, Prou. 17.
Iam. 4.
we be righteous? when men say we do sanctify those that be defiled, we
do justify the infidels, we ask and obtain it. But what is that that John
says? If any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, to wete, Jesus
Christ the righteous. But some will say, do not the Saints then ask for us?
do not the Bishops then pray for the people? understand the Scriptures,
and mark that also the Prelates do commend themselves unto the people, in
praying also together for us.

Collo. 4. 2. These. 3.
The Apostle prays for the people, and the people do pray for the Apostle.
My brethren, we do pray for you, but pray ye also for us. Let all the members
pray one for another, and the head shall be the mediator for all. Therefore it
is no maruayle that he said that which follows: Some men would show Jesus
Christ by sight, those do divide the Church.
where he stops the mouth of those which deuyde the Church of God. For he
says: we have Jesus Christ the righteous for an advocate: he it is that
obtayneth grace for our sin, for those which ought to talk and say: Mat. 24.
Lo, here is Christ, or there is Christ, and for those which will show in
part him which has redeemed all, and possesses all things.

Augustine against Parmenian in his 2. and.6. book.8. Chapter. The Christians
do commend them selves the one to the other in their prayers, Jesus Chist is
the true and only mediator.
but he which prays for all, for whom no man can pray, is the true and only
mediator. Although that Saint Paul were one of the chefest members,
nevertheless in as much as he was a member (knowing that the Lord Jesus the
true hie priest for all the church and congregation was entered into the
sanctuary of God, not by figure or image, but in truth) he commends him self
to ye prayers of the faithful: and makes not him self a mediator between God
and man, but requires that all the members of the body do pray also for him,
as he also prays for other, according as all men ought to have mutual care
and compassion. In this manner the mutual prayers of all the members which do
travail yet upon the earth, ought to mount and ascend unto the head which is
gone before to heaven, in whom we have remission and forgiveness of our
sins: for if Saint Paul were a mediator, the other Apostles should be also,
and so there would be many mediators, If Paul were a mediator, the other
Apostles should be also, and so there were many mediators. 1. Tim. 2.
the which will not agree with that which is said in an other place, that
there is one God, and one mediator between God and man. etc.

Ambrose in his book of Isaac, and of blessed life. Jesus Christ is our mouth
by whom we do speak unto the father, or eye by whom we do see the father,
or right hand, by whom we do offer unto the father, with out which mediator
there is no nerenesse toward God, neither to us, nor to all the Saints.

Augustine in his Quinquagesima upon the.94. psalm. If thou do seek thy
mediator for to bring thee unto God, he is in heaven, and prays there for
thee, as he dyed for thee in earth. It is most true that we do not imagine
that he kneeling upon his knees makes humble supplication: But we do
understand it with the Apostle, that he appears so before the face of God,
that the virtue of his death is auaylable to perpetual intercession. Romans 8.
And he being entered into the sanctuary of heaven, represents only the
prayers of the people, who have not near access unto God.

Augustine upon the Epistle of S. John.2. Treatise. But in whose name be our
sins pardoned? Is it by the name of Augustine? Then it is not also through
the name of Donatus. Our sins are not pardoned us in the name of S. Paul,
nor of S. Peter.
Do thou see that it is of Augustine, or of Donatus? neither is it by the
name of Paull nor of Peter. In love the mother bringing forth the little
children, opens her bowels in the Apostle, unto those which divided the
church, and which desired to make many parts of the unity. And by words does
somewhat break his words, and bewayleth those whom he sees to de carried out,
and calls again unto one name, those which would make them many names, and
repealeth them back from his love, that Christ be only loved: and says, 1.
Cor. 1.
was Paul crucified for you? either were ye baptized in the name of Paul?
what says he? I will not that ye be to me, but with me, be with me, we are
all to him which is dead for us, who is crucified for us.

Augustine in his Quinquagesima, upon the 108. Psalm. The prayer which is not
made through Jesus Christ, not only does not put away sins, but it is sin
it self.

Chrysostom in the.16. homily, of the profit of the Gospel. Mat. 15. The
Cananite prayed not the Apostles, but only Christ Jesus.
Speaking of the woman that was a Cananite. But tell me O thou woman, how have
thou been so bold to come unto him, in as much as thou art a poor sinner? I
know very well, said she, what I do. Behold the wisdom of the woman, she
neither prayed to James nor John, she did not go unto Peter, and regarded not
all the assembly of the Apostles, she sought not a mediator, but in stead of
all those, she took repentance for her companion, who holds the place of an
advocate. etc.

In the same. Will thou know that when we do pray for our selves, we do more
toward God, than when other do pray for us? This woman did cry out, Mat. 15.
and the disciples approached unto him, and said: God will give unto us rather
or sooner that which we desire, when we pray, tha^ when other pray for us.
send her away, for she cries after us. And he said unto them: I am not
sent, but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then she came and
worshipped him, saying: Lord help me. But he answered and said: It is not
good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to whelps. And she said:
truth Lord, for in deed the whelps eat of the crummes which fall from their
masters table. Then Jesus answered and said unto her: O woman great is thy
faith, be it unto thee, even as thou desire. Do thou see how he refused,
when the other desired him? But when she hirself cried in praying for the gift,
he accorded unto her. For he said unto them (when they entreated him) I am not
sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. But he said unto that
woman: great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou desire.

In the same. It is not needful to have patrons with God, It is not needful
to have patro^s with God.
nor to run much here and there for to entreat others, but although that
thou art alone, and that thou art without a patron, and that by thy self thou
do pray unto God, thou shall have altogether that thou desire. For God
will not so easily give it when other men do pray for us, as when we do
pray our selves: yea although that we are full of many evils.

Chrysostom upon Genesis. 43. Chapter. We are constrained to set forth all
this history, to the end to learn, that we do not so much by others as by
our selves. So that we do approach or come with a pure and vigilant thought.
Also the same woman having the disciples praying for her, profited nothing at
all, until such time as she presented her self, for to draw unto her the
mercy of the Lord.

Chrysostom in the first Tome. 5. homily of the first chapter of S. Mathewe.
We may a great deal sooner be assured by our prayer and supplication, than by
the prayer of another. For God will will not give so soon our health unto
others which do pray for us, as unto our selves, to the end that by the same
that we desire, his ire and wrath may be appeased in us: We may come to do
better, and that we may gather the trust of a good conscience.

Even so truly had he pity of that Cananite. Mat. 15. Luc. 7. Luc. 23.
And in like manner he did give salvation unto the harlote. Even so did he
transporte and carye the thief that did hang upon the cross into Paradise,
not entreated of any patrons, neither through the purity of any.

There is one God and one mediator between God and man, 1. Tim. 2.
which is the man Christ Jesus.

Jesus Christ is risen again: Romans 8.
who is also at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

He is able also perfectly to save them that come unto God by him, Heb. 7*
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

Jesus Christ says. I am the way, John. 14.
and the truth and the life, no man commethe unto the father but by me.

I am the door, John. 10.
he that enters not in by the door into the sheepefolde, but clymeth up some
other way, the same is a thief and a robber.

Thou O Lord only do know the 3. Reg. 8.
hearts of all men.

Psalm. 44.
God knows the very secrets of the heart.

Luke 16.
Jesus Christ says. God knows your hearts.

Mat. 11.
Also: Come unto me al ye that are wearye and laden, and I will ease you.

Galat. 6.
While we have time let us do good unto all men.

S. Ambrose upon the first Epistle to the Romans first Chapter. Men have of
custom used a miserable excuse, saying, that by them men may go unto God,
even as men come unto kings by the earls and lords. Is there any man so
mad, and so obliuyous of his safety which does attrybute and give the honor of
a king unto an earl or lord, for if any such be found which dare say the
same, they are worthily condemned as culpable of his majesty. And yet those
do not hold those men gyltye or culpable which do attrybute the honor of the
name of God unto the creatures. And in forsaking the Lord, Men forsake God, and
do worship the servants.
And in forsaking the Lord, they do worship those which are servants with
them. As though the serving of God were worldly gains. For the same cause men
do find to have access and coming unto the king by the means of the earls
and lords: because that the king is a man, and does not well know whom he
ought to trust of his common wealth. But for to win and obtain the favor of
God, unto whom nothing is hid (for he knows the hearts of all men) we have
no need that any do entreat for to present our supplication, but with an
humble and lowlye heart.

Of images.
Whether it be lawefull to have them in the temples of the christians. Moses
said: Deuteronomy. 4.
Take heed unto your selves therefore, that ye forget not the appointment of
the Lord your God, which he made with you: and that ye make you no graven
image, We ought to make no Images.
of what soever it be that the Lord thy God has forbidden thee. For the Lord
thy God is a consuming fire, and a ielous God. If after thou haste gotten
children and childrens children, and have dwelt long in the land, ye shall
marrye your selves and make graven images after the likeness of what soever it
be, and shall work wickedness in the sight of the Lord thy God to provoke
him. I call heaven and earth to record unto you this day, that ye shall
shortly perish from the land. etc.

Deuteronomy. 4.
Again: The Lord spoke unto you out of the fire, and ye heard the voice of the
words, but saw no image, but heard a voice only. Those are greatly deceived
who vvoulde figure God being invisible by visible things.
And he declared unto you his couenante, which he commanded you to do, even
ten verses and wrote them in two tables of stone. And the Lord commanded me
the same season, to teach you ordinances and laws, for to do them in the
land whyther ye go to possess it. Take heed unto your selves, diligently
as pertaining unto your souls, for ye saw no manner of image the day when
the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb out of the fire: least ye mar your selves,
and make you graven images, after whatsoever likeness it be: whither after the
likeness of man or woman.

I my self whose name is the Lord, Esaias. 42.
which give my power to none other, neither mine honor to the Gods.

Thou shall worship no strange God, Exodus 34.
for the Lord is called ielous, because he is a ielous God: etc. Thou shall
make thee no Gods of metal.

To whom then will ye liken God? Esaias. 40. Unto vvho^ shall we liken God, he
is a spirit incomprehensible.
or what similytude will ye set up unto him? shall the caruer make him a carved
image? and shall the goldsmith cover him with gold? or cast him into a form
of silver plates. etc. Know ye not this? heard ye never of it? has it not
been preached unto you sense the beginning. etc. To whom now will ye liken me,
and to whom shall I be like says the holy one? lift up your eyes on hie, and
consider, who has made those things.

Whom will ye make me like in fashion or image, that I may be like him? Esaias.
46.
ye will take out silver and gold out of your purses, and way it, and hyre a
goldsmith to make a God of it, that men may kneel down and worship it: yet
must he be taken on men's shoulders and borne, and set in his place, that he
many stand and not move. Alas that men should cry unto him which gives no
answer: and delivers not the man that calls upon him, from his trouble.
Consider this well, and be ashamed. Go into your own selves (O ye runnagates)
Remember the things which are paste, sense the beginning of the world, that I
am God, and that there is else no God, yea and that there is nothing like unto
me.

Sapien. 15.
No man can make a God like unto him: for seeing he is but mortal him self, it
is but mortal that he makes with unrighteous hands. He him self is better
then they whom he worshippeth, for he lived though he was mortal, but so did
never they.

Leuit. 26.
The Lord has said, ye shall make you no Idolles nor graven image, neither
rear you up any pillars, neither ye shall set up any images of stone in your
land to bow your selves thereto, for I am the Lord your God.

Deuteronomy. 11.
Beware that your hearts deceive you not, that ye turn aside, and serve
strange Gods, and worship them.

Deuteronomy. 27.
Cursed be the man that makes any carved image, The caruers of Images are
accursed.
or image of metal (an abomination unto the Lord the work of the hands of
the craftesman) and puts it in a secret place: and all the people shall
answer and say Amen.

The Images of the people are but silver and gold, Psalm. 115. Psalm. 135.
even the work of men's hands.

The Lord God said: Deuteronomy. 7. Exodus 34.
ye shall overthrow their aultars, break down their pyllers, cut down their
groves, and burn their graven images with fire. For thou art an holy Nation
unto the Lord thy God.

They hew down a tree in the wood, Iere. 10.
with the hands of the workman, and fashion it with the axe: they cover it
over with gold or silver, they fasten it with nails and hammers that it move
not. etc. All these things are the works of ye crafty workman. But the Lord
is a true God, a living God, and an everlasting king.

Jeroboam said: Behold your Gods, 3. Reg. 12
O Israel, which brought you out of the land of Egypt. And he put the one in
Bethel, and the other in Dan. And that doing was a cause of sin.

Joshua. 24.
Now then fear the Lord, and serve him in pureness and truth: and put away
the Gods which your fathers served on the other side of the floude, and in
Egypt, and serve the Lord. But if it seem evil unto you to serve the Lord,
then choose you this day whom you will serve. etc. And the people answered
and said: God forbid that we should forsake the Lord, and serve strange Gods.

Sapien. 14
The honoring of abominable Images is the cause, the beginning and end of all
evil.

Act. 17.
We ought not to think that the Godheade is like unto gold, silver, or stone,
graven by craft and imagination of man.

Romans 1. The foolish men would resemble God to a man.
When they counted themselves wise, they became fools: for they turned the
glory of the incorruptible God, to the similitude of the image of mortal man,
and of birds, and of four footed beasts, and of creeping beasts: wherefore
God gave them even up unto their hearts lust, unto uncleanness, to defile
their own bodies between themselves, which turned the truth of God unto a
lie, and worshipped and served the creatures, neglecting the Creator, which is
blessed for ever. Amen. For this cause also God gave them up unto shameful
lusts. etc.

Be ye no worshippers of Images as were some of them, 1. Cor. 10.
according as it is written: the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up again to play.

Fly from idolatry. 1. Cor. 10. 1. John. 5. 1. Cor. 8.


Babes keep your selves from Idols.

We know that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other
God but one. And though there be that are called Gods, whether in heaven or in
earth (as there be many Gods and many Lords) yet unto us there is but one
God, which is ye father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him.

Athanasius against the Gentiles. The Gentiles and Paynims say unto me: how is
God known by the Images, is it by the thing or cause which is outwardly, or
by the form and figure which is graven and put within the thing? If it be
through the thing it self, what need is there to make the form or figure? For
as much then, as before that such portraytures were made, God was manifested
and showed forth, by the means of all things: Inasmuch also as all things do
give witness of the glory of God. If the pourtracture be the cause of the
heavenly knowledge, what needs it painting or any other matter or thing? And
wherefore do not men come unto the knowledge of God by the true creatures
rather then by figures and remembrances? Those which do grave Images for to
represent God, do wicked things.
for truly the glory of God should be more clearly known if it were
manifested by the reasonable and unreasonable creatures then by those which are
without souls and immouable. Then when you do engraue and make the images and
pourtractures for to make us to know God, truly you do a wicked thing.

Lactantius Firmianus of his godly institutions, against the Gentiles and
idolaters. 2. book. God is above man, and is not set here by low, but we must
seek him in the hie region, and therefore it is most certain yt religion is
not in the places where there are images. For if religion consists in divine
things, Religion is not where there are Images.
and that it is so that there is nothing divine but in heavenly and celestial
things, we must then conclude that there is no religion in images.

He says further in his second book and second chapter. Read the 3.4. and 5.
Chapters.
That God whose spirit and puissance is spread abroad every where, cannot
be absent. The image then is always superfluous.

Lactantius Firmianus in the.2 book and.4. Chapter. Seneca did deryde and
mock the folly of the auncientes, saying: We are not twyse children (as the
proverb is) ther^ is notwithstanding great difference by the same that we
being old, and of age to judge and discern the good, should occupye our mind
to such follyes, that to these great puppets, beutified and decked up, men
should offer oyntmentes, incens, and good smells, to those that have mouths
without teeth.

Clement in his.5. book unto James the brother of the Lord. Men do adore
images in the honor of God, which is against God
We do adore and worship the visible images in the honor of the invisible
God, the which truly is false. For if ye will truly worship the image of God
in doing good unto man, you shall worship the true image of God in him. For the
image of God is in all men, and the similitude is not in all. But only there
where the soul is gentle, and the thought pure. If the^ you will truly honor
the Image of God, we shall declare unto you that which is veritable and true,
The honor of the image of God. Mat. 25.
that you do good unto man which is made after the Image of God, that you do
honor and reverence him, that you administer meat unto him which is an
hungered, and drink unto him that is a thirst, clothing unto him which is
naked, visit those that be sick, and lodge and harbor the stranger, and
help the necessities of him that is put in prison. The same is the thing which
shall be reputed truly to be done unto God. And therefore those things do
come unto the honor of the Image of God, insomuche that he which has not done
them, shall be esteemed to have done injury unto the Image of God. What is
that then to honor God, to run here and there after Images of stone and
wood? and to honor the vain figures and without souls, as divine things, and
to despise man, in whom truly is the Image of God? And which is more, be ye
certain that he which does commit homicide or adultrie, and all that which is
pain or injury to men, the Image of God is violated and defiled in all such
things. For it is great infidelity against God, to hurt man. Then when thou
do unto another, that which thou would not suffer, thou do defile and
mar the Image of God most wickedly. Understand then that such subjection is
of the serpent which is hid within you, the which does make you believe that
you may be faithful when you do honor the insensible things, and that you are
not unfaithful, when ye hurt those that be sensible, and have reason.

In the same book. Who is so wicked, or so unthankful, It is great
infidelity to receive the goodness of God, and to render thanks unto the
Images of vvood or stone.
which to obtain and receive the benefit of God, does render thanks unto
wood or stones. Therefore awake ye, and give good ear unto your health.
Truly God has no need of any man, and requires nothing, and is nothing at
all hurt. But it is only we which are aided or hurt, in that that we are
either thankful or unthankful.

Again in the same book. They are esteemed verilye to be righteous and just,
which have in veneration, not the things which are done for the administration
of the world, but the creator of them and of the world: also those things
do rejoice themselves when he is honored and worshipped: and cannot abide to
see that the honor of the creator should be given to the creature. Adoration
apertaineth only unto the true God.
For adoration is a thing belonging unto God alone, who only was not created:
And all things are his works. As then it is the property of him which only
was not created to be God: in like manner, all that which has been made, is
not truly God. We ought then before all things to understand the deception of
the old serpent, and his cautelous suggestions, who as through wisdom has
deceived you: As by a certain reason does creep into your senses. And
beginning at the head, does slide unto the interior parts, esteeming your
deception to be great gain.

Lactantius Firmianus. 6. book. 2. Chapter. Would not a man judge him to be
out of his wit, which does offer candles of wax for an oblation and gift unto
God, which is the author and giver of light?

S. Ambrose in his.4. Tome upon the 118. Psalm. 10. Sermon. The Gentyles do
adore and worship the wood, because they think that the same was the image
of God: but ye image of the invisible God is not in that which is seen, but
is altogether in that which is not seen. Thou do then see that we do walk
among many of the images of Christ. Let us take heed that we be not found to
take the crown from the image, which crown Christ has put upon every one.
Let us take heed to take nothing from them, unto whom we ought to add and
give. etc.

Ambrose of the death of Theodosius. Tome. 3. Helena then did find the title,
she worshipped the king, and not the wood: For the same is the error of the
Gentiles, and the vanity of the infidels: But she worshipped him which did
hang on the wood, written in the title. etc.

Lucyan Bishop of Antioche confessed his faith before the Judges, as recyteth
Eusebius in his ecclesiastical history the. 9. book and.3. chapter. Saying
thus among other things. The omnipotente God who was not made by our hands,
but by whom we are created and composed having pity of our error, has sent
his wisdom in this world, taking upon him our flesh, for to show and teach
us, that we ought to seek the same God We ought not to seek God by the Images.
(who has made heaven and earth) not in images made with man's hands, but in
eternal things.

The counsel of Illyberis or Granado, the.36. decretall. It has benne
concluded yt there should be no painting in the temples: to the end that the
same which ought to be worshipped and served be not painted on the walls.

Augustine of the city of God. 4. book. 9. and.31. Chapters. Those which have
put forth first of all the images, have taken from the world the fear of God:
And have augmented error.

Augustine upon the.113. psalm. No man can pray or worship, beholding and
looking so toward the images, but that he is touched as if he were heard from
thence, or else he looks and hops to have that he does demand.

Furthermore he says, Images do dravve the senses of the vveake unto vayn
things.
men cannot place and set the images in hie and honorable places, for to be
looked on of those that pray and worship, but that they do draw the senses
of the weak, as if they had senses and souls.

S. Augustine in his Cataloge of heresies. There was a woman named Marcelin,
one of the sect of the Carpocratines, which did worship the image of Jesus
Christ, and of Saint Paul, of Homer and of Pythagoras: prostrating hirselfe
before them, and offering unto them incence.

She is put in the roll of the heresies by Saint Augustine.

The counsel of Constantinople celebrated by Constantine the fifth, Eutropius of
the deeds of the Romans.
and by.38. Bishops of Asya and of Greece (people excellently learned, among
whom the cheefeste were the Bishop of Ephesus, the Bishop of Perga, and
the Bishop of Constantinople, and was begone the.15. day of Februarye,
continuing until the 15. day of August, decreed that it was not lawful for
those that believe in God through Jesus Christ, Images forbidden in Temples.
to have any images of the creator nor of creatures in the temples for to
worship them: But that all such things ought to be taken away out of the
temples, according to Gods law and for to avoid offense.

As Much has the second counsel of Toledo decreed condemning images.

The counsel of Illyberis or Granado, in the.48. Canon. Those are rejected
from the Church, which will not abstain from Images.
We have often times admonished the faithful, that they do let and hinder
as much as they can that there be no images in their houses, which if they fear
the force and strength of their servants, yet at the least they them selves
avoid from them: And if they do it not, that they be reputed as strangers
from the Church.

Origin against Celsus. 8. book. Celsus says: That we do avoid the Temples,
Aultars, and Images, to the end that they be not builded nor edified by us,
forasmuch as he esteems that the faith of this our invincible communion and
charity, and the which cannot be expressed that it is a faction or sect. In
the mean season notwithstanding he does not see, that there is in us a
spirit of righteousness, in stead of the Altar and of the temple, out of
whom without doub^e do go most sweet sauors and encense, that is to say
prayers and requests proceeding from a pure conscience. And to that effect
Saint John says thus in his Apocalips, Apoc. 8.
that the incense and odours are the prayers of the Saints. Psalm. 141.
And David prayed saying: Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as the
incense Lord. Furthermore these are images and oblations agreeable unto God,
which are not made by unclean works, but formed and fashioned in us by the
word of God: Even so then all men have such images in them, I do mean those
which have acquired and gotten by heavenly doctrine, continency,
righteousness, strength wisdom, and a true fear of God: And the buyldinges
of all other virtues, the which I do believe to be reasonable to bear honor
unto that which is the true patron of all images, A recital for to make such
Images which are pleasing unto God. Romans 6.
to wete the image of the invisible God, which is the only God, or rather those
which do kill the old man with his works, putting on the new man, the which
is renewed in the knowledge of God, after the image of him which has created
him. And then they shall make such images, as that great and sovereign
workman desires. And incontinently afterward he says, to the end that I
may speak in few words, all christians do endeuer them selves greatly to
buyld such Aulters as we have spoken of, and such images as we have declared,
not of things insensible and without life, The devils dvvell in the temples of
Idolaters.
neither of Gods and Idolles of wicked spirits, neither of dwellinges where
the devils do make their abiding: But of places capable of the spirit of God
which dwells where virtue is: and also of that great God which has created
us to his own image, and which does approach nigh unto us, as coming to his
domestical and familiar friends: And in such sort that the spirit of Christ
be resident in us, which are so figured and fashioned. And the heavenly word
willing to set the same forth, has described God making promise to the
righteous, and speaking unto them after this manner: Leuit. 26. 2. Cor. 6.
I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people. And
the heavenly word has also described the savior saying thus: John. 14.
He that has my commandementes and keeps them, the same is he that loves
me, and he that loves me shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and
will show mine own self unto him manifestlye. Whosoever then would have
such aultars, as I have lately declared, that he do seek diligently, and if
he think it good, that he do confer with such aultars. Immediatlye
afterward he says, speaking of Images: Truly one ought to know that they
are insensible, and without moving: and in process of time they will become
rotten and corrupt: and that ours shall dwell and abide in the immortal soul,
as long as it shall have any reasonable soul dwelling in it.

S. Cyprian writing against Demetrius, first Treatise. What beastlynesse of
mind is it, or rather what blind foolish rage of mad men is it, not to go
from darkness, for to come unto the light. And when those which are tied and
bound with the bonds of eternal death, will not receive ye hope of
immortality, and not to fear God, threatening and saying that he that does
sacrifice unto any Gods, save unto the Lord only, let him die without
redemption. Exo. 22. Esaias. 2.
Also: They have worshipped those which their hands have made and fashioned,
and man did prostrate and humble himself before it, and I will not pardon
them. Wherefore do thou humble and bow thy self before the false Gods?
Wherefore doste thou bow thy wretched body before Images that are filthye, and
that have no understanding, and before the works of the earth? God has made
thee right and straight, in comparison of other crooked creatures, making them
to look down on the earth. Thou have a hie look, and a face to behold thy
God: behold him, fix thine eyes on him, seek God on hie, that thou may be
exempted from the low hell: lift up thine heart unto celestial and heavenly
things. Those which do honor images, do honor the devil.
Wherefore doste thou cast thy self again to the ground, in the fall of
death with the serpent whom thou honor? why doste thou fall headlong in the
ruin of the devil through him? Keep the highness in the which thou art
borne, persevere and continue to be such a one as thou wast made of God: lift
up thy heart with the stature of thy body, and the shape of thy visage, that
thou may know God, know thy self first: leave and forsake Idols which
man's error has found out. Turn unto God, who will assist and help thee
after when thou shall call upon him. Believe in Jesus Christ whom the father
has sent for to quicken and amend us. etc.

Confounded be all they that worship Images, and delight in their Idols. Psalm.
97. Those are cursed that worship Images. 2. Cor. 6. Exodus 20. Deuteronomy. 5. Psalm.
81.


How agrees the temple of God with Images.

God did expressly forbid in the old law Images, saying thus: Thou shall have
none other Gods in my sight. Thou shall make thee no graven Image, neither any
similitude that is in heaven above, either in the earth beneath, or in the
waters that are beneath the earth. See that thou neither bow thy self unto
them, neither serve them: for I the Lord thy God, am a jealous God.

4. Reg. 18. Ezechias did burn the Image of Jesus Christ, because it was
abused.
Ezechias king of Judah, ordained that the Image of Christ should be burned
(that is to say, the brazen Serpent that God commanded to be made in the
wilderness) because that when it was borne about by the people, they did burn
sacrifice unto it, and honored it, yet the said Serpent was the image of
Christ, prefiguring him as he himself has said in the Gospel.
Notwithstanding Ezechias brake it in pieces, because that they abused it: And
he was greatly praised for it of the Lord.

Objection. The Canon law in the Chapter which begins Praelatum of
consecration, distinct. 3. The Canon law permits those which can read,
to have the scriptures.
That which the Scripture does unto the readers, the very same does the payntor
unto the gasing fools or Idiotes. For in the same the ignorant people do see
that which they ought to follow, in the same those do read which do not
know any letters.

Answer. The Prophet Abacuc in his.2. chap. answers to the same Canon.
What helps then the graven images for the workman has left it, Abac. 2.
it is molted and an image and a thing showing dreams and lies.

Gregory writing unto the Bishop Marsill, in his.4. Epistle. We had praised
thy doing, if thou had forbidden to worship images: which have been set in
the Temple not for to worship, but only for to instruct the spirits of the
ignorant. etc.

The Prophet Ieremye in his.10. Chap. answers unto Gregory. In that only
point they are altogether brutish and do folishly, Iere. 10.
for the wood is an instruction of vanity.

Jesus Christ says: Marc. 7.
In vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men.
For ye lay the commandment of God aparte, and observe the tradition of men.

S. Jerome upon the Prophet Esaias. 57. Chapter. There was not a place that was
left undefiled with the filthiness of Idolatrye, in such sort that behind the
doors and posts of their houses they have set up images, Esa. 57.
whom they do call their priuye and familiar Gods. And by and by after he
says: The Cities of many countries and provinces are in that error, and do
keep that wicked custom of the elders. Yea and Rome the mistres of the
world, does the like honoring the image of Ceres, as their sauegarde, through
out every house, with torches and candels, to the end that they have
memorialls, which should admonish them of their invented error, as well in the
coming in as at the going out of the house. etc.

Gala. 3. We have a true Image of the crucifixe in the Gospel.
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that ye should not obey the truth?
to whom Jesus Christ before was descrybed in your sight, and among you
crucified.

Epiphanius the good Doctor in the Epistle written unto John Bishop of
Jerusalem, and afterward translated by S. Jerome out of Greek into Latin.
Beside that that I have heard (says he) that some did murmr against me, for
as much as when we did go unto a holy place which is called Bethel, to the
end that I might make there with thee some prayer, according to the
ecclesiastical custom: and after that we were arrived to the village, which is
called Anablatha, I saw in passing by a Lamp burning, and after I demanding
what place that was, one answered to me, it was a Temple. And when I was
entered in for to pray, I found therein a veil hanging at the gate painted,
having the image of Jesus Christ or of some kind of Saint: Epiphanine entering
into a temple of the christians, found there the Image of Jesus Christ, the
which he did tear in pieces.
For I do not well remember whose image that was: Then as I saw in the
church of Jesus Christ an image of a man hanging, against the authorytie of
the holy Scriptures, I did tear and rent it in pieces, and gave counsel unto
the keepers of the said place, rather to wrappe some poor dead body in it,
and to carry it away. They did murmr against me saying: if he would have
cut it of, were it not reasonable that he should give an other veil in change?
I hearing the same promised to give one, and to send it incontinent. But there
was a little time between them, whilst that I searched for a certain veil
of price for to send in stead of the other. For I did think that I must
send one of Cypres, but now I have sent one such as I could find, and I
desire thee that thou doeste command the priests of the said place to
receive this veil of this bringer which is sent from us. And to command
fromhenceforth in the Church of Christ that they do hang no more any such
vayles, which are against our religion: For it becomes thy honestye and it is
also reasonable that rather thou have a care to take from the Church of Jesus
Christ all scrupulous things, which are not meet for the people given thee in
charge.

S. Jerome does give witness of Epiphanius writing to Pammachius against the
errors of John Bishop of Jerusalem. Thou have Epiphanius the Bishop, who by
the letters that he has sent unto thee, has called thee openly Heriticke:
Truly thou art no greater then he, neither of age nor of knowledge, neither in
holiness of life, neither according to the testimonye of all the world, The
heretics had thought that it had turned to their dishonestie, if they had
persecuted Epiphanius for his holy life.
during the time that the heresye of the Aryans and Eunomians did reign in all
the East countries, except Pope Athanasius and Paulin: when thou would not
communicate, or have fellowship with those of the West parts, neither with
those that did confess the name of God in exile. Either he was not heard of
Euticius during the time that he was but priest of the Monastery, nor after
that he was Bishop of Cypres, he was not touched of Valens, for he was always
so honored and esteemed that the Heritickes them selves being in their
kingdom, would have thought that the same should have turned to their
ignomynie and sclander if they should haue-persecuted so excellent a man.

Also the history Tripartite. 9. book. Chapter. 48. affirms. That he did
many miracles.

The said Epiphanius has written a book called the book of heresies, out of
which Saint Augustine allegeth witnesses. He lived in the time of Theodosius
about the year of our Lord, 390.

Of fastings and of meats.
1. Tim. 4. Those who do forbid marriage, and to eat of certain meats, do
teach the doctrine of devils.
THe spirit speaks evidently that in the latter times some shall depart from ye
faith, and shall give head unto spirits of error and doctrines of diuelles,
which speak false lies through hipocrysie, and have their consciences burned
with an hot iron, forbidding to marrye, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with giving thanks of them which
believe and know the truth. For all creatures of God are good, and nothing
ought to be refused, if it be received with thanks giving. For it is sanctyfied
by the word of God, and prayer.

S. Athanasius in his expositions upon the Epistle to the Hebreus 13. Chapter.
These are truly strange doctrines. And he rebuked those which had brought in
the Iewishe abstinences and observations of meats. For (he says) you ought to
be fortified with grace, that is to say, with faith, and ye ought to be most
sure, that nothing is defiled, and that all things are pure and clean unto
him that believes, and so that faith is necessary: Faith is necessary, and
not the observation of meats.
and not the observation of meats. For those which do abstain from meats,
that is to say, those which have their affection always to observe in such
manner meats, it is most manifest, that such have nothing profited, no more
then those which do separate them selves from the bonds and lymytes of the
true faith, and serve wholly a law altogether unprofitable.

What soever is sold in the flesh market, 1. Cor. 10.
that eat ye, and ask no question for conscience sake.

S. Jerome upon the first Chapter, of Malachye. Turn neither to the right hand
neither to the left: to decline and turn to the right hand is to abstain from
meats which God has created to be used. Also to condemn and forbid
marriage, is to fall into that which is written in another place? be not
righteous in thy self beyond measure.

Jesus Christ says: that which goes into the mouth defiles not a man: Mat.
15.
but that which comes out of the mouth defiles the man.

The Council of Bracara or Braga. 2. 30. distinct. Chapter which begins, Si
quis. Held in the year. 619. Has excommunicated those which did abstain
themselves from eating of flesh through superstition.

Eusebius in the ecclesiastical history, the.5. book. Chapter. 3.
Rehearses, that among those which were prisoners for the faith at Lions,
there was one named Alcibiades, who led a very strayte life: for he would eat
nothing but bread, and drink water with salt, the which life he was willing
to continue being in prison. He was notified unto Attalus (the true martyr of
Jesus Christ) after his first confession that he made in the theater) that the
same Alcibiades did evil, in not eating those creatures which God has made,
and that the same was an offense unto others? the which thing being come to the
knowledge of Alcibiades, he did eat (by the admonishing of Attalus) all things
as others did, rendering thanks unto God, for that the holy ghost revealed unto
the same Attalus that which he did teach.

S. Augustine of ecclesiastical manners, 33. upon the letter K. Speaking of the
Monks of Millaine, Behold the order of the Monks in times past.
whose straytnesse he saw: None is constreyned to bear a heauyer burden than
he can, else let him refuse to bear it, and he which is weaker than the other,
is not therefore condemned of them. They all do know how greatly love and
charity is commended. They do know very well that all meats are clean to
those that are clean: therefore all their industry is not to reject any
meats as unclean, but only to tame their concupiscence and lust, and to hold
and keep themselves in brotherly love. They do remember this sentence, 1. Cor.
6.
Meats are ordained for the belly, and the bellye for meats: nevertheless,
many which are strong shall abstain because of the weak. Many have another
reason, to wete, because that they had rather to be fed with gross meats,
and not with sumptuous and delicate, therefore those which in health do
abstain from one kind of meat, make no doubt being sick to eat of it. Many
do not drink wine, yet nevertheless they do not think to be defiled
therewith: for they themselves do ordeyne, that one should give unto those
that are of a weak complexion, and can none otherwise keep their health: if
there be any that refuses to drink, they admonish them brotherly, not to
make themselves through vain superstitions more weak than holy. Even so they
do diligently exercise themselves in the fear of God. And as touching the
exercise of the body, We ought to give meats according to charity.
they do know very well, that it profits only for a little time. Love is
chieflye kept, and thereunto is applied meats, words, apparayle, and the
countenances: every one does consent unto a mutual love and charity, and do
abhor to violate it, as much as God does, if any one do resist the same, he
is cast out: and if any one do disagree from the same, they will not suffer
him one day. Titus. 1.


Rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in faith, and not taking heed
to Iewishe fables, and commandments of men, that turn from the truth. Unto
the pure al things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving, is
nothing pure: but even the very minds and consciences of them are defiled.

The Council of Toledo. 13. has excommunicated those which forbydde to eat
flesh.

The Council of Pope Martin has ordained as much.

Pope Elutherius has ordained, that none should keep himfelfe through
superstition from eating of any meats, which are agreeable to man's nature.

Let no man therefore condemn you about meat and drink, Collos. 2.
or for a piece of an holy day, or of the new Moon, or of the Saboth days,
which are nothing but shadows of things to come, but the body is in Christ.
Let no man wilfully bear rule over you by humbleness, and worshipping of
Angels, aduauncing himself in those things which he never saw, rashlye puffed
up with his fleshly mind. etc. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ, and are
free from the ordinances of the world. Why, as though ye yet lived in the
world, are ye yet burdened with traditions of them that say: touch not, taste
not, handle not, which all peryshe with the using of them, and are after the
commandments and doctrines of men? Which things have in deed a show of
wisdom, in voluntary worshipping and humbleness, and in not sparing the
body, yet are of no value, but appertain to those things wherewith the flesh
is crammed.

1. Tim. 4.
The bodily exercise profits little: but godliness is profitable unto all
things.

In the first book of the history tripartite. Chap. 10. Spiridion durst eat
flesh in Lent.
The holy Bishop of Cypres, Spiridion says, that freely he dare eat flesh in
Lent, when others do abstain from it, because he was a Christian (says he.)

Romans 14.
Let us not therefore judge one another any more: but use your judgment rather
in this, that no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall, in his
brothers way. I know and am fully certified through the Lord Jesus, that
there is nothing unclean of it self: but unto him that judges it to be
unclean, to him it is unclean. But if thy brother be grieved with thy meat,
1. Cor. 8.
now walk thou not charitably. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom
Christ dyed. Cause not your commodity to be evil spoken of. For the kingdom
of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
ghost. etc. Romans 14.
But why do thou judge thy brother? or why do thou despise thy brother?
for we shall be all brought before the judgment seat of Christ.

He that eats, eats to the Lord: Romans 14.
for he gives God thanks: And he that eats not, eats not to the Lord,
and gives God thanks.

Meat makes us not acceptable to God for neither if we eat, are we the
richer: 1. Cor. 8.
neither if we eat not, are we the poorer. But take heed least by any means
this liberty of yours be an occasion of falling to them that are weak. etc.
Wherefore if meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, 1. Cor. 8.
because I will not offend my brother.

Esa. 58.
The Lord said unto the Prophet Esaias, cry now as loud as thou can. Leave
not of, lift up thy voice like a Trompet, and show my people their offenses,
and the house of Jacob their sins. For they seek me daily and will know my
ways, even as it were a people that did right, and had not forsaken the
statutes of their God. They argue with me concerning right judgment, and will
plead at the law with their God. Wherefore fast we (say they) and thou
see it not? We put our lives to straitness, and thou regardest it not?
Behold when ye fast, your lust remains still: for ye do no less violence
to your detters: Lo, ye fast to strife and debate, and to smite him with your
fyste that speaks unto you. Ye fast not (as sometime) that your voice might
be heard above. Think ye this fast pleases me, that a man should chasten
himself for a day, and to writhe his head about like a hoke in an heary
clothe, The true fast which pleases god is to abstayn from all evils.
and to lie upon the earth? Should that be called fasting, or a day that
pleases the Lord? But this fasting pleases not me, till the time be, thou
loose him out of bondage, that is in thy danger: that thou break the oath of
the wicked bargaynes, that thou let the oppressed go free, and take from them
all manner of burdens. It pleases not me, till thou deal thy bread to the
hungrye, and bring the poor fatherless home into thy house, when thou see
the naked that thou cover him, and hyde not thy face from thine own flesh.

Origin upon Leuiticus. 10. homely 16. Chapter. If thou will fast as Christ
commands thee, and humble thy soul, it is convenient that thou do it all
the time of the year, yea, do the same all the days of thy life for to
humble thy soul, nevertheless if thou haste learned of the Lord our Savior,
that he is gentle and lowly of heart, then if thou will fast, after the
commandments of the Gospel: and keep in thy fastinges the evangelical
laws, the which the Savior has commanded to fast in such manner. But if
thou do fast, Math. 6.
annoint thine head, and wash thy face. etc. Will thou that I do show unto
thee what fasting thou must fast? fast from all thy sins, take no meat of
malice, take no meat of pleasure, be not to hot with the wine of luxurye,
fast from doing evil, abstain from evil words, keep thy self from evil
thoughts, touch not the bread of theft, Col. 2.
of wicked doctrines, couete not the meats of false Philosophy, which do
seduce thee from the truth. Such fasting pleases God, 1. Tim 4.
but to abstain from meats which God has created for the faithful to take
with giving of thanks, and to do the same with them which have crucified
Jesus Christ, it cannot please God. The Pharyses were offended with Christ
because that his disciples did not fast, unto whom he answered, Math. 9. Mar.
2. Luc. 5.
that the wedding children cannot mourn as long as ye bridegroom is with them.
Those then do fast which have lost the brydegrome, we which have with us the
bridegroom cannot fast, but therefore we say not this, that we would let
slack the bridle of christian abstynence. This is verily the Christian
Christian liberty is to fast alvvayes, and not by observing of days.
liberty to fast always, not through supersticion of observance: but by
virtue of continencye. For how can they keep them selves chaste and not
defiled and marred, if they be not helped and sustained through the aid of
continencye? How shall they understand the Scriptures? How shall they study
in knowledge and wisdom? Shall not that be through the continency of the
bellye, and of the mouth? how shall every one make himself chaste for the
kingdom of heaven, if he do not cut away the affluence of these meats? The
Christians then have that reason to fast.

Augustine in the.86. Epistle written to Lasulanus. In the divine and
Apostolical scriptures, and also throughout the new testament, in
feruentnesse of courage beholding it, I do see fasting to be commanded, We
find not in the Scripture in what time we must fast.
but I do not find it to be defined by Gods commandment, or of the Apostles,
in what time or day we must fast or not fast: wherefore by this I do
understand that the commandment to fast, is not for to obtain
righteousness, the which inwardly is the beauty of the kings daughter.

Chrysostom in the 4. tome, of fasting in Lent. Homily. 73. If we do daily
here agree, and that we do fast all the Lent, and do not amend our lives,
greater occasion of damnation shall be done unto us.

Gregory the 7. has commanded to fast the Lent, upon pain of deadly sin.
Read Platyna, Page 171. in his life.

Apollonius the martyr of Jesus Christ in the ecclesiastical history. 5.
book. Chapt. 11. Rebuked the heretic Montanus, because he was the first which
made the law of fastings.

Saint Jerome to Nepotian, first tome. Lay upon thee such manner of fasting, as
thou can bear. That thou have pure, chaste, simple, and moderate fastings,
not supersticious. What profits it, not to eat of the oil, and to seek
certain dainties, and difficult kinds of meats, as figs, Superstitious
fastings.
pears, nuttes, fruits of palms, or dates, the flower of wheat, of honey,
and such manner of meats? There is no kind of garden fruit wherewith we do
not torment our selves, to the end we eat not of bread, and whylest we do
follow our pleasures, we are drawn from the kingdom of heaven. Furthermore, I
have heard of some, who against the rule of the nature of men drink not
water, and eat no bread, but do eat of delicate suppings, and of punned
Leekes, and drink not the pottage in a cup, but in a dishe. What shame is
this, how are we not ashamed of such manner of follies? how are we not weried
with such superstitions? Furthermore also, we seek in delicates the renown of
abstinence. The most strong fasting.
The strongest fasting is bread and water, but because that there is no glory
therein, and because all live of bread and water, as of a common thing, we do
not esteem it to be fasting.

In the old time they fasted until night. Judge. 20. Zacha. 7.


The fasting without works of mercy displeases God.

Cassiodorus recites in the 9. book of his history, That the Romans had but
three weeks for the Lent, fasting every day except the Sundaye and Saterdaye:
The Illerickes and the Grecians had six, and the other seven: but they fasted
by space between.

Read of fasting, Acts. 13. 1. Cor. 16. Math. 4. Luc. 2. Tobi. 2. 1. Reg. 6.
2. Cro 20. 1. Esdras. 8. Joel. 2. Jonas. 3. Hester. 4. and.14. Psalm. 35.
and.69. and.109. Deuteronomy. 9. 3. Reg. 19.

2. Reg. 1.
David and his people fasted until evening, hearing that Saul and Ionathas
were dead.

2. Reg. 12
David fasted and prayed for the people which were stricken of God.

3. Reg. 21.
Achab fasted and slept having on sackecloth, walking comfortless, and the Lord
had compassion and pity on him.

Judith Judith. 8.
fasted all the days of her life.

Hester Hest. 4.
purposing to enter unto the king for to speak unto him, fasted three days
and three nights.

Josias declares the fasting to all the people, and caused the words of the
book of Ieremye Iere. 36.
to be read openly.

Math. 4.
Jesus Christ humbled his soul with fasting psalm. 35. and.69. and.109.

Esaias. 58.
Unto whom is he like that fasteth, and nevertheless cease not to sin?

Ierem. 14.
Fasting profits nothing at all to the wicked and obstinate people.

Luc. 21. Romans 13.
Jesus Christ says: Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts
be overcome with surfeting and drunkenness and cares of this world.

Ye have been called unto liberty, Gal. 5.
only let not your liberty be an occasion unto the flesh, but in love serve
one an other.

Of marriage and of vows.
THe spirit speaks evidently, 1. Tim. 4.
that in the latter time some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed
unto spirits of error, and doctrins of devils, which speak false lies
through hipocrysie, and have their consciences marked with an hot iron:
forbidding to mary.

Jesus Christ says, have ye not read, Mat. 19. Genes. 1. Genes. 2. Ephesians.
5. 1. Cor. 6.
how that he which made man at the beginning, made them man and woman, and
said, for this cause, shall a man leave father and mother, and cleave unto his
wife, and they twain shall be made one flesh, wherefore they are no more
twain, but one flesh. Let not man therefore put asunder that which God has
coupled together.

Origene upon Saint Matthew. 23. Homilye. The Scribes and Pharyses are set in
Moses chair. etc. He does rebuke then such manner of preachers, who do not
only that they say, but also do cruelly and without mercy, No constraint from
marriage.
great things, which one cannot do, not esteeming, or iudgeing what is the
virtue of every one of the hearers, as those which forbid to mary: And do
constrain the people to a most vile vyllanye, for that they do forbydde that
which is expedient. Those also which do teach to abstain from meats, and
other such manner of things, to the which the faithful ought in no wise to be
constrained. They do lay great burdens through the word of their
expositions, against the will of Christ saying, my yoke is easy, and my
burden is light: And often times we do see that those that do teach such
things, do live altogether contrary to their sayings, doing all things for
the regard of men, and for vain glory, as the word following does show it,
saying. All their works they do for to be seen of men. Mat. 23.


Solomon in the.18. Pro. 18.
Chapter of the proverbs does describe the blessing of marriage.

The Prophet David in the.128 psalm Psalm. 128.
does describe the blessing of God upon those that are married.

The angel Raphael did teach Tobie Tob. 6.
how he ought to marie as God commands.

The confirmation of marriage is in the 9. Chapter of Genesis under the letter
A. Genes. 9.


Eusebius in the Ecclesiastical history, 3. book.27. Chap. Saint Clement, as
Eusebius of Cesaria does recite, has written against those who do despise
marriage. Among other things that he has written, says as follows: Will they
also reprove the Apostles? Saint Peter and Saint Philip had wives, and married
their daughters, The Apostles were married.
and Saint Paul in one of his Epistles, was not ashamed to make
recommendations and salutations unto his wife, Clement says that Saint Paul
was married.
whom he says he would not lead with him about the country, to the end he
might be the more free to preach the gospel. And by and by after he says,
that Clement in his 7. book of his work, says as follows: It is said that
S. Peter when he did see his wife to be martyred, rejoiced, seeing that by that
means she was of the number of the elect, and that she returned unto her own
house of Paradise, and that he cried after her when they brought her to her
death, calling her by her name, saying unto her: O dear wife remember God.
Such were the marriages of the Saints, and their affections perfect.

In the 4. of the sentences, distinction.17. Chapter.4. and in the 27. decret.
question. 2. Chapter which begins, Cum societas. etc. The Pope in his
Decretals calls marriage, uncleanness, pollution, and carnal filthynesse.

Heb. 13.
Saint Paul answers the Pope, saying: Wedlock is to be had in honor among
all men, and the bed undefiled, for whore keepers and adulterers God will judge.

John. 2.
Jesus Christ allowed marriage, for he and his mother were at the marriage in
Cana of Galile.

Augustine in his treatise of the goodness of marriage.21. chap. I dare not
prefer the virginity of Saint John, before the marriage of Abraham.

The history tripartite, 2. book, Chapt. 14. rehearses or does make
declaration of the Council of Nice, how it has decreed that Priests ought not
to marry. But the holy man of God named Pahnutius bishop of Egypt, who had his
right eye plucked out, and the right leg cut of in the hamme, and condemned by
the Emperor Maximine to be boiled in molten lead. All these great evils did
he suffer for the Gospel of Jesus Christ. The same holy man, seeing that the
Council had ordained that decree, resisted it boldly, saying that marriage is
honorable, Note what chastity is.
and that the company of his own wife was chastity, persuading the Council
never to establishe such a law, saying: that if they do make such a law, it
will be unto them a great occasion of fornication. Then the Synod praised the
sentence and advice of that holy man, The Council of Nice would not make a
law that the Priests should not marie.
and would constitute nothing touching that matter, but left it to use at
every man's liberty, not making law or necessity, yet notwithstanding the
said Pahnutius was not married. This Council was celebrated in the year of
our Lord.328.

Platyna in the life of Siluester the first. The Council of Gangres in Galatia
celebrated in the year of our Lord 333. has permitted marriage unto Priests,
and has excommunicated those which shall forsake their father and mother and
wife, under coulor of religion.

Distinction.31. Chapter. which begins, Quoniam. The counsel of
Constantinople the sixth, has in like manner ordained not to make any vows not
to mary, and that the priests which do separate them selves from their wives,
because of their holy orders, should be excluded from the communion.

Distinction.27. Chapter, Quidam, and in the Canon of the Apostles. Chapter.6.
The counsel of Anticyra which was celebrated the year of our Lord.304. like
wise did permit the Deacons to be married, after that they have taken their
orders.

John le Maire of the differences of schisms and of the counsels of the
Church. I found in the library of the Abbey of Desnay at Lions in an old
book: Priests married in France.
that in France in the time of Pope Formosus, and King Jews the second of
that name, who was surnamyd the stammerer or stutter, the priests were married.

The Canon of the Apostles says, if there be any which says or teaches under
the title and cloak of religion, that priests ought to forsake their wives,
let them be cursed.

Long time after the counsel of Nice, S. Hilarie bishop of Poictiers was
married.
in the church of the Latins, many Bishops were married: among other S.
Hilary Bishop of Poictiers, as we may see by his Epistle which he wrote
being in exile unto his daughter being a virgin, in which Epistle he made also
mention of his wife the mother of her. 1. Tim. 3. S. Paul teaches that the
bishops may be married.


A Bishop therefore must be fautlesse the husband of one wife, watching,
sober, modest, herberous, apt to teach not given to wine, no fighter, not given
to filthy lucre but gentill, abhorring fighting, abhorring covetousness, one
that can rule his own house honestly, having children under obedience with all
honesty. For if a man cannot rule his own house, how shall he care for the
church of God. etc. Likewise must Deacons be honest, not double to^gued, not
given unto much wine, neither to filthy lucre: but having the mystery of the
faith in pure conscience: and let them first be proved, and then let them
minister if they be found faultlesse. Even so must their wives be honest, not
evil speakers, but sober, and faithful in all things. Let the Deacons The
Deacons were married in the primative church.
be the husband of one wife, and such as can rule their children well, and
their own housholdes. After these words in the beginning of the fourth
chapter, 1. Tim. 4.
he says: the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, and shall give head unto spirits of error, and
doctrines of devils, which speak false lies through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences marked with an hot iron: Forbidding to marie.

Again: Titus. 1.
For this cause have I left thee in Creta, that thou should continue to
redress that which rests, and should ordain Elders in every city, as I
appointed thee. If any be faultlesse, the husband of one wife, having
faithful children, which are not slaundered of ryote, neither that are
disobedient, that he be chosen.

Objection. Pope Gregory the 7. Naucler. Albertus. Crantzius. Lambert. Hirsued.
Monk of Cluny otherwise called Hildebrande, who was Pope in the time of the
Emperor Henry the 4. has commanded by letters, unto Otto bishop of
Constance, that he should forbid in his Dioces, the Priests to marie, and that
he do unloose or make frustrate the marriages of those which were already married.

Answer. The Lord answered unto the same, Genes. 2.
saying: It is not good that man should be alone.

Extra de Cle. cons. lib. 6. Cap. 1. Pope Boniface the 8. has permitted all
liberty unto ye religious people, although they were married.

Saint Ambrose in his first book of Virgins. 1. Cor. 7.
As concerning Virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: but I give unto
you mine advice. If the Doctor of the Gentiles had no commandment, what is he
that can have it? And in very deed he had no commandment, but he has had an
example. Virginity not commanded, but desired.
For virginite cannot be commanded, but be desired. For the things which are
not in our power, are more to be desired, than to be commanded. etc.

After that Paul has counsayled that it were good, if we could live
unmarried, because that we are more free to think on God, 1. Cor. 7.
he says: And this I speak to declare what is profitable for you, not to
tangle you in a snare: but that ye follow that which is honest and comely, and
that ye may quietly cleave unto the Lord without separation.

1. Cor. 7.
To avoid fornication, let every man have his wife, and let every woman have
her own husband. I would wish that all men were as I am: but every man has
his proper gift of God, one after this manner, another after that* etc. If they
cannot abstain, let them marie: for it is better to marie, than to burn. etc.

S. Vldaric bishop of Augspurge, in the Epistle that he sent to Nicholas the
first, concerning the forbidding of marriage unto Priests. The forbidding of
marriage was altogether contrary both to the word of God, the decrees of the
Council of Nice, and to the ancient Church. After he declares unto him the
great euilles and dangers which therein were. Note the fruit which came of
the forbidding of marriage unto Priests.
And among other things he declared that which chanced in the time of Gregory
the first, through the occasion of such forbidding, which constrained him to
change his mind in that case. At a certain day the said Gregory sent to his
fish ponde or stewe, for to draw fish, and there were brought unto him more
than six thousand heads of little children, which had been cast in there,
for to cover and hide the whoredom of the Priests and other Ecclesiastical
persons. Wherefore Gregory seeing the same, was constrained to say,
condemning the decree that he had made against the marriage of the
ecclesiastical persons. The Apostle says, it is better to marye then to
burn: And I say also for my part, that it is better to mary, then to give
occasion of death. This Epistle was found in a library of the town of
Hollande, called Aldwater.

Of vows.
S. Ambrose upon the first to the Corinthians. 7. Chap. NO man ought to be
constrained, least having forbid things that are lawful he do fall into
things unlawful.

We may break the vows made against the faith.
The counsel of Toledo.8. did permit to break the vows and oaths made
against the faith.

David sinned in swearing that he would put to death Nabal and all his men, 1.
Sam. 25 The vow of David.
he did very well to break that vow, which was against God: And therefore
he praised greatly God for that he let him to shead blood, by Abigail.

Mat. 14.
Herod made a vow to give unto the daughter of Herodias The vow of Herod.
that daunced before him, whatsoever she would ask. And she being before
instructed of her mother, said, give me here John Baptist his head in a
platter. And ye king sorowed: nevertheless for his oaths sake, and for their
sakes which sat also at the table, he commanded it to be given her. He did
evil in fulfilling that vow against God.

Saul did evil to vow 1. Sam. 14 The vow of Saul.
to put to death his son Ionathas, who was hindered to accomplish his vow
by the people.

God has said and commanded, Exodus 20.
thou shall not kill.

Iephtha vowed a vow unto the Lord and said, Judge. 11. The vow of Iephtha.
if thou shall deliver the children of Ammon into my hands, then that thing
that comes out of the doors of my house against me, when I com home in peace,
from the children of Ammon, shall be the Lords, and I will offer it up a burnt
offering. After the wars were ended he came home, and see his daughter came out
against him with Timbreles and daunces. And when he saw her, he rent his
clothes, and said: Alas my daughter, thou have made me stoop and art one of
them that trouble me. For I have opened my mouth unto the Lord, and cannot go
back. etc. And he killed his daughter against the commandment of God, which
forbyddeth to kill.

Saint Cyprian the Martyr of Jesus Christ. 11. Epistle first book. If the
virgins have given them selves with a good will unto Christ, let them persevere
in chastity not dissembling, If the virgins vvil not or cannot persevere in
their virginity, let them marie.
being so strong and constant that they attend the reward of their
virginnitie: if they will not or cannot persevere, it is better for them to
mary, then to be thrown hedlong into the fire through their pleasures.

The counsel of Arausique or Orange the 11. chapter has decreed, that we can
vow nothing rightly unto God, but that which we have received at his hand: In
as much as all things which we can offer unto him, are gifts proceeding from
him.

The counsel of Gangres in Galatia, in a Canon and rule says, if any of those
which keep virginity for the love of Jesus Christ, do eleuate them selves
against those that are married, let them be excommunicated, If the Mones do
think themselves more holy than the married folk, they ought to be
excommunicated, or given unto the devil.
or given to the devil. In an other Canon it is said, when a man because of
dissembling countenance, uses strange apparel, believing that thereby he has
righteousness in him self, and despises others, which with honesty and
reverence do wear caps and other comely apparel, that he be excommunicated.

John le Maire of the difference of schisms and of the counsels of the
Church. Pope Gregory the seventh, was the first which made a law that
priests should not mary.

Platyna in the life of Pope Pius.2. or Aeneas Syluius. The Pope Pius borne at
Senee, aforenamed Aeneas Syluius, among other proverbs, The proverb of the
Pope.
which he was wont to speak, was accustomed also to say, by good right and by
good cause, they have taken away marriage from priests, but for better cause
they ought to restore it unto them again.

Jesus Christ says in vain they worship me, teaching for doctrines, Mat. 15.
which are but men's precepts.

Math. 15.
All plants which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up by
the roots.

1. Cor. 7.
It is better to mary then to burn.

Of the church, and how it may be known and of her authorytie.
Chrysostom upon S. Mathewe.48. homily.24. Chapter. The wicked have Churches,
Preachers, Orders, and Clerks.
THere be some who do greatly seduce, although that it be through liyng, yet
nevertheless they do preach Christ, they declare the faith: For they also
have orders, and priests as well as the faithful. They do also read the holy
Scriptures. Also they do think that they do give the same Baptism, and the
same Sacraments of the body and of the blood of Christ: likewise they do
honor the Apostles, and Martyrs, and thereby do cause the thoughts of men
greatly to err, not only of the mean and simple people, but also of the
prudent and wise. Who shall he be whom Antechrist will not move? partly doing
the works of Christ, and fulfilling all the offices of the Christans, before
the Christians: except it be paraduenture he which considers that which
the Apostle has said: 2. Cor. 11.
Forasmuch then as Satan himself is changed into the fashion of an angel of
light. Therefore it is no great matter, though his ministers fashion them
selves as though they were the ministers of righteousness, whose end shall be
according to their deeds, and not after the fayning and form of their
christianity.

Chrysostom upon S. Matthew, 9. Homily. Chapt. 24. All the Christians in this
present time, ought to confer themselves in the holy Scriptures. The true
Church known by the holy Scriptures.
For sithence the time that heresy has obtained and gotten her churches, men
can have no certain proof or trial of true christianity: And there can be
no other refuge for the Christians, who are willing to know the truth of the
faith, but the holy Scriptures. Afterward he says: Whosoever then will know
what the true church of Jesus Christ is, how shall he know it but only by
the Scriptures?

Saint Augustine, 2. Tome, 166. Epistle. In the holy Scriptures we have learned
Jesus Christ: and in the Church we have commonly those holy Scriptures.
Wherefore then is it, that in them we keep and hold not altogether, in common
both Jesus Christ and his Church?

S. Augustine.7. Tome, in the Epistle against Petilian a Donatist. Chapter. 2.
3. 4. Amongst us and the Donatistes is a question where the Church is. What is
it then that we shall do? Ought we to seek it in our words, The Church is in
the words of Jesus Christ.
or in those of our head Jesus Christ? Truly we ought to seek it in the
words of him which is the truth, and which also knows his body.

Chrysostom upon Saint Mathewe, 49. Homily. Chap. 24. Heresy the troop of
the soldiers of Antichrist.
Heresies are the bands and troop of the soldiers of Antichrist, chiefly
those which have obtained the place of the church. And it is holden in the
holy place, insomuche that it seems that they are there holden, as the word
of truth: but it is the abomination of desolation, that is to say, of the
host and band of Antichrist, the which has made the souls of many men
desolate, forsaken, and destitute of God. 2 Thessalonians. 2
And peradventure that is that which the Apostle speaks of, which is an
adversary, and is exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped:
so that he shall sit as God in the temple of God, and bear in hand that he is
God. And so all his evils of diverse heresies, the which were before but only
heard of, are afterward holden in the holy place, in overthrowing the
Church of Jesus Christ. etc.

Chrysostom upon Saint Mathewe, Chapt. 24. Homily.49. He then which would
know what is the true Church of Jesus Christ, how shall he know it in so
great confusion of such likelyhoode, but by the scriptures? For to have the
surenesse of the true faith, we must have regard unto the holy Scripture.


In the same. The Lord then knowing so great confusion to be come in the
latter days, therefore willed that the Christians which are in Christianity,
which will take the surenesse of the true faith, should have refuge unto
nothing but unto the Scriptures: Otherwise if they regarded other things, they
shall be evil spoken of, and shall perish, not understanding what the true
Church is, and thereby shall fall headlong into the Abomination of Desolation
which stands in the holy place of the Church. Mat. 24.
etc.

In the same. Mat. 24.
If any man shall say unto you, behold here is Christ in the houses, believe it
not. For now you do injury and wrong to the Godheade, if you seek it in
houses, that which fills both heaven and earth: or if ye think that he which
is come for to resist the proud, and for to exalt the humble and meek, is
hid there: showing by such things, how of his true Church oftentimes do
rise up seducers. Therefore we must in no wise believe them, We must believe
no men if they do not teach the scriptures.
if they say not or do not that which is agreeable to the Scriptures,
believe them not: for as the smoke goes before ye fire, and the battle
before the victory: even so the temptation of Antichrist, preceedeth and goes
before the glory of Christ. etc.

Saint Barnard upon the Canticles 33. Sermon. From whom shall the church hide
hirselfe? all are friends, and all are enemies: Judges of the Church in our
time.
all are kinsefolkes, and al are adversaries: all are household servants, and
there is none at peace: all are neighbors, and all seek but their own
profit: They are the ministers of Christ, and serve Antechrist: The Priests
are apparalled pompously like harlots, and those that play in comedies or
tragedies when they do their divine office.
they do walk in the honor of the gooneds of the Lord, unto whom they do no
honor: thereby comes that beauty of the harlotte, which thou see daily in
their apparel, as the players of Comedyes, as in the apparel of a King:
thereby thou see the gold in the brydels, saddels and spurs: Thereby are
the tables beautified with meats and vessels. Thereby comes drunkenness,
and gloutonye, thereby proceeds the harp and the viol, thereby are the
priests ouerrunning, and the garners full, aunswering the one the other:
Thereby are the boxes full of oyntmentes and sweet savor, thereby are the
purses filled, therefore would they be, and are the princes of the Churches,
the Prouostes, Deanes, Archedeacons, Bishops, Archebyshoppes, and such things
come not lawfully, but because they do walk in the business of darkness.
By that before it has been forespoken, and now is come the time of the
fulfilling of the same, Esaias. 38.
Behold now in peace my bitterness is most bitter, it has been before
bitter, in the death of Martyrs, afterward more bitter in the controuersye of
Heretics, now it is most bitter in the manners of those of our own house: we
can neither chase them nor drive them away, they are so mighty and multiplied
without number. The fores and plagues of the Church are entered into the inward
parts, and are incurable, and therefore is her bitterness most bitter. etc.

S. Hilary writing against Auxentius. We ought to take heed of Antichrist, for
if we do mark well the scriptures, we shall find him in the Church.
I do admonish you to take heed of Antechriste, ye stay your selves to much
on the walls, seeking the church of God, in the fairness of buyldings,
thinking that the unity of the faithful is there contained: do we doubt
that Antechriste ought there to have his seat? The mountains and the woods,
lakes, prisons, and deserts are more sure unto me and of better trust, for
the Prophets being therein hid have prophesied.

Saint Barnard upon the.90. psalm, Qui habitabit. verse.6. O Lord Jesus thou
have multiplied the people, Esa. 9. Mat. 20. Philip. 2.
and thou have not increased their joy: for many be called, but few be
chosen: All the Christians, almost al do seek their own profit, and not of
Jesus Christ. And have removed the offices from the ecclesiastical dignity
into shameful gain, and into works of darkness, and the health of souls is
not searched for in such things: but the pleasure of riches. Therefore are
they shoren, therefore do they frequent the Churches, The Priests are shoren
and shaven, and do all their ceremonies for covetousness
and do celebrate masses, and sing psalms. They strive and contend most
impudently daily by process for Byshoppryks, Archebyshoppryks, in so much that
the revenues of the Churches are bestowed and wasted in superfluyties, and to
vain uses. There remains nothing but that the man of sin be reveled, the
son of perdition. etc.

S. Barnard in his Sermon of the conversion of S. Paul. Alas O Lord God, Esaias.
1.
for these are the first which do persecute thee, The heads of the Church do
persecute the Church.
whom we do see to love the highest places in thy Church, and to hold the
principality. They have taken the Arches from Sion, they have occupied the
Castle, and afterward have freely and by power and strength, set all the city
on fire: their conversation is miserable, the subuertion of thy people is
pitiful.

S. Jerome upon the.9. Chapter of the Prophet Oseas. I do not find in the
old hystories any other to have separated and divided the Church, and seduced
the people from the house of God, than the Priests and Prelates which are
placed of God, for to be the spies and watchmen for the Christian people,
against the enemies of the church.

S. Barnarde in his first book, De considera. to Eugenius. Speaking unto Pope
Eugenius: what are those thy flatterers which say unto thee: now up boldly:
thou doste by them of the spoil of the Churches? The life of the poor is
sown in the places of the rich. Silver shyneth in the mire, they run
thither out of all parts, the poorest sort do not carry it away, but the
most strong, or he that runs swyftest: this custom, or rather this mortal
corruption, has not begone in thy time, but I beseech God that it may end in
thine. In the mean time thou art apparayled and decked up very gorgeously and
sumptuously. If I durst speak it, thy seat is rather a Park of devils, than
of sheep? Did S. Peter so? Did S. Paul mock after that sort? Thy Court ought
rather of custom to receive the good, than to make them such. For the wicked
do profit nothing, but the good do very much empayre. Afterward he
concludes: Behold the murmuring and common complaynt of all Churches, they
do cry out that they are cut in pieces and dismembered. There are very few,
or almost none, which do not fear the stroke or wound: Do thou demand
what? The Abbots are drawn away from their Bishops, the Bishops from their
Archbishops. It is great maruayle if one can excuse the same. In doing so, you
do show very well, that you have fullness of power, but not of Justice. You
do the same, because that you can do it: but the question is, whether you
ought to do it. You are there constituted and placed for to keep and preserve
unto every one his honor, and his degree, and not for to bear him envy and
malice.

In the 34. distinction, Chapter, Lector. Gloss and distinct. 82. Chap.
Presbyter, and Gloss. And in the Canon of the Apostles.17. quest. 4. Chapt. And
distinct. 40. Chapt. Si Papa. And distinction.96. Chapt. Satis. And Chapter,
Simplici. And Incipitis. The Pope says that he has power to make laws
against nature, and against the Gospel.
It is written in those Canons, that the Popes have such power and authority,
that they may dispense against the Apostolical doctrine, and against the right
of nature, and consequently against the Gospel and the word of God. For the
Pope has all the rightes as well divine as humane, in the inward parts of
his breast, wherefore he ought to judge every man, and ought to be judged of
none: Insomuch that though he should lead a great number of people into hell,
yet no mortal man ought to presume to rebuke his faults: For he is God which
cannot be judged of men.

Saint Paul answers unto the same saying. 2. These. 2. Judge ye now who
is Antichrist according to the Canon, and according to the word of God.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for the Lord comes not, except there
come a departing first, and that that sinful man be opened, the son of
perdition which is an adversary, and is exalted above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped: so that he shall sit as God in the Temple of God, and
show himself as God.

Saint Hilary in his book against Auxentius. Whosoever denies Christ to be
such as he has been preached by the Apostles, he is Antechrist. The property
of the name of Antechriste, is to be contrary unto Christ.

The Priests do say that the Pope cannot err, neither the counsels. Jesus
Christ has said unto S. Peter, Luc. 22.
I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

Unto the same their own Canons do answer in the.40. distinction Chap.
which begins, Si Papa. If the Pope do fall into an error in the in the
faith, and that he be an Heretic one may very well rebuke and check him in
his faults.

Alexander.6 Pope.227. in the year of our Lord 1492. Read Guliel. Bud.
Pope Alexander the.6. speaking once unto an Ambassador of ye king of France,
unto whom he had these words, this fable of Jesus Christ has gotten unto us
great riches.

Sanazarius an Italian Poet in his Epigrammes in the.2. book. Behold the
enormitie of the Popes, and their life more than diabolical.
Speaking of that Pope Alexander, noting the inceste of him, with his own
daughter Lucrecia, and asking her, Lucrecia will Alexander desire thee always?
afterward answered, O wicked case: it is thy father. Behold the witness
which the writers of his time have, declared of that head of the church.

Abbas Vrspurgensis recites of Gregory the.7. otherwise called Hildebrand.
That the common wealth of Rome, and all the Church has been under him in
great danger, The Popes may very well err.
through the error of new schisms, and not heard of, and that he has usurped
the Papal seat through tyranny, and not by lawful election.

The counsel holden at Worms in the year.1080. Affirmed of Gregory the
seventh, Gregory.7. was not chosen of God.
that it is most true that he was not chosen of god, but that he exalted him
self, without all shame through disceit, and money, and that he has turned
vpside down the ecclesiastical order, and that he has troubled the kingdom
of the Christian Empire: and that he has attempted the death both of the
body and soul of that Catholic and quiet king, and that he has defended
and holden up the wicked and perjured king, and that he has sown discord,
among those that agreed together, and strifes amongst the peace makers, and
offenses amongst brethren, and diuorcement between married folk, and that he
has removed and troubled all that was at rest, quiet and in peace between
the good lyuers. Gregory has put in question the catholic faith, and has
been a coniurer and necromancer.
We being assembled together of God against the said Hyldebrand, preaching
sacriledges, and fires, mayntayning perjured persons and homycides or men
slears, putting in question or doubt the catholic and Apostolic faith of
the body and blood of the Lord, being an obseruer and keeper of diuinacion and
coniuring, and of dreams, and a most manifest Necromancyer, having familiar
spirits, and for that cause swaruing from the true faith, we do judge that he
ought to be canonically deposed driven away, banished, and condemned
perpetually, if he do not leave of his seat, after that he has heard these
things.

Benno Cardinal in the life of the said Gregorye. Amongst many wickednesses
that he alleged of him, said, that he always used to bear about with him a
book of Necromancye, Note the life of Gregory.
the which was unto him very familiar, and that he did cast through his
enchauntments, the consecrated host into a fire, that by that means he might
feign to have had a heavenly revelation, against the Emperor Henry: Benno
alleges for witness, John Bishop of Porta, Secretary of the said Hildebrand.

Platyna in the life of John the 8. And Sabellicus, lib. 1. of the 9. Ennead.
The Papesse John. 8. Pope. 107. Year. 855.
The woman called John the eight, was borne in England, and her parents were of
Mentz. She followed in her young age, a young scholar in the studies of
learning, and profited so well at study, that she was esteemed at Rome amongst
the wysest: for which cause she was chosen to be Pope, thinking that she had
been a man, and was chosen with as great consent as ever was Pope, following
still the study that she had learned with her study fellow. Apoc. 17.
At the time that she was chosen Pope, she was found with child with one of
her own servants, who perceiving hirself big, Esaias. 3.
knew so well to provide for her great bellye, that none could perceive it,
Behold the goodly stuff that has been holden by the popes
until such time as she trauayled of child in the open street, and in the
open procession, upon the shoulders of those that did bear her, and dyed in
the same travail, the second year after her Papacy.

One may now well see whether the Pope cannot err.

Platyna in the life of Syluester. And Sabellicus. Lib. 2. of the 9. Ennead.
Syluester. 2. Pope. 147. Year. 999.
Syluester the 2. was a Monk in his youth, afterward did give himself unto
the devil, as a right sorcerer, The Pope gives himself to the devil.
upon condition that his body and soul, should be his after his death.
Provided that the devil do help to obtain that that he desires, by which
means he came afterward to be Pope.

Platyna in the life of Bennet. 8. And Sabellicus lib. 2. of the 9. Ennead.
Benet. 8. Pope. 152. Year. 1012. The Pope did shevve himself a devil being
alive, and the devil appeared Pope after his death.
Bennet the.8. appeared damned after his death in a monstrous and horrible
likeness having an head and tail like unto an Ass, and the residewe of the
body like unto a Bear, saying that he did show himself after such sort,
because that being Pope he has lived beastly.

The year. 457. The counsel of Carthage was holden in which S. Augustine
ruled. In the same a law was made, upon the appellations in Ecclesiastical
judgment. The Pope was found in a lie, and proved a lier
The Pope required that it might be lawful to every one that would, to
appeal unto his seat. And to ye end that he might obtain that which he
demanded, did commit falshode, in alleging a decree of his own inuenting,
the which said that it was made in the counsel of Nice: After that the lie of
the Pope was known, through the doubleness of the Councelles, brought from
Constantinople, the request of the Pope was refused and denied.

The counsel of Ariminum or Rimino, The Council of Ariminu^ has erred,
nevertheless it was general
which was holden by.60. Bishops was general, condemned the counsel of Nice.
And did err with Arius, who was before condemned, by the word of God in the
said counsel. In like manner the.2. counsel of Ephesus has erred, with
Eutyches, and Dioscorus.

The counsel of Carthage in which that holy man Cyprian was present, with.86.
The Council of Carthage in which Saint Cyprian was present has erred.
Bishops, that is to say almost all the Bishops of Africa, Numidia, and of
Mauritania, decreed that Baptism ministered by the Heritickes, ought not to
take place, but that those which have been baptized by them should be baptized
again: The which sentence was afterward condemned, as it appears in
the.5. distinction, chapter, Quare.

S. Augustine writing against Maximian bishop of the Arians. Lib. 3. Chapter.
14. I ought not to prefer the Council of Nice, nor of Ariminum, as though I
should prefer them before the Scriptures. We are not holden by the
authority of Councils, but by holy scripture.
For by the authority of the same, I am not bound, neither thou likewise by
the other: But by the authorities of the holy Scriptures, and not of men what
soever they be. But witness unto both a like, as the thing with the thing, the
cause with the cause, reason with reason. etc.

We ought also to observe the decrees of Pope Alexander the 3. of Gelasius, of
Nicholas the 2. of the Council of Illyberis, of Toledo, of Carthage, of
Chalons, of Calcedonia, and the Lateran, the which have forbidden to take money
and gifts for the satisfaction of sins, for baptism, for the temples, for
the sacraments and gifts of God. And have ordained that none should be
promoted and ordained in the Church by money and rewards, and that he should
be holden for an Apostate, and not for an Apostolic, which shall obtain the
seat of Rome, either with money or favor.

The Council of Orleans has determined, that the poor, the sick, and the
weak, should be nourished and clothed by the Bishops, and that the Monks
should possess nothing of their own.

John Gerson in his first part of the examination of doctrines. The first
verity should be so sure, A lay man well instructed in the Scriptures, may
be objected against the Council, or the Pope, if they err.
that every simple man not authorized, might be so well instructed in the holy
Scriptures, that one ought rather to believe his assertion in the cause of
teaching, than the doctrine of the Pope. For it appears that rather we should
believe the Gospel than the Pope. If then such a man do teach any verity
which is contained in the Gospel, there where the Pope cannot greatly err, it
is manifest of whether one ought to prefer the judgment. By and by
afterward he says: If it should happen that there should be a general
Counsel assembled, in which such a man were present which is well instructed,
in case the greatest part should declyne through malice or ignorance, to the
opposition of the Gospel, such a lay man may be objected against the said
general Counsel.

Panormitan in his Chapter, Significasti, extra de electionibus, who was
present at the Counsel of Basil, and of Constance. In matters which concern
the faith, the saying of a lay man ought to be preferred before that of the
Pope, if his saying be more probable, by better authority either of the old
or new Testament, than that of the Pope.

Thomas of Aquino in the sum, 3. part. 46. addition 6. article. Because that
the church is builded upon faith and the Sacraments, Articles of the faith not
to be altered.
it appertains not unto the ministers of the church to make new articles of
the faith, or to make new Sacraments, or to change or take away those that
are made: for that is the excellency and puissance which appertains only
unto Jesus Christ, which is the foundation of the church.

The counsel of Gangres in Galatia, does curse those which abide not in the
faith of the Lord, and which do make every day new constitutions.

The Canons and Decretals of the Popes in the.9. distinction chapter Noli, and
chap. Ego, and chap. Negare, and.24. Q. 1. chapter. Non afferamus. We must
hold our selves unto the holy Scripture, and not unto the sayings of men how
holy soever they be.

Origene upon the Prophet Jeremy, in the first homilye. It is necessary for us
to call to witness the holy Scriptures: for unto our senses and allegations,
without those, one ought not to believe.

S. Jerome upon S. Mathewe. That which is spoken without authorytie of the
Scriptures through the like facility may be despised as it is said.

Saint Augustine upon S. John. 46. treatise. Chap. 10. Verily in sitting upon
Moses seat, What it is to sit upon Moses seat.
if they do teach the law of God, it follows that God teaches by them:
but if they will teach that which is theirs, hear them not, neither do them.
For truly such people do seek the things which are their own, and not of
Jesus Christ.

S. Cyprian unto Cecill, 2. book of his Epistles. 3. Epistle. If you do
whatsoever I command you, I will not call you servants, John. 15.
but friends: and also that Christ ought to be only heard, the father has
witnessed it from heaven, Mat. 17.
saying: this is my dear son, in whom I delight, hear him. Wherefore if it
be so that Christ alone ought to be heard, Christ alone ought to be heard.
we ought not to have regard what that is that others before us have thought
good to be done: but that which Christ which is before all has don. For we
must not follow the custom of men, but the verity of God, forasmuch as the
Lord speaks by Esaye the Prophet, saying: Esaias. 29.
They do praise me highly with their lips, teaching the commandments and
doctrine of men. And again in the Gospel, Mat. 15.
ye have made that the commandment of God is without effect, through your
tradition. And therefore, dear brethren, if any of our predecessors either
through ignorance, or through simpleness, has not observed and kept that
which the Lord has taught us to do by his example, or doctrine, Those
which do reiecte the word of God, have none excuse
the same may be left of through the simplicity thereof, and it may be
pardoned him, through the mercy of the Lord. But it cannot be pardoned us
which are now admonished and instructed of the Lord. And also we must write
letters unto our companions that the law of the Gospel and the doctrine of
the Lord be kept of every one, and that we do not go back from that ye
Christ has taught and done. etc.

Afterward he says: If we be the priests of God and of Christ, I do
not find that we ought to follow any other than God and Christ. Forasmuch as
especially he says in the Gospel: John. 8.
I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not walk in
darkness, but shall have the light of life.

Lactantius Firmianus in the.6. book of his godly institutions 8. Chapter. We
ought not to follow men but God.

S. Augustine writing unto Fortunatus. 198. Epistle. We ought not to hold or
esteem all the disputations of men as canonical scri^tures, The vvritings of
holy men are not to be preferred before the canonical scriptures.
although they have been made by learned men, insomuch that it is lawefull for
us (saving the honor of men which is due unto them) to gainesay or reprove some
things in their writings, if peradventure we do find that they savor
otherwise then the verity conteyneth, understood by others, or of us through
the help of God. I am such a one in other men's writings, as I would that they
should be which do understand mine.

S. Augustine in his Prologue of the.3. book of the trinity. Augustine
vvoulde not that we should obey his vvritings as canonical
Obey not my writings as if they were the canonical Scriptures, but all that
which thou shall find in them, believe the same without doubting: But give no
farther credit unto mine than they do accord and agree with them.

In the same book. I cannot deny, but as well in my great works as in my
small works there are many things, which justly and without any temeritie
might be blamed.

S. Augustine in his Epistle unto S. Jerome.19. Epistle.3. Tome. folio.161. I
do confess through thy love, t^^t I have learned to bear that honor and
reverence only unto the books of the holy Scriptures which are called
canonical. There is no fault in the canonical scriptures.
And I do believe most surely that no Authors of them, writing them have
erred: but if any things are found in them the which do seem to be repugnant
to the truth: I do esteem it none otherwise, but that either the book is
evil written, Augustines opinion.
or that the interpreter has evil understood that which is said therein, or
else that I do understand it nothing at all. And as for others, I do read
them in such sort, that with whatsoever holiness or doctrine they be set and
painted forth, yet I do not think that to be true which they say, because
that they have such an opinion, but so far as they could persuade me, either
by those canonical authors, or by probable reasons which are not disagreing
from the truth. And as for thee, my brother, I do think that thou think
none otherwise. Yea, I do esteem truly that thou would not that we should
read thy books, as the books of the Prophets and Apostles, which have
written so certainly, that it should be a wicked thing to think that they
have erred or failed in their writing.

S. Augustine in the.112. Epistle written unto Paulinus. I would not that thou
should follow mine authority, thereby to think that it is necessary for
thee to believe it, because I have spoken it: but to the end that thou believe
the canonical scriptures. etc.

Saint Jerome upon the Epistle unto Titus.1. Chapter. Without authority of the
Scriptures, babbling and scoffing ought not to be believed.

Tertullian in his prescriptions against the heretics. It is not in our desire
or free will, lawfully to bring in, to chose, or to allege for witness, that
that another shall bring in or allege, for his will and pleasure. For we have
the Apostles of the Lord for authors, who have brought in nothing for their
pleasure, neither no new thing, but they have faithfully taught unto the
people, the discipline and knowledge which they have received of God.

S. Augustine of one only Baptism in the Epistle unto Vincent. What is he
that knows not the holy scriptures? etc. My brother meddle not against so
great and heavenly things. For the places are known by the Canon law of the
Bishops.

Saint Augustine writing unto Vincent, in the.48. Epistle. Gather not together
false accusations against the brethren, We ought not to bring the faults of
the ancient doctors against so great number of vvitnesses of the holy
scriptures.
of the writings of the Bishops, or of ours: as of Hilarie, or of that unity
(before that the part of Denatus be divided or separated) as of Cyprian, or
Agrippin, against the heavenly witnesses, which are in so great number, so
clear, and not to be doubted. First of al, because that such kind of letters
ought to be discerned from the authority of the canonical Scriptures. For we
do not read them after that sort, as for to take witness, to which it is by no
means lawful to speak against, except peradventure they have perceived any
thing otherwise than the truth requires. Immediatlye afterward he says: But
nevertheless let us walk in that in which we are come unto, (that is to say)
in that way which is Christ. For the integrity and the knowledge of letters,
of any Bishop (how noble and virtuous so ever he be) cannot be kept as the
canonical Scripture is kept, through or by so many letters, orders, and
tongues, and through the susception of the ecclesiastical celebration. Against
the which, there are some notwithstanding, who under the name of the Apostles,
have invented and imagined many things: nevertheless, it has been in vain,
because that it is to well proved, celebrated, and known. etc.

S. Augustine in his.2. book of Baptism against the Donatistes 3. Chapter.
You have accustomed to put before us the letters of Cyprian, the sentence of
Cyprian, wherefore do you take the authority of Cyprian, for your schism,
and do repeal and keep back his example for to trouble the church? And what
is he but that he knows that the holy canonical scripture, as well of the old
testament as of the new, is kept within his limits which are certain, and
that the same is to be preferred before all the writings of the Bishops
that are past, insomuch that we must nothing doubt thereof neither dispute, to
wete, whither that all that which is written in the same be true. But it is
lawefull to rebuke the writings of the bishops which have been written or
which they have written sithence the confirmation of the canonical
scriptures, or by word, peradventure more full of wisdom of every one better
instructed in such things, or by greater authority of other bishops: or
through the wisdom of the wise, or by the counsels, if peradventure they have
swarued in any thing from the truth, and also the counsels which are done,
through out every region or province, without all doubts ought to give place
unto the authority of the first counselles which are made through out all
Christendom, and the first and general determinations, ought often times to
be amended by those that follow after, when through any experience of things
that which was secret is declared, and that which is hid is made known,
without any kind of pride, which is no sacrilege, not having a neck puffed
up with pride, without any contention or envy, with holiness, humility, with
the catholic peace, with christian charity.

Irenaeus in his.3. book.4. chap. What would it be if there were any
disputation or debate moved, of any light question, must we not have our
recourse unto the most ancient churches, which were in the time of the
Apostles, and to take of them that which is clear and certain, for to resolve
the debate or question put forth?

S. Augustine of baptism against the Donatistes.3. book.9. Chapter. Honoratus
Attuca has said, forasmuch as Christ is the truth, we ought rather to
follow the truth, then custom.

The Bishop Castus in the 5. Chapter. Custom ought not to be follovved.
He that presumes to follow custom, in condemning the truth, either he is
enuyous or wicked toward the brethren, unto whom the truth is reveled, or he
is ungrateful toward God, through whose inspiration the church is instructed.

Iere. 7.
Trust not in false lying words, saying: here is the Temple of the Lord, here
is the Temple of the Lord, here is the temple of the Lord. etc But take heed
how ye do trust in counsels that beguile you and do you no good.

Mat. 17. 2. Pet. 1.
God has witnessed of his son saying: This is my dear son, in whom I
delight here him.

The Lord has said: Deuteronomy. 18. Deuteronomy. 17.
But the prophet which shall presume to speak ought in my name, which I
commanded not to speak, and he that speaks in the name of strange Gods, the
same prophet shall dye.

Moses said, Deuteronomy. 12.
ye shall do after nothing that we do here this day, every man what seems
him good in his own eyes.

Moses said, ye shall do afer nothing that we do here this day, Deuteronomy. 12.
every man what seems him good in his own eyes.

Ye shall put nothing unto ye word which I command you, Deuteronomy. 4. Apoc. 22.
neither do ought there from, that ye may keep the commandments of the
Lord your God which I command you. Behold I have taught you ordinances and
laws such as the Lord my God commanded me.

S. Augustine writing unto Orosus against the Priscillanistes and
Originistes.11. Chapter. The doctrine of man seems to have reason so long as
it is not compared unto the heavenly knowledge: Man's doctrine has great
appearance in it self, but compared to the truth, is confounded.
but when the lie approaches to the truth, it is by and by devoured and
destroyed, as a spark of fire, and all the teachinges of faulshod and lyinges
the which now are called Idolles. Forasmuch as they are made, they shall be
altogether broken.

John. 3.
He that comes from an hie, is above all: he that is of the earth is earthly,
and speaks of the earth: he that comes from heaven is above all. And what
he has seen and heard, that he testifies: but no man receives his
testimony, howbeit he that has received his testimonye, has sealed that God
is true. For he whom God has sent, speaks ye words of God.

John. 5.
Jesus Christ says. And his words have ye not abiding in you: for whom he
has sent, him ye believe not. Search the scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me.

John. 7.
My doctrine is not mine but his that sent me. If any man will do his will,
he shall know of the doctrine, whither it be of God, or whither I speak of
my self. He that speaks of him self seeks his own praise: but he that
speaks his praise that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is
in him.

John. 8.
He that sent me is true: and I speak in the world, those things which I have
heard of him.

If ye continue in my words, John. 8.
then are ye my disciples, and shall know the truth, and the truth shall
restore you to liberty. etc. I speak that I have seen with my father: and ye
do that which ye have seen with your father. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
if a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

My sheep hear my voice, John. 10.
and I know them, and they follow me.

I have not spoken of my self: John. 12.
but the father which sent me, gave me a commandment what I should say, and
what I should speak. And I know that this commandment is life
everlasting. Whatsoever I speak therefore, even as the father bade me, so I
speak.

The words that I speak unto you, John. 14.
I speak not of my self. If ye love me, keep my commandments. He that has
my commandments and keeps them, the same is he that loves me. He that
loves me not, keeps not my sayings, and the words which ye hear, are not
mine, but the father which sent me.

Many other signs also did Jesus in ye presence John. 20.
of his disciples, which are not written in this book. These are written that
ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that in believing
ye might have life through his name.

Galat. 1.
Though that we, or an angel from heaven, preach unto you other ways than
that which we have preached unto you, hold him as accursed. As we said
before, so say I now again, if any man preach unto you other ways than that
ye have received, hold him accursed.

John. 4.
The woman that was a Samaritane, said unto Jesus, I wot well Messiah shall
come, which is called Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

Act. 20.
I have kept nothing back, but have showed you all the counsel of God.

Chrysostom in the first homily upon the Epistle unto Titus. The Gospel does
contain all things, the things present, and things to come, honor, piety, and
faith. etc.

Saint Hilarie upon Saint Matthew, 14. Canon. Mat. 15.
Every plant which my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked up by
the roots, that is to say: All man's traditions ought to be plucked up by the
rotes.
all man's traditions ought to be plucked up, by the favor of the which they
have transgressed the commandment of the law. And therefore he called them
the blind leaders, promising the way of everlasting life, the which they see
not themselves: and says that the falling hedlong of those blind leaders and
their conductors, is common.

S, Augustine upon S. John.49. treatise.9. Chapter. Although that the Lord
Jesus Christ has done many things which have not been written, as also his
own Evangelists do witness it, that the Lord Jesus Christ has said and
done many things which are not written, nevertheless, the things have been
chosen to be written, which were thought sufficient for the salvation of the
believers.

Of the holy scripture, and how it is lawful for all men to read it.
Happy is he that reads, Apoca. 1.
and happy are they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those
things which are written therein: for the time is at hand.

Luke 11.
Jesus Christ says: Happy are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.

Psalm. 119.
Thy word is a lantern unto my feet, and a light unto my paths.

Eccle. 1.
Gods word in the heygth is the well of wisdom, and the everlasting
commandments are the entrance of her.

Iere. 15.
When I had found thy words, I did eat them up greedilye: they have made my
heart joyful and glad.

Ephesians. 6.
Take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word
of God.

S. Augustine of the City of God.19. book.19. Chapter. We ought not to
forbid any man to know the truth.
It is forbidden no man to know the truth, that which he ought to do through
honest repast and recreation: how much time do men and women lose daily, in
going and coming, playing and scoffing, in detracting and beholding plays and
follies.

Chrysostom upon S. John in the end of the.16. homilye. I pray you mark well
one thing which is true, is it not a thing full of absurdite that a surgian, a
shoemaker, a weauer and generally all men of occupation, every one of them do
strive for the profession of their art and science, and that a christian
knows not how to make an account or a reason of his religion? It is very
true that when the occupation is not known it is but a loss of money, but the
despising of christian religion brings with it the loss of the soul, and
yet nevertheless we do travail through so great misery and through so great
madness, that we do put therein all our heart and cogitation: but the things
which are necessary for us, and which are as most strong holds of our
salvation, we esteem them nothing at all. The ignorance of the Christians is
the cause that the infidels do not acknovvlege their error.
That same is that which lets the Gentiles to know their error. Forasmuch
then as they do ground them selves upon lyinges, for to do all that, that
they do, and for to defend the ignominye and sclander of their teachinges, we
which do obey and serve the truth, dare not open the mouth for to defend that
which is ours. What lets them that they cannot condemn our great
imbecillitie and weakness, and that they should not suspect us of some
disceyt and follye? That they do not speak evil of Christ, as of a liar,
which by his fraud and disceyt has abused a great multitude? we are the
cause of that blasphemy: This is commanded us of Saint Peter. 1. Pet. 3. We
ought to be ready to give a reason of our faith unto those that ask us.
Colos. 3.
For he says, let us be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks us a reason of the hope that is in us.

Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously. But what do they which are
more fools then mad answer unto the same, blessed be every simple soul,
and he that walks surely. But this is the cause of all euilles, Prou. 10.
Common words to be simple.
that many know not to bring witnesses of the Scriptures in due time: for we
must not understand in this place here the simple for the fool, and for him
that does understand nothing, but for him which is not crafty and malicious.
For if we should understand it so, it should be superfluous to say, Mat. 10.
be wise as serpents and innocent as doves.

S. Ierom in his Prologue upon the Prophet Sophony. If they had known that
Huldah did prophecy when men held their peace, 4. Reg. 22 Judges. 4.
and that Debora did judge and prophecy, who overcame the enemies of Israel
when Barack was a frayde, and that Judith and Hester (in figure of the church)
killed the adversaries and delivered Israel which were like to perish,
Judith. 13 Hester. 7.
they would never have played the noddyes behind my back (that is to say)
they would not mock me behind my back. And a little after he says, it
suffiseth me to say in the end of the prologue that our Lord Jesus Christ
appeared first unto the women, and they were Apostles of the Apostles, to that
end that the men should be ashamed that they have not sought that, which that
same brittle or frail kind has already found.

Chrysostom upon S. John.3. homily.4. Chapter. Let us then be ashamed, The
slothfulness of Christians in not reading diligently the word of God.
that the wife that had five husbands, and a Samaritane, was so diligent to
learn, who neither for the time of the day, nor for any other business could
not be drawn from the doctrine of Christ. But as for us, we are not only far
of from enquiring any thing of that which appertains unto the erudition of
heavenly things, but also we are, as it were assured in all things, and we do
care no more of the one, than of the other, and therefore we are ignorant of
all things. What is he among us, I pray you, who being come into his house,
does go about to do any work appertayning unto a Christian? A great number
of those which do call themselves christians, have oftener the tables and dyce
in their hands, than holy books.
What is he that will declare the sense and meaning of the scriptures? Truly
none. We do find oftentimes Dyce and Cards, but very seldom times books:
and if any have them, they do keep them sure in their chambers, as though
they had none. Or else all their delight and study is to have fair and
pleasant couerings, and painted or goodly figures of letters, not for to read
them, nor use the^, but for to show forth their riches and ambition, and
study none other thing. Vain glory is so great, as I do not hear any
ambitious persons to understand any book, but only to esteem letters of gold.
What gain comes thereof I pray you? The Scriptures are not given unto us,
for to have them only in books, Prou. 7.
but to that end we should print and engraue them in our hearts. Scriptures
to be graven in our hearts, and the books diligently read over. Iere. 31.
Wherefore such having and keeping of books, is of the ambition of the Jews,
unto whom the commandments were given in letters. But unto us it is not so,
unto whom they are given in the tables of the heart of charity. I do not
forbid to have books, but I do admonish them, and instantly pray them, that
we may so have them, that nevertheless, as we may rehearse often times in
our minds, both the letters and the sense, in such sort that thereby we may
be clean. For if the devil dare not enter into an house where the Gospel is,
much less shall he touch his soul, which by continual reading has that
doctrine familiar and common.

Sanctify then the soul and the body, Psalm. 1.
and that shall come if thou have always the Gospel in thy heart, and in thy
tongue.

S, Jerome in his Proheme upon the first book of his Exposition unto the
Ephesians.9. Tome. All words and all reasons are contained in the holy books,
by the which also we know God, and forgette not the cause, wherefore we are
created. I do much maruayle, that some have been given so much unto
foolishness, and to slothfulness, not willing to learn the most excellent
things, yea, they have esteemed and do esteem worthy of rebuke and blame all
those which have such a study: unto whom although I could answer more
straightly and briefly, leaving them either angry or appeased. I do say that
it is a great deal better to read the scriptures, than to give themselves
after riches, for to gather and heap them up. 1. Tim. 6.


Chrysostom upon Genesis.6. Tome. 5. Homily.1. Chapter. Neighbors ought to
take holy scripture in their hands to sprinkle their souls.
I desire you that we be not negligent unto our own salvation, yea rather
that our word be of spiritual things, and let us take in our hands Gods
books, and calling together our neyghbors, sprinkle with heavenly words our
own selves, and of the assistentes, that thereby we may chase and drive away
the treasons and assaults of the devil.

S. Jerome in his first Tome unto Marcellus, persuading him to go to Bethleem.
In the town where Jesus was borne, there are none but rusticall people, where
ye shall here nothing but singing of psalms in every place: the ploughman
holding the plough by the tail sings Alleluya: The mower to pass away the
time sings psalms, the Vine dresser with his hook cutting the vine, sings
some thing of David, these are the songs of this province, these are (as we
say commonly) the songs of love.

Athanasius upon the Epistle unto the Ephesians..6. Chapter. Ye fathers move
not your children to wrath. etc. Ephesians. 6.
he adds the cause of the obeying of the fathers commandment, and shows
unto the parents how they should make their children obedient and ready to do
that that they are bydde. If thou wylt (says he) that thy children do obey
thee, accustom them unto heavenly words, and say not that it belongs unto
the Monks to understand holy letters: For truly it is the office rather of
every christian, and chefelye of him which medleth and has to do with the
affairs and business of this world. And the more that he has need of the
greater healpes, the greater need has he to understand it: for he is more
provoked with the assaults of this world. This then is greatly for thy profit,
Reading of the scriptures makes children obedient.
that thy children may hear and read holy Scriptures, for thereby they shall
learn to honor father and mother: But thou do the contrary, thou bring
up thy children in the doctrine of panims and gentiles, of which they shall
learn most wicked things, the which shall not be so when they are instructed
in the heavenly Scriptures.

Primasius (Bishop of Vtica in Africa, disciple of S. Augustine) upon the
Epistle to the Collos. 3. chapter. Collos. 3. The lay people ought to have the
holy scriptures.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously. etc. Here is most amply
declared, that the lay people ought also to have the word of God, not only
simply, but also abundantly and plenteously, and they ought also to admonish
and teach the one the other.

Athanasius upon the.3. Chapter of the Collossians. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you plenteously in all wisdom: Collos. 3.
He declares the way by the which we may give thanks in all things. For if the
word of God (says he) dwell in you, that is to say, the doctrine or heavenly
commandments and admonitions, The holy scriptures cause us to bear all
tribulations patiently.
by the which he instructs us to despise this life, we cannot greatly esteem
earthly riches. Truly we should not fall or be overcome with to grievous
things, but to bear all things stoutly and manfully rendering thanks unto God,
although there happen adversities. For he has not said, let the word of God
be in you simply, but let it dwell in you plenteously. For if we do abound in
the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, we shall easly bear trybulations, pains
and calamities, and all other manner of evil.

Theophilacte upon the.6. chap. to the Ephesians. If thou wylt (says he) that
thy children should obey thee, instruct them in the word of our Lord, and say
not that it does belong only unto the Monks to read the Scriptures. For it
belongs as well unto every christian, and cheefely unto all those which have
to do in this world.

S. Jerome upon the.6. chap. unto the Ephesians. Little children ought to be
taught the holy scriptures.
If he do command the Ephesians being lay men, and unto many that are
occupied in the business and affairs of this life (as we see among the
people) to teach their children in all discipline, and admonition of the Lord:
what ought we to think or judge of the priests? of whose order he has
written unto his disciple Timothe saying, having children subject in all
reverence. etc.

S. Ambrose upon the.2. Epistle unto Timothe. 3. chapter. 2. Tim. 3.
All scripture given by inspiration of God. etc. It is manifest that all
scripture of which God is said to be the author, to be profitable: For it is
given to that end that it may profit the ignorant and amend the disformed
creatures, drawing the wicked into all good works: For in profitting a little
and little to the new man, it will make him the man of God.

Chrysostom upon the.2. Epistle unto Timothe.3. chapter. Thou have (says he)
through me the Scriptures, if thou do desire to learn any thing, of them
thou may learn it: If he did write those things unto Timothe who was full
of the holy ghost, how much more ought we to think that it is spoken unto us.

Lactantius Firmianus in the Proeme of his heavenly institutions. We which have
received the Sacrament of true religion, for as much as the truth is reveled
unto us, and that we may follow God the doctor of sapyence and wisdom, let
us call unto that heavenly banquet all men universally without any difference
either of kind or age: for there is no meat sweeter and more delectable unto
the soul, then the knowledge of the truth. Every one may dravve out of the
holy scriptures that which is needful for his souls health.


S. Augustine in the.6. chapter of the utility and profit of believing. All
that which is in the Scriptures is high and heavenly, all is truth and most
fit and wholesome doctrine (believe me) for to fill and satisfy the spirits,
in such sort that every one may draw out that which is sufficient for him, so
that he draw it devoutly and holily, according as true religion requires.

Augustine of true religion.51. chapt. about the letter E. In forsaking (says
he) the open and Poetical trifles and foolishness, let us feed and comfort
our spirit, in treating and considering of holy scriptures. The which spirit
being wearye and to much overcome with the heat, hunger, and thirst of vain
curiosity, and things to no purpose, desires to be refreshed and comforted
with vain fantasies, as of goodly and dainty meats.

Chrysostom upon S. John 5. Tome.10. Homily, first Chapter. We ought to
teach one another in Gods word.
Before I do come to entreat of the words of the Gospel, I would request of
you one thing, which I would not have you to despise. For I do not demand
of you heavy things, nor such as are hard to be done, neither that which is
only profitable to me, but a great deal more to you. What is then the request
that I demand? That one day in the week, or at the least upon the Sundays
and Festival days ye be diligent to have in your hands before the preaching
the Gospel, which we do read unto you, and to repeat them often in your
houses, searching diligently the understanding thereof, and noting that which
is easy or obscure and hard in them, and that which seems to have
contrariety, yet notwithstanding has not: and after that ye have thoroughly
examined it, be very attentive to those Sermons, by which mean shall come
great profit both to you and to me. For I shall have no great labor to declare
unto you the virtue and efficacy of the gospel, so that the sentence before
be made easy by you in your house. And you shall be a great deal more wise, not
only to hear and understand, but to teach others. For there are a great
many that hear, What is the cause that many do profit so little in the
scriptures.
and take great pain to keep all the words of the Gospel, and all that we
do interpret upon them, yet nevertheless they profit not very much,
although we should remain there with them a year. Wherefore? Because they
give not themselves unto our sermons but a small time, and that only in the
Church. And if any excuse themselves by reason of their business, and
occupations of public and particular things: First of all, they err very
much, chiefly in that they understand so many things, and are so much given
unto temporal affairs and business, as they do nothing at all study on the
things which are most necessary, No excuse from reading of scripture.
and do allege a vain excuse, and of no force. For one may rather accuse in
this matter, the long conversation of friends, the long sitting in the theaters
and gasing places, the long time that men spend in beholding the running of
horses, in which vain things they consume and spend many times a whole day,
and the which nevertheless, they excuse not themselves by reason of their
occupations. Furthermore, ye are to diligent in things that are vile, and
nothing worth. But when ye must understand heavenly things, ye esteem them
unprofitable, and of no price: insomuch as ye make none account to bestow on
them any little care and diligence. And how are they worthy of victuals, and
to see the sun, which make so small account of it. The negligent people have
yet another excuse, but very evil, yt is to say, that they have no books. That
should be a ridiculous thing to answer here for the rich, but because I do
think that many poor men do use many times that excuse, An admonition unto
the poor people to have the holy books.
I will a little speak unto them, and ask them whether they have not all the
instruments and tools that belong to their arts and sciences. Although that
poverty lets or hinders them greatly to buy them: It is then a foolish
thing to excuse themselves through poverty, and to be diligent in lacking
nothing necessary for their occupations and sciences, yet to excuse themselves
upon their occupations and poverty, in things whereof comes unto them so
great utility and profit.

Augustine in the.56. Sermon unto the brethren being in sorrow and care. He
ought to fear which will not read the Scriptures, to be tormented with
eternal pains.
He which makes none account to read the holy Scriptures, sent from paradise,
ought to fear, yt he do not only peradventure receive eternal retributions
and rewards, but also that he escape not eternal pains. For it is so
dangerous not to read the heavenly precepts, that the Prophet with great
mourning does cry, Esaias. 5.
therefore comes my folk into captivity because they have no understanding:
for he that is ignorant shall be ignorante still. 1. Cor. 14.
Without doubt he which makes none accounte in this world to seek God by
heavenly reading, God will scorn to know him in the eternal and everlasting
blessedness: We ought greatly to fear with the five foolish virgins (who
came after the gates were shut) when Christ said unto them, Math. 25.
I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. What is that to say,
I know you not, I know you not? How does he not know those whom he sends
to the fire? not without cause both of them. For as he said not long sithence,
those which will not understand in reading in this world, God will not know
them in the day of judgment. We ought also to hear not negligently, but
diligently, and with great fear that which is written in the proverbs of
Solomon, Pro. 28.
he that turns (says he) away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer
shall be abhorred. He that would be heard of God, ought first to hear God:
He that vvoulde be heard of God, ought first to hear God.
for how would he that God should hear him, considering that he dispiseth so
much as he makes none account to read his holy commandments And that, what
is it my brethren? Some christians yea and which is worse some of the clergy,
when they would bring them into the right way do ordain that bread wine and
oil and other necessary things of cost be prepared for them. And forasmuch
as every one prepares so many things for his terrestrial journey, for to
nurrishe his flesh, wherefore has he no care or desire to read so excellent
a book of which his soul should be refreshed here eternally.

What soever things are written before time are written for our learning, Romans
15.
that we through patience, and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope.

To all you that be at Rome: Romans 1.
he has written unto all, that that he did write.

These things were written to put us in remembrance, 1. Cor. 10.
whom the ends of ye world are come upon.

Saint Jerome writing unto Caelantia a gentlewoman of Rome. You demand and
redemand very carefully and earnestly, that I should describe for you a
certain rule of the holy Scriptures, to which you should address and lead
the course of your life, to the end that knowing the will of the Lord, among
the honors of this world, The married wife ought to be an example to all those
of her house, in holiness of life and conversation.
and the pleasure of riches, you should rather have a heap and great store of
good manners. And to that end that you being married may please not only your
husband, but also him which has permitted marriage. And again, first of all
that the authority of the husband be kept, and that all his family do learn
of you, how greatly they ought to honor him, the Lord declares through
service and great obedience by humility, for the more you honor him, the more
you shall be honored: for the Apostle says: The husband is the wives head.
Ephe. 5. 1. Cor. 11.
For the body has more ornaments upon the head, than all the residue of the
whole parts.

Again S. Jerome writing unto the said Caelantia. Let all excuse of error
cease, the filthy the filthy and dishonest rejoicing in sin, The wicked
life of another to cover ours, ought not to be alleged.
let them be put away: for if we will excuse and defend our selves by the
example of the multitude, reciting many times the vices of others for our
consolation and comfort, and saying that we have none who^ we may follow, we
do nothing. We are sent to the example of him, who, we do all confess, ought
to be followed. And therefore the chiefest care is to know the heavenly law,
by the which thou may see the examples of the saints, as if they were
present: Learn by the counsel of the same what we ought to do, and what to
avoid. For he helps greatly to justice (that is to say increases virtues)
that fills his spirit and mind with heavenly words, and which has
always in his heart that which he desires to fulfill by works. etc.

Immediately after he says: Let the holy Scriptures be then always in thy
hands, and continually in thy thought, and think it not sufficient for thee
to remember, or to have in mind the commandments of God, and not fulfilling
them by works. But know them, to the end you may learn that which ought to
be done. For before God they are not righteous which hear the law: Romans 2.
but the doers of the law shall be justified. Truly the field of the heavenly
law is much, and without measure enlarged, the which does shine with many
witnesses of truth, and as with a certain heavenly flower feeds and
nourishes the spirit of him that reads it, with a marvelous delight: All
which things you shall know to be very good to keep justice.

S. Jerome writing unto the Lady Gaudentia, of the bringing up of her daughter
Pacantull. How we ought to bring up the young daughters in reading.
When the little and young damsel shall come unto seven years of age, and that
she begins to be shamefast, to know when she would keep silence, and to
doubt of that that she ought to speak. Let her then learn by heart the
Psalms, and unto twelve years, that she do make a treasure in her heart of
the books of Solomon, of the Gospels, of the Apostles and Prophets.

Again, writing unto another good Lady called Leta, exhorting her to instruct
her daughter from the cradle in the holy scriptures, he wills her to love the
godly books, in stead of precious stones and silk, in which books, let not
the couers being embrodered with diverse colors please her, but the erudition
distinct and corrected according to faith: Let her learn first the Psalter,
and through such songs, that she do withdraw her self from the world: Let
her be taught to live virtuously in the Proverbs of Solomon. And that she do
accustom hirselfe to despise and contemn worldly things in Ecclesiasticus.
The canonical books.
That she do follow the example of virtue and patience in Job. That she do
learn the Gospel, not letting it go out of her hands. That she willinglye
learn the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles. And when she has enriched her
heart with such riches, to learn by heart the Prophets, and the books of
Moses, the books of the Kings, Paralipomenon, Esdras, also Hester, and last
of all the Canticles of Solomon, called Cantica canticorum. For if she should
read them at the beginning, it might hurt her, understanding not the holy
songs of the spiritual marriages, under carnal words. That she do avoid all
books that are apocrypha or hidden. That she have always in her hands the
works of Cyprian, Athanasius, and Hilary.

S. Jerome in his Proeme of his commentaries upon Esaias unto Eustachius. I give
unto thee that which I do owe thee, obeying the commandments of Christ,
John. 5.
which says, seek diligently the Scriptures, seek and you shall find,
that it be not said unto me as it was said unto the Jews, Christ is the
virtue of God.
you do err knowing not the Scriptures and the virtue of God and the wisdom
of God, and he that knows not the Scriptures, knows not the virtue of God,
nor his wisdom. Ignorance of the Scriptures, is ignorance of God.

Chrysostom in his.3. Sermon of Lazarus. I have told you many times, before
now whereof we ought to speak, to the end that in the mean season you may
take the book, and consider it diligently, and after that you have understood
that which shall be said, and that which shall remain to be declared, you
shall make your spirits more instructed and ready to hear the thing spoken of.
I do exhort you and will not cease to exhort you alwais to be attentife, not
only to that which shall be spoken here: but also when you shall be in your
houses, always give good ear to the holy Scriptures, which I have not ceased
to prick forward cheefely those which have been with me, and that none say
unto me his words are cold, The excuses that the temporal people do make,
to avoid from reading the holy scriptures.
there are many things smally to be esteemed: I am an advocate: I am let with
public affairs: I have an occupation: I have a wife: I do bring up my
children: I have charge of my family: I am a temporal man, it belongs not
to me to read the Scriptures, but for those that have forsaken the world,
which dwell above the mountains, which chastely lead a solitary life. What
say thou O thou man? does it not belong unto thee to read the Scriptures,
because thou art let and hindered with business and innumerable cares?
Therefore the more thou haddeste need to read them then they.

For those have not so much need of the aid and help of the Scriptures as
thou which art tossed through the mids of the waves of business troubles,
and cares: for truly the Monks Monks were solitary people, who
notvvithstanding did lead a common life, not as the Monks at this day.
and those that dwell in solitary places which live without suit of law and
other business, and which dwell in the deserts, have none acquaintance with
any man, but study philosophy in most peaceable tranquillity with safety,
and have the fruition of most safe things. On the contrary we (as in the
midst of the sea) tossed with innumerable sins, have always need of the
perpetual and continual solace and comfort of the scriptures. They are very
far of from the combat, and therefore they do not receive many strokes and
wounds, but thou because thou art still in the battle, and that thou do
receive many wounds, thou have the greater need of remedy.

For thy wife does provoke thee, and thy son does make thee sad, and does
stir thee up to anger, and thy enemy goes about to circumuent and deceive
thee, and thy freende does bear thee envy and hatred, and thy neighbor does
persecute thee, and thy companion does deceive thee, and many times the Judge
does threaten thee, and poverty does molest and grieve thee, the loss of the
things in thy house does make thee sorrowful, and prosperity makes thee
proud, and adversity draws thee away: to conclude diverse occasions and
necessity of cares, troubles, sorrow, boasting, pride, do compass and
inuirone thee on every side, and round about innumerable darts do fly, for
which things it is necessary to take incessantly the weapons and armor of the
Scripture. Acknowledge the^ that thou walk through the pinnacles (that is to
say the most high places) of the city. For the concupiscences of the flesh
do eleuate themselves more sharply against those which live amongst the
multitude of men, whom the beauty of the face and the comlynesse of the body
conceived through looking on and dishonest words which enter in at the ears,
do trouble much. And the harmonious and pleasant songs do weaken often
times the constancy of the spirit. But to what end do I recyte this? The
savor of the sweet smelles (which seems to be a thing more vile then all
that) coming from those women which dwell at the stews for gain in playing
the whores, does lead us captife and overcomes us by only meeting them: so
many things there be which do assail our soul: And therefore we have need
of heavenly remedies, not as well to heal the hurtes we received, as for to
keep us from them, that they do not assault and afflict us again, but to
avoid and give the repoulse through the continual reading of the scriptures,
to the darts of the devil coming a far. For if we be always hurt and take
no remedy, what hope of health shall we have: Do thou not see the workers of
metal, goldsmythes, coyners, and all those which do exercise any occupacion,
to have all the instruments of their occupacion ready and to lack none?
Although that honger constrayneth them, and poverty does afflict them, they
had rather to suffer all things then to sell any instrument of their occupacion
for to nurrish them, yea many had rather to borrowe money upon vsurye, then to
lay to gage any little instrument of their science or occupacion, and for a
good cause, for they do know that after that they have sold it, the
occupacion should be unprofitable, and all the foundation of their gain taken
away: but in having them, it may be that in time they will pay that they have
borrowed of another, in using always their occupation: But if they do sell
them to other before they have paid that they do owe, they have not whereby
to excogitate or invent any thing to help their hunger and poverty. Truly it
behooves us to be of such courage: for even as to them the Hammers, Anuiles,
and Tongs, are instruments of their Arts, Even as the instruments of art for
to gain the life, even so are the books of the Apostles for the life of our
souls.
even so the books of the Apostles and Prophets, are instruments of the Art
and way of salvation, and all Scripture being heavenly inspired, is
profitable. And even as they finishe all that they do take in hand to do by
those instruments, even so truly by those books, we frame our soul, and
amend and correct it when it is wicked, and renew it when it is waxen old.
For those can but only by their Art give forms and fashions to things, for
they cannot change nor alter the substance of the metal, neither make gold
of silver, but only give them their figures to be like. But it is not so with
thee, but thou may do more, for thou may sometime of a vessel of wood
make a vessel of gold: of which thing S. Paul is witness, 2. Tim. 2.
speaking after this manner: In a great house are not only vessels of gold, and
of silver, but also of wood, and of earth, some for honor, and some for
dishonor. But if a man purge himself from such fellows, he shall be a
vessel sanctified unto honor, meet for the Lord, and prepared unto all good
works. Wherefore let us not be negligent to buy us books, that we receive not
wounds in our hearts, and let us not lay up our gold in the earth, but let us
furnishe our selves with a treasure of spiritual books. Truly when that gold
abounds greatly, then it deceyueth greatly those which possess it: but great
store of books gotten together, do bring great utility unto those that have
them, even as weapons in the roial assemblies: although that none do use them,
yet nevertheless they give great assurance unto them which dwell in the house
where they are, when neither thieves, nor breakers of walls, nor any wicked
persons, dare not assail the house. Even so in any house where these
spiritual books shall be, The profit that comes unto us of the holy books.
from them all the force of the devil is driven away, and great consolation
and comfort comes unto those that dwell there: for the only beholding of
books makes us the slower to sin. And although that we have done some
things that are prohibited, and have defiled our selves: the conscience does
condemn us more sharplye, when we are come unto the house, and have beheld
the books, and are made slower to commit at another time such things again.
If we do persist in holiness, we are made surer and stronger by the books.
For as soon as any has touched the Gospel, he has by and by withdrawn his
spirit from worldly things, by the beholding of them: and if he read
diligently, Although that many do not understand all the scripture, they must
not therefore leave of to profit in it.
the soul is by such means purged and made better, no otherwise tha^ being in
ye holy secrets, it imploieth it self to holy things, God speaking unto it by
such scriptures. What the^ (say they) if we understand not yt which is
contained in ye books: truly although thou understand not yt which is hid, yet
nevertheless, great holiness comes of such reding: For it cannot be that thou
be ignorant of it altogether. For truly the grace of the holy spirit has so
dispensed and moderated it, to the end that the Publicanes and sinners, makers
of Tabernacles, Pastors, and Apostles, Idiotes, and the unlearned should be
saved by those books. And to the end that none of those Idiotes might excuse
themselves, alleging the difficultye thereof, he would that those things
which are spoken, should be easy at the first sight, and that the laborers,
servants, women, wydowes, and the most ignorante of all men should receive some
gain and profit of the reading that they did hear. For those whom God has
reputed from the beginning worthy of the grace of the holy spirit, have not
done all these things through vain glory as gentilles, but to the salvation
and health of the hearers. Truly the Philosophers being ignorant of Christ,
The Philosophers have not searched that which profits, but to make
themselves esteemed.
good orators, and composers of books, not seeking that which profits all
men, but tending to make them selves esteemed, although they have said some
thing that is profitable, yet not withstanding obscurity has kept it hid, as
in a certain kind of foolish wisdom: but the Apostles and the Prophets,
have done altogether therwyse, The Apostles and Prophets have written
clearly and plainly.
expounding unto all men the books clearly and manyfestlye that they have
written, as public doctors of the world, in such sort that every one may
learn the things which are spoken by the only reading: That which the
Prophet did pronounce, Iere. 31. Heb. 8.
saying al shall be taught of God: and from thence forth shall no man teach
his neighbor or his brother, and say: know the Lord: But they shall all know
me, from the loweste unto the highest.

I brethren when I came unto you, 1. Cor. 2.
came not in gloriousness of words or of wisdom, showing unto you the
testimonye of God: And again, my words and my preachinges was not with
entising words of man's wisdom: but in showing of the spirit and of power.
And again: That which we spoke is not the wisdom of this world, neither of
the rulers of this world which go to naught. For unto whom are not all the
things that are in the gospel manifest? who would have a master for to
learn, hearing any of these words? Math. 5.
Blessed are the meek, blessed are the merciful, blessed are the pure in
heart and such other things: The signs, miracles and historyes are not they
known and manifest unto every one? That is a color and a cloked excuse of
their slothfulness, to say thou understand not the things which are
there, how can thou a-thing at all understand when thou will not but with
great pain lightly see it? Take the books in thy hands, read all the
hystory, and keeping in memory the things that are plain and known, let
pass the hard and obscure things. And if thou can not with continual
reading find out that which is there spoken, go unto one that is wyser then
thy self, or unto a doctor, declare unto him the things that are written,
declare unto him thy fervent desire: And if God would give unto thee so great
promptitude of courage, he will not despise thy diligence and carfulness. But
yet although that no man will teach thee that which thou desire to know,
yet without doubt he will declare it unto thee. Remember the Eunuch of the
Queen of the Ethiopians, Act. 8.
who although he were a barbarous and rude man, The diligence of the Eunuch
reading the scriptures, not understanding them.
let and hindered with innumerable cares, and on every side environed with
worldly affairs and troubles, and that he did not understand that which he
read, nevertheless he did read it sitting in his charret. If all the time as
he went in the way, he ceased not to read, much less when he was at rest in
his house: if he did read understanding not that which he read, and has not
ceased to read: much less after that he has learned: Now to the end that
thou know that he did not understand that which he did read, hear what
Philip said unto him. Act. 8.
Do thou understand (says he) that which thou read? And he hearing his
words, was not ashamed, but confessed his ignorance, and said: How can I
understand except I had a guide. When there was none that could show him the
way, nevertheless he did read, and therefore he had immediately a guide. God
knowing his prompt and ready courage, and loving his diligence, incontinently
did send him a doctor: but we have not Philip ready. Let us not despise my
brethren and friends, our health and salvation, all things are written for the
love of us, for our correction unto whom the ends of the ages are come upon.
1. Cor. 10.
The reading of the Scriptures is a great munition against sin, the ignorance
of the Scriptures is a great peril of falling headlong into hell: to know
nothing of the heavenly laws is a great perdition of salvation. This thing
has engendered heresies, this has made us lead a naughty life, and has
mingled all things both high and low. Truly it can not be that he should
be sent away without fruit which takes pleasure in continual and attentive
reading of the Scriptures.

S. Jerome in his.6. Tome upon Jeremy. Chapter.9. The error of our forefathers
We ought not to follow the error of our forefathers.
ought not to be followed, but the authority of the Scriptures, and the
commandment of God which he teaches us. And again, truly through the
ignorance of the law, they receive Antichrist for Christ.

Chrysostom in the 29. homily upon Genesis. There is neither the passion of
the body nor of the soul in man's nature, but that it may take medicine of the
holy Scripture. Afterward he says: Therefore I pray you come often hither,
and mark diligently the reading of the holy scripture, not only when you do
come hither, but also in your houses, take in your hands the holy Bible, and
receive with great diligence and care the utility that lies therein hid, for
thereby you shall get great profit: First truly that by the reading your
tongue be reformed: afterward your soul takes wings, and eleuateth her
self, and is illuminated through the splendour and brightness of the sun of
righteousness. And in the mean time it is delivered from the inticementes and
allurements of filthy and unclean thoughts, reioicing with great rest and
tranquillity. And furthermore, that which the corporal meat does unto the
body, for to augment and increase strength, ye same does the reading of the
holy scriptures unto ye soul.

The Canon law in the Chapter, Praelatum, de consecratione.3. Distinction.
That which the Scripture does unto the readers, the same does the Paynter unto
the Idiotes and ignorant in beholding it: for in the same the ignorant people
do see that which they ought to follow: This constitution in the body of
the law is imprinted at Paris at the sign of the golden sun.
in the same they do read which know not the letters. The Emperor Justinian
in his new Constitutions autentike, in the 146. Constitution of the Hebrews,
says thus: It was expedient that the Hebrews should take great pleasure, not
of the history only, when they give ear unto the holy books, but that they
should mark and behold the sense hid in them, by the which they show
forth the great God, Jesus Christ, savior of mankind. But although that by
the interpretation among them dreamed, they do debate and reason it among them
selves unto this day: nevertheless they have erred from the right sentence.
And because we have known that they have amongst themselves debates, we would
not leave them in such dissentions. For we have known by the interpellation
and reports, which have been told us, that some of them would not receive but
the Hebrewe tongue only, and would that we should use them in the reading of
holy books, other do hold an opinion that we must have the Greek tongue,
and there has been for this thing of long time sedition among them. The holy
ordinance that Justinian made touching the holy books, to have the^ in all
tongues, to the end they should be read of all men.
We then having understood this debate, have judged those better which desire
to have the Greek tongue in the reading of holy books, and for to be short,
such a tongue as the place requires most fit and meetest for the hearers,
we then do ordain that in what soever place the Hebrews are, it shall be
lawefull for them in their assemblies to read the holy Scriptures in the
Greek tongue, and in the Italian tongue, or translated and changed into any
other tongue, as the place shall require, to the end that all the continuation
and order of that which is said, be manifested unto those which shall
understand the holy boks, by the reading of them. And according to these
things, they do direct their life and study, and their interpretors (which
do use only the Hebrewe tongue) may not after their own fancy maliciously
entreat and expound them, hiding and cloking their wickedness by the
ignorance of the people.

And a little after he says, let us altogether forbid that, which they do
call Deuteros, as the second tradition, not contained in the holy books, not
given from above by the Prophets, but containing a certain extracte of men,
which speak not but of earthly and terrestrial things, not having in it any
thing of the heavenly spirit. But truly we desire that they read the holy
sayings, when they declare the holy books, not hiding the things that are
therein contained, and not heap together vain words that are not written,
but excogitated and invented by them, to the destruction of the simple people,
which license by us given shall not turn to any man's hurt or damage, of those
that receive the Greek tongue and other tongues: and that shall not be
prohibited nor forbidden them by no man what soever he be: And over and
besides those which are cal-Archpharasies or Ancients, or masters shall not
have license to prohibit through their cautelous inventions, or
anathematisations, if they will not be chastised nor corrected with corporal
punishment, and after confiscation of their goods, malgre their heads to
consent unto us, who do will and command things better agreeable unto God.
We ought to take heed of the malice of the interpreters.
And again a little after he says: For our will is that by this and other
tongues, those which give good ear unto the holy books, ought to be ware of
the malice of the interpretors, and that they do not only understand the
letters, but also taste well the things therein contained, and receive it
thoroughly, and understand the most holy sentences, to the end they may
learn better that which is best, and be no more deceived, erring and failing
in the end. For there is nothing so excellent as for to have affiance and
trust in God: Therefore we have opened unto them all tongues, for the reading
the holy books: to that end that if all by order, do embrace the science and
knowledge of them, they may be the more diligent to learn that which is the
best: The Emperor Justinian gives liberty unto all men to read the holy
scriptures, and the reason wherefore.
Forasmuch as it is most evident that he which has been and is nourished and
instructed in the reading of holy books, is more prompte and ready to discern
and receive that which is the best, to receive correction and to be conducted
and lead into goodness, then he that understands none of all this,
depending of the only name of religion: and staying him self as to the anchor
of respect and sovereign refuge, thinking that the science and true knowledge
of God, is in the only calling of the sect.

This then which has pleased us, and which is declared by this holy law,
shall keep as well thy glory as those which are under thy obedience: And also
shall keep and observe them which shall succeed in the honor of thy
magistrate and ruler. Those which vvoulde not suffer the scripture in all
languages and tongues, were punished through the confiscation of their goods.
And shall not suffer that the Jews do contrary or against those things: but
shall utterly put to exile and banish al those that shall resist, or attempt
to let this ordinance, punishing them first by corporal punishment, afterward
confiscating their goods, to the end they may not eleuate them selves against
God and the imperial majesty, more insolently through a foolish and rash
boldness, and use their Edictes toward the presidentes of the provinces,
considering our law, to that end that knowing those things, they may set them
forth in every town and village, and that they may know that they ought
necessarily to observe these things, by them which do fear our indignation
and displeasure.

S. Jerome in his Proeme of the Prophet Jeremy. What other life can there be
without the knowledge of the Scriptures, by the which Christ also is known,
who is also the life of the believers.

Saint Ambrose in his.35. Sermon. The Lord does witness that the reading of
the Scriptures is life, John. 6.
saying: The words that I speak unto you, are spirit and life.

Moses said: Number. 11. Moses enuyed not those which had the gift of God.
Amos. 7.
What is he that causes that all the Lords people do prophecy, and that the
Lord does give them his holy spirit. etc.

As for me, I am no Prophet, nor Prophets son, but a keeper of cattle. etc.

Eusebius bishop of Caesaria in his Ecclesiastical history. lib. 6.
Chapter.11. Alleging the Epistle of Alexander bishop of Jerusalem against
Demetrius, and rebuking him thus, says: That which thou have added in thy
letters, thou say, The Priests do say that it appertains not unto the
lay people to dispute in the Church: behold diligently the contrary.
that it was never seen that the lay and secular people should dispute of the
faith in the presence of the Bishops. I maruayle what moved thee to affirm a
lie so evident. In as much that as often as there is found any man that is
sufficient and apt for to give good counsel, and to instruct the people, the
Bishops have accustomed to desire him to do it, as our brother the Bishop
Neon did unto Euelpius in the City of Laranda, and the Bishop Celsus unto
Paulinus in the City of Iconium, and the Bishop Atticus unto Theodosius in the
City of Sinnas. And there is no doubt but that the other Bishops may do the
like in their diocesses, when they find any one which is a man for to profit
the people.

Chrysostom upon the first Chapter of Genesis. 8. homily. Chrysostom would
that all were doctors.
I desire most earnestlye, and do pray that ye may be all in the order of
doctors, and not only to be hearers of our words, but also that ye would
report and declare unto others our doctrine, and that ye would correct those
that do err and go astraye, to the end they may return into the way of
truth, as S. Paul says: 1. These. 5.
Exhort one another, and edify one another. etc.

And a little after he says: God would not that the Christian should be
only content with himself, but that he do also edify others, and not only
with doctrine, but also with good life and conversation. etc.

Chrysostom upon the.2. Chapter of Genesis.10. Homily. He which has the care
to teach and instruct his neighbor, does not so much good unto his neighbor,
as he gets great gain unto him self, when he shall receive double reward,
and obtayneth of God great retribution. etc.

In the same place he says moreover: If we do understand rightly those
things, we may being at home in our houses, and taking the holy Scriptures
after we have well dyned or supped, to take the profit and give spiritual
meat unto the soul. For as the body has to do with sensible meats, in
like manner also has the soul need to refreshe it self daily with spiritual
meats, to the end that the same be corroborated and made strong against the
assaults of the flesh, and against the continual battle, by the which we
are constrained, that it may resist it. And it is to be feared least the soul
should be brought into servitude and bondage, if we will be slothful any thing
at all.

Chrysostom upon the first Chapter of Saint Matthew. 1. Tome, 2. Homily. You
that are here present, answer me I pray you, what is he among you, who if one
demand of him a Psalm, can say it without book, or any other parcel of the
holy Scripture? There is not one, and yet this evil is not only here, but for
because you are slothful and negligent in spiritual things, Many do learn
sooner foolish and baudie songs than spiritual.
so much do you surmou^t through feruentnesse the fire unto devilish things.
For if any man will demand or ask you foolish, or (as men call them) merye
songs, or songs of bawdrie, they shall find many which most diligently have
learned them, which they will sing very willingly.

But yet they would defend such crimes, saying: The excuse of many.
I am not a Monk, I am married, and have care of children and of my house
keeping. Truly it comes thereby, that you do corrupt and mar all things
together, as a plague, because that you do think the reading of holy
Scriptures to belong only unto the Monks, where it is a great deal more
necessary and needful for you then for them: For those which are in the
midst of the battle, and which do receive continually wounds upon wounds,
such people have more need of Gods medicine or help. etc.

Chrysostom upon the.21. Chapter of S. Mathewe. 39 homily. And when he was
come into the temple, Math. 21
the chief priests and the elders of the people came unto him as he was
teaching, and said: By what authority do thou these things? and who gave
thee this power? They declared that there was some which did give power unto
men, be it corporal or spiritual: As if they had said thus, thou art not
engendered of the sacerdotall family, the Senate has not permitted thee to do
this, Ceasar has not given it thee, but if they had believed that all power is
from God, they would never have asked, who has given thee this power, Romans 13.
knowing that every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, Iam. 1.
and comes down from the father of lights, and that a man can receive
nothing at all, John. 3.
except it be given him from heaven.

Of the assemblies and congregations of the faithful.
Saint Hilary against Auxentius. I Pray you O ye Bishops, which do think
your selves to be so, what suffrages have the Apostles used for to preach the
gospel? with what power were they aided for to preach Christ, Act. 5. Act. 16.
and as it were to change all Gentiles from images to God? have they taken any
dignity of the palace, in singing of Himnes and Psalms unto God in prison,
being in yrons and chains? and afterward to be whipped and scourged? Did
Paul assemble the Church of Christ by the Kings Edicte, when he was as a
spectacle in the theater? He did defend himself (as I believe) by Nero, or
Vespasian, or Decius, through whose hatred and malice the confession of the
heavenly preaching has flourished: they nourishing and keeping themselves with
their own handie labor, in assembling themselves together within chambers and
secret places, and by the streets, and villages, did enuiron and compass about
almost all people, by land and by water, against the decrees and ordinances
of the Senators, and Edictes of the Kings.

Tertullian in his Apology against the Gentiles.29. Chapter. This assembly of
the Christians should be very unlawful, if it were like or equal unto the
unlawful things, The Christians never assembled themselves to the hurt of any
man.
it should be worthilye condemned, if it were complained of as of a faction
or sect. But whom have we endammaged or hurt by our assembling and meeting
together, we are the very same as when we were all dispersed asunder, every
one by himself, not hurting any man. When wise men, and good and faithful
people do assemble themselves together, we must not call that a faction or
sect, but rather a court. And on the contrary, we must apply the name of
faction, unto those which hate good me^, that cry against the blood of the
innocents, If rhere happens any evil unto the world, the worldlings do
say that it is because of the faithful.
under color of their unity, and for defense of their hatred, forasmuch as
they do esteem and judge that the Christians are the causes of all losses and
common mishaps. If the river Tyber mounteth or swells above the walls: If
the river Nylus do not descend upon the fields: If the heaven do stand
still: If the earth tremble: If there be famine or pestilence: by and by they
cry after the Christians, for to cast them into the lions den.

Saint Luke declares in the Acts, the order of the primitive Church, that the
faithful assembled themselves oftentimes in the fields, Act. 16.
saying thus: On the Saboth day we went out of the city, besides a river where
they were wont to pray: and we sat down and spoke unto the women which
resorted thither. etc.

They assembled themselves together in the night, within chambers, for to
preach the word, and celebrate the Lords supper, as it appears by that which
is written: And the first day after the Saboth, Act. 20.
ye disciples being come together fo to break bread, Paul preached unto
them, Act. 2. Act. 1.
ready to depart on the morrow, and continued the preaching unto midnight. And
there were many lights in an upper chamber where we were gathered together.
etc.

And when the days were ended, Act. 21.
we departed, and went our ways, and they all brought us on our way, with
their wives and children, till we were come our of the city, and we kneeling
down on the shore, prayed. etc.

Tertullian in his Apology. 39 Chapter. We coming and assembling our selves
together, do pray for the Emperors, In the ancient assemblies they prayed for
the Emperors and magistrates.
for their servants, and for the magistrates, for the estate of the world, for
peace. etc. We are assembled to make commemoration of the divine scriptures, we
do feed and nourishe the faith with voice and holy words, we hope well, we
plant and graffe most stronglye our faith, and do travail much to imprint in
the hearts the discipline of the commandments. etc.

Tertullian in his Apology 30. Chap. We christians have our eyes elevated unto
heaven, and our hands streched out, because they are innocente, and the head
bare and uncovered because we are not ashamed, and we do it without bydding.
For we do pray with the heart, we pray always, for all the Emperors, that
God would give them long life, and assured empire and a trusty and sure house,
mighty in battle, a faithful counsel, good people, a quiet world, and all
that man and the Emperor can desire. I may not demand and ask these things
but of him of whom I do know I shall obtain them: for it is he only that will
give it, and I am he that ought to require it, that is to say his servant,
which do honor him, and which have in reverence him only: which am killed for
his doctrine and discipline and which do offer the best and greatest
sacrifice that he has commanded, Prayer is the best sacrifice that one can
offer unto God.
that is to say the prayer that proceeds from a chaste body and from the
innocent soul and from the holy ghost. Not with little grains of incence of
small value, nor also with the tears of the tree of Arabie, nor those two
drops of wine, neither the blood of a wicked man that desires his own death.
etc.

Pliny in the.10. book of his Epistles 317. Epistle. The Emperor Traianus did
send him a commandment, Pliny vvriteth unto the Emperor of the life and
manner of the faithful in their assemblies.
commanding him to make enquirye of the faithful, and of their manner of
living: and afterward to persecute them. Pliny did write again unto the
Emperor, that after he had thoroughly enquired, yea with most cruelty and
torments, until such time as he delivered them into the hands of the
hangmen to see them executed, he never did find any other thing, but that the
faithful have accustomed to assemble them selves together at certain times in
the morning, before day, and when they were come together, they did sing
praises and psalms unto Christ as unto God. etc.

If any will see more amplye these things, Eusebius Caesariensis in the
ecclesiastical history, lib. 11. Chap. 4.
let him read the ecclesiastical history and there he shall find how the
faithful did assemble them selves in the mountains, in caves and dens for
fear of persecutions. As it is declared in the historye of Theodorite,
Theodorite lib. 4. cha. 24.
after this manner. When that the faithful were driven away (by Valentius)
they assembled them selves together at the foot of the mountain, History
tripartite, lib. 10. chap. 20.
and there gave praises and thanks unto God, rejoicing of the heavenly
scriptures, suffering there the impetuositie and violence of the co^trarietie of
the air, some time raines, snowes and coldes, and other times most extreme
heates. Valentius not suffering them to use this most laborious and paynfull
commodity: sent men of war who drove away and scattred that assemblye every
where.

Jews burned in a cave.
The Jews being in captivity were not suffered to live after the laws of God.
They went and assembled them selves together in the next caves, for to
celebrate secretly the saboth: But being accused unto Philippe the governor, 2.
Mac. 5.
he caused them all to be burned

Psalm. 133.
Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is brethren to dwell together in
unity. etc.

Math. 18.
Jesus Christ says in the Gospel, where two or three be gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them.

That no man ought to be compelled to believe by force.
Lactantius Firmianus in his divine institutions. Li. 5. chap. 20. THose which
kill their own souls and the souls of others, let them learn and know that
they have committed a fault that will not be forgiven. etc.

O meruaylous and blind foolishness, they think that those who endeavor them
selves to keep the faith have wicked thoughts, and that the tyrants and hang
men have good. Have those wicked thoughts, who against the right of humanity,
and against all heavenly or godly right, are torn and pulled in pieces: It
should be rather those that do such things unto the bodies of the innocents:
The which the most cruel thieves, nor the cruellest enemies, nor barbarous
people never did? Do not they deceive them selves in turning and changing the
name of evil into good, In this latter time the wicked are called good, and
the good wicked.
and good into evil? wherefore then do they not call the day, night, and the
night day, the sun darkness: otherwise it is the like impudency to give
the name of evil unto good, and of fools unto wise men, and of the wicked
unto the just and righteous. If they have any belief or trust in Philosophy,
or in eloquence, let them arm them selves with their disputacions, let them
overcome or vanquishe us if they can with the words that we speak: let them
approach for to fight together, and to examine particulerly every point: let
them defend their gods, to the end they be not forsaken with their temples,
tromperies, and disceytes worthy to be mocked. Now because they can do
nothing by force and violenee (forasmuch as Gods religion the more it is
oppressed the more it augme^teth and increases) let them proceed rather by
prayer, and exhortations. Let the Bishops and Priests of their religion call
us unto their Sermons and disputations: let them exhort us to receive the
adorations of their gods: let them tell us that there are a great many which
take a great care to govern, and to mayntaine all things by their puissances
and powers: Let them declare unto us the original and beginning of their
ceremonies, of their sacrifices, and of their gods, and how they were given
unto men: let them declare the beginning of them, and the cause wherefore. Let
them declare unto us and tell us what reward those shall have which shall adore
and worship them, and what pain they shall have that shall despise them. etc.
Let them prove and confirm all these things, not with their own opinions,
(for the opynion of mortal men is nothing worth or auaylable) Mortal man is
vvoorth nothing.
but that it be by some witnesses of holy Scriptures, as we do. It is no need
to use any force, nor injuries, forasmuch as religion cannot be compelled,
they ought rather to proceed by fair words, then by stripes, for to cause us
to be willing. Let them disploye all the puissance and subtlety of their
spirits: And if their reason be good, let it be brought forth, and we are
ready to hear it. But if they do hold their peace and be dumme, we will not
believe them, nor any more we will give them the victory, through their
crueltye. Let them follow us, or else tell us the reason of all the doings:
For we draw none unto us through fair words (as they say) but we do
teach, prove and declare: And so we compel none by force, for he is
unprofitable unto God which has neither faith nor devotion, and yet
nevertheless none departs from us, because the truth holds them. If they
have any confidence or trust of the truth, let them speak and open their
mouth, and let them dispute with us, upon any matter.

Truly their error and their foolishness is now mocked at of the old men
whom they despised and set naught by, and by our children, wherefore then are
they so incensed and mad that where they would diminishe their follye and
foolishness they augmente it? Truth and force inseparable, and righteousness
and cruelty.
There is great difference between crueltye and pity, and truth can not be
joined with force, or righteousness with cruelty, but it is not without cause
that they dare not teach any thing of heavenly things, for they fear to be
mocked at of our people, and forsaken of their people. etc. Religion ought to
be defended, not in putting to death, To kill and exercise cruelty belongs
not unto the good, but to the evil.
but in suffering her self to be killed: not through cruelty, but by patience,
not through wickedness, but through faith: For to kill and exercise cruelty,
is wickedness, and belongs unto the wicked: And to suffer death and to have
patience and faith, belongs unto the good. There is no question but the good
is in religion, and not the evil, forasmuch as if thou will defend religion,
through sheading of blood, through torments and cruelty, it shall not be
then defended, but polluted and defiled: For there is nothing more frank and
free then religion. The reason is then good and right, if thou defendest
religion through patience, and by suffering death, in the which the faith
kept and preserved, is agreeable unto God.

Saint Jerome says: He follows Christ, which is persecuted, he follows
Antechrist which persecuteth.

Rubert or Robert writing upon the.13. Chap. of the Apocalypse. Behold the
sign and token whereby you shall know those that are of God, The sign of the
good and the evil.
from the evil and wicked: Those are the wicked, which do kill and lead into
captivity, the which thing all those that are of God, have not done nor do.

Lactantius Firmianus in his divine Institutions. Lib. 5. Chap. 21. I would
demand this question, unto whom do they think chiefly to do pleasure in
compelling men, against their will to do sacrifice: Is it unto them whom they
compel? But that which is in charge unto him that refuses, that is no benefit
unto him. But we must also give counsel unto him that refuses when they know
not that which is good: Compulsion avails not
Wherefore then do they torment and vex them so cruelly, if they desire to
have them saved? Or from whence comes the piety so unfaithfully, and most
miserablye to destroy, lame, and make impotent them unto whom they should
provide and give remedy? Is it unto the Gods they do such pleasure? No, for
that which a man does by compulsion is not a sacrifice, forasmuch as if it be
not done voluntarlye and with the heart, it is most execrable and accursed.
Forasmuch as there are but they which are constrained and compelled through
banishments, injuries, imprisonmentes, and torments which do it: If they be
Gods which are so honored, truly for that only cause they ought not to be
honored, in as much as they would be so adored and worshipped: they are
worthy to be detested of men, unto whom sacrifice is made with tears and
sighings, and with blood running down all their body. But we to the
contrary, require not that any will he, nill he, should adore and worship our
God, which is the Creator of all things: nor we are not angry if they do not
worship him. For we do trust in his majesty, God will avenge the griefs of
his servants.
that he has also great power to avenge as well those that do contemn and
despise him, as the injuries and troubles of his servants: and therefore when
we suffer such things so wicked and execrable, we do not therefore repugne
against the word, but we refer the vengeance unto God.

The Prophet Esaias says: Esaias. 59.
Truth is fallen down in the street, and the thing that is plain and open
may not be showed, yea, the truth is laid in prison, and he that refrayneth
himself from evil, must be spoiled. When the Lord saw this, it displeased
him sore. etc.

Ezec. 34.
The Lord said by the Prophet Ezechel: I will deliver my sheep from their
mouth, so that they shall no more be spoiled. etc.

Lactantius Firmianus in his divine Institutions. Lib. 5. Chap. 22. They are
not then mad or angry with us, Veritas odium parit.
because we adore not or worship their Gods. For there are many people that do
not worship the^, but it is because the truth is with us, the which, as the
Proverb is, gets hatred. etc.

Lactantius Firmianus. Lib. 5. Chapter.23. What patience is.
Patience is a principal virtue, the which is by the common voice of the
people, and of the Philosophers and Orators exalted with great praise. If no
man will deny but that patience is a sovereign virtue: It is necessary that the
righteous and wise man be in the power of the unrighteous man, for to have that
patience: for patience is a volu^tary suffering of evils which are done unto any
man, or which do happen unto him, whereby the righteous and the wise man, has
in himself patience, It is necessary that the righteous man be afflicted of
the wicked, to the end he have patience.
because that he receives the virtue of the which he shall be altogether
deprived, if he suffer nothing to the contrary: Although that he do no injury
unto any man, nor that he coueteth his neyghbors goods, and though he defend
not his own goods if they be taken from him by force and violence, forasmuch
as he can quietlye enough suffer the injury that is done unto him, because
that he is garnished with virtue. It is necessary that the righteous man be
subject unto the unrighteous man. And the wise be despised of the fool, to the
end that the one do sin, because he is unrighteous, and that the other be
in servitude and bondage, because he is righteous. For how can a Captain
prove and try his soldiers, if he have no enemy? And yet nevertheless the
adversary eleuateth and exalts himself maugre him, because that he is
mortal and may be vanquished and overcome: but because we cannot repugne and
strive against God, he himself moves and stirs up the adversaries against
his name, not for to strive and fight against him, but against his souldiars,
The cause why adversaries are stirred up.
to that end he may prove and try the faith and devotion of his: until
such time as he does correct and amend in pressing and beating the discypline
which was become cold. There is also an other cause wherefore he does
permit and suffer that we should be persecuted that is to the end that the
people of God should be augmented. Some desire to know what that goodness is
which is defended even unto death, which is preferred above all the pleasant
things and best loved and set by in this world: of which goodness, nothing
can draw them from it, neither the loss of their goods, nor the loss of
their sight, Through persecutions a great number is joined to the gospel.
dolor of body, nor any other torments whatsoever they be: all things are
much worth, but the greatest causes which followed, have always augmented our
number. The people being round about the good christians, heard them say in
their torments, that they should not do sacrifice nor offer unto stons made
and hewn with man's hands, but unto the living God which is in heaven: many
do hear that the same is good and true, they receive it in their minds and
understandings. Afterward (as men have accustomed or used to do in
uncertain things) when they demand and enquire within them selves, what may
be the cause of that perseverance and constancy, many things belonging unto
religion are spread abroad and known, and declared from the one to the other,
by the report that they make: And by yt means they are taught, who for as much
as they are good, it is necessary that they please. Furthermore, the vengeance
that follows (as it happens often) has a great vehemence to make them
believe: All these causes put together, have gotten and drawn unto God, a
marvelous great company of people.

S. Hilary in his book against Auxentius. Ambition does aid it self by the
name of Christ: The Church does fear and compel the people through
banishements and imprisonmentes to believe her, the which they have believed
through banishmentes and prisons: She depends upon those that do disdain
to communicate with her: She which is consecrated and made holy by the terror
of the persecutors, drives away the prestes. She which has been engendered
by the running away of priests, does glory and extol her self to be beloved
of the world, She which could not be beloved of Christ, if the world had
not hated her: Experience cries in all men's mouths and declares and shows
the comparison of the church, the which of late has been given unto us, and
never shall be destroyed.

Romans 14.
All that which is not of faith is sin.

Chrysostom in his first Tome upon S. Mathewe.47. homily Chapter.13. Math. 13
Let them both grow together till harvest come, the Lord did forbid them least
while they went about to weed out the tares they should pluck up the wheat
also: Jesus Christ does not require shedding of blud
which thing he spoke to forbid the sheading of blood. For if the
Heritickes were put to death without alliance of peace, war should be
without truce. Wherefore he does forbid it for two causes, the one because they
should hurt and hinder a little the corn. The other is that if they do not
heal them selves, they shall never escape the eternal and everlasting
punishments and torments: wherefore if thou would amend and in no wise
hurt the corn, you must attend and tarry the time convenient and that is
meet for the same. But he does not forbid to divide break up and put asunder
the consistories of the Heritickes, with their counsels, and to stop their
mouths and to restrain them of their liberty to speak, but he forbyddeth to
kill them, and to put them to death.

S. Augustine in the.58. Epistle of the catholic clerks of the city of
Hipona, unto Ianuarius, and Donatus. This is then our desire, which we do
allege by these letters unto your reverence, and also by the brethren whom we
have sent. First if it may be, that you would confer with our Bishops
peaceably and quietly, to the end that the error be taken away from those in
whom it shall be found, and not that the men be taken away, nor punished but
gently corrected.

In the history tripartite. Lib. 6. Chap. 22. Athanasius in the satisfaction of
his fleing says. Behold the presumption of the infidelles, which do such
things, and are without shame, of which, first they have imagined euilles
and disceyt against us. And unto this present time they accuse us that we flee
from them, being ready to kill us. But which is more they do sighe and mourn
most bitterly, because they cannot altogether destroy us. And do rebuke us
because that we fear: And when they murmr of the thing, the more do they
cause the evil to return upon them selves. For if it be evil done to flee, to
persecute is a great deal worse. For the one hides himself, to the end he
turn not and change his opinion, and the other persecuteth for to kill. But it
is commanded to fly, and he that demands to kill transgresses the law,
and gives unto us greater occasion to fly. Then if the persecutors do rebuke
us because that we do flee, let them rather be ashamed in them selves, and let
them cease and leave of to lie in wait, and incontinently those which did
fly will fly no more: but they will not cease from their malice, but haste
themselves as much as in them lies to take them, knowing that the fleeing of
those which suffer persecution, is a great sign of those which persecute them.

For none did ever flee from the meek and gentle, but rather from the cruel
and deceytfull: every man that sighed and which was vexed of Saul, went for
refuge unto David, and fled from Saul: But therefore these here desire to put
to death those that are hid, fearing that their malice should not be by them
stopped. Who are not blinded in that matter. The persecutors do seek to put to
death, for fear that their malice should be uncovered and known.
Forasmuch as the more the fleeing is manifested and known, the more are they
known by their slaughters, murders, and banishments: For although they kill,
their death cries daily against them: Again, although they threaten to
banishe, it is known all about, that they establish a memorial or remembrance
of evil against the^.

If they were wise and had any understanding in them, they should see
themselves stopped and let in such things, and they themselves fail in their
counsayles: but because they have no understanding, therefore are they deceived
through their persecutions, and in seeking to kill, they consider not their
infidelity: for if they rebuke those which fly, when they seek to kill them:
Genes. 27.
What will they say that Jacob did flee from Esau his brother, Exodus 2.
and that Moses went down to Madian for fear of Pharao? The holy men have
fled from the hands of the persecutors. 1. Reg. 21.
What will they say of David which fled from Saul, who sent into his house to
kill him, when he hid himself in the cave, and that he changed his face
until he was come to Abimelech? By which means he escaped the watchings and
vain deceytes of his enemies. What will those here say, which rashly utter and
speak all things, seeing the worthy man Helias which through his prayer had
raised up one that was dead, and yet nevertheless hid himself for fear of
Achab, and fled for fear of the snares of Iezabel? 3. Reg. 19.
yea, then the children of the Prophets which were sought for to be put to
death, 3. Reg. 18
were hid in ditches and holes by Abdias: but if they have not read those
ancient histories, at the least let them remember the Gospels. For the
Disciples for fear of the Jews, John. 20.
did withdraw and hid themselves. And when Paul was sought for by the Prince
of the country at Damascus, Act. 9.
the Disciples put him out of the wall, and let him down in a basket, and so
he escaped their hands that sought for him. Wherefore in as much as the
scripture tells such things of holy men, what excuse do thou think that
they can find to excuse their madness? If then they rebuke their fear, they
speak as men mad and incensed against themselves, and if they say that it is
done against the will of God, they show themselves altogether ignorant of the
holy scriptures: Number. 35. Joshua. 20.
for in the law it was commanded, that ancient cities were deputed and
appointed for refuge, to the end that they whom men did seek for to put to
death, might there save themselves. And in the latter time of the world, when
the word of the father (which was spoken unto Moses) is come, he has given
again a commandment, saying: When they persecute you in one city, fly into
another. Mat. 10.
And a little after he says: When ye therefore shall see the abomination of
desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, standing in the holy place: let
him that reads it, take heed. Then let them which be in Jury, fly into the
mountains, and let him which is on the house top, not come down to fet any
thing out of his house: neither let him which is in the field return back to
fetch his clothes. Wherefore in knowing these things they are so governed: For
that which the Lord has commanded, the very same has he spoken by his
saints, before he took on him our flesh. And this is the end that leads
to perfection, that we do that which the Lord has commanded. Therefore also
the very same word being made man for us, John. 8. John. 12.
did hyde himself when they did seek for him (as also we do.) And again,
when he suffered persecution, he did fly and hyde himself from the treasons,
for it was couenable and needful for him to suffer such things, as hunger and
thirst, and after such sort to show himself to be man.

Yea also at the beginning when he was made man, being yet but a little child,
it was commanded by the angel unto Joseph saying, Math. 2.
arise and take the child and his mother, and fly into Egypt, and be there
till I bring thee word. For it will come to pass, that Herod will seek the
babe to destroy him. Also when Herod was dead and that he had heard that
Archelaus reigned in his fathers stead, he fled into Nazareth.

Also when Jesus showed him self as God, Mat. 12.
and had healed the hand that was dried, and that the Phariseys went out, and
consulted against him, how they might destroy him, Jesus knowing the same
departed from thence.

Also when Jesus raised Lazarus from death, John. 11.
from that day forth (says he) they consulted together to put him to death.
Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews: but went thence into a
country nigh to the wilderness.

In like manner when Jesus said, John. 8.
yer Abraham was I am. Then took the Jews up stones to cast at him, but Jesus
hid him self, and went out of the temple, Luc. 4. Men ought not to burn them
that speak other wise than the truth allows.
and passed even through the midst of them, and went his way. Thou do
now know how that they which see these things, or which do hear them (for
they see them not) as it is written, ought not to burn those which speak and
think things contrary unto such as the Lord has made and taught. Mat. 14.
For when John suffered martyrdom, and that his disciples buried his body,
Jesus hearing thereof departed thence by ship into a desert place, and even
so the Lord does his things, and also teach them: But would to God they were
so ashamed that they would not declare their furor, but unto men, and that more
and more through their madness, men should not see them rebuke and check the
savior, The persecutors them selves are ignorant of the gospel.
blaspheming against him: But the same the Idiotes and fools could not suffer,
although they are rebuked of them selves, not to know only the gospel: for
this is the occasion of our departing and fleeing, of which the evangelists
does make mention, and of which our savior has used, and we must also think
such things to have been in holy men: For that which is now written of the
savior after the fashion and manner of men, the same is commonly deputed unto
mankind. He has taken those things that are ours, and has showed and
declared the passions of our infirmity, ye which Saint John writes thus:
John. 7.
They sought to take him, but no man laid hands on him because his hour was
not yet come. For before that the same was come he said unto his mother,
John. 2.
woman what have I to do with thee mine hour is not yet come. John. 7.
And he said unto those which were called his brethren, my time is not yet
come. Math. 26
And again at the time of his passion he said, sleep henceforth and take
your rest, for behold the hour is at hand and the son of man is betrayed
into the hands of sinners. But he did not suffer him self to be taken before
the time was come, also he did not hide him self, but gave him self unto his
adversaries, and enemies: In like manner the blessed Martyrs, did keep them
selves from temporal persecutions, and when they were sought for they fled
into secret places. But when they were found out, they gave them selves to
martyrdom: behold the words of Athanasius a Martyr of Jesus Christ.

That the magistrates that persecute the faithful, under color of religion,
shall be tormented with eternal pains.
Sapien. 6. Romans 10.
Hear therefore (O ye kings) and understand ye therefore ye Judges of the
ends of the earth: An admonition unto Kings, Princes, and Judges.
Learn and give ear ye that rule the people, glorify your selves in the
multitude of nations. For the power is given you of the Lord, and the strength
from the hiest: which shall try your works and search out your imaginations:
how that ye being officers of his kingdom have not executed true judgment,
have not kept the law of righteousness, nor walked after his will. etc.

Miche. 3.
Hear, O ye heads of the house of Jacob, and ye leaders of the house of
Israel: Should ye not know what were lawefull and right? But ye hate the good
and do that is evil, ye pluck of men's skins, and the flesh from the
bones: ye eat the flesh of my people, and flaye of their skin: ye break
their bones, ye choppe them in pieces as it were into a cauldron, and as flesh
into a pot. etc. And a little after he says, O hear this ye rulers of the
house of Jacob, and ye Judges of the house of Israel: ye that abhor the
thing that is lawefull, and wrest aside the thing that is straighte: ye that
build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with doing wrong. O ye Judges, ye give
sentence for gifts: O ye priests ye teach for lucre: O ye Prophets, ye
prophecye for money. etc.

Lactantius Firmianus in his divine institutions, Lib. 5. Chap. 24. writing
unto the Emperor Constantine. All that which the wicked Princes do against
us, God does permit and suffer it to be done. And yet nevertheless the most
wicked persecuters, in whom the name of God has been had in derision and
mockery, ought not to think therefore to escape unpunished, for they have been
as ministers of his wrath against us: Persecuters cruelly tormented.
Truly they shall be punished by the judgment of God, because that after
receiving power they have abused it above all measure, and by that means are
waxen and grown into great pride against God, and have unfaithfully trodden
under their feet his eternal name. Therefore he promises that he will with
all speed be avenged of them, and root out of the earth all wicked beasts:
But although that he has accustomed to aduenge the vexations, and torments
done unto his people, and especially in this world, nevertheless he does
command us to attend and tarry patiently in this world until the celestial
judgment, at which day he will reward or punish every one according to their
works. Luke 18.
Wherefore the wicked people and co^mitters of sacrilege, ought not to hope
that those whom they have so handled shall be despised and unrevenged. The
reward shall come unto the ravening wolves, who have tormented the simple and
righteous souls that never offended. But as for us, let us only travail that
nothing be punished in us by men, but only righteousness, let us endeavor our
selves with all our strength to serve God, and to be avenged of that which we
suffer, and to receive our reward.

Saint Barnard in his sermon of the conversion of Saint Paul. Oh Lord God,
these are the chiefeste and first that persecuted thee, whom men see to love
the hiest seats and romes in thy church, and which bare the greateste rule:
They have taken the arc of Sion, they have occupied and used the castle, and
afterward have frankly and by power set all the city on fire, The despising of
the poor people of God is pitiful.
their conversation is miserable, the subversion of thy people is pitiful, and
would to God that they should not hurt but in that only part, peradventure
there will be some who will be advertised and admonished with the exhortation of
the Lord, who will beware of following their example, and who will keep the
commandments according to that which is said, Mat. 23.
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do, but after their works
do not: But now holy orders are given for an occasion of most filthy gain,
and do esteem and think gain to be piety and godliness. The Prophet Esaias
says, O Lord our God, Esaias. 26.
though such Lords have domination upon us as know not thee, yet grant, that
we may hope only in thee, and keep thy name in remembrance.

Eze. 22.
Thy rulers in thee are like rauishing wolves, to shead blood, and to destroy
souls for their own covetous lucre.

Miche. 7.
There is not a godly man upon earth, there is not one righteous among men, they
labor all to shead blood, and every man hunteth his brother to death.

John. 16.
Jesus Christ says: The time shall come, that whosoever kills you, will think
that he does God service.

Mat..12.
If ye wist what this means, I require mercy and not sacrifice: ye would not
have condemned innocents.

Psalm. 116.
Right dear in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his saints.

Esa. 26.
The earth shall discover the blood that she has devoured, she shall never
hyde them, that she has murdered.

Zacha..2.
The Lord said unto the faithful, who so touches you, shall touch the aple of
his own eye.

Mat..23.
Jesus Christ said unto those that persecuted the faithful. Fulfill ye likewise
the measure of your fathers, ye Serpents, ye generation of vipers, how should
ye escape the damnation of hell? wherefore, Persecution is prophesied to happen
unto the children of God.
behold I send unto you prophets and wise men, and Scrybes, and of them ye
shall kill and crucify: and of them shall ye scourge in your sinagoges and
persecute from city to city: That upon you may come all the righteous blood
that was shead upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel, unto the blood
of Zacharias the son of Barachias, whom ye slew between the Temple and
the Altar. Verily I say unto you al these things shall light upon this
generation. Jerusalem, Jerusalem which killest the prophets and stonest them
which are sent unto thee.

The Judges and governors willing to please and fulfill the wicked desire of
Iezabel, 3. Reg 21.
condemned the innocent Naboth to be put to death.

Augustine unto Boniface. 182. Epistle. To do well, and not to let and forbid
the things which are unlawful, is a very consenting unto error.

Origin in the 3. Homily upon Leuiticus. Let us take heed that we do not
consent unto other men's sins, I say consent, not only in doing the like
things, but also in holding our peace, or winking at things that are evil done.

Prou. 17. Esaias. 5.
The Lord hates as well him that justifies the ungodly, as him that
condemns the innocent.

Prou. 29.
The righteous considers the cause of the poor, but the ungodly regards no
understanding.

Prou. 29.
The seat of the king that faythfullye judges the poor, shall continue sure
for evermore.

Prou. 31.
With thy mouth defend the thing that is lawful and right, and the cause of
the poor and helpelesse.

Prou. 29.
Many there be that seek the Princes favor, but every man's judgment comes
from the Lord.

Moses has written what the Magistrates ought to be. They must be (says he)
virtuous men, fearing God, men of truth, hating avarice and covetousness. etc.

Chrysostom in his imperfect work. Chapter.23. upon that text, And say: if we
had been in our fathers days, we would not have been their companions, to
shead the blood of the Prophets. When thou shall hear any man say, that the
doctors of the old time be blessed, prove and try, what good will or zeal he
has toward those doctors, for if he do honor and reverence those with whom
he lives, without doubt he would also have honored the other if he had lived
with them.

In the same place he says moreover: the Jews have always been worshippers
of the Saints that be past and dead, and condemners of those that be present
and a live.

S. Jerome in his.4. Tome in the rule of Monks. It is very true, that ye truth
can be kept in and bound, but it cannot be vanquished, which is content with
her little number, and is not a frayde of the great number of her enemies.

Saint Jerome upon Jeremy.5. Tome. Chapter.26. When the congregation of the
people were assembled together, Ierem. 26. Jeremy was accused by the priests.
the Priests and false Prophets accused Jeremy, and the Priests and false
Prophets would have destroyed and killed the Prophet, if the Judges had had
the power of judgment: By that we do understand that they which seem to be
altogether ordained for religion, being moved with envy, with the holiness of
the Prophet, were more cruel than they that had the charge of public
necessities.

In the same Chapter he says moreover: If at any time for the commandment
of God, and for the verity of the faith, the Priests, or false Prophets, or
the foolish people, are angry with us, let us not esteem nor make any account
of it: but let us execute the sentence of God, not thinking on the euilles that
are present, but beholding the goodness to come.

Esa. 10.
Woe be unto you that make unrighteous laws, and devise things which be to hard
to keep: through which the poor be oppressed on every side, and the Innocents
of my people are therewith robbed of judgment: the wydowes may be your pray,
and that ye may rob the fatherless. What will ye do in time of the visitation
and destruction that shall come from far? To whom will ye run for help? The
torments of the wicked princes.
or to whom will ye give your honor, that ye may keep it: that ye come not
among the prisoners, or lie among the dead: After all this shall not the wrath
of the Lord cease, but yet shall his hand be stretched out still.

It is verily a righteous thing with God, 2 Thessalonians. 1
to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, and to you which are
troubled, rest with us when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven,
with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance unto them that
do not know God, neither obey unto the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Which shall be punished with everlasting damnation, from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

At the day of judgment (says the book of wisdom) the righteousness
shall stand in great steadfastness against such as have dealt extremely with
them, Sap. 5.
and taken away their labors: when they see it, they shall be vexed with
horible fear, and shall wonder at the hastiness of the sudden health:
Groaning for very distress of mind, The complaint of the persecutors at the
day of judgment.
and shall say within them selves, having inward sorrow and mourning for very
anguish of mind. These are they whom we sometime had in derision, and iested
upon. We fools thought their life very madness, and their end to be without
honor. But lo, how they are counted among the children of God, and their
portion is among the saints. Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, the
light of righteousness has not shined unto us, and the son of understanding
rose not up upon us. We have weried our selves in the way of wickedness and
destruction. Tedious ways have we gone: But as for the way of the Lord we have
not known it. What good has our pride done unto us? or what profit has the
pomp of riches brought us? all those things are passed away like a shadow.
And toward the end of the Chapter he says: Sapi. 5.
his cruel wrath shall he sharpen for a spear, and the whole compass of the
world shall fight with him against the unwise. Then shall the thunder boltes
go out of the lightnings, and come out of the rain bow of the clouds to the
place appointed: out of the hard stony indignation there shall fall thick
hayles, and the water of the sea shall be wroth against them, and the floods
shall run roughlye together, yea, a mihgtie wind shall stand up against them,
and a storm shall scatter them abroad. etc.

Behold how the true christian doctrine is at this day called a new
pestilentious doctrine by the worldlinges. Even as in the old time it was
called, and in the Apostles time.

Men have called before time (as they do at this day) the doctrine of the
Apostles new doctrine, The doctrine of the Apostles nevve doctrine.
as it appears in the acts of the Apostles where it is said: And they took
Paul, Act. 17.
and said unto him, may we not know what this new doctrine, whereof thou
speak, is? for thou bring strange tidings in our ears. Some called him
a babbler, and a tidings bringer of new Gods.

All men did speak against the Apostolical doctrine, Act. 28.
as it appears by that which the Jews said unto Saint Paul when he was come
to Rome, saying unto him: we will hear of thee what thou think: for as
concerning this sect, we know that every where it is spoken against.

Saint Paul being accused and brought before the great governor, they accused
him after this sort: We have found this fellow, Act. 24.
a pestilent fellow, and a mouer of debate unto all the Jews throughout the
world, and a chief mayntayner of the sect of the Nazarites.

Act. 24.
Saint Paul answers unto the same: This I confess unto thee, that after that
way (which they call heresye) so worship I the God of my fathers, believing all
things which are written in the law and the Prophets. The resurrection of the
righteous and unrighteous shall come.
And have hope toward God, that the same resurrection of the dead which they
them selves look for also, shall be both of the just and unjust: some said
that the Apostles with their doctrine, did nothing but move the people to
sedition, as it appears by the acts of the Apostles: Act. 17.
saying, certain vagabonds which were wicked fellows did make assault against
the house of Jason, and drew him with certain brethren unto ye heads of the
city, crying, these are they which have subverted the state of the world, and
here they are, which Jason has received: and these all do contrary to the
decrees of Ceasar, affirming that there is another king one Jesus.

Therefore we labor and suffer rebuke, 1. Tim. 4.
because we have sure hope in the living God, which is the savior of all men,
but specially of those that believe.

The Tyrants shall not escape unpunished, but often times they them selves
that did put to death the children of God, by the hands of the hangmen, have
not that good to be killed of the hangmen, but they them selves are the hangmen
or murderers of their own bodies. 1. Sam. 31 Note the vengeance of God against
the wicked persecutors.
As it appears by Saul which persecuted David. It was not needful that
David should have pursued him, for he was avenged more then he desired. It was
not needful to hang up Achitophel: nor the Apostles to pursue Judas that
betrayed his master, Act. 1.
for he him self was his own hangman, hanging himself by the neck, brast a
sunder in the mids, and all his bowelles gusshed out. Esaias. 37. 2. Mac. 8.
And Senacherib had for his hangmen his own sons: and it did cost Ezechias
nothing for to avenge him self of the tyranny against him.

Act. 12.
Were Antiochus and Herod left unpunished for their tyranny upon the children
of God? Eusebius. li. 1 cap. 9. li. 2 cap. 10.
It appears no. For they were consumed and eaten with lyce and vermin. God
will not leave the wicked unpunished as it appears of Achab, 3. Reg. 22 4
Reg. 15.21.24.25
Manasses, Sedechias and many Emperoures of Rome.

1. Timo. 6. Regi autem seculorum immortali, inuisibili, soli sapienti deo,
honor and gloria in secula seculorum. Amen.

FINIS.
A Table to find out the principal things contained in this present book,
and first of the Letter A.
ABstinence. Page 229. Adam condemns his posterity. Page 50. Adam not good
of himself. Page 59. Adam his free will. Page 59. Advocate for us, Jesus
Christ. Page 192. Advocate any other is error. Page 191. Advocate for S. John,
only Christ. Page 191. Advocates none with God, as Earls, and Lords with
Kings. Page 200 Angels not to be honored. Page 175 Angels would we should
honor God. Page 175. Apostles married. Page 245. Apostles teach the
commandments of God. Page 284 Apostles write clearly. Page 325. Apostles
praying for the Cananite. Page 197. Apostles assembled secretly. Page 340.
Assemblies certified by Pliny. Page 345. Assemblies of the Christians by
night. Page 342. Assemblies their deeds. Page 343. Assemblies harmless. Page
241. Assembled, their prayers. Page 343. Assembly of Jews burned. Page 346.
Ashes of Saints. Page 186. Augustine counts but two Sacraments. Page 38.
Augustine his recantation. Page 48. Augustine of free will. Page 60. Augustine
his exposition. Page 171. Augustine his opinion. Page 283.
B.
Baptism purges not sins. Page 23. Bishop of Bishops none. Page 50. Blood
of Oxen. Page 37. Body of Christ not carnally eaten. Page 3. Body of Christ
not divided. Page 3. Body of Christ whole in heaven. Page 3. Body of Christ
in likeness of bread. Page 4. Body of Christ called bread. Page 22. Body
of Christ not consumed. Page 24. Body of Christ but in one place. Page 25.
Body of Christ offered once for all. Page 37. Books of the Machabees. Page
173. Books of the Apostles. Page 321. Books holy to be had. Page 309. Books
spiritual. Page 222. Books their profit. Page 223. Burners of Christ's
body. Page 24.
C.
Canons. Page 24. 28. 30. 36. 161. 169. 172. 214. 216. 222. 230. 246. 248. 251.
268. 269. 271. 278. Chair of Moses. Page 279. Chastity. Page 247. Children
obedient. Page 301. 303. Children well instructed. Page 302. Christ the virtue
of God. Page 316. Christ the only head. Page 280. Christians given to dyce.
Page 298. Christians their idleness. Page 297. Christians small account of
faith. Page 295. Christians not content. Page 337. Christians their ignorance.
Page 295. Church the true. Page 263. 261. Church of the wicked. Page 258.
Church where. Page 260. Church of our time. Page 263. Church of the wicked
mighty. Page 263. Church rent by priests. Page 266. Chrysostom his opinion.
Page 316. Clement. Page 245. Commandments of God what. Page 56. 134.
Commandments how perfected. Page 140. Commandments bring humility. Page
144. Commandments great. Page 143. Compulsion of no effect. Page 352.
Compulsion no pleasure. Page 353. Confession auricular abolished. Page 43.
Confession not before men. Page 43. Confession to God only. Page 40. Counsel
of Basil. Page 29. Counsel of Toledo. Page 161. 216. 233. 276. Counsel of
Constantinople. Page 215. 248, Counsel of Gangres. Page 248. 256. 278.
Counsel of Nice. Page 249. 247. 21. Counsel of Anticyra. Page 248. Counsel
of Ariminum. Page 275. Counsel of Oreng. Page 256. Counsel of Illyberis. Page
276. 214. 216. Counsel of Carthage. Page 274. 275. 276. Counsel of Orleans.
Page 276. Counsel of Chalons. Page 276. Counsel of Chalcedon. Page 276.
Counsel Lateran. Page 276. Counsel Mileuitan. Page 55. Counsel of Laodicea.
Page 174. Counsel of Ephesus. Page 275. Counsel of Worms. Page 271.
Counsel of Braga. Page 230. Counsel the authority. Page 275. Custom not
followed Page 288. Custom follower. Page 288. Cup ministered to the lay.
Page 29.
D.
Daughters their education. Page 314. Daughter to eschew the world. Page 315.
Deacons married. Page 250. Dead have nothing common. Page 164. Dead nothing
profits. Page 162. Death of Christ. Page 84. Doctrine of men. Page 281.
Doubt. Page 283. Doubt of secrets. Page 151. Drink sanctified. Page 22. Devil
overthrown. Page 165. Devil his dwelling. Page 218.
F.
Fast without works. Page 241. Fast of the Grecians. Page 241. Faith only
saves. Page 93. Faith the help. Page 105. Faith without law. Page 112. Faith
the surety. Page 261. Faith the things concerning. Page 277. Faith new. Page
^78. Faith rendered. Page 296. Faith the excellency. Page 333. Faithful not
compelled. Page 244. Figure none of God. Page 202. Flesh of Christ. Page 214.
Flesh. and blood of man Page 8^ Flesh against flesh. Page ^^^ Flesh of Christ
without sin. Page 1^7. Fly from the meek none. Page 361. Fly the wicked.
Page 362. Flight commanded. Page 360. Flight reproched. Page 360. Flight of
the Saints. Page 362. Fool fashioneth God. Page 206. Forgiveness of God. Page
116. Forgiveness in the blood of Christ. Page 118. Forgiveness in this world.
Page 156. Freewill condemns. Page 52. Freewill to do ill. Page 59. Freewill
destroys faith. Page 61. Freewill not to be defended. Page 53. Freewill
delivers not. Page 65. Freewill lost. Page 67. Freewill established. Page 69.
Freewill naught. Page 70.
G.
Gift of God. Page 118. God descended from heaven. Page 58. God gives the
demand. Page 344. Good thought. Page 55. Good works. Page 72. 117. Good
works not of our virtue. Page 71. Gospel in the heart. Page 188. Gospel
dispensed. Page 268. Gospel the surety. Page 292. Gospel contains all.
Page 292. Gounes for the dead. Page 163. Grace separated from merit. Page 75.
Grace justifies. Page 75. Grace hindered. Page 81. Grace free. Page 94. Grace
works goodness. Page 94. Grace of the Heretics. Page 102. Grace eases.
Page 135. Gregorye his doubt. Page 271.
H.
Heretics spared Epiphanius Page 227. Heretics their books. Page 286.
Hilarye. Page 249. Hoc. Page 11.
I.
Idolaters Christians. Page 185. Jesus Christ seen with the eye. Page 192.
Jesus Christ where. Page 25. Jesus builder of the Church. Page 49. Jesus our
purgatory. Page 152. Images not lawful. Page 201. 215. Image caruers. Page
208. Images do not show God. Page 207. Image of God the honor. Page 210. Image
the pilgrimage. Page 210. Images of Christ. Page 213. Images not to seek God.
Page 215. Images pleasing God. Page 218. Image honorers. Page 216. 221. Images
burnt. Page 222. Image rent. Page 225. Images hurtful. Page 215. 223.
Judgment given. Page 157. Judgment not avoided. Page 178. Just. Page 95.
Justification not by nature. Page 100. Justified freely. Page 86.
Justification. Page 88. Justification by faith. Page 93.
K.
Keys of the Church. Page 46. Keys of Peter. Page 47. Kill. Page 351. 360.
L.
Law of the two tables. Page 145. Law for the proud. Page 145. 144. Lent. Page
234. Life. Page 156. Life lasting profits, Page 158. Love of God. Page 140.
Love, not idle. Page 109.
M.
Man naught. Page 62. Man under sin. Page 53. Man separated from God. Page
154. Man wise despised. Page 355. Man profits not by force. Page 252. Marriage
forbidden. Page 244. 253. Mediator Jesus. Page 192. Mediator not man. Page
194. Merit of men. Page 75. Monks their life. Page 231.
N.
New alliance. Page 1.
O.
Offering of candelles. Page 213.
P.
Pelagians. Page 141. Popes. Page 270. 271. 272. Prayer. Page 196. Prestes.
Page 45. 166. 249. 265. 335.
R.
Religion. Page 208. Righteousness. Page 103. 144. 86. Righteousness of God
ours. Page 79.
S.
Sacraments. Page 19. 39. Sacrifice. Page 36. Saint has sin. Page 103. In
Saints no hope. Page 184. 181. Scripture has no fault. Page 282. 279. 285.
Scripture in the heart. Page 299. 313. Scriptures forbidden. Page 300. 301.
302. 334. 222. Scriptures the profit. Page 303. 304. 305. Scriptures no
excuse. Page 308. 309. 310. 317. Scriptures the necessity. Page 318. 323.
Scripture spiritual. Page 16. Scripture life. Page 335. Signs for the
signified. Page 39. Souls of the good. 151. 153. of the wicked. Page 153 163.
Souls of the dead. Page 181 Supper. Page 3. 4. Supper of the sick. Page 7. 8.
Supper the signification. Page 20. Supper in two kinds. Page 27. Supper of
bread not kept in the pix. Page 29. Supper called Eucharistia. Page 31. called
a Sacrafice. 35. not changed Page 20. Songs filthy. Page 338.
T.
Torments of the wicked Princes. Page 377. Truth not vanquished. Page 338.
V.
Vengeance of Christ. Page 377. 381. Village of Christ. Page 301. Virginity.
Page 252.
W.
Will of good things. Page 69. Woman of Canaan. Page 196. Woman married.
Page 312. Woman honor of the husband. Page 312. Word rejected. Page 280.
Works condemn us. Page 77. Works not esteemed. Page 77. Works of ours
have no life. Page 72. VVorshyppe of Saints. Page 180. 188. 190. 200. 209.
VVorshipp only the true God. Page 212. VVorshippe of Helena. Page 213.
Worshippers of images Heretics. Page 215. VVorshippe of infidels Page 220.
Wounds of Christ. Page 78.
FINIS.

