A YOUNG MAN'S INQVISITION, OR TRIAL. Whereby all young men (as of all ages) may
know how to redress and direct their ways, according to Gods word, and if
they be in the way of life to salvation, or in the way of death, to
condemnation. Together with a godly and most comfortable Meditation and Prayer
joined thereunto.

GALAT. 5. 25. If we live in the spirit, let us also walk in the spirit. By
William Guilde.

AT LONDON. Printed by R. Raworth, for John Bache, and are to be sold at his
shop in Pope's Head Palace. 1608.

To the most worthy, and zealous of Gods truth, the Senate and City of
Aberdene, together with the painful, and faithful Pastors of the same, all
grace and peace from above, constancy in the purity of the truth, joy of
Gods spirit here, and eternal joy, glory, and happiness, with the same
spirit in the world to come, Amen.
HIpponicus the Son of Hippias, a citizen of Athens, having decreed and
appointed to erect and dedicate a certain Image unto his native soil, as a
testimony and manifestation, of his ardent love, dutiful affection, and
gratitude toward the same, was counseled and importunately persuaded by his
friends and kinsfolks (who did hear of his immutable determination thereunto)
to give out the same to be framed and made by Polycletus, (an excellent grauer
of Images in those times) but he greatly disassenting from their opinion, and
rejecting their importunate persuasions, answered them; that in doing so, he
should exhibit to the eyes of Athens, an image or representation, rather of the
excellent Art of Polycletus, the Image maker, then (according to his intention)
the image and manifestation of his own love, regard, and affection; and that
likewise it might be that Athens so should rather respect the one, then
perceive so well or regard the other: and therefore he had decreed, to
manifest his own affection or heart, by his own hand, persuading himself,
that the whole, to wit, the manifestation howsoever, as his love manifested,
proceeding both from himself, would be more acceptable to his Athenians, then
the exact art of expert Polycletus; and that not having great occasion to fix
their eyes only upon the exquisite work of the image or representation, to
say, who wrought it? they would only behold the ardent affection represented
of him who dedicated the same: So likewise with Hipponicus, after long and
earnest wishing of an occasion, whereby I might in some sort also, manifest and
testify my dutiful affection, regard, remembrance, and gratitude; which I owe
to the Athens of my birth and education, as a small river returning to his
Ocean. I have decreed to erect and dedicate unto the same, as an image and
plainer manifestation of my love, (being a young man my self) this image and
representation of a godly and Christian young man, trying his ways, and by
earnest inquiring in consolation with God, showing whereby or how to redress
the same, to wit, in taking heed thereto, according to Gods word. unto the
which examplar, I wish that every young man may (as he should) conform
himself; and being invaded or never so little stung, with the poisonable and
serpentine lusts of youth, whereof this wilderness is so full, he may unto this
image, erected in Gods word, lift up his eyes, thereby and therein beholding
his duty, and the safety of his soul, which (with Hipponicus) I persuade my
self likewise, that it shall be so in love accepted of my native Athens and
Athenians, as in love, and a testimony of my love, I dedicate the same unto
them. In the framing whereof, albeit the exact art of Polycletus be wanting,
and is not to be expected, yet with him, without any suspecting of the
contrary, I do assure and persuade my self, that the love of the Dedicatour
with his intention to manifest and testify hereby the same, will be more
respected and weighed in the balance of reciprocal love, (which covers many
infirmities) then the Image thereof dedicated, or manner of testification
howsoever. In the which assurance and persuasion, I do rest, repose, secure
and satisfy my self; desiring withal, and earnestly wishing, that the
almighty God of Israel, who neither slumbereth nor sleeps, may ever be the
watchman and wall of the City, with the s^nne of his love, and sincere truth
of his Son, that he may ever shine in and upon it, that the Candlestick
thereof may never be removed, nor the Chariots and Horsemen thereof taken
away, but his blessings may be upon his people externally, internally,
eternally, Amen.

William Guilde.

TO THE THREE Right worshipful Brethren, Sir John Sheffeeld, Knight; Master
Edward and Master William Sheffeeld, sons to the truly, noble, and right
honorable, the Lord Sheffeeld, Lord President of York, and one of his
Majesty's most honorable order of the Garter: all increase of true virtue,
honor, and happiness here, and eternal felicity with Christ for ever
hereafter.
IT is said of Apelles, (a most cunning Painter) that after he had painted and
appointed any piece of work, to be exhibited to a public view in any open
place, used to lurk privily behind the same himself, to hear the diverse and
dissonant opinions and censures, which the pass^rs by used, and did pronounce
of his picture; and willing to satisfy their curious and captious natures,
withal used to excuse himself by under writing so, Apelles faciebat, (not
fecit). If Apelles therefore in his age, sole and most expert in his art, used
never to expone any picture to public view, without shrowding himself (as it
were) both with his bo^^d and this forenamed excuse, from the captious tongues
of the multitude; verily the use of patronage in these our days, wherein so
many of carping Zoilus, and taxing Momus lives, is not only customable, but
also altogether necessary, who verifieth the Proverb, Quot capita, tot
sente^tiae, and qua^ varia ora, tam varia Iudicia, and are busy to be pulling
out the mote out of their neighbors eyes, not co^sulting with (...) Nosce te
ipsum, to take the beam first o^t of their own. Therefore it is (right
Worshipful Trinarie) that leaving the Viper to the file, and hos ardeliones,
(...); yet this time I have presumed to shroud and cover this little Treatise,
under the shield of your benevolence and favor, offering and dedicating these
small and unworthy labors of a young man, concerning a young man's direction in
his life, according to Gods word, with the hands and heart of all humility,
duty, and affection to you, the young branches and happy offspring of so noble
a stock, whose root so to fasten and establish in the land wherein he lives
with honor, and in the land of the living for ever, that the worm of his
enemies may never prevail to make any of the least of his branches to wither
or decay, but they may ever spread, and more and more flourish in all
godliness, honor, and blessedness: I pray almighty God, to the glory of his
name, his Churches comfort, and the posterities happy memory; persuading my
self, that as in all hearty and inexpressible love, (my conscience bearing
me witness) I present the same unto your Worshippes, till God enable me more
to express my devotion: so also you will graciously accept thereof, respecting
rather the inward affection of the heart dedicating, then the outward thing by
it dedicated; as also assuring my self, that Jonas was never better guarded
under the shadow of his green and tender Gourd, from the offensive heat of
the scorching Sun; Ulysses never thought himself more safe, when he did
hold the weapon of noble Achilles in his hand; nor Iole daughter to King
Euritus, more feared when she did stand armed with the weapon of valiant
Hercules: then I shall be safe and secure, under the shadow of your protection,
and refreshing wings of your Worships favor, resting and reposing my self
with my labors.

Your Worships in most humble duty, and heartiest affection devoted, WILLIAM
GVILDE.

A YOUNG MAN'S INQVISITION or Trial.
PSALM. 119. VERSE. 9. Wherewith shall a young man redress his way? In taking
heed thereto, according to thy word.
COncerning the Author of this Psalm, amongst writers there is no concordance,
and agreement, in certainty of any nominated particular; but as the tree is
known by his fruits, so it is evident by this Psalm, and the manifold
comfortable matter therein contained, that he was a singular sanctified and
holy Prophet of God, who wrote the same, by the special inspiration of Gods
holy Spirit. And it appears more particularly that the certain Author
thereof was David, being then a young man in Saul's Court, then greatly
corrupted (as by his collation verse, 100. appears) and that he did meditate
this Psalm not 1. Sa. 17. 49.
long time after the slaughter of Goliath, 1. Sam. 18. 9.
being presently thereafter notwithstanding, laid open to the narrow marking
and hatred of Saul himself, Ps. 119 161.
and to the malice of his wicked servants, as also beset and pursued with the
temptations of the Psalm. 119. 157
enticing pleasures and manifold alluring vanities of youth. Which desiring to
avoid, and to institute his life and ways according to the law of God, that
so he might have Gods love more increased toward him to encounter the unjust
hatred of man, and his strength more confirmed in his heart, to overcome the
manifold temptations of frail youth. He therefore imploreth Gods help and the
assistance of his Spirit, Verse. ^8.
to open his eyes that he may see the wonders of his law, to make him
understand the way of his precepts, 27.
to direct him therein, 35.
to incline his heart to his testimonies, 36.
to turn away his eyes from regarding vanity, and to quicken him in his way,
37.
to direct his steps in his word, and let no iniquity have dominion over
him, 133.
to deliver him from the oppression of men, that he might keep his statutes,
and to let his loving kindness and salvation 134.
come unto him according to his promise. 41


The title prefixed before this Psalm is, Halleluiah, an Hebrew word, used as
well by Gods Saints on earth in praising of his name, as by David, Psalm. 76.
as also by the glorified spirits and Angels in heaven before his throne, Re^.
19. (...)
retained by all Nations and peoples, and unturned in their own native and
proper tongue or language by any, for the ^^^estie and reverence the H^brew
word imports in it self, incommunicable to any other. As for the
signification thereof, it is compounded of two words, Hallelu, a verb in the
imparatiue mood signifying Praise, and Iah, the glorious name of God, retained
so in the original, Psalm. 53. unexpressed by any other word: so that by this
signification, the reason of the intitulation thereby, of this Psalm, is this;
that in the same great matter of praising Gods holy name, is set before our
eyes, who in his love to man, has manifested his will in his powerful word,
by the keeping whereof, and walking in the same, we are made truly happy and
perfitly blessed, verse. 1, 2. Whereby young and old may redress, purify, and
make straight their sinful, unclean and crooked ways, reforming and
conforming them by the same to his will. Which as it is the word of him, who is
the resurrection and the life, so it quickens every dead soul in sin, Ver. 25.
50. 39.
raising it up to newness of life; a cou^sellor to the simple, Verse, 24.
a delight to the godly, a lantern to our feet in darkness, Verse, 105.
and light to our path in the night; Ver. 11, and 28
a comfort in trouble, which raises, and saves from sin, and preserves from
eternal confusion, as verse, 6. So that for this great and excellent benefit,
and for such an inestimable Jewel, in this Psalm revealed unto us, we are
bound with that wise Merchant in the Gospel, to rejoice exceedingly in our
heart, and to express and manifest our joy in hearty praise and thanksgiving
to God the giver thereof. And so forth for the signification of the title of
this Psalm, or inscriptio^, with the reason thereof, and use made in this
place. As for the further etimologie, according to the Latin orthographie
thereof: Ha. l^. lu. ja*
some makes it to include a mystery in it, making the first syllable, Al, to
signify Altissimus; the second, le, to import leuatu^ in cruce; the third, lu,
lugeb^nt sancti; and the fourth, ia, iam vero resurrexit; including so therein
the mystery of the passion and resurrection of Christ, which is the chief and
only cause to move all christian hearts to rise in hearty praise and
thanksgiving to God on high.

The Doctrine contained in this Psalm or matter, is moral, which as it is
above all other most pleasant and delectable; so this Psalm containing the
same, as in length, so in excellency it surpasses the rest, as the Sun does
the small glistering stars in glory and brightness of light, showing and
setting forth to the eyes of all men, the inestimable worth and rare virtue of
GODS word, with the most blessed and happy estate of all those whose delight
is therein, and who makes it a rule to conform all their actions thereby, and
their way wherein they will walk.

The Psalm it self, according to the form thereof, is of a mixed kind of
style, containing diverse exhortations to all men, who would attain unto true
happiness to seek after Gods word, and embrace the same with their whole
heart, walking therein, and practicing the same in their life and conversation,
with sundry and sweet comforts to the godly that are afflicted any way; also
confessions of his own delight, earnest desire, estimation, ardent love, and
careful observation of Gods precepts and word, fearful threatenings to the
wicked, who despises the same, and many earnest prayers to God to confirm him
in his truth, to establish his feet in his ways, and to take away all
impediments whatsoever might hinder his course in this path of salvation.

The division of the Psalm is in 22. sections called octonaries, according to
the number of the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet, being so many. Every section
or octonarie containing 8. several and distinct verses, beginning all in the
original Hebrew text, with one several letter, wherein some will have a
mystery included. But there are three chief reasons rendered thereof: the
first is, that it is done and composed so, for the greater ornament of the
Psalm, the matter thereof being so excellent. The second is, that the
excellent doctrine and matter of the Psalm may be the more diligently noted,
and greater delight and estimation had thereof. And thirdly, that these
excellent doctrines abounding so in every part and verse of the Psalm, being
many, diverse, and so necessary by this form of composition and order, they
may more easily be comprehended in our memory. But Ambrose upon this same
Psalm, yields a fourth reason and use, diverse from the former of the
notation of this Psalm so, which is thus; Vt paruulorum Ingenia primis
literarum elementis legendi vsum addiscunt: ita nos buiusmodi elementis vsum
viuendi: As the Ingines or wits of little children (says he) by the first
elements of letters learneth the use of reading, so let us by these Elements
learn the use of living.

The full Alphabet whereby this Psalm is noted, notes to us the fulness of the
matter therein contained, and that we with our whole affections should fully
embrace the same, and with all our heart and soul desire it, and delight
therein.

The diversity of the letters shows the diversity and plenty of matter,
that is set before our eyes; as so many pleasant and wholesome delicate dishes,
at a bountiful ba^quet.

The unity of all the verses in every octonarie beginning with one letter,
does demonstrate the unity of the matter therein contained, to the delight
whereof, if we will unite our hearts, it is able to unite us with God our
Father in love.

By the octonar number in every section is declared, Leuit. 12.
that as the purification of uncleanness, and the celebration of Circumcision
(whereby the foreskin of the flesh was taken away) by Gods law, was observed
the eight day; even so by the embracing of these doctrines and observing of
Gods holy Law (whose excellency and powrefull effects are set down in these
octonaries) our hearts shall be purified, and made clean before God, having
thereby the foreskin of our heart, which barreth out Gods spirit, that king of
glory from entering into it, and our carnal affections taken away, our drossie
and unclean corruption, by the fire of that word and spirit burned up, and
consumed, and the Image of God, Jesus Christ, that second Adam restored to us;
with whom we must rise in righteousness, as by sin in that first Adam, we
al did fall and lost that glorious Image of our Creator, and God.

As for the Argument of the whole Psalm: In the same the holy Prophet of God
exhorts all the faithful, and members of the true Church of Christ,
carefully to retain, keep and observe the word of God in all sincerity and
purity of truth, eschewing all addition, or mixture of man's wisdom (which is
foolishness) thereunto, and worshipping God, as he has commanded and
warranted us, in his word only. As also that not only we retain the same in
the sincerity thereof, worship GOD only according thereunto, but also we make
it a rule to all our actions, practicing the same daily: night and day
delighting and meditating therein: laying and hiding it up in our hearts: and
by the sanctification of our life, to show the piety of our heart, thought,
word, and deed agreeing thereunto. And because to understand Gods word (in
respect of our natural ignorance) and in our life to practice the same (in
respect of the dominion of sin, that he has gotten over us) is not of the
strength of man, but must be the power, and work of Gods holy spirit,
therefore he mixeth often prayers; to open his eyes; to make him understand the
way of his precepts, Verse. 18.
to direct his steps therein, 27.
and to let no Iniquity have dominion over him: 37.
by this example teaching us the like 133.
duty. There are joined also thanksgiuings of the Prophet, that already (as he
confesses to Gods glory and the encouragement of the faithful) he had found
and perceived in his heart, the beginnings of true faith, comfort, and new
obedience to be kindled, which earnestly he craves to be augmented and
confirmed in him, thereby also in his person teaching us our duty, to enquire
if we can, or have found Gods graces begun, sowed or rooted in our hearts; if
not as yet to desire the same earnestly, if already to crave the increasing
and confirmation further thereof, and be truly thankful for that we have
received. Verse. 25. 28. 81. and 120.
He complains also, showing the heaviness, faintness, grief, and fear
that he has conceived for the horror of his sins: notwithstanding comforting
himself, and all the godly, that are inwardly or outwardly afflicted, by
relying in faith upon Gods promise, and salvation revealed and made to him, and
to all those that believe in his name; which is, and must be, the only ease
and comfort to any afflicted soul. As also of the multitude, Verse. 157. 161.
93.
greatness, and cruelty of his enemies, that despising Gods law themselves,
did seek likewise to hinder him from walking therein, for whom his eyes
notwithstanding, did gush out with rivers of water, because they kept not the
same, desiring God therefore to repress their cruelty, and wicked enterprise,
and the more they did seek to draw him away from his law and obedience, that
he would in his mercy the more confirm and establish him in his statutes;
showing thereby the many hindrances, that the godly has ever had, and shall
continually have cast in their way by Satan, to hinder their journey to that
spiritual Canaan, with their Joshua, Jesus: and our duty therein, to be
sorry for their aberring, and desire our own confirmation; likewise, as he
did show that they were blessed who walked in Gods law, so to the wicked he
shows their condition, and that their portion is shame and confusion, if they
will not return and walk also therein: so setting before every man's eyes,
with Moses, life and death to choose.

The division of the Psalm (according to the matter therein contained) may be
in four parts.

In the first whereof, he shows the true felicity and happiness of the
godly, to be placed and consist in the study, belief, and obedience of the
will of God revealed and manifested unto us in his word, which (in respect of
the excellency thereof, the desire and estimation we should also have of the
same in our heart) is adorned with many titles proper thereunto.

In the second part, the Prophet (for an example to the faithful) earnestly
desires God, to inform and confirm him in the knowledge, study, belief and
obedience of his revealed will, by the operation of his powerful spirit, who
may inlighten his understanding, reform and conform his will to his own,
sanctify his affections and all the members of his body, seeing the same is
not in the power of man to do, neither can flesh and blood reveal the same to
us.

In the third part, he desires God to deliver him from all impediments,
whether of his own flesh, of sin, the world, Satan, or his outward enemies,
which might hinder or stay him any ways from walking more freely in the paths
of salvation and his word.

And in the last and fourth part, being privy to his own conscience, of the
institution of his former life, and equity of his cause, he imploreth Gods
constant assisting grace, in the administration of the rest of his life,
committing and commending to his eternal protection, for ever, himself and
his cause.

So far in general, concerning the Author, Intitulation, Notation, Argument,
and Division of this Psalm, for an Induction to the specials following.

Now concerning the special notation, argument, and division of this second
octonarie, or section. The first verse whereof, by the assisting grace of Gods
spirit, shall be by us handled.

The notation of this second octonarie, is by the second letter of the Hebrew
Alphabet, (...) Beth: wherewith every verse in the original, contained in this
section is noted, and begins.

The signification thereof (as all Hebrew letters signify, and therein
excels all other letters) is double, for it is either Confusio, as Ambrose
turns it, and so, the reason why this octonarie is noted therewith, is thus;
that whosoever redresseth his way by Gods word, seeks him with his whole
heart, wandereth not from his commandments, hides his promise in his heart,
that he sin not against him, declares the judgments of his mouth,
delights in the way of his testimonies, meditateth in his preceps, and
forgets not his word: whosoever (I say) observes these eight things,
contained in this octonary, of eight Verses, shall never see Confusion. This
same reason and promise is set down more briefly in the 5. and 6. verses of
this Psalm, the words whereof are these, O that my ways were directed to keep
thy statutes this is the wish or condition; the promise by way of infere^ce
follows; The^ should I not be confounded: the condition repeated; When I have
respect unto all thy commandments. But we must understand that there is a
twofold confusion, for there is, Co^fusio damnationis; a confusion of
condemnation, inflicted upon the reprobate by God in his justice, for just
desert and punishment of their sins, of the which the Prophet of God, in this
place means: and there is confusio contritionis, a confusion of repentance
proper to the godly, which proceeds of humility and sorrow for their sins,
wherewith God in his mercy moves their heart, that so he may accept them in
his favor, raise them by the comfort of his spirit, and forgive them their
just desert for their offenses, which every one must have, who would escape
that eternal and fearful confusion of everlasting destruction.

The other signification of this Letter (...) Beth, is Domus; a house (whose
figure it represents) and so the reason is thus, that whosoever would be
counted as one of Gods house, and so be saved; As God (the Master of the
house) is pure and clean; his house and servants clean likewise: so thou who
would adioyne thy self in thy youth to their society, and eat at his table:
thou must be clean also; Cleansing thy ways according to his word: putting on
that white clean robe of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, that wedding
garment, and serving him in his Family, in purity and holiness of life, by
observing these doctrines which are here set down in this section to do the
same.

The Argument of this Section is this, as in the former generally to all men
he commended the desire of godliness, and keeping of Gods word, showing the
estate of such to be blessed, and that to be the only way to attain to true
and perfect happiness for ever: so now in this octonarie, and first verse
thereof: particularly he commends the same desire of piety, and observation
of Gods word, unto young men first, and that for two chief causes moving him.
Whereof the first is, because that age, places a man uncertain, between two
ways, what course of life to choose, (as Xenophon reports of Hercules out of
Prodicus; and Cicero in the first of his Offices says, Imprimis autem
constituendum est qui nos, and quales esse velimus, quae deliberatio est omnium
diffic^ll^na. We must first appoint what men, and of what sort or calling we
would be, which aduisement of all other is hardest and most difficult, in such
an hard and doubtful deliberation: therefore the Prophet here shows that no
better nor surer counsel can be, then to follow Gods word, Verse. 24.
as our counselor which may both direct and retain us in a good course of
life, and therefore not to delay time till old age: but to begin in our
youth, which whosoever neglects, and therein hardens his heart in sin, that
man hardly is, or can be recalled and brought (except it be by the
extraordinary mercy of God) to repentance and a good life hereafter.

The second reason is, because youth is carried with a more headlong force unto
vice, lust, and vain pleasures of the flesh: Therefore it has need of
straiter discipline, more careful watching, and harder brydling, and more
diligent instruction by the word of God, which except it be adhibited timely,
there is great peril, and it is to be feared, lest head-longs in the
vehemency of their course, they be carried suddenly into utter destruction,
which lamentable experience has too often taught to be true.

The division of this octonar is in three chief parts. The first whereof, is
contained in this first Verse, which God willing shall be entreated of; wherein
(being to show the excellent effects of Gods word, in this whole Psalm) is,
that it keeps from sin, it quickneth, it brings peace, and gladness to
the heart, it gives understanding etc. (thereby the more to induce and mrue
every man, to a greater desire and love thereof) He sets down here the
first particular and chief effect of Gods word, as to all ages and men, so
chiefly and more particularly, commending and commanding the study, exercise,
and desire thereof; to youth (the firstage, capable of the same) for the
reasons and causes aforesaid.

The second part of this octonarie, is from the 1. Verse thereof to the 15.
wherein he sets down his own example, for confirmation, and further
moving of young men, to embrace his former exhortation, and it contains four
several confessions made unto God. The first, of his great desire to Gods
word, Verse. 10.
in seeking him with his whole heart; with a prayer to confirm him the more
therein. The second, of his great care and estimation he had thereof, Verse. 11.
in hiding it in his heart* for the end, that he should not sin against him.
Verse. 13.
The third of the declaring of the judgments of his mouth with his lips:
Verse. 14^.
and the fourth, of the great delight he had therein, as in all riches. In the
midst of his confessions, verse. 12. interponing a thanksgiving and prayer.
Blessed art thou O Lord, teach me thy statutes.

The third part, is in the 15. and 16. Verses, containing a fourfold promise
further, according to his foure-folde former Confession, which are; first,
Verse. 15.
Meditation in his preceps: secondly, consideration of his ways: Verse. 16.
thirdly, delight in his statutes: and fourthly, remembrance of his word.

The first part of the octonarie contained in this first Verse thereof, is
divided again in two parts, a question, and answer made thereunto, (albeit
there be some who make all the Verse a question only, thereby denoting the
difficulty (chiefly in young men) to live according to Gods law, and framing it
so, according to the Hebrew: Whereby shall a young man cleanse his way, that he
may keep the same, according to thy word?

The Question. Wherewith shall a young man redress his way?

In this question there are four things to be considered. First, the person
concerning whom this question is moved, described by his age; A young man.
Secondly, the matter of the question; A young man's way. Thirdly, an action is
set down; Redressing, or cleansing thereof; in futuro, of the contrary, thereby
signifying, the present estate thereof to be unclean and vnredressed in it
self. And the fourth means; Wherein? or wherewith? this action should be
performed, by way of interrogation denoting the difficulty thereof.

The answer has reference unto the question propounded so: Wherewith shall a
young man redress his way? In taking heed thereto, where the actions of
redressing, and taking heed has their reference: the rule of both is,
according to thy word.

The translation of the question, according to the original in the Hebrew is,
(...) in quo mundabit, etc. Wherein shall a young man cleanse his way? Genesis 6.
5.
as if he would say; seeing the way of all men is defiled with many
enormities, and much filthiness of sin in all ages, but chiefly youth is
polluted with great iniquity, and uncleanness of the burning lusts of the
carnal affections: therefore (sin in them being most strongest, and so most
severely and soonest to be repressed) wherein or in what manner shall a young
man purge the uncleanness of his youth, and redress these strong enormities of
his life? The vulgar translation is wherewith, or by what way or means may, or
shall a young man redress and rectify his way and course of living? All to the
same sense and meaning.

First, that this admonition and exhortation of young men in this verse is
propounded questionwise, Wherewith? etc, It teaches us, first the difficulty
of the redressing the way of our youth, both in respect of the perverse and
adverse nature thereof, from hearing good counsel and the godly grave
instructions of our elders, as also of the unaptness of this age, to follow or
to embrace the same, except by Gods special grace it be assisted and seconded,
which is plainly manifested in the examples of those in the primitive world,
that despised old Noah's instructions, of the Sodomites, and chiefly the two
sons in law of old Lot, to whom he appeared, to mock when wisely and
lovingly he warned them to flee Gods judgments, of the two sons of old
Eli, who despised their fathers reproof and warning to abstain from the
filthy lusts and sins, with sundry others, whose end was ever fearful
destruction and overthrow, for youth like an untamed or wild colt, can hardly
hear or will obey, the strait bridle that restrains liberty, it cannot away
with grave counsel of his Elders: but as foolish Rehoboam, despised his
fathers old counselors, and heard the furious and hot young men that were
brought up with him. So they think old age, doting, and willingly has a
ready ear open to the intising Sirens of their own affections and youthly
lusts, who are their young counselors, and Placebos, hearing and being
seduced by them: till many of them have lost a greater kingdom then Solomon
could leave to his son, even that kingdom of heaven, which Christ has
purchased by his blood; they will follow whether they draw them, and sail as
they blow in their sails, till on the pernicious rocks of fearful
destruction, many of them make ship-wracke, they will not be recalled nor
awake, but lie asleep upon the deceitful knees, of the delaying and dallying
Dalilah, of the filthy lusts and vain poysonable pleasures until they have
lost their strength, Gods graces and benefits bestowed upon them, become a
mocking stock for their enemies, and a ready prey for Satan, that greedy
devouring Lion. Therefore let all young men, (considering that the difficulty
of youth is such, to hear or obey good and grave instructions, whereby their
ways may be redressed,) desire and entreat earnestly of God Almighty, to
give them his grace and the assistance of his spirit, that their ears may be
willingly and readily open to hear his word, and the godly admonitions of
their Elders, to give them hearts to understand aright, that it is for their
great and only good, to follow the same, to shut their ears and hearts, to all
entising of sin or vice, and to direct their footsteps into his holy way: that
by his grace they may the more easily walk from grace to grace: and truly such
difficulty resisted and overcome, makes a greater and more glorious victory
to every young man, who has Gods fear before his eyes.

The second thing which we note, by the interrogatiue setting down, of this
exhortation of youth, is, not only the forenamed natural difficulty, in
them for redressing of their ways: but also the duty of all Youth, as the
Prophet here in the person of a young man plainly shows: which is that every
one should enter into a diligent examination and inquisition of his ways, and
that, not consulting with flesh and blood, for then many excuses and delays
shall be, but with the Prophet here, with and before God alone, enquiring of
his ways according to his word. The further command of this duty, beside the
prophets example here, is plainly set down in the old testament: Lam. 3. 40.
Let us search and try our ways and turn again unto the Lord: the neglect
and incommoditie whereof, the same Prophet complains greatly upon: Iere. 8.
6. I hearkened, and heard, but none spoke aright; no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, What have I done? (the incommoditie follows) every one
therefore turned to his race, as a horse russheth into the battle. In the new
Testament, also the Apostle commands the same duty: 2. Cor. 13. 5. Prove
your selves whether you are in the faith, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
examine your selves; know you not your own selves? how that Jesus Christ is
in you, except you be reprobates. So that this trial and diligent examination
must be in the heart of every true Christian, young and old; and indeed it is
the very first step to salvation: Marie Magdalen, before ever she could come
near to Christ, or found any comfort in him, she tried and with mourning
considered; What are my ways? what have I done? Peter, ere ever Christ looked
comfortably upon him again, after his denial, with bitter tears he
considered; what have I done?

The Prodigal child, and true pattern of a converted sinner, before ever he
saw his fathers face or house: his first step, was, he considered with sorrow
and tried; What have I done? Paul, before his conversion, heard from heaven and
considered in his heart; What he had done, before he said, Lord, what shall I
do?

The Jews at Peter's Sermon were pricked in their consciences, and with grief
of mind considered; What they had done, before they could say: Men and
brethren, what shall we do? For this trial is the first step and embracing of
Gods mercy. For from serious trial comes true acknowledging, from true
acknowledging, comes humble confession, and from humble confession proceeds
the assurance of absolution, and comfort of Gods spirit: if we judge our
selves, we shall not be judged (says the truth) and how can we judge before
trial and knowledge? Therefore let every young man learn to try himself and
his ways: What he has done, according to Gods word: For without this first
^nquisition to find out the error and impuritie of our ways, we shall never
attain to the second, to enquire Wherewith they shall be cleansed, redressed,
or rectified,

The 3. thing which is to be noted by this inquisitiue manner of the Prophets
speech, and which may be called the second step to salvation is, that after
such diligent and earnest inquiry of our ways, What we have done, we must
also join a true acknowledging and humble confession of our error and
transgression, proceeding from an inward grief, with an hearty desire of
redressing; for how can a young man inquire and desire of God, that his ways
may be redressed, or cleansed, except he first try them and acknowledge the
error, and uncleanness thereof? Can a man turn to walk in the right way,
except first, he find and acknowledge himself to be in the wrong? Can a man
seck for a Physician except first he find and acknowledge himself to be
diseased? Therefore if we would return or be converted, we must first by
trial, acknowledge and confess with Isaiah, 53. 6. All we like sheep have
gone astray: we have turned every one to his own way. And except with the
Prodigal son we acknowledge, first, that we have gone in a far country
from our father, we can never resolve to draw nere again, except we confess
humbly, first upon the knees of a sorrowful soul, that we have sinned
against heaven, and before him, not being any more worthy to be called his
sons. Verily, we shall never be embraced in the arms of his mercy, nor receive
the comfortable kiss of his love: thou must say, Lord, forgive me the sins
and rebellions of my youth, before he say to thy conscience that they are
pardoned: thou must first acknowledge thy ways, to be polluted with the filth
of sin, and lusts of thy youth, before thou can inquire, Wherewith they may be
redressed, or obtain that the Lord would cleanse and purge them in his mercy,
the poor Publican acknowledged first that he was unworthy to lift up his
eyes to heaven in respect of his offenses, before he went home justified before
God, the thief upon the cross confessed that he dyed and suffered justly for
his sins, before he received that comfortable promise and assurance from
Christ, to be with him that same night in Paradise. David first confessed to
the Prophet Nathan, that he had sinned indeed, before he received the answer
that his sins were forgiven him. With many such examples, showing that young
and old, we must al confess our guiltiness before that great Judge and King
of all Kings, before we receive our pardon: before earthly Kings and Judges,
confession and acknowledging of the fault makes present condemnation; before
God almighty, confession and acknowledging of our sins with sorrow, makes
present absolutio^. Therefore let every man, and chiefly youth (whose errors
commonly are greatest (profess and confess in all submissio^ of heart before
God the enormities, uncleanness, and iniquity of their ways, that the God of
all mercy and love, may at his good will and pleasure, reform, redress, and
purge the same, to his glory and our eternal comfort.

The fourth and last observation that may be gathered by this interrogatory
proposition of the Prophet in person of a young man, and which may be truly
called the third step to salvation, is not only to try our ways, and to
acknowledge the erroneous course thereof with sorrow, but to make a further and
second inquisition of the right way with a hearty desire to walk therein, I must
not only examine my ways and course of life hitherto, nor think it enough to
be sorrowful and grieved for the erroneous going astray therein, which I
deprehend and acknowledge, but also I must join this inquiry and desire to
know, Whereby shall a young man redress or purge his way? It is not enough to
know that I am out of the way, except I labor to know also, how I may come into
the same again. It is not enough for a man to know that he is sick, except he
study also, to know whereby he may attain to his perfect health again. When
a man is in a great danger or peril, his chief devising is how to come out of
it. It is not enough to know that I am in prison, except I labor how to be
freed: Youth for the most part walks and loves to walk in that broad and
by-way of liberty, where there is no restraint or curbing of the affections,
and lusts of the flesh for a time delighting in vain and transitory
pleasures, which carries a momentary sweetness with them to the flesh, but
leaves behind them eternal bitterness to the soul, this way is a strait and
dark prison in the end. It is a by-way that brings weariness to the soul,
the walking therein, is in great peril, and the foote-steps thereof wounds
the conscience, therefore it is not enough to know and see that it is evil,
erroneous and unclean, but they must also earnestly seek after the right way
and follow it, Whereby they may redress and purge their ways. The Prophet of
God, Ierem. 6. 16. commands and shows this duty to old and young, in these
words: Thus says the Lord, Stand in the ways and behold, and ask for the
old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest for
your souls. Paul observed this, when he said, Lord, What shall I do? The
young man in the Gospel that came to Christ, observed this also, when he said;
Master, What shall I do to obtain eternal life? The Jews that were pricked
in conscience at Peter's sermon observed this, when they inquired one another;
Men and brethren what shall we do? The Iailer, Act. 16. 30. observed this,
when he fell down before Paul and Sylas, and asked them; Sirs, what must I do
to be saved. And Christ Jesus the way it self, teaches us the same duty, when
he co^ma^deth; Search the Scriptures, for it is they that testify of me. Let
all young men therefore, who desire to be esteemed true Christians, and having
a name to be alive in Christ, not to be dead, inquire of their own ways,
carefully, narrowly, and impartially, acknowledging truly and in most
submissiue manner confessing before the throne of almighiy God, their errors
and manifold enormities, with an earnest and hearty desire to know and
practice, wherewith they may redress and purge their ways, and walk in the
immaculate and holy ways of God and his commandments, and for all, propone
and set before their eyes the example of that forenamed young man only in the
Gospel, that imitating him they may address themselves in prayer and
meditation to Jesus Christ and his word, making it their chief care and
inquiry to know and practice, how they may attain unto eternal life. Blessed
is the condition of such a young man who does so, and who in all humility does
daily prostrate himself upon the knees of his heart before the throne of the
majesty of God, earnestly desiring and wishing with the same Prophet in the 5.
verse, O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes O Lord. Happy is the
estate of such a young man, and far happy shall it be hereafter, whose delight
is in Gods word, and care to reform and conform his ways according thereunto.
As woeful and dangerous is the condition of the contrary of all such who like
unbridled horses, untamed colts, and swine wallowing in the mire and puddle of
uncleanness, only ravished in the hot fury of the lusts of their affections,
and led by the fearful hand of sin, and vain pleasures of the flesh:
until blindlings (as the Ox is led to the slaughter, or the fool to the
block) they be drawn down the stairs of perdition, and headlongs
precepitat in the deep gulf and p^t of utter destruction, because in time of
their youth they neither enquired, observed, nor examined their ways, nor by
Gods word sought to redress and purge the same.

Now concerning the first thing particularly to be considered in the question,
or first part of this Verse, which is the person concerning whom the same is
moved. He is set down to be a Young man, so described by the adiunct of age,
(albeit, some others (as Augustine) means a new or regenerate man hereby,
albeit decrepite in age, as Aristotle in his Ethics distinguishes betwixt
Iuuenis etate, and Iuuenis morib^^. Disputing de Idonco auditore Ethices)
Generally The 1. Use.
therefore and indefinitely, without limitation or exemption of any, that the
person concerning whom this question is propounded, is said, to be a young
man, whither poor or rich, noble or ignoble, mighty or impotent, the princes
or the beggars son, or what soever he be, we learn; First, that this
exhortation (as al Gods word) is indifferently spoken to all young men* For with
God there is no respect of persons: and therefore that all young men, great or
small, should hearken thereunto, and apply the same particularly to their own
consciences. For from the kings son to the poor beggars, all are his
creatures alike, and God their only Creator, their beginning is all one, for
out of the dust were they taken, and their end equally, shall be al one, for to
dust they shall return: all came equally, naked out of the womb, and all
shall go the same way, to the grave and corruption. Sickness comes alike,
and Deaths Sithe cutteth down both as grass equally: all live one natural
life upon the earth, and draw their breath equally; and all live one
supernatural life in Jesus Christ equally, the natural food of the mortal
bodies of both, is the same, to wit, meat and drink; the supernatural food
of the immortal souls of both, is likewise the same, even the body and blood
of Jesus Christ, who has redeemed both alike by his death, and sanctifies
both alike by his viuificating spirit, unto the life of righteousness: one
Judgment abides both, without respect, and one reward is to both, the pledges
of the kingdom of God, which are his Word and Sacraments, are alike offered,
and should be alike administrated to both: the mightiest Monarch as the poorest
beggar, boh are equally the sons of the first Adam, and the poorest beggar,
as well as the mightiest Monarch is equally the son and member of the second
Adam Jesus Christ, if in him he obey Gods will, and apply to his soul his
promises by faith; as in the first Adam he disobeyed Gods will, by misbeleeuing
of his threatenings; yea, as Lazarus was preferred before Dives, so are many
outcasts of the world, before the mightiest Powers and Princes thereof, Gods
law equally binds both great and small, his threatenings for sin, appertain
equally to both, and are alike executed upon them without any exception or
exemption of persons, as his sweet promises of mercy belongs also and are
equally offered to both. All are alike admonished in his word taught, and
rebuked by the same, and before all men's eyes indifferently is set down
therein life and death to choose. Therefore let no man, rich or poor, exempt
himself from the exhortations, admonitions, reprehensions, or any part of the
word of God, but as they are spoken to all, so particularly let every one apply
them to his own soul and conscience, they are the King of kings statutes,
binding and pertaining to all his subjects, as well of highest as of lowest
place and degree; and especially let every* young man (whatsoever he be, hearken
to this Exhortation of Gods word and spirit, in this place; and learn, Whereby
to redress his ways?

The second observation, and Lesson here-upon, The 2. use.
which the Prophet would have every one to mark and consider, is this: That in
our youth and first age, we must begin then to serve God, in vprightnes and
holiness of life, without any further delay or procrastination of time; not
sacrificing our childehood or youth to the idol of our own affections, and
the devil (as these Idolaters did their children to Molech) and thinking that
God will accept of our decrepite, cold old age, when coldly we shall offer the
same unto him: but as he will have the evening sacrifice of age, so will he
have the morning oblation of youth, as he has given life to al ages, so by all
ages he will be served, and being all to all, by all, in all he will be
worshipped. The Lord is Alpha, and Omega, the first and the last, the beginning
and the end: he will be honored therefore as well in the Alpha or the beginning
of our youth and first age, as he will in the Omega, or end of our last old
age: he is strength, and gives strength to all; in this our strength then of
youth, we must not rise against God, and run with the diuill, but as Gideon
in his strength was commanded by Gods angel to rise against the Midianites, and
fight against his enemies: so by Gods own word, and the holy messenger of his
spirit, every young man is commanded in the strength of his youth to rise
against, fight and subdue his own corrupt affections, which are enemies to God
and his own salvation, so that in our youth we must begin and serve God, amend
and redress our ways according to his word, not excluding, but in every age
we have need and must do so, and the rather (seeing a maiori ad minus) if
Gods word serve to redress a young man's way, who burns in his lusts and
affections, much more serves it to redress a man in ripe age, his affections
being the^ more cooled: but chiefly in youth we have most need by Gods word to
cleanse and redress our ways, for sundry reasons.

First, because our nature then (which contraries grace) is strongest; and so
we are more apt and ready to be led away by our lusts, and to be drawn in
the chain of our affections by Satan into a far country of sin, from our
own fathers house with that prodigal son, to abuse and riotously to consume
Gods liberal gifts and manifold graces bestowed upon us in poverty,
nakedness, and famine of all goodness, feeding our filthy unclean lusts of
the flesh, and greedily feeding and eating with them. Therefore in most
dangerous estate we must take the best and straitest heed, when our enemy is
within walls, then most strongly and courageously must he be resisted, when
we find our nature most inclining to obey sin, then must we strive and
wrestle with GOD in most earnest prayers, and hold him fast, until he give us
his blessing, and the strength of his Spirit to strive also and prevail with
sin, that our nature by his grace may be reformed, our will made
conformable, and inclining to his, and that in soul and body we may bow in
obeying his Commandments.

Secondly, our youth is the beginning of our pilgrimage, and in it, we must
enter in, either at the broad way which leads unto everlasting destruction,
or at the narrow way which leads unto everlasting joy and salvation. The true
way is Jesus Christ, and his righteousness: (I am the way, the verity and life)
who as he is the way, so he is the end of the way, eternal salvation; as he is
God, so he leads unto God, and to the kingdom of God, his father: and is the
ease and rest of all that comes laden or weary unto him. Therefore in thy
youth, and entering in thy pilgrimage, see thou enter in this way, and if thou
would find this way to walk therein, desire God to open thy eyes, that thou
may see this narrow way: Search the Scriptures, (says the way it self) for
they are that testify of me. When thou have found him in his word, and known
him by his word, (as the sheep does the true sheep-heard) apply him then by a
lively faith to thy soul, and take hold of the way. and having found, known,
applied, and taken hold of him, then apply thy whole course of life, in
thought, word and deed unto this way, ever walking therein, Be you holy as I am
holy (says he;) Learn of me, for I am humble and meek. Moses was commanded
to pull off his shoes, because the ground he did stand upon was holy. If thou
stand t^^n upon that holy ground, and ground-stone Jesus Christ, and walk in
that sacred pure way, thou must separate and cast from thee all filthiness of
sin and corruption. If thou would walk with that unspotted Lamb, thou
must walk clothed with that white long robe of sanctity and righteousness,
purchased and washed in his blood: believe Christ Jesus in thy heart, confess
Christ Jesus with thy mouth, and show Christ Jesus and him image in thy life
and conversation; so have thou enterd, so do thou walk, and so shall thou
attain to the end of this true and joyful way. All other ways are by-waies,
the leader and ladder Satan, a manslaier, a liar from the beginning; and the
end of al such is Gods fierce wrath and eternal perdition, he leads thee
from the true City of Jerusalem in his deceitful by-waies, to rob thee of the
good gifts of God bestowed upon thee, and to kill body and soul, and cast it
into utter darkness: like a wise Ulysses harken not to this Siren, who would
allure and draw thee so, to no sweet harmony, but to destroy the ship of the
body, and precious loading of thy soul, (for which christ shed his precious
blood) upon the rocks of eternal destruction, to be his pray. Avoid this
Scylla and Carybdis, and hold constantly forward in the true way Christ, enter
and persevere in it in thy youth, and when thou art aged thou shall be at the
end thereof, that thou may see with the holy Apostle, 2. Tim. 4. 7.
when the time of thy departing is at hand, I have sought a good fight, and
have finished my course. I have kept the faith: for henceforth is laid up for
me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give
me at that day; and not unto me only, but unto a^l them that love his
appearing. Lord grant that every one of us may in our youth enter in this
course, constantly continue therein t^ll our ^^ues end, and at our last
dissolution we may have this sure and comfortable persuasion.

Thirdly, we should serve God in our youth, chiefly obeying his will, and
abstaining from sin, because our youth is as the fat, most pleasant unto God,
not sinning in it when we may sin, and therefore let us sacrifice the same
unto him, not offering up the fat morning sacrifice of our youth to Molech, the
devil and our sinful corrupt affections, and thinking that the God of Israel
will accept of our lean and lame cold evening sacrifice of weak old age, and
so be served with the worst after his enemy Satan. In our youth we must not
run with the devil, and in age think to return unto God, never forsaking
our lusts, nor ceasing to fulfill them in our youth, till then in age they
forsake us, with the strength to accomplish them; when we are strongest we are
weak enough to follow Christ: much more unable when we are weakest. Therefore
as David killed Goliath in his youth, so let us seek to slay that manslayer
Satan, in resisting him, and kill that Goliath of sin and our corrupt
affections, which he uses as weapons against us, putting off all fleshly
armor, and arming body and soul with the strength of Gods Spirit, putting our
trust and sure confidence in Jesus Christ, (who as by former experience) he did
overcome his tentations in his own person, and in the persons of all the
Saints, his elect members, so likewise of his constant love, infallible truth,
and vnfaileable strength, he will assist and persist with us, until we have
likewise trodden him under foot. As David being young, did pull out a Lamb out
of the mouth of the Lion and the Bear, so by resisting that cruel raging Lion
Satan, who daily seeks how to devour our souls and bodies, which the Lamb
of GOD has bought to himself. Let us by the strength of Gods Spirit, redeem
our selves from his destroying jaws, and in our youth show Gods strength in
us, and while we are young men, let us cast off the old man of sin, and
concupiscence of the flesh, and put on Jesus Christ the new man, walking with
him in righteousness and holiness of life, a glorious garment, and blessed
companion. As Sampson being a young man, killed the Philistims, the enemies of
God and his people; so in our youth, let us endeavor by the special assistance
of Gods grace, and strength of his powerful Spirit, to kill, overcome, and
subdue the cruel enemies of God, and our own souls salvation, sin and our
corrupt affections, whom we bear about in our mortal bodies, and who dippeth
in the platter with us, yet like so many Iudases seeking to betray us in the
hands and power of our malicious and cruel enemy Satan: they give us their
sweet milk to drink, but for our destruction: they make us sleep upon their
knees, but to abrace our strength, and to make God abrace our name out of the
book of life, to betray us trecherously into the hands of our persecuting
enemy, and to cut off our heads in the midst of our drunken sleep of sin,
yea they sleep with us, as a snake in our bosom to sting us to eternal death:
suspect then their venom, and the^^ deceitful wicked purpose; let them not
keep thee under the yoke of their slavery, but keep them under thy
commandments and rule, and subjugate thy neck under the light and easy yoke
of Jesus Christ, to obey him in all the powers of thy soul, and members of thy
body, that so here on earth, thou may be a member of his body militant and
suffering, and in heaven hereafter a glorified and triumphant member in eternal
joys, and so thou shall be happy and rejoice that ever thou did suffer the
yoke in thy youth. Saul, David, Salomo^, with many others in the Scripture,
were called to be Kings, being young men; but we in our youth are called to a
more ample, glorious, and permanent a kingdom, to be kings and coheyres with
Jesus Christ, the only begotten and well-beloved Son of God, in that eternal
kingdom of his Father, which he has prepared for us, taken possession
himself before us, and granted us here on earth, the pledge of his holy Spirit
to begin our joys, and his holy Sacraments as seals of his kingdom: who will
then deny such a honor in his youth, to be a glorious King with Jesus Christ?
Solomon in his greatest glory, was not so gloriously clothed, as one of the
white Lillies of the field; but, when thou shall be clothed with the white
long robe of the righteousness of Jesus Christ, crowned with an incorruptible
crown of glory and life, in euer-permanent joys eternally to remain, to
behold the glorious face of the lamb of God, associated to the blessed Angels
and infinite companies of the glorified spirits and Saints, praising
continually, and extolling his justice, and the infinite mercy and love of the
Lamb, before his Throne in light perpetual, in glory unspeakable, and joys
that cannot be expressed, how blessed and happy shall be thy estate in this
kingdom? to day thou art called to it young, to morrow thou know not if thou
shall enter by the passover of death in full possession thereof; while then it
is offered, possess thy self to day with the pledge and rights of it, walk in
the true way to it, that at thy iourneyes end, thou may be crowned an
immortal King: procrastinate therefore no time; it is a gift, and a great
gift, when God holds out his hand in thy youth, to offer thee the rights and
pledges of his kingdom, the sooner thereby to thy greater comfort, to possess
thee with them; and yet in the mean time, thou pull in thy hand from receiving
them, until thou prove the devils slavery: verily, when he has pulled in
his hand again, from offering, albeit thou never so often put out thine to
receive, when thou shall seek it, thou shall not find it: but as thou
refusedst of God in thy youth to be a king, and accepted of Satan to be a
slave: as thou refusedst to remain in thy fathers house, and to eat at his
table, but wandering in a far country, yielded to be a Farmers hyreling, and
to eat with swine: so, except Gods extraordinary mercy, and the beams of his
unsearchable love shine upon thee, thou may expect in age, but terror and
fearful torment of conscience, and hereafter to receive the just reward and
hyre of thy slavery in the bottomless sinck and deep pit of perdition, in
endless and easelesse torments, with Satan thy master. In thy youth, then
accept to be a king of God, receyu^e the rights and pledge of the Kingdom in
thy heart, show that thou have them by thy speeches, thy works, and an holy
life, speak the language of the Kingdom, and learn it daily, more and more,
which is prayer and praising of God: the kingdom, whereof thou art made an
heir, is Heaven, will thou know thy self, and make others also know, if
truly thou belong to this Kingdom, let thy thoughts be heavenly, thy words
be heavenly, gracious to God and man, and offensive justly to none, thy works
and actions also heavenly and upright before God and man, doing good according
to thy power to all, evil or the least injury to none, no, not to thy enemy;
but good for evil in word and work; let all thy conversation and course of
life, private and public, be heavenly, as a lamp shining before others, that
resembling thy Fathers conditions, and bearing his image in thy life, thou
may be known to be a child and son of the King of heaven, and sometimes
to be a crowned king there thy self, when thy father shall call thee home from
thy traveling, to thy native country and kingdom, as on earth in good example
thou shined as a lamp before others, so then in heaven to shine in glory as a
bright lamp before his throne.

But some would think, that this exhortation of redressing our ways, had
been fitter for old men then for youth, because they are nearer death, and
giving of account of their ways where young men sees that they may die, they
^ee that they die, and youth must have it own course, and therefore their
faults are not so much to be observed, seeing they are rather ^tatis then
hominis, and so in time enough they may return from their young courses when
age breaks them, and become good and grave men at last.

To such I answer, that such excuses as these, are but impostures of Satan
and the flesh: age has need to see they end well, the claudite of their life,
with a joyful plaudite of the assurance of Gods favor; and youth must take
heed also that they begin well the fable of their life: if they be all
upon their pleasures in the beginning and first part, it is like to prove a
Tragedy, with a lamentable and sorrowful end in the last part. If thy youth
be a battle, and troublesome at the beginning to subdue thy rebelling
affections against Gods Spirit, surely thy age, the end of the Comedy shall
bring rest, joy, victory, and peace unto thy soul. And therefore says
Jeremy, It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth. Lam. 3. 27.
When Christ came many thousand years after he was promised, Genesis 3.
and did cast out Devils, Mat. 8. 29.
yet they said; he did torment them before the time: so whenever thou even
in thy old age, go about to dismiss thy sins and pleasures, they will
say notwithstanding, that thou dismissest them before time. Satan is a liar
from the beginning, in saying to Eu^, Thou shall not die: so when in thy youth
he says; that it is not time as yet to dispossess him out of thy heart, and
dismiss thy sins and vain pleasures of youth, he is a liar, believe him
not. He says; Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the
sight of thy eyes, eat and drink (with the rich fool) follow thy pleasures
and be secure, for thou have many years before thee, thou shall not die. But
the truth of God warns thee, that thou must know for all these things God
will bring thee to judgment: Eccles 11. 9.
therefore take away that grief out of thy heart, and cause evil to depart
from thy flesh, for childhood and youth are vanity. Satan counsels us to
remember our selves and our own lusts in our youth; but the spirit of God
says; Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth: showing that all the
sins of our youth, proceeds from our forgetfulness of God, as all our
obedience comes from this remembrance of him, considering that God created us
for this end, that in righteousness and holiness we should only serve him here
on earth for a while, and eternally hereafter with himself in heaven enjoy
everlasting felicity: he created us out of the dust of the earth, and we know
not now how soon we must return thither again in childhood, youth, middle
or old age: therefore in all ages we must remember our Creator and the end of
our creation, all things were created for our use and comfort, and we only
for Gods glory: therefore let us so shine before others, that they seeing our
good works, God may be glorified by us. No child can forget his father, God is
our father, and therefore none too young to remember him; this thing the
natural child and son of God, Jesus Christ, taught us to remember, when he
commanded us to say, Our Father, etc. Shall we say so in our mouth (being
young) and not show him to be so in our life; as we pray so to God, so we must
profess before man. Why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not those things which
I command you? (says Christ:) Therefore as Abraham, being commanded by God,
Genesis 22. 3,
did rise early in the morning, to sacrifice his young son Izhac; so in the
morning of thy life early, (as thou art commanded likewise by Gods word) thou
must offer up thy self being young, a living sacrifice unto God, having the
life of Christ, which is true righteousness in thee, God requires the first
borne for his offering, so God requires thee when thou art first borne, from
thy birth, with Samuel to be offered and consecrated to his service and
obedience. So soon as thou art borne, thou art baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ, showing, that when thou art scarce out of the house of thy mothers
womb, he will have thee entered in his house and family, when thou can not
go unto him, thou should creep unto him, serving him (as thou may) in
all ages. In the faith, wherein thou art baptized, thou say, I believe, etc.
not, I will believe hereafter. If then in thy youth, thou would not be
counted an infidel, but a true believer in Jesus Christ, thou must show thy
true faith by works and holiness of life: have thou received Christ's name
upon thee, see if thou have Christ's nature? otherwise thou pertaynest not to
him. In thy Baptism, thou vowedst and sworest to serve him in holiness all
thy life, and receiuedst his name and badge: will thou then presently after, in
thy youth, mock God? keep still his name, but serve the devil in thy
affections and lusts, which thou promisedst then to mortify? The first fruits
were for Gods service: in thy youth thou must also bestow thy first fruits upon
the service of God, and, not giving the first summer fruit that is sweet, to
the devil; and the last winter fruit which are sour grapes to God: when we
pray as Christ has taught us, we say first: Hallowed be thy Name: thy kingdom
come: thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven, before that we desire,
this day our daily bread: if then we seek Gods glory, and that Gods will may
be done by us, before we ask that food, by which we are preserved, and live,
how much more should we seek the same, before our pleasures and the
accomplishment and fulfilling of our lusts and ^innes, whereby we perish and
die: Christ says, First seek the kingdom of heaven, and all other things
shall be cast upon you. Philosophy says; ^rimum quaerite bona animi, catera
aut aderunt, aut certe non oberunt: First seek the goods of the mind (which is
virtue and piety) and other things shall either be present, or, if absent, they
shall not hinder you: if then by Christ's commandment, we must first seek
after the kingdom of God, and by Philosophy to seek after virtue and piety
to be planted in our minds, shall we then first in our youth, seek after our
own pleasures, the kingdom of Satan, and to root in our hearts all vice and
ungodliness? God forbid: when Christ says to us, Follow me; with his
Disciples, leaving our nets and devises in the sea of the world, to catch
profit or pleasure, we must obey and follow him straight, if ever we would be
counted his Disciples: when he asks us, with Peter, if we love him in our
youth, we must answer, Yea, Lord, I love thee, and not say, when I have
fulfilled the lusts of my youth, then I will love thee. This is the acceptable
time, 2. Co^. 6, 2.
this is the day of salvation, today, if we will hear his voice: for whosoever
comes not at Gods callings, whatsoever he say, it is impossible that he
should resolve to come hereafter when he pleases; for, being evil, can he
resolve to be good? A dry dead tree, which is withered, and brings no fruit
in the Summer, nor buddeth in the Spring, can it bring forth pleasant and sweet
fruit in the cold winter? so, either now in our youth let us serve God, or
never exspect that we can hereafter being hindered by many abstractions and
cares of the world: but if now resolutely we begin; that same God who gave the
will and the beginning, will also give perseverance and a perfect end. Therefore
now or never, now and ever: life and death is set before our eyes. How soon
soever as the Lord distributed his talents, he commanded his servants
immediately to use them, and give them out to usury. Now who is so young but God
has given him some talent; to use the same, to his glory and honor, which if
it be unlawful to hide in the earth, how much more to abuse and consume it to
the dishonor of his Master, and his own destruction. When God had created the
heaven and the earth, the first thing he did afterward, was, that he
separated the light from darkness, that we might learn to separate good from
evil, G^n. 1. 14.
before we should confound and make our good become evil. Satan is the
prince of darkness; sin is darkness it self: will thou then convert Gods
graces into this darkness? or adm^^^^ (...) thy youth this prince of darkness
into thy soul, and yet think thou can retain the light of God? There is no
society betwixt God and Belial. Darkness and light cannot remain both in one
place: therefore in thy youth love the light, embrace the good, and abstain
from all appearance of evil. 1. These. 5. 22.
Dedicate thy youth to God, who renews the same, as the Eagles. Verse. 103.
Give unto God that which is Gods, Mat. 22. 21.
and that is, My son give me thine heart. Prou. 23. 26.
The way to heaven is like Jacobs Ladder, and it has four steps. First, to
begin betime, following Christ's example in this, Matur^.
as in all the rest; seeing as in heaven now he is our patron, so then on earth
he was our pattern, to which we must conform all our life. At twelve years of
age, he was found in the Temple of Jerusalem doing his Fathers business, Luke.
2. 46.
in hearing and asking questions of the learned Doctors: so his first step to
heaven, was, in his childhood he began to do his Fathers will; and (...) would
follow his footsteps, to come likewise to heaven, we must also in our
childhood and youth, learn the knowledge of God, and to practice the same, in
our life and conversation. Propere Psalm. 119. 32.
The second step to heaven, is, to hasten and make speed; herein also following
our Masters example, who in the short time of his life here, spoke and did more
things, then (if they were written) the world could co^taine the books thereof,
as testifies St. John: as we should also abou^d in good and godly works. I^h.
21 25. Recte.
The third, to persevere and keep the right way: for he said, Who can accuse
me of sin? And albeit many false witnesses came against him, they could find
nothing to accuse him of justly; as we should take heed, that we suffer not by
evil doing, but be unblameable before all men. Constanter.
And fourthly, steadfastly to continue: for as he was the Lamb of God, so he
dyed innocently, and meekely as a lamb; praying for his enemies: and whosoever
constantly continues with him, faithful unto death, as he has promised, so
he will give them, Reu. 2. 10.
the crown of life. This is the way, by which, the way it self, has gone
before us to heaven; so he, as our Captain, and his footesteps, as our
directions, we must follow, if we look for any portion in his glorious
kingdom with him. Therefore, let all youth learn to begin betime, and tread
his first footesteppe to heaven, not thinking that in youth, he may run down
with Satan, to the lowest step of the stairs of sin and perdition, and in
age he may creep up from thence, and fly to the highest step of Jacobs
Ladder. Neither that in youth he may take his pleasures, delaying and dallying
with them a while, thinking all sins of youth to b^e venial: no, the holy
Prophet David desires God earnestly, and importunately entreats him; that he
would not Remember the sins of his youth, (being a man according to Gods own
heart) and he calls the^, his rebellions; showing as rebellion is highest
treason unto earthly Princes, so the sins of our youth, is highest treason and
rebellion to God our Father, being most strongest, as our natural corruption
is so the^, of which they proceed; and therefore most offensive. And truly, if
the dedicatio^ of our youth to Gods service be most pleasant to him, the^ the
dedication of the same to the devils service, is most displeasant and grievous
in his sight: God is that fou^tain and wel-spring of all true wisdom. In our
youth then let us desire that true wisdom with Solomon, to dwell in our
hearts, and honor and riches shall ever acco^panie the same, as the shadow
does the body inseperably. Wisdom says; They which seek me e^rly shall find
me: Prou. 8.
but to the^ which delaieth seeking of her till age come upon them, she says;
Ye shall seek me, but you shall not find me: seek her then, and take hold of
her in thy youth, that thou may reap the fruits thereof in thy age. It is
written, when Christ heard the young man in the Gospel answer him; that he had
kept all the Commandments from his youth, that Christ began to love him, to
show how well Christ loves these timely beginnings, when in our childhoode and
youth we cleave to him as our Nurse, and sucketh the milk of godliness from
his breasts. Manna was gathered in the morning before the hot rising of the
Sun, which would melt it away: so early in the morning of our youth, we must
gather and eat of Jesus Christ, that true Manna, the food of our souls, we
must learn true godliness and virtue, before the hot sun of our lusts and
pleasures make it to melt away faster the^ we can gather the same. We must be
like the wise young Virgins, to prepare our oil, and dress our lamps in time,
not knowing in our youth or age, when the Bridegroom shall call upon us. It is
said, that a new vessel ever sauoureth of that liquor wherewith it is first
seasoned, according to the Latin proverb, Quod noua testa capit,
in^eteratasapit: and the saying of the Poet: Quo semel est imbutarece^s
seruabit odore^, Test^ diu.

In our youth therefore we must infuse in our hearts, and season the^ with such
liquor, as may make us in age, smell well in the nosthrills of God our father,
(as Esaus garments did to Isaac) that so we may obtain that everlasting
blessing: and this liquor is godliness and sanctification, through the blood
and garment of the righteousness of Jesus Christ our elder brother and
Savior. Samuel began to serve God in his infancy, and continued still:
Sampson was a Nazarite, consecrated to God from his birth: 2. Tim. 3. 15.
Timothy is praised of Paul; That he did know the Scriptures of a child,
which were able to make him wise unto salvation, through the faith which is in
Jesus Christ: John the Baptist, as he grew in years, so he waxed strong in
spirit. Luke. ^. 80.
So likewise, every young man must strive to do, to consecrate himself from the
womb to the grave, in the service of God, and to deserve that good
commendation of Timothy, from his childhood to know the holy Scriptures, which
may teach and instruct him in righteousness, as a Master; which may improoue
and correct his faults, as a Father, and make him a man of God absolute and
perfect unto all good works.

The third lesson and observation is to fathers of youth, The 3. Use.
as the first was to youth it self: and it is, that as young men in their
youth must learn and practice godliness, in redressing of their ways
according to Gods word: so the fathers of all youth, must begin to teach the
same unto them, and go before their children in good example of life while they
are tender, and as new vessels fit to receive and be seasoned with piety. Gods
commandment in his word concerning this duty of parents, is, Deutronomie, 4.
9. But take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, that thou
forget not the things which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart not
out of thine heart all the days of thy life, but teach them thy sons, and
thy sons sons. Again, Deutronomie, 6. 7. where he says; And thou shall
re^earse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them when tho^
^^riestin thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thourisest up. Moreover, Deutronomie, 32. 46. in Moses last
exhortation to Israel; Then he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the
words which I testify against you this day, that you may command them unto
your children, that they may observe and do all the words of this Law.
Likewise the Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 4. And ye fathers provoke not your children to
wrath, but bring them up in instruction and information of the Lord. So Psalm.
78. 5. How he established a testimony in Jacob, and ordained a law in Israel,
which he commanded our fathers that they should teach their children. Also the
practice of all the godly has ever been so, according to this commandment of
God. Adam taught his sons to sacrifice and offer to the Lord. The three
Angels that came to Abraham, they revealed unto him the destru^tion of Sodom,
because the Lord did know that he would teach this his judgment for sin to
the posterity after him. Genesis 18. 17. 19.
And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? For I
know him that he will command his sons and his household after him, that they
keep the way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord
may bring upon Abraham that he has spoken unto him. Isaac being a young
child, yet was well instructed in the typical service of God, and things
pertaining unto the sacrifice of the old Law, when he asked his father; Behold
the fire and the wood, Genesis 22. 7. 8.
but where is the lamb for the ^urnt offering? And he answered; My son, God
will provide him a lamb, etc. His exercise also when he was a young man, by
his fathers instruction and example was, Genesis 24. 36.
And Isaac went out to pray in the field toward the evening, etc. So Joshua in
his last commandment and exhortation to Israel, says unto them; And if it
seem evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this day whom you will
serve, etc. but I and my house will serve the Lord. With sundry such examples
in the Scripture, where we may see the practice and care of all the godly, to
have been ever in instructing and bringing up their children in the knowledge
and fear of God, which all godly Christian parents in this age must follow
likewise: for if God has established his covenant between us and our seed
after us, Genesis 17. 7.
to be our God for ever: how careful should we then be, that our seed and
children may be instructed in the true and perfect knowledge thereof, that as
he is their God, so they may be his people; as he is their father, so they
may prove his children by dutiful love and obedience to his commandments. It
is said, that Alexander had children borne and brought up in military
discipline and exercise, from their infancy in his Camps, which made him so
victorious and prosperous in battle: even so let all parents bring up their
children from their infancy and cradle, in the knowledge and exercise of the
Christian warfare of this life, in all godliness and virtue, that they may
prove courageous and good soldiers under their victorious King and Captain
Jesus Christ. And seeing youth is as tabula rasa, a new vessel, a young tree,
or Olive plant (as David calls them) like soft wax to receive any print,
inconstant and wavering, and most inclining by their own nature to sin and
vain pleasure, which even godly Job suspected in his children, albeit well and
godly brought up, when he went to sacrifice for them daily, fearing it might
have been that his sons in their banqueting had sinned, and blasphemed God
in their hearts. Therefore let all fathers, as God has given them children of
his grace: so with Hannah, Samuels mother, dedicate and give them again unto
the Lord and his service, in bringing them up carefully in the fear and
reverence of his holy name: season their tender hearts in their youth, with the
liquor of godliness, and the true knowledge of the blood of Jesus Christ,
which must be their life: print them with the glorious image of Christ, which
is true piety, that as he was the resemblance of his father, so they may here
represent him also in pureness and sanctity of life, while they are as young
tender twigges and Olive branches: bow them that way as you would have them
stand, when they are grown and old, which is to the obedience of Jesus
Christ, in whom they must bear fruit, and receive fatness: write and ingraue
the knowledge of his will and commandments in their hearts and minds, that
with all their hearts, souls, and minds, they may honor and serve GOD, in
all fear and love, a band to hold out all ^inne, and so place and set them in
the right way, see that they constantly continue and persevere therein, and
join severe and strait animaduersion for repressing of their vices, as also of
cherishing of Gods good graces in them, that so they may be lively stones in
Sion, to the glory of God, the comfort of his parents, and their own souls
salvation. So parents making them dutiful to God their heavenly Father, he
will make them dutiful also and reverent to them again: otherwise with Elias
sons, they will be a grief to their hearts, and the means to bring their
gray hairs in sorrow to the grave, and with Absolon, prove unkind and
unnatural children: for being David's darling, he proved David's traitor: and
the reason is set down thus, 1. Kings. 1. 6. And his father would not
displease him from his childehoode to s^y; Why have thou done so? I remember
one example in the Scripture, of children carelessly and euilly brought up,
which may make all fathers tremble and quake, to hear the fearful punishment
thereof, and may teach them by careful and godly education of their children,
to prevent the like wrath and judgment of God, for he is the same in all
ages, both in judgment and mercy. 2. King. 2.
When the Prophet of God Elisha was coming up to Bethel, there came out of the
City certain children, and mocked him, calling him, Balde head, balde head*
therefore God in his wrath sent out Bears out of the wilderness, at the
Prophets desire, and they tore and rent 42. of these children in pieces: a
lamentable spectacle, young children before their tender parents eyes, to be so
devoured and torn of wild beasts. But consider their careless and loose
educatio^, which deserved this, they were not kept in at virtue or learning,
but suffered to run abroad in the streets idly, they were not brought up in
the reverence, neither of God, his word, or his Prophets, but to mock Gods
servants, and scornefully to jest at old age, which they should rather been
taught to honor and reverence in all duty, and in all persons: therefore,
because their parents neglected to correct them in time, and to take no more
care for their instruction, God sent wild Bears out of the wilderness (to
teach them more humanity) and at the Prophets request, whom they so mocked and
contemned, to be their correctors to their destruction. There are too many
such careless and indulgent parents nowadaies, which makes so many prove
wild and undutiful children, both to God and them; and their own wicked and
vuruly affections, often times proves these wild bears, which Satan hunteth
out, and God suffers to tear their souls (more precious and lamentable to
see) and at last to bring body and soul to a most miserable estate, both here
by poverty and despair, and hereafter by death and endless condemnation. The
Lord auert such judgments from many, and convert their hearts to him again,
that they may prevent his fierce wrath, while the acceptable time is, and to
day while we hear his voice: and as young men should not, so neither let their
parents think the faults of youth to be but small, and rather to be imputed to
the nature of the age: the former searefull example teaches the contrary, they
being but children, and their fault mocking, yet their punishment most grievous
that God inflicted upon them: as David also calls the sins of his youth, not
small, but rebellions, which is highest treason against our God, the King of
Kings, and Prince of all Princes. Therefore let all parents be careful, in the
good and godly education of their children. Every tree is known by his fruit:
the fruit of the parents, is their Olive branches; their children. Let them
show then their godliness and religion, in the godly education of their
children, proving thereby, that themselves are the good tree, by sending forth
lively branches, to be ingrafted (as themselves are) in the stock Jesus
Christ, not being too indulgent to them, nor wincking in a manner at their
faults: neither with old Eli, saying only; My sons, do so no more: but to
show their love to their children, in correcting them for their faults: For
whom the Father loves, him he chastises: Prou 13. 24.
and, he that spares the rod, hates his son; but he that loves him,
chasteneth him bet^^e. Therefore, as the Wiseman counsels; Prou. 29. 17.
Correct thy son, and he will give thee rest, and will give pleasures to thy
soul.

And as the vessel which a man makes most of, and deareliest esteems, that
uses he oftest to scour and make clean, from the least spot or stain: so a
wise and loving father, will not suffer his son to be polluted with the least
spot of vice, for chastising is the fathers honor, and the life of the child:
So that correction is like Ionathans arrows, not in anger, but in love; not to
harm, but to warm, not to put in peril, but to preserve from peril, not to
deforme, but to reform, like a good corrasiue to eat away the rottenness of
vice, and a bitter potion to make their children vomit out from their soul and
heart, the poison of sin, lest having taken deep root, and growing up with
them, they be so endured and hardened therein, that they break first by final
destruction, before they will bow by timely instruction, or wholesome
correction. Therefore, so plant them in virtue, and virtue in them, while they
are tender and flexible in youth, that in the harvest of age, their tops may
bow down in Gods obedience, laden with the pleasant fruit of godliness and
good works. Teach a child in the trade of his way (says Solomon) and when he
is old, Prou. 22. 6.
he shall not depart from it. Youth is the seed time, in the spring we must
not sow popple, and in harvest look for good wheat; but as we sow, so we
shall reap. The Nurse frames the body while it is young and tender; so must
parents their childrens minds, while they are green and flexible. If we see a
fault or evil manners in any man, we judge that he was evil brought up; and
if he have virtue, we adiudge it to his good education: yea in an old proverb
we say, that nurture changes nature: as Lycurgus proved before the
Lacedaemonians to be true, by taking two young whelps of a like nature, and of
one damme, and bringing up the one according to it own nature in a kitchen,
and the other, besides it proper nature, to hunting; so that at a certain
solemn assembly of the Lacedaemonians, Lycurgus brought forth his two dogs
before them, placing before the one, who was brought up to hunting, a pot, and
before the kitchen dog, a hare; but the hunting dog in sight of them all,
refused the pot, and ran after the hare; where the other, according to his
education, refused to follow the hare, betaking himself to lick the pot.
Whereby it was showed, the altering power and efficacy of educatio^, which is a
second nature (as it were) unto a man: for by evil educatio^, a good nature may
be corrupted, as by good, an evil nature may be rectified: a good ground
unplanted with wholesome herbs, or unsown with good seed, in time does soonest
bring forth unprofitable and evil weeds; where, on the contrary, a barren
ground well labored and sowed, produces pleasant flowers, and sauorie fruits.
The right blessing, which Parents should bestow upon their children, is, when
bringing them up in the fear of GOD, they make God bless them also; for if
thou bless thy child, and God curse him, what avails thy blessing? but, if
thou bring him up in the true knowledge and obedience of Jesus Christ, to thy
blessing, God and Angels shall say, Amen, and he shall heap, both upon thee,
and thy seed after thee, manifold and great blessings, as he blesses all
those, who do his will, and curses them that keep not his commandments: as
God has commanded, in the first precept of the second Table of his Law, that
children shall honor their Parents, with a double promise, of this life, and
the life to come: then command thou likewise, and instruct thy children, to
honor God also, and let this be thy first and chiefest care in the table of
thy heart, and so show thy self thankful to God again. When Solomon was to
try, whose was the living child, 1. King. 23. 6.
for which the two women strove, to find out the same, by the natural
affection of the true mother, he commanded the child to be divided in two;
wherewith, as the true mother was much moved and displeased, so the wrong
mother cared not, but was contented it should be so; and so the verity for the
adjudging did appear: It is even so, with godly and wicked parents, and by
this they may be known; the wicked parents, not having any conjunction with
God themselves, they cannot know nor apprehend the ioyfulnesse thereof in
others, as in their children, and therefore they care not, though they be
destroyed by sin, and divided asunder from the body of Jesus Christ but
godly and true parents, feeling in their own hearts, the sweet joy of that
blessed union with God through Christ, they endeavor only, so to bring up
their children in the true fear and love of God, that they may be partakers
also of that unspeakable comfort and joy of that conjunction with themselves,
and so have true life in them; yea, before they should be divided from that
comfort and life, which they have in that conjunction with Jesus Christ, they
rather would give over that natural title and right of comfort, which
belongs justly unto them as parents, as they did naturally beget them in
sin, by the seed of man in the flesh, to their own image; so their chief
care and desire is, Psalm. 51. ^. Ephesians. 2. 3.
that they may be begotten of a new, supernaturally, in the spirit unto
righteousness, by the spirit of God, to Gods image, and by the immortal seed
of the word of Jesus Christ, God and man, and as they did dwell together on
earth, so for ever in heaven also they desire together to remain. This, I say,
is the wish, care, and note of all godly and true parents, and which every one
should have or be known by; and truly, we see oftentimes, that children take
example of their parents, and walks in their footsteps, pressing to imitate
them, that they may the more be loved by them: so that if the father be
carefully and godly disposed, his son will fear, lest the contrary
disposition be deprehended in him, (at least by his father;) if he see, that
his father hate and detest drunkenness, fornication, swearing, or such sins,
surely, if he be a natural son, and not a castaway, he will be loath to
commit any such, or at least to his fathers knowledge or face; and, if he have
grace in him, he will do that rather, which he knows to be liking and
acceptable in his fathers sight: the example whereof, first consider, in a
truly godly and obedient son Jacob, who knowing that the daughters of Canaan
displeased Izhak and Rebekah, Genesis 27* 46.
his parents, he would not join with the^ in marriage, but with his own
kindred, commanded by his fathee; as also, the like after a manner, in a
counterfeit castaway, Esau his brother, Genesis 28. 6, 7, 8.
who seeing, that to marry with the daughters of Canaan (as he had
notwithstanding already done) was displeasant and grievous to his parents, and
that his brother Jacob had obeyed his father, to do otherwise, in going to
Padan Aram, he went also, and took Ishmaels daughter to wife, of his own
kindred, (albeit a bastard generation) such was the care (albeit hypocritical)
even of this castaway, 1. Sam. 2. 23.
to please his parents. Elies wicked sons also, seeing their fathers godly
disposition, durst not before him commit such enormities as they did, or to his
own knowledge, until by the people, it was reported so unto him; so that the
good inclination of the father, is a great awe band unto the son, as of the
contrary, the nature of the son, is more apt to follow a lascivious and
impious father to wickedness and vanity, then a godly grave father to piety
and true wisdom. Concerning this aptness of children, to imitate their
parents example, in good or evil, Christ himself also says to the Jews;
John 8. 39. 44.
If ye were the sons of Abraham, ye would do the works of your father
Abraham, but ye are of your fafather the devil, and the lusts of your father
ye will do: therefore let all fathers, in the good education of their
children, be as lamps themselves in their life, that they may be followed by
them; and do such things, that therein, they would desire their childrens
imitation. It is a great delight to parents, to hear, that their children are
like unto them, but if they be like them in godliness, it is a great joy and
comfort to others also. For then they represent and resemble the Image of Jesus
Christ, the common Savior and Father of all men, as he was the character and
express Image of his Father, in Justice, Mercy, and Holiness; so they, being
likewise, the image of Christ again, in holiness and sanctity of life, being
holy as he is holy, and having that honor, to be like the King of all kings;
and thereby brother to the Prince of princes, of whose kingdom it may be
truly said, His ego met as nec tempor a pon^. without limitation or
prescription of time, Joy infinite, and Eternity without end.

In the 127. Psalm, David calls children by three titles; First, Behold
(says he) children are the inheritance of the Lord; to show, that they should
be educated and brought up by their parents with such care, as though they
were not the children of men, but of God; and consider, what care a man has
and respect unto his inheritance, that it be not abused any way, or spoiled;
the like, and greater care, has God our heavenly Father, that our children,
which are his inheritance, (for of these is the kingdom of heaven) be not
negligently or euilly brought up, to dishonor his name, who should honor him.
The heir of a king and kingdom, must be so educated, that he may be found
worthy of the crown. The children of the faithful, are heirs to the King and
kingdom of Heaven. Therefore their parents, as tutors, to whom they are
concredit for a time, must train them up so carefully, in piety, and and the
obedience of God their heavenly father, that they may be found worthy of the
inheritance, of that Kingdom, and Crown of glory, purchased by the blood of
Jesus Christ our Lord, and their parents may be found faithful, so in
discharging their duty therein, to God and them. Secondly, David calls
children the Lords Reward, showing, that as God of his grace, does give to
parents children, as a testimony of his love, to their earthly pleasure,
comfort and service, so they should (as it were) reward God, by giving and
dedicating them again, with Hannah, unto his service, and pleasing of him, by
an immaculate and pure life, as a token and testimony of their love to God
again.

And thirdly, Children are compared to arrows in the hand of the strong man;
who, if they be well and godly brought up and framed, they will shoot at their
parents enemies, and be a grief to their heart, to see them prosper so, in the
fear of God, by his blessings; and blessed is the man that has his quiver
full of them: but, if they be carelessly and too indulgently brought up, as Elies
sons, and Absolon, they will be the darts to pearce their fathers heart, with
grief and bitter sorrow to them.

In Latin, Children are called pigno^a, and pueri, the one, because they are
the pledges of Gods favor to the parents, as also natural pledges of the
mutual love of the parents betwixt themselves, (being the surest bond in
marriage, to knit and continue the love of man and wife betwixt themselves,
which Leah well did know, when being conceived, she said, Now my husband will
love me.) If therefore, they be the pledges of Gods love, to their parents, in
giving them of his grace, for their worldly pleasure; then, by their good
education, let them be the pledges of the parents love to God likewise, in
giving and dedicating them again, unto his heavenly pleasure and service, as
an unspotted and clean sacrifice, being puri, sicut pueros dec^t, and in the
mean time, let parents be aware, to esteem or love the pledge or gift, more
then God, the giver thereof: for if they love their children too much, dallying
and delighting only with the gift, God the giver, will either make them of a
blessing in his love, turn to a curse in his anger, or else separate them one
from another, in making either the father childlesse shortly, or the child
fatherless, which experience oftentimes proves manifestly: let children
therefore be only as cords, to draw the parents hearts more and nearer unto God,
in increase of love and thankfulness to him, and God will heap his blessings
more abundantly on them both, and also let their parents chief care be, to
trim and adorn their hearts and minds so with piety and virtue, as becomes
a gift or reward, which is to be presented to the King of al kings before
whose eyes, no unclean thing can stand: therefore Christ, once being to
show, who should inherit the kingdom of heaven, took for example, a little
child, and set him in the midst of his disciples, saying, Whosoever
receives not the kingdom of heaven as a child, Luke 18. 17.
he shall not enter therein: thereby showing, that our children should be so
innocent, so humble, and void of all evil, that they may be taken for example
of the sons and heirs of God* not as many are now (woeful to see) made proud
in their cradle, learned to curse and swear, before they can well speak or
ask their parents blessing, and full of evil, before they have reason to
discern good or evil: therefore set tender and wise parents not excuse their
children in their faults: saying, They are tender, or have no wit to do
otherwise; if they be tender, let not the worm of sin so stick upon them,
for the danger is the greater, lest the sooner it eat through their heart; and
it is fearful, when they have wit to do or speak evil, and go in the
wrong way, before they have wit, or are taught to speak or do well, and enter
in the right way. As they were before compared to arrows, we know, as the
arrow is directed at the first, so it flies all the way, over, or under, or
beside, but it never comes unto the right mark or butte unless it be
directed right at the first, in the letting forth out of the Bow: so it is,
that except from the first coming forth out of the womb, children be directed
in the right way, they shall hardly or never attain to the end of the way,
which is true happiness in Jesus Christ; we know also, if our children be
deformed in their youth, we never expect that they will be well favored in
their age; and, when a young Plant sprouteth up, if there be a worm, that
lies at the root thereof, we know, except we remove and kill the same, the
tender Plant will never thrive, nor grow forward; do we know and believe so,
in respect of our childrens bodies? and plants of our gardens? then let us know
and believe the same in respect of their minds: if sin grow before piety, the
weed will smother the good corn, if vice be sown and appear before virtue in
youth, no appearance of a good or joyful harvest in age: remove and kill the
worm of sin from the tender plant of childhood, lest it gnaw out the life
thereof, ere thou be aware: kill the serpent in the egg, lest when he is
hatched, he kill thee who is the parent, with grief, and thy child with his
poison: yea, we teach a dog while he is a whelpe; we tame a bird while it
is young; we break a horse, while he is a colt; and bow the tree, while it is
a twig, so, with wise Solomon; Teach thy child in his youth, that he may
remember it when he is old: the birds of the air teach parents their duty,
they fly before their young ones, to teach them to follow; as parents should by
good example and godly education, teach their children to fly to God also, by
faith and holiness of life: we have a care to feed our beasts, and see their
education carefully, who, if they starve or die, we have only lost a carkas;
but, when carefully we ouersee not the education of our own children and seed,
the feeding of their souls by instruction, and curing of their sores of vice
by correction, we loose their bodies and souls, which is more precious then
all the world, and their blood shall be required at our hands, and of this
vice complayneth Isaiab, 1. 3. that the ox and the ass were taught to know
their masters, but his people did not know him, as Gods Ministers may now also
justly complain of the same. We have three notable examples of parents, for
good education, in the Scriptures: 1. King. 2. we have David, instructing his
son. Genesis 34. Jacob reproouing and correcting his sons: and Job. 1. Job
praying for his sons; put these three together, instructing, correcting, and
praying, they will make blessed children, and thrice happy parents; and as it
was a sweet and comfortable thing, to see children go before Christ to the
Temple of Jerusalem, singing Hosanna to the most highest, that it might be
fulfilled, that out of the mouths of babes and sucklings, Gods praises should
sound: so it shall be to the great joy and comfort of their parents hearts,
when in the temple and congregation of the faithful, they shall see their
children (being well brought up) singing praises to God on high, and setting
forth the mercy of Jesus Christ their Redeemer: and as their children shall
be a joy to their heart in that present, so also their God, and the God of
their children, shall send a blessing upon them, as Genes. 18. 17. upon
Abraham, with whom they shall be worthily called Fathers of the faithful; God
shall auert from them that shame and sorrow, that proceeds to parents from
their childrens liberty, whereof the wise man speaks, Pro. 17. 21. and 29.
15. and commands the contrary, Give not the waters any passage, no, not a
little: and the diuturnitie of the good of such education, shall be ever upon
them, and their children, when after them they shall prove good fathers of
faithful and godly children also, and at last, receive both, a crown of glory
in life eternal, with God our heavenly father, and Christ his son our
Savior. And so for the duty and admonition of parents, let this observation
suffice, to teach their children, being young, how to redress their ways. The
matter, concerning which the question is propounded, is, a young man's way, that
is, his course of life, which must be redressed. And it is a Metaphore taken
from pilgrimage or iourneying, wherein a man, if he would come to the right
end of his journey, must keep the true and right way, without declining,
either to the left or to the right hand, that he aberre not, nor go astray; so
that our life here, being a pilgrimage, (as old Jacob confessed to Pharaoh*
and the Apostle, 1. Pet. 2. 11. exhorts, saying, Dearly beloved, I exhort
you, as strangers and pilgrim^s, abstain from fleshly lusts, which fight
against the soul.) wherein we have many bywayes, which leads to the wrong
end, to wit, destruction; but one only true way, which leads to the right
end, to wit, Salvation, which is Christ Jesus, and a young man being the
pilgrim, beginning, or having newly begun his way, he must diligently take
heed and try, in what way he insisteth, and whether he treads the right or
the wrong path; and seeing in a young man's way, Satan the leader and way to
perdition, on the one side, is busiest to cast before him many lets and
hindrances of the affections, and alluring lusts of the flesh, with the
pleasures of youth, thereby to hinder his course, or draw him back from the
right way, (as the Sirens would Ulysses) and to precipitate him headlong from
the high rocks of sin and despair, in the fearful and deep gulf of
utter destruction: and on the other side, of all ages, Youth, (having newly
begun, and unacquainted with these terrifying lets) being easiest by nature to
be drawn away, and persuaded to the enticing and sweet pleasures of the flesh,
the world, and of sin, and so in most peril to yield: therefore a young man
must the more earnestly enquire and desire of God, (the way it self, the
leader, and end thereof) that of his grace, he would so direct and confirm
him in his paths, and give him grace and strength, whereby to redress his
own ways, and overcome all the impediments of Satan, that insisting therein,
he may ever constantly persist and continue, until he come to the joyful and
happy end thereof, where is true rest, from all labors, and glory infinite for
a perpetual reward.

The reason, why a young man, in his youth, and first steps of his walking,
should examine and redress his ways, is this; we know by experience, in a
journey, that the farther we are gone from the right path, which leads to
such a place, it is the harder and laborious, either by coming back again,
to find the right high way, which we foolishly lost, or to come near the
place, which we wish to be at; and thererefore that it is best, at the
beginning of our journey, to enquire, and be instructed, what way to keep, by
them who know, and have tread the fame before us, and by their directions in
walking forward, to try and examine our selves, if we hold likewise in the
right way or no; or if not, in time to return, while we are not far off.
So, in the journey of this life, we have a place which we aim at, to wit,
Heaven* we have but one true way to it, which is Jesus Christ and his
righteousness, out youth is the beginning, or first step of our journey,
therefore in it, we must know and be instructed what way to keep, and how to
walk therein, by the example of Jesus Christ, and the faithful, who know and
have tread the same before us, and by the directions and touchstone of Gods
word, we must ever be trying and examining our selves, if we hold in the right
way, or no? and if not, in time shortly to return, while we are not far gone
astray in age, not running in the by-waies of iniquity in a strange country,
far from our fathers house, while we are young, and in feeble age, thinking
we can return and find the right way again, to walk therein, let no man
presume so, that in the day of his youth, while he is able, he may run half
way with the devil to hell, and in the night of his age, when he is unable,
that he may return easily from Satan's hold, and the slymie pits of sin, to
walk the whole way with Christ to heaven.

The second reason, why a young man thus, in the first steps of his way, must
so take heed thereto, and redress the same, is, because the time, of the
walking in the way of this life, is so short and uncertain, and therefore that
we should not trust thereto; for we see some die in the bud of infancy, some
in the flower of youth, some in the ripeness of mid-age and strength, and some
in the fall of weak rotten old age. The sun of the life of some goes too
shortly, as in the winter day; and of others, it makes longer delay, as in the
summer. Our life is compared to a shadow, and we know, at midday, when the
Sun is vertical, and in his greatest strength to us, the shadow uses to be
least, so, oftentimes when we are in the greatest strength and vigor of youth,
the shadow of our unconstant and short life is least, and when we think upon
many years to come, as the rich Glutton did, commonly the sentence of
unexpected death comes, and warns to remove. Therefore in youth, and every
age, yea, every day and hour thereof, we have need to suspect the uncertain
and short way of life, and therein carefully and strictly examine and try if
our ways and walkings be in the way of the Lord, the end whereof, is
eternal salvation, and if not, to day, while we hear his voice, and the
acceptable time offers it self, to redress and cleanse our paths and
walkings, and conforming them unto his. For as all rivers and springs, that
come from the sea, return again; so all men that are made of the dust of the
earth, shall thither also return, but of the time, who can say? this drop of
the river, at such a time or hour, shall return into the Ocean? or the
returning of such a man unto the earth, shall be at such a determinate special
time or age? No, our returning is uncertain, only then, being as a drop of a
great River, let every man commit the same to God, and endeavor, as he came
salt with original corruption from the earth or Ocean, so to walk in Gods
ways, and the way of this life, that he may return fresh and purged by
Christ's blood, to the Ocean of the grave, and so drink of that fresh springing
river which proceeds from the midst of the throne of God, in that heavenly
new Jerusalem for ever.

Our whole life is limited but to 80. years, and in one of these, as in a
poisonable cup, or dish of meat, death surely lurketh: of all then if thou
should taste and drink, knowing this, would thou not suspect every one?
divide again every year in 12. months, thou know not in what month or
parcel of meat the poison of death lies, every month again in so many
weeks, and every week in so many days, yea every day also in so many hours,
in which hour or moment thereof, sleeping or waking, can thou secure thy
self from this secret and uncertain poison? suspect then all, and live so
always, as to die always, night or day, being provided, and being never so
young, remember thou know not but the poison may be in the first drop of the
cup, and year of thy youth, as well as in the dreg or last dish of old age,
when thou art first set at the table of the careful banquet of life, the sword
of death is so soon hanged in a small hair above thy neck, suspect then the
same at every morsel, that it fall not heavily unawares upon thee, but ever
have an eye upwards, thou know not if it will fall at thy first sitting
down* more then at thy last rising up; as it ever threatens then, so be thou
ever prepared, and in time seek to redress thy ways* Man's breath is in his
nosthrels; which is the life or combination of soul and body, whose
dissolution is death. Be thou never so young then, nor so strong, when thou
lets out the same, thou know not certainly if ever thou shall draw it in
again. Let therefore thy soul breath unto God, and thy desire be, to walk in
his ways, and to redress thine own. All flesh is as the grass of the field;
now green, and presently blasted: whilst thou art then as the green plant in
thy tender youth, expect ever, and suspect this withering blast of Death, whose
sithe shall send thee with withered age alike, to the grave; and in the short
inconstant way of this life, walk in his way who is true and eternal life.

This life is a swift post, running fast unto death, whose certain steps thou
can not mark nor observe. Let thy soul then begin with him in thy first
youth, and of the contrary run swiftly unto life, and in the way of life, which
is Jesus Christ. Our life is a dream, now present, and presently gone, wherein
who lies longest, and is most pleased, commonly (being awaked) rises faintest
and most sorrowful. Do not assure thy self therefore of the length thereof,
but suspect the shortness: in it there is no solid truth nor rest; apprehend
therefore in the beginning thereof, and in thy youth: let thy soul wake and
walk in the way of truth, Jesus Christ, in whom true rest is only to be
found. Pythagoras the Philosopher, did set out the double course of this our
life by the letter Y. expressing thereby with Christ the double way thereof:
the one whereof has a straight passage and narrow gate at the first, and few
they are that enter in thereat: but in the end, there is great comfort and
rest, for it leads unto eternal happiness and salvation. The other, wide
and large at the beginning, whereat many do enter; but in the end, they find
great trouble and straightness, for it leads unto eternal misery and
destruction. Both these ways are set before the eyes of every young man, as
Biuium Herculis, or as life and death to choose.

This narrow way which leads unto eternal life and salvation, (in the which
every young man should walk in the pilgrimage of this life, and redress his
own ways of youth, according thereunto) is Jesus Christ himself. I am the way,
the verity and life, aad no man comes to the Father but by me. Our walking
in him and with him, must be in righteousness and holiness of life, being
holy as he is holy. The gate of this way is narrow, and the passage straight;
for the liberties of flesh and blood must be restrained, our affections
bridled, and the whole man captiuated under the yoke of the obedience of Jesus
Christ. And as through many tentations he entered into the kingdom of heaven;
so we must the same way follow him, denying our selves, with our crosses taken
up, till we come to the end of our way, which is true life, and eternal
salvation.

The other broad way which leads to destruction, and whereat many do enter,
is sin and Satan, who is that deceiving way unto eternal death (and which
every young man should abhor and fly, to enter thereat never so little, or
walk therein never so few footesteps in youth). The walking in him, and with
him, as he is an unclean spirit, must be in the impurity and impiety of all
sin and filthiness. The gate of this damnable way, in the beginning is
broad, and the passage easy, but the end is utter perdition and straightness.
Where in following Christ, we must subject the flesh unto the Spirit; they who
follow him, must abandon, subject, and banish Gods clean Spirit out of their
hearts, and be subjects and slaves themselves, to the libertine concupiscence
of the flesh, and the unclean licentious lusts and affections thereof. They
must refuse the light yoke of the obedience of Jesus Christ, to follow him to
life, and take on the heavy yoke of al kind of sin, that may press down
their souls to the lowest hells, and follow Satan their way and guide unto
eternal torments of fire and brimstone; for as he is a condemned spirit
himself, so the end of the way wherein he leads captiuated souls, under his
heavy yoke of slavery and sin, is death and eternal condemnation; for the
reward of sin is death.

Therefore let every young man, beholding these two ways, choose that which
leads unto a glorified eternal life in heaven, by a sanctified life for a
time on earth, and walk with, and in him, who is the resurrection and the
life, to all them that are saved. If thy walking heretofore has been in the
by-waies of sin, and that broad way of Satan, giving liberty and full head
to thy youthly affections, and lusts of the flesh. Seek how to redress these
thy ways, and hereafter strive violently to enter in at that straight way,
which leads to salvation; press hardly to thrust in at that narrow gate, lay
off, and cast away far from thee, all the impediments of sin, and the
intising vanities and pleasures of youth, and let thy only care be with thee,
first to see thy Savior, the way is narrow that leads to him; delay not then
till it be full, but strive to be foremost; the way is narrow that leads to
life, therefore not soon found: in the beginning the^ of thy life, timely
begin, and search carefully and narrowly for it; the true way is narrow and
straight, therefore thy steps therein (when thou have found it) must be
strait and narrow, thou must make a covenant with thy eye, that it behold no
vanity, thou must shut the gates of thy ears, that thou hear no vain
profane, or idle speeches, offensive to God, thou must not harken to them; but
let the sound of Gods word, and healthful admonitions, be pleasant only unto
thy hearing: thou must have a watchman before thy lips, and Gods fear a bar
unto thy heart and tongue, that thou utter nothing, but may be to Gods glory,
thy own comfort, and the edification of those that do hear thee, abstaining
from swearing, cursing, lying, backebiting, slandering, iudgeing, idle or
corrupt speaking, and from all things that has but the appearance of evil:
thou must exercise thy hands to do good only, thy feet to prosecute the same,
thy will must be made comfortable to thy Saviors, thy understanding to
perceive and apprehend virtue, and Gods mercy toward thee, thy memory to
think upon his judgments, to thine amendment, upon his mercy, to thy
comfort, and his manifold blessings and undeserved benefits, for increase of
thankfulness in thee. Thy whole body and all the members thereof, which is a
member of Jesus Christ, must no wise be made a member of Satan by sin, or
polluted, to be the member of an harlot, thy soul and heart, with all the
powers and faculties thereof, must be the temple and tabernacle of Gods
sanctifying and holy spirit, and not a lodge for that unclean spirit of sin,
and his fellows of thy filthy lusts and carnal affections: in body and soul
thou must walk so warily and narrowly, in fear and trembling working out thy
salvation. The way is narrow, fear then, never so little, to depart from the
paths of the Lord; this straight passage and path to salvation, is soon lost
by negligence, but not so easily found out again, without great diligence:
care not for the scornful and devilish slander of the world, to be called
precise, but daily more and more, labor so to be indeed; strive to live a
pure and unspotted life, without an hypocritical and external show only
thereof. It is said in a devilish proverb, A young Saint, an old devil: but
endeavor thou, being young, to be a Saint of God, and to dedicate thy youth to
him, and his service only, walking in this strict and narrow path, and the
same God who has given thee beginning, shall also give thee constancy and a
joyful end, that thou may live an old Saint also (as well as young) on
earth, and in heaven he shall glorify thee a blessed Saint for ever with
himself. It is said, and that most truly; Temporis praeteriti, been impensi
suauis est memoria: The memory of time bypast, which was well bestowed, is
sweet and joyful to the mind of man. And let any young man consider with
himself, if God bring him to age, what greater joy and comfort he can have,
then to remember that he has borne the yoke in his youth, (as the Prophet
says) that he entered, and walked then in the narrow and straight way, and now
is come to the easy passage, and out-going thereof, to receive that promised
reward of eternal joys, and everlasting life: where he sees others, who
then entered a contrary course, giving loose liberty to their flesh, fulfilling
their lusts, and never caring to redress their ways, in their old age to be
punished with poverty, punished with infamy and disgrace, overcome with
sickness, humbled greatly, despised, expelled out of all good company, a
pattern of all misery, in great straightness (the end of the way) and
compelled with the prodigal Son, after they have spent all, and abused Gods
gifts, to live in a lamentable estate, and to fly from City to City, from
Country to country, wrestling, if they may to come out of their straightnes,
but falling from pit to pit, from Scylla to Charybdis. And except God their
father give them a mind at last to return to him aright, and half way run
and meet them; that is to be feared, they be cast into an everlasting
straightnes of eternal death and condemnation, which by their walking in that
broad way of carnal liberty, they justly have promerited. What joy (I say)
shall this be to an aged man, to remember his happy estate he is in? And this
woeful condition he has by Gods grace escaped, when for age he cannot so
well eat his meat, this remembrance, that he remembered his Creator in the
days of his youth, and redressed his ways according to his word, shall be a
continual banquet unto him; this peace of a good conscience, and joy of an
upright heart, shall be a staff to uphold his soul, when he beholds the
green field, and pleasant fruits and flowers of his well spent youth, greater
solace shall be to his mind, then the pleasure of the finest decked garden of
the world could be to the eye, his soul shall flow with comfort, and his
heart pant and leap with joy; an infinite treasure shall he possess and see
continually, which shall never make him careful, or the fear of the losing
thereof, put sleep from his eyes: but from death to life it shall pass with
him, and leave a perpetual fame thereof in the world, when he shall die in the
Lord, his works shall follow him. Let every young man then spend and bestow his
youth so, in walking in this narrow way and straight passage, circumspectly,
precisely, and as purely as he can, redressing his ways according to Gods
word, that in the harvest of old age, he may pull and eat of the fruit of his
youth, and find refreshment after weariness, rest after labor, victory after
the battle, easiness after straightness, and infinite eternal joy, after
momentaneall mourning and tears for a season: assuring himself, that his
fasting from sin in youth, shall be a feasting of comfort in age, his sowing
in tears, shall be a reaping of joy. And Christ, the way, the truth, and the
life, who has promised the reward, is faithful, willing, and sufficient to
perform: Reu. 2.
he says; To him that overcomes, will I give to eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God. He that overcomes, shall not
be hurt of the second death; to him that overcomes, will I give of the Manna
that is hid, and I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
written, which no man knows, saving he that receives it. He that
overcomes; shall be clothed in white array, and I will not put out his name
out of the Book of life, but I will confess his name before my Father, and
before his Angels. Lo^, many rewards, diverse recompenses, great liberality,
unspeakable mercy, and infinite matter of comfort, and encouragement in thy
youth to walk in this narrow way, that in age thy ouercomming may be
fulfilled and finished. Christ, who promises, he is the way that cannot err,
walk in him, he is the truth that cannot deceive, walk by himself, and he
is the life that has swallowed up death, walk therefore to him, make him
wholly thy whole way, and wholly holily insist and persist in him, redressing
all thy own ways according to his. Be importunate with Moses, that the Lord
would show himself unto thee, wrestle with Jacob for the blessing, that thou
may prevail with God, and by his grace, he may preserve and direct thee in
all thy waies^ according to his own way: strive to enter in at the straight
gate, as Christ the way commands thee: pray with Paul 7. times, yea 70. times
7. times, and be instant that his grace may suffice thee: with the widow weary
the Judge of al flesh, that just and willing Judge to hear thee, and grant
thee thy desire: with the poor Samaritane woman, beg earnestly at Christ to
cure thy own sick soul, to redress thy ways, to direct thee in his, and to
give thee of the childrens bread, that hid Manna, to eat. The kingdom of
heaven, and end of the straight way, suffers violence; infer violence
therefore to enter in at the same, neither delay any time. Jacob was desired by
Joseph, to make his journey speedily to come to the kingdom of Egypt, where
he was second person. Jesus Christ our brother, whom we sold by our sins,
desires and wills every young man to make his journey speedily likewise, in
the right way to come to the kingdom of heaven, where he is the second person
also. Jacob, except that he had made haste to get the blessing of his father,
he had been in peril to loose it; for presently, as he went out from the
presence of his father, his brother Esau came in: so, except thou make speed in
thy youth to obtain the blessing of God thy heavenly Father, by redressing thy
ways and walking in his, thou art in great peril to loose the same: this
narrow and strait gate of grace is opened before thy eyes, then strive that
thou may enter in thereat, be not slow then, but make speed in thy way
here, lest hereafter, with the foolish Virgins, thou call and knock, at the
gate of glory, but be not admitted to that Joy: say not in thy youth, with
sluggard, Pro. 6. 10. Yet a slumber, and unfolding of hands, but up, and walk
with Jesus Christ in the way of godliness, at the first call, according to the
rule of Gods word, purge and redress thy ways: when that cloudy pillar
warns thee, to go forward, go and walk, having it before thy eyes, in the
way of holiness; and when it warns thee to stay, then stay thy course, in
repressing thy affections, brideling thy lusts and their precipitate course,
redressing thy ways, restrayning the liberties of the flesh, conforming thy
will to Gods will, and walking in a strait and narrow way of life: follow young
Abell, who walked innocently and holily before God, offering the first fruits
of his flock, as thou must of thy youth, to the Lord; and not the broad way of
Cain, in murder, wrath, and despising of God; or of Lamech, in vaunting and
bragging of thy strength in youth to commit sin, (as many young men do.)
Follow godly Noah in the strait way of holiness, and of curbing the liberties of
the flesh, who in that general corruption of time, was only found just, and
found favor in Gods eyes, when the rest drinking and eating, taking of those
whom they liked best, rejoicing and walking in the broad way of iniquity and
liberty of the flesh, were destroyed with all flesh, in that general Deluge.
Follow just Lot in this true way, who remained only undefiled with the filthy
lusts of the Sodomites, and in uprightness of conversation, walked only
before GOD, afflicting his soul every day, for their abominations, and eschued
the broad way of their uncleanness, whoring, oppression, drunkenness, etc.
wherewith young and old was infected, and cried down from heaven fearful
destruction upon them. Follow Abraham, who obeyed and believed God: godly
Izaak, who in his youth was diligently occupied in prayer in the field, and
lived chastely in the fear of God, until a lawful wife was provided for him.
Follow plain Jacob, who esteemed Gods blessing better then all the world, and
did cast all his care upon God (as the Apostle commands) and served in a
painful service, long and truly, without sleep in the cold frost of the
night, and burning heat of the day; also suffered many injuries, and ever
rewarded good for evil. Follow young upright Joseph, who being greatly
tempted, to enter in that broad way of liberty and lust, by his mistress,
refused to commit that vild sin of adultery with her, and chose to walk on
in the strait path of holiness, he walked so wisely, that he found favor in
all men's eyes, and was loved greatly for his gentle and courteous behavior,
and at last was promoted, by Gods providence, to be the second person in all
Egypt, after his straitness in prison there. Follow faithful Moses, and enter
in at this strait gate with him, who chose rather to suffer adversity with the
people of God, (walking in the narrow way) then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, (walking in the broad way) esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater
riches, then the treasures of Egypt, (the reason is) for he had respect unto
the recompense of the reward, (the end of this narrow way.) Israel whom he did
lead, went out of Egypt to Canaan the land of their rest, through much
straitness, and a narrow passage; as the true Israel of God must go out and
from the Egypt of this world, to that spiritual Canaan, the land of their
eternal rest. Follow courageous Joshua, who went through a narrow passage over
Jorden, unto the land of Canaan, with God's Ark before him, and by many battles
overcame and obtained the same; as thou must by many battles, betwixt the flesh
and the spirit, obtain that eternal Canaan, walking toward it in a narrow
passage, and having Gods word continually before the eyes of thy heart, to
redress and conform thy ways according thereunto. Young David, after he was
elected king of Israel, he walked in this narrow path, through many tentations,
to draw him from Gods fear and service, and through much straitness, before he
came to the possession of the kingdom; as after thy election to that
everlasting kingdom of heaven, in this world, during that Prince of darkness
reign, thou must pass and overcome many temptations of Satan and the flesh
likewise, and walk in the strait and narrow way of holiness and
sanctification, before thou come to the easy and spacious end of thy way, to
the full possession of that heavenly kingdom, and eternal glorification
through Christ Jesus: thou must be in labors, before thou rest from labors;
thou must live in the Lord, before thou can die in the Lord; thou must live
the life of the righteous, if thou would wish to die the death of the
righteous, and thy last end to be like theirs. All the holy Patriarks,
Prophets, Saints, and Martyrs of God, have trod this narrow way, before they
obtained the recompense of their reward, unto which they had respect: if
therefore thou have any respect unto the same, and by hope look for that,
which they fully now possess, follow and insist in their footsteps; if thou
would triumph and glory with them, thou must also courageously fight with
them, against the devil and thine own corrupt affection^ and concupiscence of
the flesh, which feign would have liberty, and draw thee in that broad way of
destruction; but assure thy self in thy youth, and in the way thereof, that
the greater liberty of thy flesh and affections here, makes the most strait
incarceration, and fearful plunging of soul and body, in endless and
easelesse torments of hell hereafter: which thou may plainly behold and
learn, by the example of Dives and Lazarus, whereof the one, in the broad way,
had his pleasures in this life, but not a drop of water to cool his tongue
after death, (the strait end of his way:) the other had his miseries here,
without necessaries scarce for the flesh, but after death, (which opened the
large end of his way) he was carried into Abraham's bosom, in eternal joys
for ever to remain; in their life, Lazarus was compelled to beg, from Dives,
crumbes of his bread; at their death, Dives was compelled to beg from Lazarus,
a drop of cold water, there did straitness follow after ease, and ease after
straitness, in their several ways. Albeit the rich man in the Gospel,
walking in the broad way, did bid his soul, Eat, drink, and take it ease,
for it had much laid up for many years, yet God from heaven had decreed, that
the strait end of his way should be nearer then he thought, and they should
fetch his soul from him that same night. Albeit Nebuchad-nezzar (walking in
the broad way also) in the pride of his heart said, Is not this great Babel
that I have built, for the house of my kingdom, by the might of my power, and
for the honor of my Majesty? glorying so in the flesh; yet he was cast into a
great and wonderful straitness, while the word was in his mouth, and driven
from men, as a beast to eat the grass of the fields. Albeit Bel^hazzar
likewise, (walking in the same large way) in the exaltation of his heart
against God, proclaimed a banquet, sitting with his Princes, wives and
concubines, pampring and giving all pleasure to the flesh, drinking wine in the
vessels, consecrated only to Gods service, which were brought out of
Jerusalem, not glorifying GOD, but praising his Idols of gold, silver and
stone, yet the end of his way was this; the Hand declared on the wall, that he
was weighed, and found too light, his kingdom was ended, and given to others,
and that same night he was slain presently; so when he was highest, upon the
top of his rejoicing hill, most suddenly he did fall lowest, in the valley of
mourning, and pit of tears, by lamentable destruction, the unexpected strait
end of his broad former way. The Sodomites knew little how near fire and
brimstone was near them; the primitive world, how near them was the Deluge;
and all such that walk in this way of liberty of the flesh, how near,
subversion of soul and body is at hand. Therefore let us walk in the right
way, if we would sit at Christ's right hand; let us be sanctified here, if we
would be glorified hereafter; let us walk in the true path, if we would
attain to the true end thereof; and subdue the slesh with the affections
thereof, to the spirit and yoke of Christ's obedience, if in body and spirit
for ever, we would reign with him. Let us redress our own ways, and let
every one that calls on the name of the Lord, 2. Tim. 2. 19.
depart from iniquity: as the Apostle commands Timothy, 2. Tim. 2. 22.
and in his person all young men, Fly from the lusts of youth, and follow after
righteousness, faith, love, and peace, with them that call on the name of the
Lord, for if any man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honor, sanctified and meet for the Lord, and prepared unto every good work.

Seeing also, our course of life here, is compared to a Way, which we must
redress according to Gods word, therefore let us walk in this life, as in a
way, warily, and working out our salvation in fear and trembling. Considering
with ourselves; 1. First, as in a way or journey, no rest is to be expected,
that is permanent, until we come to the end thereof; so neither must we
look for any permanent city, or solid rest, in the way or course of this
life, until we come to Jesus Christ, being dissolved, to be with him, who is
the true end and rest, of the true and narrow way, the temple of that
spiritual Jerusalem, and City of all perfect light and joy. For the estate of
his Church here, is, as the Boat, wherein upon the sea he was with his
Disciples, ever tossed up and down, in continual labor; so that, except he
were our stay, our rest, and refuge, we should surely perish. Our life here is
a Warfare, our enemy is ever pursuing, as a raging Lion, seeking to devour
us, therefore we must be in continual defense of the life of our souls, by
his strength being armed, who gave his life for our souls, until under his
defense, having fought a good fight, and finished our course, we be victorious
and triumph with him, having received that immortal and incorruptible crown
of glory, which is laid up for us, and for all them that love the coming of
the Lord Jesus in glory, to glorify us with himself. 2. Secondly, in a way,
we ever go forward, and one step follows another, sicut vnda impelli, tur
vnda, as one wave is enforced by another; so also in the way of this our life,
we poast to our end, and our days pass more swiftly then a weauers shittle;
our life is as a flower, that now springs up, and with a blast fades; as a
water bubble, now up, and now down with an air of wind; as a smoke, seen,
and gone presently; as the fat of Lambs, which suddenly is dropped away: so
that whether we sleep or wake, whether we eat or drink, whether we go or
sit still, as in a ship we are carried speedily, with full sails, through the
sea of this turbulent world, to the port and haven of our grave, and our
refluxe is to that Ocean. Let us watch then carefully, and have the
houre-glasse of the number of our days, ever before our eyes, that we may
apply our hearts to wisdom; let us look diligently to the precious and most
dear loading of our souls, once purchased by Christ's blood, suspect our weak
vessels, and clay tabernacles, acknowledge that we are ever in danger of death,
and that there is little betwixt us and him: foresee carefully the rocks and
dangers before us, have ever the Compass of Gods word before our eyes, to
direct our course and way according thereunto. Behold still the Map and Card
of that heavenly coast of Canaan, toward the which we intend and attend our
course, try and spy out the marks, whereby we may know that we are near the
same, or in the right way thereto; forget the things that are behind, and have
our eyes forward, still on the further bank; and by continual and earnest
prayers, desire almighty God to save us, lest we perish, to give us his spirit
to be our guide and pilot, and by his infinite mercy and grace, to bring us at
last, to that wished Land of our blessed Canaan, with Joshua our Judge and
Captain, through all the perils and dangers of this dark desert. And
chiefly, let us daily strive, as in the way of our natural life: so likewise,
that in the way of our supernatural and true life, Jesus Christ, and his
righteousness, we may make some progress, and so step forward from life to
life, forgetting the world and her whorish intisements behind us, and bending
our forces directly to follow him only.

Thirdly, in a way also, we have ever certain limited bounds, 3. We are
limited.
which we must not transgress nor go over. In the way of this life likewise,
we have Gods word and Commandments, as walls on each side to enclose us,
which we must strive to contain our selves within, and to redress our ways
according thereunto. Christ's voice is the walls and hedge of his sheepfold,
over which whosoever passes, wandreth astray in the fearful and dark desert
of sin, a ready prey to that cruel devouring bear, and raging Lion Satan:
for God, as he is just and merciful, so he has declared and manifested the
same plainly in his sacred word, his justice chiefly in the old testament,
his mercy in the new; his justice he has set up as a wall on our right hand,
that we may fear to sin; his mercy as a wall on our left hand, that if we
sin, we may know that we have a Mediator and Savior, even Jesus Christ the
man: therefore, seeing we are set betwixt these two walls, let us walk warily,
that on the one side beholding Gods justice, we despair not, nor on the
other, beholding his mercy, we presume not, but with an equal eye beholding
both, and with an equal pace walking betwixt both, in fear and love of him,
we may go on our way to our iournies end, and so work out the great work of
our salvation.

Fourthly, in a journey way, or race to be run, 4. We take no burdens
every man, who desires to be at the end thereof soonest, will make himself
lightest, and not take up heavy burdens to hinder and weary him: So in this
way and race of our life, if we have eyes to see the reward, (being a crown of
immortal glory) if we have hearts to consider or understand the preciousnes
thereof, or a desire to attain, or obtain the same, we must not take on, the
heavy and hindering burdens of this world, and the wearisome vanities thereof,
to be impediments in our course, but cast off and disburden our selves of
these dangerous loadings, using the things of this world, as though we used
them not: and in our youth begin and take up the light and easy yoke of
Christ's obedience, and with our crosses follow him: in our hand we must take
the staff of his word; we must gird our loins with his sanctity and
righteousness, and in the footesteps of pure unspotted innocence, must we
follow him, being holy as he is holy: this is the way, Sic itur ad astra.

Fifthly, 1. We desire not our way to be long.
no pilgrim also will desire his way to be long and wearisome, but the sooner
he may come to the end of his journey, the more he will rejoice. In this way
and pilgrimage likewise of our life* let us not desire so much to live long
till age, that our way may be prolonged, but to live well while we are young,
that we may insist constantly* in the true way, and desire with the Apostle,
rather to be dissolved and be with Christ: and with old Simeon, after our
eyes by faith have seen our salvation, and in the arms of our heart we have
embraced him, to desire to depart in his peace, and enjoy the reward and
fulness of our hope.

And in the mean time, 6. Our way dangerous.
seeing in our way chiefly of youth, we have many impediments cast before us,
many fetters and nets for our feet, laid to ensnare us, many outward and
inward enemies seeking to destroy us; and no wisdom nor strength in our
selves to prevent or avoid them: therefore let our continual and humble
petition be to that Lord of strength, and wisdom of the Father, Lead us not
into temptation, but deliver us from all evil: and so in a way of this life,
let us walk as in the way, according to the word and way of Jesus Christ,
redressing our bywaies. And having these considerations, before our eyes,
until by that true and lively way Christ, we attain to the end thereof,
eternal life and endless rest for ever.

The action set down in this question is, Whereby shall a young man redress
his way? according to the vulgar translation, but according to the original
and Hebrew text, it is, Whereby shall a young man cleanse or purge his way? The
first, to wit, redressing, is a metaphore taken from a house, which being
unclean or out of order, uses to be redressed and trimmed up for the guests
it should receive, according unto the Parable and words of Christ, concerning
the unclean spirit, who departed out of the man whom he possessed, and wandered
in dry places, seeking rest, and finding none: therefore he decreed with
himself, to return back again to his former lodging, and took with him
other seven unclean spirits worse then himself; who returning, found the
house dressed and well garnished for them, and there they aboade; so that the
last condition of that man, was worse then the first. And so truly it is in
all ages, but chiefly in youth, that our souls and bodies, (which should be
the temple and tabernacle of Gods holy and clean Spirit, who can abide no
impuritie) is polluted daily with the uncleanness of sin, and defiled with the
filthy Harpies of our lusts and carnal affections, and so we harbor in our
heart (as it were) that unclean spirit, and dresseth up the same as a house or
chamber for him to rest in with his fellows. Therefore in our youth and tender
years, if we would be accounted, or any way esteemed to be the children of
God, to be the members of Jesus Christ, to be temples of Gods Spirit, to have
our names written in that book of life, or ever to exspect participation or
enjoying of the endless and infinite joys of heaven: then let us by the
assistance and strength of that stronger man Jesus Christ, who has overcome
and subdued all, and by the special grace of his blessed and powerful spirit,
strive to bind and expel that usurping tyrant, out of the precious house of
our soul, and to shut him out of the gates and doors of our hearts, that we
be none of his possessions, or vessels in his house, and with all our
strength, diligence and power, seek to redress our soul and heart again,
and make it fit and meet for the habitation and abiding place, of that clean
and holy spirit of Jesus Christ only, being sanctified by his grace, in all
the members of our body, and faculties of our soul, that the Lord of rest may
give rest to our cesciences, and rest by his comfortable presence in our hearts
continually: let us lift up the celestial and everlasting gates of our souls,
and let the king of glory enter in: walk in his ways, and redress by his
grace, our unclean and enormous ways of sin and unrighteousness.

The second word, to wit, cleansing, according to the original word in the
Hebrew text, which is (...) mundabit, is taken likewise by a metaphore, chiefly
from vessels, which uses to be made clean and purged, when they are foul
or polluted with any thing, according to Christ's words, Matthew. 23. 25. in
reprehending of the hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees, who did make clean the
outter side of the cup and platter, but within were full of hypocrisy and
iniquity. So indeed, all men, young and old, we are Gods vessels, either
of honor or dishonor, appointed either continually to remain in his sight,
or eternally to be rejected and banished from his glorious presence: there is
no day also, but we are polluted (chiefly in youth) and desiled with some
uncleanness of sin, and our filthy lusts and affections ever does infect us:
therefore continually we must endeavor, and seek with earnest prayers, that
we may cleanse and purge (according to Christ's commandment) first, Matt. 23.
26.
the inside of the cup and platter* that the outside of them may be clean
also. In our youth, we are as new vessels in Gods house, if at any time a
vessel be esteemed of, or be clean, it is when it is new: and therefore in
our youth let us chiefly try and know if we be vessels of honor* if we be,
surely then we must be most cleanest, for a precious vessel of honor,
ordained to be in the presence of the Prince, is never defiled with filthiness,
nor suffered to be put to an unclean use, chiefly being as yet new; but if we
find our selves polluted with filthiness in our youth and newnes, and our soul
made the receptacle of stinking lusts, and of all impuritie of sin, let us
fear and suspect that, except God of his free mercy and grace, create and
frame us of a new again, and purge us from all our iniquities, that we can
judge our selves to be no other but vessels of reiection, impurity, and
dishonor. Therefore in youth, while the filth of sin sticks not so fast upon
the vessels of our souls, nor the old man of iniquity has not taken so long
and strong possession of the house of our heart (as he may plead long custom
or defend it) let us purge by the tears of true repentance our filthy blots,
and uncleanness of sin, and desire that unspotted Lamb by his precious
bloodshed, to purge us likewise from the guilt thereof: let us by the strength
of his gracious Spirit, expel that unclean spirit of sin, and pleasures of
the flesh, and redress the room and house of our soul, with open gates to
receive, retain, and entertain with joy, that spirit of all cleannes, of joy,
and endless comfort. As Jesus Christ our Savior has commanded; let us first
purge and make clean the inside of the cup and platter, that the outside may be
clean also, that is, let us begin and purge the worm of sin and corruption
from the root of our hearts and the branches, with the fruit of word and
deed, shall prosper the better; begin and purify the spring, and the streams
that runs therefrom shall be the clearer: Out of the abundance of the heart
the mouth speaks: and according as the affection of the heart is, so the
works proceed, and the members executes their command. This purifying is by
true repentance, with Marie Magdalen, in sorrowing truly for our sins, and in
all humility washing his feet with the tears of deep remorse, constantly
endeavoring never to sin no more, and by a lively faith in the arms of our
soul, embracing and apprehending the blood of Jesus Christ and his death, as
our only righteousness, obedience, and propitiatory sacrifice before the
Father, and by good works and a sanctified holy life, showing our faith and
Gods mercy manifested in us, to our lives end, to the good example of others,
and our own souls salvation.

This action of cleansing or redressing, is set down in the future time, Qui
nam mundabit, etc. Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way. Noting thereby
the present estate thereof to be vnredressed and unclean. Whereby we learn
and may observe, first, that howsoever we flatter or excuse our selves in any
age, but chiefly in our youth, that our ways nor course of life is not so
unclean nor worthy of reproof, but may be easily borne with, and soon
redressed oramended, yet the spirit of God in this place of his sacred word
does by the mouth of his holy Prophet, show unto us that our ways are so
unclean and filthy, that it is a very hard and difficult thing to redress or
cleanse them, their pollutio^ being so great: which he would signify by asking
interrogatiuely, how they shall be redressed? And therefore, that in all
humility and lowest submission of heart in our youth, and in all ages, we
should acknowledge the infinite greatness of our transgressions and filthy
uncleanness of sin, which cannot be cleansed but by an infinite purgation,
even by the blood of Jesus Christ, in his infinite and unsearchable mercy shed
for mankind, which we should daily beg, and continually thirst after the
same greedily, walking worthy hereafter, as those who are redeemed with so
precious a price. Secondly, we may observe here, the marks and difference
betwixt a godly and ungodly young man, the one consulteth and asks at God,
Whereby he may redress and purge his ways? the other consulteth with flesh
and blood, and asks counsel at Satan and his own filthy lusts and
affections, whereby he may defile and pollute his ways? The only care and
vigilant study of the one is, how to redress vice, and overcome sin in his
mortal members, that Gods free Spirit may make his abode and comfortable
habitation in his soul. The diligent care of the other is, how to repress and
oppress virtue and godliness, that it take no root in his soul, nor bring
forth no acceptable and pleasant fruit before God, but that as a sink of
iniquity, it may abound and yield forth out of the abundance thereof, rotten
and unsavory smells, in thought, word, and action. The one seeks to purge
himself from the least spot of sin, that might make him displeasing in his
fathers sight, yea he abhors from the very appearance of evil, or the
least mean that might draw or persuade him any way thereunto. The other
seeks the foulest puddle or mire of sin, wholly in body and soul, not caring
to tu^ble and pollute himself as a filthy swine thereinto, and as a dog
devouring sin griedily, (which deuoureth his soul) and returning ever to his
vomit, he embraces all occasions of sin, he headlong runs unto the
brinke of destruction, and as it were with cart-ropes of iniquity, he is
swiftly carried, as the ox to the slaughter, or the fool to the block, unto
the bottomless pit of perdition. The one, for the least sin he commits,
that stayneth his soul, he heapeth and powers out tears upon tears, as a
treasure to be laid up in a bottel before God, that thereafter he may reap
the fruit of his seed sowed in tears, in the joyful and plentiful harvest of
the Lord, when he shall find true rest and comfort to his soul. The other, in
his greatest sins he most rejoices, and with Lamech, Genesis 4.
vaunteth of his ungodly fury and cruelty, of impiety inferred to his own
soul, he heapeth sin upon sin, until the day of wrath, as a treasure,
and with all griedines fills the cup of iniquity to the full, til God in his
just iugment give to him also the full cup of his fierce wrath and indignation,
and make him drink out the very dregs thereof* for as he sows, so he shall
reap. The one sort, being the children of the light and the day, they walk in
the light, and do the works thereof, therefore they shall enjoy the clear and
endless light of that heavenly new Jerusalem, which is the bright countenance
of the Lamb. The other being the children of darkness and the night, they
delight to walk in the ways of darkness, and to do the works thereof;
therefore with the prince of darkness, they shall be at last cast into
utmost darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth. Finally, as every
tree is known by his fruit, so by their works you shall know and discern,
betwixt godly, and ungodly young men; as a good young tree brings forth best
fruit in the spring, while it is young; so, a godly young man brings forth
best fruits of virtue and piety, in his tender years, and spring of his
youth, not delaying, till the cold winter of old age come, wherein either no
fruit at all, or if any, nothing but sour grapes are to be expected: but as no
man can gather figs of thorns, nor seek for honey out of the viper, so, from
those that consume their best age and prime of youth, in all lustful
licentiousness, and outlaw living in sin, and slavish liberty of iniquity,
nothing can be expected, but that the harvest shall be like the spring, wherein
they shall reap the fruit of their labors, and their seed time of wickedness
shall be rewarded, with the measure of bitter and severe punishment; when the
axe shall be put to the root of the tree, and every tree that brings not
forth good fruit, shall be cut down, and cast into unquenchable fire. The
examples of both these sorts of young men, we have in the Scripture, set before
the eyes of all youths in this age, to learn by, and behold. Of the one, whom
they should follow, the examples, of young Abel, uprightly sacrificing unto God,
the first fruits and fat of the flock; as they should the first fruits and fat
of their youth, in uprightness and holiness of life: of young Isaac,
exercising himself in prayer alone in the field: of young Jacob, in suffering
many wrongs, obeying the good counsel of his parents, fearing their
displeasure, dealing faithfully, in an holy and humble mind with all men: of
young Joseph, refusing the way of sin and adulterous lust, suffering
patiently, rewarding good for evil, and being a comfort and relief to his old
father, and his whole family: of Moses, refusing to be counted the son of
Pharaohs daughter, to be esteemed the son of God, and a faithful servant in
his whole house: of young David, in trusting ever steadfastly, and believing in
Gods mercy toward him, suffering much adversity, and still sticking fast unto
the Lord, who delivered his enemies so oftentimes in his hands, and his life
out of theirs: of young Solomon, in seeking the true wisdom of God, before
honor or riches: of young Samuel, zealous and faithful in Gods sanctuary in
his youth, there serving him: of young Daniel, in walking with an holy and
upright heart, before the almighty: of young Timothy, brought up from an
infantin the true knowledge and fear of God, a glorious star and painful
instrument in his Church: of the children of the elect Lady, 2. epist. Ioh. 1.
4. who^ the beloved Apostle of Jesus Christ found walking in the truth, as God
had commanded, and therefore rejoiced: with such like examples, which are set
before the eyes of all youth, according thereunto, to reform and conform
themselves in all things, that they may obtain that rich reward of eternal
life, whereof they are already in possession. Of the other sort, which we
should eschew and abhor, is malicious murdering and hypocritical Cain, who
was accursed of God: vaunting Lamech bragging of his strength and fury to
commit sin in his youth: Ham dishonouring and contemning Noah his father:
Esau, in being a grief to his parents heart, a profane A theist and persecutor
of his godly brother: Absolon, a bloody, unnatural, proud and wicked son to
his father David, whose end was a shameful and sudden death: Elies two sons,
who oppressed Gods people, committed most vile filthiness in Israel, and were
at last the death and heart-break of their old father, and their own
destruction: Ammon, incestuous with his sister, whose reward was cruel death
and sudden destruction: the young men of Sodom, who in their filthiness were
consumed with fire and brimstone: Zimri and Cozbi in their burning lust, thrust
through by zealous Phineas: with many other such examples, of those, who in the
time of their youth, fulfilled their own lusts, and wicked affections, til
they tasted of the full cup of Gods fierce wrath, to their utter destruction,
which was their s^al end and lamentable condition; such therefore let us abhor
with their course of wicked life, as we would eschew their fearful end and
most cursed death. R^hoboam, by his young counselors, in obeying them, lost a
kingdom, to the which he was called: by the wicked and furious hot counselors
of our lusts and affections in our youth, let us not also loose the glorious
kingdom of heaven, to the which we are likewise called by Gods word. Neither
(as the young man's love to his riches, made him to forsake Christ) let the
unclean love, or desire to follow our youthly pleasures, or to fulfill our
filthy lusts and affections draw us from following Jesus Christ our Savior,
and these godly examples and patterns of youth* which in his word, we have
here set before our eyes; but with young Samuel when the Lord calls us in his
Church, to hear and do his word, let us so often answer, Lord, here am I, thy
servant, to do thy godly will, speak, for thy servant hears: while the
spring and seed time is, of our tender years, let us so sow, as we would
reap; and so bud as we would ripen: our youth is the day, to do our works
in; the night of age comes, wherein we cannot work, in that time we shall
say only, I might have bin learned, I might have bin so or so, if I had used
my time aright; but winter is come, before I thought on seedtime, and Times
bald backe-side is turned to me, but the heary forehead, which I might have
caught hold by, is already past: therefore the wise man says, Remember now
thy Creator, in the days of thy youth, whiles the evil days come not, nor
the years approach, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them, whiles
the sun is not dark, nor the light, nor the moon, nor the stars, nor the
clouds return after rain, when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and
the strong men shall ^ow themselves, and the grinders shall cease, because they
are few, and they wax dark that look out by the windows, etc. describing so
metaphorically, the infirmities of old age. They, who stepped in first, when the
Angel came down and troubled the waters of the poole Bethesda, were cured of
their disease; so if we would be cured of our souls disease, and leprosy of
sin, we must strive to step in first, before others, in our youth, without
lingering, to be washed with the blood of Christ, and live a pure unspotted
life. Joseph before the time of famine came, laid up abundance of corn
prouidently for the same; so before the lean and crinkled years of age come,
we must prouidently, in the Summer of youth, with the Be and Ant, gather and
lay up food for our souls, filling the storehouses of our heart full with the
knowledge and true fear of God, to be our comfort and ease in that time, that
here, and in the world to come, we may be accounted among the number, and of
the sort of those forenamed, who dedicated their youth and first fruits
thereof, to God their heavenly Father, and now do enjoy the joyful recompense
of their labors with Jesus Christ, in the presence of the Lamb for ever to
remain.

The answer that is made unto this question, is this; In taking heed thereto,
according to thy word: that is, by these means, a young man may redress his
ways and course of life, if, according to the rule and prescript of thy holy
word, O Lord, he take heed thereto, diligently and straightly marking,
examining and judging the same, and rectifying all his ways and actions by the
direct line and rule of thy commandments.

This answer is made by way of prayer or confession to God, or (as it were) by
resolution from God: In taking heed thereto, Use.
according to thy word: thereby showing and teaching all men, that to know,
will or do aright, as God has commanded, according to his word, is not of our
strength, neither can flesh and blood reveal it unto us, but our heavenly
Father, and it is the gracious work of his glorious Spirit, who, as the
knowledge of Gods will proceeds of his special Illumination, so the acting
and doing of the same, in an holy and upright life, is of his special grace
and powerful operation also, who gives thee knowledge, will and power to do
the same. Velle and perficer^, by enlightening our understanding, reforming our
wicked will, and conforming the same unto the holy and perfect will of God, and
with his command to rise from the sleep and death of sin, to a new and
sanctified life, giving us a power and flowing light and life from himself to
do so, as when Christ our Savior said, Talitha cumi, or, Lazarus arise, etc.
and at that last day, when it shall be said, Rise dead folk, come to
judgment: and so in all Gods word, when he commands to repent, believe,
bring forth good fruit, or so, we must not thereby think, because God
commands so, therefore that we have knowledge or free will to do, or not do
so, but with the command there flows a concomitating power and virtue from
Gods spirit, to the hearts of the faithful predestinate for salvation, to do
this command; as a further induration, to harden the hearts of the sons of
reprobation in their stiff-necked disobedience to Gods will, even as at the
words of Christ, the fig tree withered: free will then and strength of our
selves, to know and do evil, we have, for it is according to our nature, for
by nature we are the children of wrath, and all the imaginations of our heart
are only evil continually from our very infancy: and it is the work of our
flesh, for the flesh coueteth against the spirit: but to know, will, or to do
well, we have no power at all, but it is Gods sanctifying Spirit, who gives
both, and it is above nature, yea, it is the work of the Spirit, against
nature. Therefore let us not trust to our own knowledge or wisdom, for it is
darkness and foolishness, nor think of our own will or strength, that we
can do, or truly desire or know, that which is good, being so perverse and
wicked, but with the Prophet, after his example, acknowledge al our knowledge of
his will, or of the right way to salvation, to proceed only from the
illumination of his good spirit, and that the will or strength to do and
perform the same, is only his own free work in mercy also, and let us by
earnest prayers (as in all ages, so chiefly in our youth) implore his holy
help, to teach us, according to his word, how to walk in his ways, and to
take heed to our own, in greatest difficulties consult with him, who is true
light and wisdom, and in whom is no changing; in greatest tentations, by
continual prayer, let us fly to him, that with his all-sufficient grace, he
may ever assist us, when Satan would not only buffet, but kill and devour our
souls, with the poison of sin, and our own lusts, and in all things let him
be our only refuge, resolution and comfort continually.

In taking heed thereto, etc. this action of taking heed to our ways, in the
answer, has reference to the action of redressing or cleansing the same in
the question, as if he would say, by taking heed to his ways, according to
gods word, a young man may redress or purge the same.

The purging therefore or redressing of the ways of youth, whereby every young
man may insist and persist in the right way of holiness to salvation, must be
in marking straightly, and in taking heed carefully to the whole course of his
life, in thought, word, and deed, directing and instituting the same according
to the rule and express direction of the word of God, in the which, night and
day he should meditate and exercise himself continually, that thereby his whole
life, and all the ways thereof, may be kept spotless and clean from all
corruption of sin, and the filthy lusts of the flesh. Use.
Therefore, let all young men apply all the actions and ways of their life to
this touchstone of Gods word: let them take diligent heed to thought, word,
and deed, mark them narrowly, examine and judge them diligently and
impartially, according to this rule and square, that by God himself, they be
not strictly marked here, and severely examined, judged and rewarded in the
world to come. If they find their ways to be in some measure conformable to
Gods word (for none are perfect) desire Christ to help their imperfection,
praise God for his mercy and this measure of sanctification, desiring increase
thereof and confirmation. If by taking heed unto their ways, and due
examination thereof, they find them disagreeable unto the word of God, then
humbly prostrate themselves in true repentance and contritenesse of a broken
and rent heart, before the tribunal of that great King and Judge whom they
have offended; desire earnestly remission and cleansing of their sinful ways
by the precious bloodshed of Jesus Christ; vow and perform reformation and
conformation of their ways hereafter, according to Gods word, by a renewed and
sanctified life; and to that effect, beg importunately with that poor widow,
from the just Judge of all me^, his holy sanctifying spirit to be their
directer and leader in that way of salvation, to the end thereof. This way of
young men, unto which they should take heed according to Gods word so diligently,
is threefold. 1. Their way of particular and lawful vocation. 2. Their way of
christian and civil manners. And 3. their way of true godliness, the perfection
of all. According to this rule of the word of God, let every young man therefore
(I say) take heed and examine* First, his way of the ordinary and particular
vocation, God has called him to, if in the same he has behaved himself
uprightly, and used aright, the talent that God has given him for that effect:
for to none of his servants, but God has allotted and given some special
tale^t and gift, fit to be used in a special and particular vocation; whereby in
some measure they may be profitable to church and Commonwealth, from the Son of
the Prince that sits on his throne, to the son of the poorest beggar by
the hie way side: to some he has given a quick wit and diverse inclination
to diverse kinds of learning, as Divinity, the Laws, Physic, etc. wherein
severally by every one, his glory may be advanced, and the Church or
Commonwealth in some measure profited: to others he has given of his spirit,
in wisdom, understanding, and knowledge to work in all manner of
workmanship, as he did to Bezaleel and Aholiab, Exodus 31. 3.
fitting them for several mechanical and handiecrafts: and for some one
particular of these two kinds of vocation, that God has given every one from
his cradle, a natural inclination and special gift therefore, (if education
be joined) it does evidently appear by experience. Let every young man then,
noble or ignoble, consider and take heed unto this way of vocation, according
to Gods word, that if God has fitted him by some special gift and
inclination, he loose not, spend, nor hide his talent by idleness, for fear of
the punishment that Christ has mentioned in his word thereunto: for idleness
and delicacie was the sin of the primitive world that drew down that fearful
deluge upon the^; idleness was the sin that c^ied down fire and brimstone upon
Sodom. Prou. 6. 11.
It is the impouerisher and destroyer of a Kingdom, City, house, or man, as
industry is the enricher. The one cries for Gods curse on a people or person:
the other for a blessing. Idleness is the door to let in sin and the devil
even in the godliest. When Adam was idle from dressing the garden, he was
tempted to eat of the forbidden fruit, and did fall, and we in him: when
David was idle, he was drawn in adultery and murder: when Sampson was idle
from the wars, he fell a whooring with Dalilah, and fearful destruction
came upon him. The little unreasonable creatures of God condemns it:
therefore Solomon, Prou. 6. 6. refers the sluggard to the Pismire, to behold
her ways and be wise: and Virgil says of the Bees; Illae continuo saltus
^yluasque peragrant, Excudunt ceras, and mella tenacia fingunt Venturaeque
hyemis memores, aestate labore^ Experiuntur, and in medium quesita reponu^^ Not
like the Grasshopper, who sings all the summer, but starueth in winter: as
many Gentlemen's sons in their youth are idly brought up by their parents,
but in the winter of old age must beg, or try many unlawful shifts, because
they cannot frame themselves to work, nor were not in their youth trained up
to virtue. It is a pity that such should live in a Kingdom or commonwealth,
but have the Apostles Law; He that labors not, let him not eat. And a
greater pity it is to see or suffer such idle bringing up, or rather bringing
down to poverty and destruction, in a civil or well instituted kingdom or
commonwealth. God our heavenly father ever works, in propagating, conseruing,
and governing of his creature, so that if once he should withdraw his hand,
all should perish; our soul also which resembles him, is called by Aristotle,
(...): that is a continual operation. As God then is ever occupied in doing of
good, so should we be; and in so far as we are idle, so far we depart from
likeness to God, and our own soul. The blessed and holy Angels also are ever
occupied, either in continual praising of God their Creator, or in doing his
message, for preservation and ministering to the godly, and punishing of the
wicked, whereof many examples are in the Scripture: the glorious Sun in his
swift motion compasses the earth continually: and assure thy self, whosoever
thou be, that albeit thou be idle from applying thy mind, or exercising thy
self in virtue while thou art young, the devil he is not idle, who
compasses the earth too and fro, to entice thy mind to vice, and lay snares
before age come, to draw thee to destruction and a shameful end. Neither think,
albeit thou be a Noble or Gentleman's son or heir, that has lands or ample
possessions, that therefore thou need not, nor should apply thy mind to
virtue, or thy hand to work: the truly noblest that ever was, Jesus Christ,
God and man, whose creatures and work all Nobles and Kings are, wrought with
his hands under his supposed father Joseph, in the craft of carpentarie, in all
subjection, till the time of his public ministry came, wherein he behooved
to go about his true Fathers business. Jacob a great Patriarch, and borne to
great possessions, eue^ the whole land of Canaan, which flowed with milk and
honey, yet sent to service by his parents, who loved him more dearly and wisely
then many who cocker up their children now, and think it an indignity to put
them to handie-crafts or service, being a great deal less able to sustain
them, nor having so sure a promise that God will so provide for them: yet he
being so great a man's son, thought no shame nor grief to serve full 21.
years in the cold frost of the night without sleep, and hot sun burning
of the day, and when he had many servants and goods, yet still served
painfully, albeit under an unthankful Master. Moses sometime called the son
of King Pharao, was called by God to be the leader of his people to Canaan,
from keeping of sheep in the field: Gideon, son to Ioash, father or chief
of the Ezrites, who had many servants, as is evident, Judges, 6. 27. was found
threshing wheat himself, when the Angel called him to be Judge of Israel:
Saul, who is called, 1. Sam. 9. 1. the son of a man of Benjamin, mighty in
power, named Kish, was sent to run through many countries, with one servant
only a foot, to seek his fathers Asses, that were lost, with no great
provision of money or victuals, as appears verse. 7, 8. and thereafter called
to be King of Israel: David likewise from keeping of sheep: Elisha that great
Prophet, called from the Plough: Amos from keeping of cattle: many of the
Apostles of Jesus Christ, who shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, and
whose doctrines are the twelve foundations of the wall of that spiritual
Jerusalem, were called from painful fishing: Paul a man of great learning and
authority, yet a Tent-maker: and if thy parents (how noble or gentle soever
they be) thinks thee better then these, or thou thy self; then indeed
think shame to work, or to apply thy mind to some kind of virtue or
vocation: neither trust only to thy lands or possessions, for God may give
Satan power, as he did concerning Job, to try thee and take thy goods from
thee many ways, unexpected and never thought of. Seeing also he has given
them to thee freely, as sufficient means to increase and employ thy talent:
and as Solomon says, Prou. 17. 16. As a price in thy hand to get wisdom; if
in idleness notwithstanding, without any vocation, thou suffer the same to
perish, and waste the means and price improfitably, they shall make thee
(howsoever for a time the more honored and acceptable before me^) yet the more
inexcusable and vile before God, who^ thou so dishonourest: for many of these
forenamed, had greater possessions then thou can have, yet labored with
their hands. It is not thy lands that makes thee noble or gentle, it is only
virtue: Nobilita^ sola est atque vnica virtus; and thy predecessors obtained
this title only by some virtuous acts, which is derived to thee; increase
therefore the same by virtue, and impair it not. We read of an ancient
custom and most laudable amongst the Romans, that none was suffered to go in
the public streets without some instrument in his hand, to be thereby known
of what vocation he was of, to show he was not an idle drone in the bee-hiue of
the Commonwealth, and to teach him that whatsoever he was, not to be ashamed
of his calling. And amongst the Indians in these days, before they eat, they
use to take an account what they have earned or won. Justinian, the Emperor
of Rome, exercised himself in the laws, and perfited the law of Nations:
Mithridates king of Pontus, was a Physician, who first found out that excellent
compound called from his own name, Mithridatum: Quintus Cincinnatus, was called
from the Plough to be Dictator of Rome. And we read of Dyonisius, who being
expelled from his Kingdom, that by the virtue he learned in his youth, he
lived in teaching a few youths in a school, and therefore only was called
back to his Kingdom again. Homer, in commendation of Ulysses, accounts
this as a note of great honor, mentionating that he could make his own ships
himself. Quintus Fabius a most noble Roman, with his own hands painted the
walls of the Temple of Salus, and not thinking shame thereof, but rather
cou^ting it a laudable and auowable thing, agreeable with his honor and
degree, affixed thereto, and under wrote his name. Achilles is recorded to have
bin so cunning in cookery, that he thought it no dishonor at a certain time to
show the same, in dressing a royal and sumptuous supper to certain
Ambassadors who came to him. Constantine the Emperor also had his living a
long time (^as it is reported) by drawing. And a certain learned Philosopher
in Grecia vaunted, that his cloak and the ring he wore on his finger, were of
his own making, esteeming it a great praise he could do so. Therefore, take
example of these, that by thy own virtue thou may rather shine before thy
predecessors, then to glance only by their light: study to be called, not
only one of such a race, which is by thy parents, but a virtuous one, of such
a race which is by self. By trusting to lands or possessions, often times virtue
is neglected, and infamy or no fame follows: when poor men's sons, not
having lands to trust to, but leaning only to virtue and Gods grace, come to
great honor, riches, and renown: both which, experience teaches to all men.
The poverty of such as are idle, without any vocation, comes, as Solomon
says, like a traveler in the hie way, or the necessity of an armed man,
which is suddenly or hastily: and therefore it is, that so many Noblemen or
Gentlemen make away with their lands, which their antecessours by their virtue
and hard purchase obtained and left to them, they by virtue got it, they by
idleness and vice consume it. Hence aso it is, that so many old and young
sturdie beggars are in a kingdom or city: education without vocation. From
idleness also in youth it is, that so many miserable spectacles are seen, of
so many that go to the gallows, who behooved to steal, because they applied
not their mind to any virtue being young; dum vires annique sinebant, and now
could do nothing else. Hence it is that so much wickedness abounds, and is
committed in the world, as in the time of Sodom and the primitive world.
Whereby we may know, that the second destruction by fire (as the first was by
water) is not far of. In this clay age hence also it is, that many gentlemen
being shooed in their cradle, and now barefooted (as we say) in the saddle, are
forced (when Fortune fails them, or rather when God punishes their idle
vp-bringing without virtue) to have the cruel wars as their last and best
refuge to go to, and to be set before the devouring mouth of the Canon, and
under the sharp edge of the sword, when in their youth, if they had betaken
themselves to some honest and lawful vocation, they might have lived quieter
at home, done more pleasingly to God, been more profitable to Church or
Commonwealth, in their Country or elsewhere, been a greater comfort to their
friends, and left a better fame and memory to the posterity after them, to
Gods glory, and the honor of their Country and themselves for ever. To
conclude, from hence as from the root, proceeds all vice and evil, as out
of an untilled ground proceeds nothing but weeds; Otium enim ^omes vitiorum
est, otia mentem ad mala multa trahunt: all kind of sin arises from
idleness (as Adams fall did from idleness in his charge, Genesis 2. 15.) all
kind of sin is nourished by idleness, and idleness brings (as sin to
perfection): so man to the end of sin, which is final and fearful
destruction. For God decreed and appointed man to labor from the beginning,
both in his innocence, as in the forenamed place, and after his fall. Genesis 3.
19. In the sweat of his face that he should eat bread, till he returned to
the earth. Therefore, let every young man examine and redress this his way,
in the ordinary vocation that God with his special gifts has fitted him for,
In taking heed thereto, without idleness, or iniust dealing therein,
according to Gods word, that the necessities of life may be supplied, and he
be found rather helpefull then chargeable to any.

Secondly, according to the rule of Gods word, let every young man take heed
unto the way of his manners, to redress the same in a godly and comely form,
reuerencing and honoring, first, his superiors any way, and elders: secondly,
his equals: and thirdly, his inferiors. Concerning the honoring of our
superiors and elders, according to Gods word; the first precept of our duty
toward our neighbor, in Gods Law, commands all young men, Honor thy father
and thy mother, where not only our natural parents, but our superiors, as
Magistrates, Pastors, etc. and our Elders are understood also, Leuit. 19. 32.
Thou shall rise up before the hoare-head, and honor the person of the old
man, and fear thy God, I am the Lord: likewise, 1. Tim. 5. 1. and 17. where
the Apostle commands young Timothy, to exhort elders as fathers, and elder
women as mothers, and says, that Elders which rule well, are worthy of double
honor: Examples of this, we have many in the holy and sacred scripture also:
The profane Hittites, did know and acknowledge this duty to old Abraham,
Genesis 23. 6. Jacob to his elder brother Esau, Genesis 33. 3. when he bowed himself
7. times to the ground, till he came near his brother; Hannah to old Eli, 1.
Sa^. 1. 15. The children of the Prophets to Elisha, 2. King. 2. 15. with many
such: the precept also of the Ethnicks was, Seniores reuerere: for if our
Superiors and elders be not honored and duly reverenced by youth, they
shall not be regarded, if not regarded, not obeyed, if not obeyed, wicked
liberty, rebellion and oppression shall arise, as the Prophet shows, Isai 3.
5. The people shall be oppressed one of another, and every one by his
neighbor, the children shall presume against the ancient, and the vile against
the honorable; and so, all shall come unto miserable confusion, and at last to
lamentable destruction. Concerning the mutual honoring of our equals, let us
take heed thereto, according to Gods word. Romans 12. 10. The Apostle of Jesus
Christ says, Be affectionated to love one another with brotherly love: In
giving honor, go one before another; so that honor amongst equals, is as the
daughter of love, and likewise the mother that begets and nourishes love
amongst neighbors, whereof, some examples there are also, and experience
sufficiently proves the same, and truly, where there is not such mutual
honor and loving salutations amongst equals and friends, by this rudeness (as
of beasts) there proceeds mistrust and suspicion, from suspicion dislike,
from dislike hatred, from hatred, unchristian breaking forth in open dissension
upon the least occasion offered, and so the bond of peace and christian love,
which is the life of Religion, is altogether broken, and cast off, living so,
not as Christians, but as rude, savage, and cruel wild beasts, maligning,
detracting, despising, and seeking the mutual destruction of one another, which
all Christians should abhor and study to prevent. And lastly, of the honor
and reverence we owe also to our inferiors, according to Gods word; the
Apostle Peter in his 1. Epistle 2. 17. commands us to honor all men, for in
the meanest man that is, the Image of God is represented before our eyes, yea,
oftentimes the true Image of Jesus Christ, which is holiness and
sanctification, is most seen in such, which with all reverence, love and
humility, we should honor in the^, and in others also, knowing that we honor
God chiefly in so doing, as by contemning such, we contemn and despise God
and his image, with the humble and low estate of Jesus Christ in them, and are
a discouragement and scandal unto such, moving God thereby to despise and
refuse us likewise, because we contemn so his best members, whom the world
favors not, because he has selected and separate them from the world, and
the condemnation thereof, abiding it. Let all young men therefore, so humbly and
courteously behave themselves to all persons, and of al conditions or estates,
hie or low, that in taking heed so unto their ways according to Gods word,
they may first purchase and obtain Gods favor and love, who resists the
proud, and gives grace unto the humble, who are vile in their own sight, as
also they may gain the love and good will of all men, of mean or great
condition whatsoever, whom they in humility and duty so reverence and honor,
and so they may grow in grace and favor (as Christ did) with God and man. In
conference, gesture, etc. let every young man also take heed unto his way of
manners, to redress the same according to Gods word: In conference, 1. speak
advisedly, and that very sparingly, as Solomon teaches, Pro. 17. 27. He that
has knowledge, spares bis words: and as the Ethnicks command was, (...):
Audito multa, loquere pauca; Hear many things, but speak few. God has given
two ears, as receivers in; but one tongue only, to dispense moderately out
again, and by much babbling, a fool bewrays and betrayeth himself. 2.
Speak not commonly, (chiefly amongst thy betters or elders) except thou be
asked or spoken to, for Solomon says, Job. 32. 7.
Pro. 17. 28. that even a fool, when he holds his peace, is counted wise,
and he that stops his lips prudent: therefore the wise man of this age is
pictured with a padlock upon his lips, for as of an arrow vnshot, so of a word
unspoken (as we say) proceeded never harm. 3. Speak not before thy elders or
betters, but patiently wait, without interruption or carping at their speech,
till they have fully spoken, according to the example of Elihu, Job. 32. 46. (
now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, for they were more ancient in years
then he.) Therefore Elihu the son of Barachel, the Buzite answered, and said,
I am young in years, and ye are ancient, therefore I doubted and was afraid to
show you mine opinion, (suspecting and fearing his own wisdom, in humility,
and giving place unto his Elders, as all young men should) for I said, the days
shall speak, and the multitude of years shall teach wisdom. The contempt of
this, when young men would take upon them to give better counsel to Rehoboam,
being wise in their own conceit, then the old beaten counselors of Solomon,
1. Kin. 12. and the forsaking of the experienced wisdom of these ancient and
grave men, for the rash unexperienced foolishness of these young giddy heads,
that were brought up with him, made him to loose the kingdom of Israel to him
and his posterity thereafter. Not excluding, but sometimes more wisdom may
be learned from the mouth of a young man, then of the most ancient, as it
pleases God to distribute his gifts, extraordinarily, or in greater mesure; as
he did to young David, Solomon, Daniel, etc. and sometimes, according to the
Proverb, Qui plus menti, non etiam plus mentis habet; he that has the
whitest beard, has not ever the ripest wit, nor soundest judgment, always
let none that is ancient, be therefore despised, nor none that is young, so
presume. 4. Speak, as moderately, so modestly, and be not hasty or sudden
therein, for of them that be hasty, Solomon says, Pro. 29. 20. that there is
m^re hope of a fool then of such; and as the wise man has commanded, (...).
ne lingua pracurrat menti, let not thy tongue run before thy mind, seeing it
should be the minds interpreter only, and the mind should speak inwardly to
an end, before the voice express outwardly the sense and meaning thereof, not
setting the cart before the horses, or the plough to run before the oxen.
Periculosa temeritas, rashness or hastiness in word or deed is perilous. And
in all thy speech or conference take heed, according to Gods word, to speak
the truth only, abhorring from lying, as from Satan the father thereof: to
speak evil of no man, albeit thou may truly, and to abstain not only
from evil words, which corrupts good manners, as the Apostle says, but also
from ieasting, which is not comely, and all idle words, of every one whereof,
we must render account at the day of Judgment as Christ the truth
testifyeth: speak all to edification in knowledge or godliness; give to none
the least offense justly by thy speech, and desire to profit all men thereby,
and so as every one is known to be such a Country man or of such a Kingdom,
by his tongue or speech, so by thy good speech and language thou shall be
known to belong to God the wel-spring of goodness, and to the kingdom of
Heaven, the land and country of that spiritual Canaan. To this effect desire
God by his holy Spirit, to purge and sanctify thy heart first, which is the
root, and out of the abundance whereof the mouth speaks, and then with the
Prophet David, to set a watch before thy lips, and a bar before thy tongue:
that as well in thy speech as actions, his will may be done in earth, as it is
in heaven. In thy gesture also take heed to behave thy self dutifully and
comely toward al me^, according to Gods word, without all rudeness on the one
part, or curious affectation of apish novelty on the other part, rather to be
contemned, then any way imitated by any ingenious young man or person
whatsoever. 1. As thou art commanded. Leuit. 19. 32. thou shall rise up before
the hoare-head, and honor the person of the old man, not rudely sitting, or
not giving place to them whom God has blessed with many and good years, but
so doing to them, and honoring such, as thou would be of thy yongers, if God
so long prolong thy life, and respecting their infirmity by weak old age, with
consideration of thy better ability in thy young and strong years, who may
better stand then they, as also before thy betters thou shall rise, or them, to
whom thou art bound in duty, according to Salomons example, 1. King. 2. 19. 2.
Stand, where thy beters sit, according to the example of Abraham, Genesis 18. 8.
And he took butter and milk and the calfe which he had prepared, and set
before them, and stood himself by them, under the tree while they did eat.;
where, notwithstanding, i^ he had pleased, he might have commanded a seat for
himself.

3. When thou come to appear before thy betters or elders, in a comely
fashion show the reverence of thy heart toward them, by bowing the knee of thy
body before them, according to the example of sundry in the Scripture, as
Abraham, Genes. 18. 2. when he saw the Angels a far off, he came to them,
and bowed himself to the ground: also Genesis 23. 7. and 12. And he bowed
himself before the people of the land of the Hittites: so Lot to the two
Angels, Genesis 19. 1. Jacob to Esau, Genesis 33. 3. Joseph's brethren to him, Genesis
42. 6. Solomon to his mother, 1. King. 2. 19. with many others, but ch^efly,
that example of the young man, who came to Christ, Mark. 10. 17. And when ^ee
was gone out on the way, there came one running, and kneeled to him, and asked
him, Good Master, what shall I do, that I may possess eternal life? showing
so the honor of his heart to Christ, by this outward gesture of his body, and
reverent speech of his mouth, in calling him Good Master. 4. Set not thy self
down in the chiefest place any where, but rather take the lowest room, that
those that have authority, may rather set thee up with honor, and thou be
called humble, then displace and set thee down with dishonor and shame, and
thou be called proud: according to the Parable of Christ, to the guestes in
the Pharisees house, Luke 14. 8. When thou sha^t be ^idden of any man to a
wedding, set not thy self down in the chiefest place, etc. But when thou art
bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room, etc. for whosoever exalts
himself shall be brought low, and he that humbleh himself shall be exalted.
Fifthly and lastly, as for the uncovering of the head, and all other points of
good manners in Christian and civil society, according to the rule of the
Apostle generally; Let all things be do^^ decently, in love, without
dissimulation: being as the spring, from whence our reverence and honoring one
of another should proceed; and the end likewise to be love out of a pure
heart, 1. Tim. 1. 5.
and of good conscience, and of faith vnfa^^ed. Thirdly and last of all, let
every young man, according to the prescript rule of Gods word, take heed
unto his way of godliness and religion, to redress and cleanse the same,
which indeed is the most profitable vocation of all others: for as the Apostle
says; Godliness is great gain, 1. Tim. 4 8.
and for bodily exercise it profits little: but godliness is profitable unto
all things, which has the promise of the life present, and of that that is to
come. Solomon also, Prou. 14. 27. says; that The fear of the Lord is a
wellspring of life, to avoid all the snares of death: it is a most precious
jewel, the comfort, glory, and value whereof, surpasses all understanding:
the straight way whereof, albeit displeasant and hard to the flesh for a time,
yet it is most delectable and pleasant to the spirit and soul for ever. It is
a tree having (albeit gall in the root) yet honey in the top, whose fruit
endures for ever. Prou. 14. 26.
And in the fear of the Lord is an assured strength. Therefore, seeing it is
more amply spoken of before, I cease now with this exhortation only of the
Apostle to al young men, Tit. 2. 12, 13.
concerning the same; Let every one embrace the grace of God, that brings
salvation unto all men, which has appeared, and teaches us that we should
deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly and
righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for the blessed hope and
appearing of the glory of the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge
us, to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works, forgetting
that which is behind, Phil 3.
and endeavoring our selves to that which is before, and following hard toward
the mark, for the price of the hie calling of God in Christ Jesus, having our
conversation in heaven continually, from whence we look for the Savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ: counting all things dung that we may win him, and may
be found in him, endeavoring only that we may know him, and the virtue of
his resurrection, and the fellowship of his afflictions, and be made
conformable to his death, that at last we may be fashioned likewise unto his
glorious body, according to the working whereby he is able, even to subdue all
things unto himself. In the mean time, whatsoever things are true, Phil. 4. ^.
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things pertain to love, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, or if there be any praise, let us think on
these things to do the same, and the God of peace shall be with us: here by
grace, and we with him for ever hereafter in glory.

We must redres our ways the Prophet says here, In taking heed thereto
according to Gods word. We must not then read, hear, or know only the word of
God, but practice and do the same, in purging and taking heed to our ways
according thereunto. It is that good seed that Christ speaks of, which must
not only be received with joy, but must be retained and laid up in a good and
honest heart, to bring forth good fruit, according to the measure of Gods
grace. We must do as Israel did, Exo. 19. 7, 8. and 24. 3. when Moses proposed
Gods Commandments, unto them, they answered, All that the Lord has commanded
we will do: not hear or know them only: So Moses commandment and
exhortation to the people, Deuteronomy. 4. 6. Behold I have taught you ordinances and
laws, as the Lord my God has commanded me, that ye should do even so,
within the land whither ye go to possess it: keep them therefore and do^
them, for that is your wisdom, etc. The peoples desire to Moses again was,
chap. 5. 27. Go thou near, and ^eare all that the Lord our God says: and
declare thou unto us all that the Lord our God says unto thee, and we will
hear it and do it. The condition also that God makes by Moses, that he will
exalt and bless them is, chap. 28. 1. If thou shall obey diligently the voice
of the Lord thy God, and observe and do all his Commandments which I command
thee, then the Lord thy God will set thee on high, and all these blessings
shall come unto thee, etc. So 19. 9. Keep therefore the words of this
covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all other things that ye
shall do. So 30. 14. The word is very near unto thee, even in thy mouth, and
in thy heart, for to do it. John the Baptist, Matthew. 3. 8. said unto the
Pharisees that which all men should do; Bring forth fruits therefore worthy
of amendment of life. And now also is the axe put to the root of the trees,
therefore every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewe^ down and
cast into the fire. And Christ our Savior says, Matt. 7. 17. Every tree is
known by his fruits, for every good tree brings forth good fruit: and a
corrupt tree brings forth evil fruits. A good tree cannot bring forth evil
fruit: neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. For do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Therefore, so let our light shine
before men, Matthew. 6.
that they may see our good works, and glorify God our heavenly father. For
as in Moral Philosophy it is said; Omnis virtus in action consistit; all
virtue consists in action: so truly in divine and true Philosophy, it may
be likewise said, that all Religion and Christian virtues consists in
practice, and not in prattling of them only. The fig tree that Christ
accursed, had a fair show by his leaves a far off, that he was like to have
fruit also, but because he had none, therefore by Christ's curse he withered
presently. It is not a fair show likewise or pretense, and profession of
religion that God does accept; but we must with our outward show, have the
inward substance and life of Religion, good works proceeding of true faith and
love. We must not only profess in word, but in deed and action also,
imitating not only Christ's sayings, but his holy life and doings. Luke, 6. 46.
he says, But why call you me Master, Master, and do not these things which
I speak. A servant not only acknowledges his Master in word, but must also
in deed; he must not only hear and know his Masters will, but except he
do it also, he shall be beaten with many stripes. Luke 12. Mat. 7. 21. Not
every one that says unto me Lord, Lord, (says our Savior) shall enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does my Fathers will which is in heaven.
Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not by thy name
prophesied? and by thy name cast out devils? and by thy name done many great
works? And then will I profess to them I never knew you: depart from me ye
that work iniquity. Whosoever then hears my words, and does the same, is
like the wise man that builds his house upon a rock, etc. Seeing God sows
the seed of his word in our hearts, he looks for a ripe harvest of good
works: if he has planted us as vines in his vine^ yard, or olive branches in
the stock Christ, he looks that in him we should bring forth sweet grapes,
and show that we live in him, by bringing forth good and pleasant fruit in
him. Gal. 5. 25. If we live in the spirit, let us walk also in the spirit. We
must not like that barren and unprofitable fig tree, Luke 13. 7. delay to give
fruit to our Master from year to year, lest we be cut down and thrown over
the hedge for ever, in his fierce wrath; but in our youth and tender age, we
must bud and bring forth sweet and pleasant fruits, such as he expects.
Christ Jesus abolished the curse of the Law by his coming; but he came not to
take away the Law it self, and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. As he
therefore perfitly obeyed Gods Law, so that there was no sin at all found in
him: so must his members here on earth, strive in some measure to obey Gods
Law, and to come to that perfection that is here permitted by Gods Spirit to
the elect to attain unto, and that there be no sin found reigning in them. For
there is none, no not one man in this world, but sin is found in him: neither
was there ever any other ways, (except Jesus Christ, God and man) but we must
strive and endeavor, by the powerful operation of Gods sanctifying Spirit
assisting us, every one of us, that if sin abide in us, and the law of sin
be in our flesh, yet that it bear not dominion or overrule over us, but that
in the spirit we may have the law of righteousness subiugating and weakening
the other daily more and more, till at the last by grace, both soul and body
be captiuated unto Christ's obedience, and take on his yoke, that both
likewise hereafter may be in and with Christ, victorious and triumphant in
glory. Amongst Pastors, Whosoever shall observe and teach Gods Commandments,
Mat. 5. 19.
their reward shall be great, they shall be called great in the kingdom of
heaven: so amongst the hearers and flock, Luke, 11 28.
Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. The true Pastor
makes his voice sound like Arons bells, before his flock: And the sheep
hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name, Ihon, 10.
and leads them out. And when he has sent forth his own sheep, he goes
before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice. Where, to see
the necessity of good works, and doing of Gods word therein, we may consider the
duty both of the true Pastors of Christ, and of the true sheep of Christ,
with both their marks, whereby so they may be easily known; the one not to
be Woolues in Lambs skins, thieves, robbers, and hirelings, the other not to
be sheep of another Pastor or pasture. True Pastors here then must go
before their sheep: first, by an incorrupt doctrine or voice: and secondly, by
the footesteps of an incorrupt conversation and life.

Concerning the first, Christ's charge to Peter is; Love thou me? t^en feed
my flock. So that Pastors love to Christ, is approved before God, to their
own conscience, and before men, by feeding only his flock, the woe of the
contrary whereof is set down plainly. Ezekiel. 24. 2. Woe ^ee to the shepherds
of Israel that feed themselves; should not the sheepheards feed the flocks?
Also 2. Tim. 4. 1. Paul's charge to Timothy, I charge thee therefore before
God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the
dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom; Preac^ the word, be instant in
season and out of season, improve* rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and
doctrine. So here is Christ's charge, and the Apostle of Christ's charge, the one
to Peter, the other to Timothy, and so to all Ministers, that they should make
their flocks hear their voice, and sound the same before them. For as John
was a voice in the wilderness to prepare the way of the Lord at his first
coming in humility: so they must be now voices, crying in the desert of this
world, to prepare the way against the Lords second coming in glory, by
Repent, bringing low every high vnhumbled hill; and by Believe, exalting and
comforting again every low valley and humbled soul in Gods presence: so they
must loose and bind, open and shut, set life and death before every one: and,
W^e be to them if they preach not the Gospel: John, 12.
or therein love their own glory and praise of men, more then the glory of
God: seeing the King has sent them out to call all men to his banquet, to eat
of the fat calfe. God has made them Angels to cry before that last day; Rise
dead folk in sin, prepare to come to Judgment, cast off the corruption of
the lusts of the flesh, put on renouation of the spirit, and be sanctified in
body and soul, that in both hereafter you may be also glorified, they have
concredit to them the trumpet of Gods voice, at whose sound the high and proud
walls of the Jericho of every man's heart must fall, and therefore must
compass them, and blow the trumpets diligently and often. Isa. 61. 2.
They are sent that they should preach the Gospel to the poor, heal the
^roken hearted, preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to
the blind: that they should set at liberty them that are bruised, and that
they should preach the acceptable year of the Lord. This then is the voice
that they should utter, and this is the voice the true sheep should follow and
know.

Concerning the second mark of true Pastors, to wit, their going also before
their flock in good example and holy life, according to their own voice,
doing the same. Christ's charge likewise to his Apostles is, Matt. 5. 16. Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and
glorify your Father which is in heaven. The neglect and transgression whereof,
he shows in the Scribes and Pharisees, (whose righteousness except theirs
exceeded, Mat. 5. 20.
he tells his Disciples they should never enter in the kingdom of heaven)
Matt. 23. 2. in these words, saying; The Scrbes and Pharisees sit in Moses
seat: and therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do^, but
after their works do not, for they say, and do not, (as alas, too many such
in these our days do.) The Apostlte Paul also, Romans 2. 21. to this effect,
says; Thou therefore that teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou
that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say a
man should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? thou that
abhorrest idols, committest thou sacrilege? And therefore in his charge to
Timothy he says; But thou O man of God flee from these things, (meaning
pride, avarice, etc.) and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love,
patience, and meekenes, etc. Which many men preaching only to others, may, and
has become notwithstanding reprobates themselves: but the Apostle having in
his own life, first practiced his own doctrine to others, and like a Cock,
wakened and raised himself, first by his voice; shows the like duty to all
other Pastors, in a holy li^e to go before their sheep, when he says; Be ye
followers of me: and in another place adding, as I am of Christ. For as Aaron
had upon his breast, Vrim and Thumim, that is, knowledge and holiness: so must
every true Minister have the same in his breast and heart, the one to preach
well, and go before in voice; the other to live well, and go before in good
example: For I will be sanctified (says God) in them that bear me. And if
they that should be the light of their flock, be darkness, how great is that
darkness? For as Am^rose in Psalm. 119. says, Vita bona sine doctrina ^abet
gratiam, sed doctrina sine vita integritate^ non ^abet. And as Christ shows,
if that servant, that knows not his Masters will, and does not the same,
shall be beaten with few stripes; what shall be to him, who knows not his
Masters will, and yet in some measure does the same? But he that knows it,
yea, teaches others to know it, Romans 2. 19.
and persuadeth himself that he is a guide to the blind, a light of them that
are in darkness, an instructor of them that lack discretion, a teacher of the
unlearned, etc. and yet does not the same himself, but wilfully runs into the
pit, truly he is worthy and shall be beaten with many and grievous stripes
one day: Lord grant, many in this age may prevent them. Judas preached
Christ, yet sold him through covetousness, and was a child of perdition. Balam
said, All what the Lord shall command, that will I speak, yet was a false
covetous Prophet, and likewise perished. Yea, the Devil himself could cry
out, that he knew he was that Jesus the son of God, and so gave public
testimony of Christ, yet he persecuted him, and now is condemned. Many in that
last day, with their true preaching, shall plead miracles also, yet because
they wrought iniquity, they shall hear that fearful Away from me, I know
you not. Therefore let all true Pastors go before the flock in good and godly
example also, in life and doctrine, so shining as bright lamps and stars in
Christ's right hand or family, saying and doing according to the counsel of
the same Ambrose ibid. Nec. vita sit sine doctrina, nec doctrina sine vita, sed
vna adstipuletu^ alteri: and this is the second mark, whereby true Pastors are
known by, Matthew. 7. 17. For by their f^u^tes (says Christ) you shall know
them, for as from Vrim or knowledge must proceed the ringing of the bells of
Gods word before the people to hear; so from Thumim or holiness, must proceed
the pomegranates, pleasant and sauory fruits of good works to be seen and
imitated of Gods people, that as they are followers of Christ, so they may be
followers of them again (as the Apostle says of himself.) The Lord of the
harvest, increase the number of such painful and godly laborers, who may not
only be diligent in preaching, but being zealous of good works also, may
shine in a good life, before the flock concredit to their charge, and by these
two marks, be known so to be true Pastors, and in his own time, remove
these ravening woolues, clothed in lambs skins, who usurp like lords, over
the Lords inheritance* seeking to feed themselves and not the flock, no ways
considering, that if Labans sheep were kept by Jacob so carefully in the frost
of the night without sleep, and in the burning heat of the day; that much
more the sheep of Jesus Christ, bought by his own heart-blood, should be
with a careful eye ouer-seene and fed, tithing the mint and cumming seed, but
omitting weightier matters; stealing, killing and devouring Christ's flock, and
beating out their fellow servants: their separation with hypocrites is at hand;
the Lord grant they may speedily prevent it.

The two like marks of Christ's true Sh^^pe and Sheepefolde, are, First, they
hear and know their Pastors voice: and Secondly, as he goes before them in
an holy life, so they follow him; then as he is not dumb to speak, so they
are not deaf to hear, they hear then his voice* they know it, and will not
follow the voice of a stranger; so that God gives them knowledge and
discretion, not ignorance, to be a mother of their devotion, no^ fearful
simplicity, to be led every where: if the scriptures be hid, they are not to
them, but to those that perish: they search the Scriptures, their chief
Pastors voice, which testifies of himself, they try the spirits, if they be
of God or no; and if an Angel from heaven should lay any other foundation,
except that which is laid. Jesus Christ the Lamb; or should teach any other
doctrine, then that which the holy Apostles have taught, they should hold him
accursed: they are as lively stones in Sion, builded only upon the foundation
and doctrine of the holy Apostles: they do follow precisely and only the
voice and written word of Jesus Christ, their chief Pastor, and Shepherd of
their souls, which sounds daily in the midst of his Church and family,
accounting all other voices to be of thieves, hirelings, and dissembling
woolues: they are in Christ, who is the light of the world, and in whom is no
darkness, Io. 8. 12.
and according to the Apostles command, they strive to grow in grace^, Pet. 3.
18.
and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: so true sheep must
hear the Pastors voice, receiving the seed that is sown; they must know his
voice, discerning if it be good seed or no, wheat or popel that is sowed. And
thirdly, (which is the second mark also of the true sheep) they must bring
forth good fruit thereby, according to the measure of Gods grace in them. The
Pastor sounds his voice, and they hear and know it, and he goes before
them, and this must be their following of him, by hearing, comes their faith,
so by their faith and from the same, as the fruit and effect, (if it be lively
and true) proceeds, and must proceed, this imitation of good works, they
must follow their Pastor, as he is a follower of Christ, but if he be not,
according to Christ's counsel and command, what he bids observe, that
observe and do, but after his works do not, (if he say and do not) then
follow the chief Pastor Jesus Christ only, who has gone before us, in a most
perfect and holy example of life,; as for him, he rises or falls to his
own Master, and is to be left to God, whose servant he is: For, that the
hearing and knowledge only of Gods voice and word, is improfitable to our
salvation, without the practicing of the same in an holy life and conversation
by a true faith in Christ, the Apostle Paul testifies, Romans 2. 13. For the
hearers of the law (says he) are not righteous before God, but the doers of
the law shall be justified. And the Apostle Saint. James 1. 22. gives an
express commandment to all Christians, saying, Be ye doers of the word, and
not hearers only, deceiving your own selves: so that we deceive our selves
greatly, when we think that we have done our duty, when we have heard and
known Gods word, no, the devil and reprobates do so also, but to us, who
look to be saved, by Christ's blood and passion, the word of God must be
powerful to salvation, God working with it in our hearts, begetting and
increasing a lively and true faith in us, which must show it self by the
fruit of charity and good works: when God speaks unto us, and utters his
voice by our ordinary Pastors, we must take heed, if we have that inward
feeling, which the Apostles confessed they had at the hearing of Christ, Luke
24. 32. (for the same spirit which wrought in them then, works so now also in
the hearts of the Elect) And they said between themselves, did not our hearts
burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and when he opened to us
the Scriptures? Let us consider if we have this fire of the moving and
quickening spirit of God, Mark. 13.
who works together with his word in our hearts; let us examine, if by this
powerful operation of hearing Gods word, faith and repentance be begotten or
increased in our hearts. Let us try again, if this repentance be true, by
abstaining (by Gods grace) ever thereafter from sin, that it reign not in
us; and if our faith be lively (by not only abstaining and abhorring so from
evil) but also doing good and godly works, according to our power, and the
measure of our faith, and Gods grace in us, following the example of the poor
widow, albeit we have but little, yet thereof to impart somewhat to Christ's
members, laying it up so in his treasury, and then we are the truesheep; for
the Pastor may preach, and we duly hear his voice; but except he go before
in a holy life, and we follow after in a sanctified conversation, talk that
we have faith, as we will, yea that thereby we could remove mountains,
cast out Devils, and work many miracles (as many reprobates shall plead at
that day) in Christ's name, we are notwithstanding, but as tinckling cimballs,
if we have not charity and good works, and shall receive that fearful, Away
from me, I know you not. Christ is offered to us in his word, we must not
only take him in our mouth, by hearing, but by a lively and true faith, we
must chew and eat him, by unfeigned love and charity digest him, and by our
good works and holy conversation, show that we are renewed, ingrafted, and
grown in him: so that he may be not only ours, but us, and we not only his,
but him: he is that fruitful vine, if we be then in him, we must be fruitful
branches: the fig tree was commanded to be cut down, because it did bear no
fruit: the natural Olives were rejected, because they lost their fatness; if
they had been the sons of Abraham, they had done the works of Abraham; if
we be the sons of God by adoption, and true members of Christ, we must
learn of him, for he was humble and meek, we must be holy as he is holy,
else we have no part in him. It is not enough to hear the Kings servants
message, but without excuse we must come to his supper and eat of the fat
killed calfe, in the white wedding garment of holiness and a godly life. He
that says that he loves God, and yet hates his neighbor, he is a liar: and
he that says that he loves God, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar
also; the reason is given by the Apostle plainly, 1. John, 5. 3. For this is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Command^ments are not
grievous. And also, In this we know that we love the children of God, when
we love God and keep his Commandments. The thing that Jesus Christ (the
first and the last) shows that he took notice and knowledge of in the seven
Churches, to whom he writes in the Revelation, (and under their name to his
whole Church militant to the end) is, I know thy works. Revel. 2. 2, 9, 13.
19. and 3. 1, 8, 15. Also when that glorious Judge of all flesh shall come, and
all his holy Angels with him, and shall sit upon the throne of his glory,
there to judge and reward all the Nations of the earth, that shall be gathered
before him; he shall judge every one according to his works: for in that
great and last day, he shall say unto the sheep at his right hand; Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit y^e the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundations of the world: the reason, For I was hungered, and ye gave me meat;
I thirsted, and ye gave me drink; I wa^ a stranger, and you lodged me; I was
naked, and you clothed me; I was sick, and you visited me; I was in prison,
and you came to me. And the contrary shall he say to the reprobate goats at
his left hand, who did not the same, and must depart into everlasting pain.
For albeit it be most true, that faith only justifies before God, and
whosoever believes that Christ is the Son of God shall be saved; because
God he sees the heart, and searches the most inward and deepest cogitations
thereof; and many has believed with the thief at the last hour, and in Gods
mercy have been saved so, only by faith. Yet, as the Apostle says, Iam. 2.
24. We see, that of works a man is justified, and not of faith only: because
we cannot enter into the heart, to perceive and behold the inward faith: but
by the fruits we see it only, and that a man by such a fruitful, true, and
lively faith, is justified: for good works (which alas in these days are
rare, as faith and love their root is cold, and almost none left upon the
earth) are the way wherein we must walk, to justification, albeit not the
matter or cause thereof: they are not the evidence of our faith, as says the
Apostle, James, 2. 18. Show me thy faith out of thy works, and I will show
thee my faith by my works. There is their nature and use, they are the
assurance to us of our election, and the makers sure of the same, and whosoever
has time, means, and opportunity (as few are but has in some measure) to
do good works, (whereby their election may be confirmed to their own
conscience, their faith in Christ showed and testified before the world, God
their heavenly Father thereby glorified, and his children their brethren thereby
strengthened) and yet notwithstanding does not: verily, howsoever they say that
they have faith, Gods Spirit and word testifies the contrary, and that it is
a dead faith they brag of, (which Satan himself has, and trembles, verse,
19.) which being dead in it self, can never apprehend nor apply that true life
of the soul, Jesus Christ and his righteousness, the godlies only comfort;
for faith worket^ with, and by works, (as the fire does by heat) and through
works is faith made perfect; as the Apostle testifies, and as he reasons,
James, 2. 14. What au^^leth it my brethren, though a man says he has faith,
when he has no works; can the faith save him? For if a brother or a sister be
naked, and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto them; depart in
peace, warm your selves, and f^ll your bellies, notwithstanding you give them
not those things which are needful to the body, what helps it? Even so the
faith, if it have no works, is dead in it self. And after confirmation of
this by the example of Abraham and Rachab, he concludes; For as the body
without the spirit is dead, even so the faith without works is dead. We see
then, that as works without faith justifies not, (For whatsoever is done
without faith is sin) even so faith without works, (being dead) justifies
no man before God, and that it is neither sufficient to Pastor to preach and
know Gods word, except in practicing it he go before his flock by good works,
nor that it is sufficient to the people or sheep, who would be accounted of
Christ's sheep-folde, to hear or know Gods voice, except they also follow and
practice the same by good works, following the holy and unspotted life of
Jesus Christ the Lamb, in whom they hope to be saved. Let therefore Pastor
and people, old and young, from the highest to the lowest; strive by a holy
life, and fruitful, of good works, to show themselves to be true branches in
Jesus Christ the vine, and lively members of his blessed body, and as he who
has called us is holy, so let us be holy, in all manner of conversation, as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, 1. Pet. 1. 15.
zealous of good works: Phil. 1. 27.
Not hearing or knowing our Masters will only, but in taking heed to our
ways, to redress the same according to his word, and will revealed therein,
executing and doing the same, and when we have done all that we can do,
confessing and acknowledging our selves to be unprofitable servants, so shall
we be assured in our own consciences, by Gods spirit, that we are sheep of
his pasture, and children of his inheritance, so shall we be known by the
world, by our confession and profession of Christ in an holy and christian
life, to be members of his Church and Kingdom also, and so at last, we shall
be found worthy in Christ, to walk with the Lamb, when he, who gave his life
for us here, shall give us eternal life with himself for ever hereafter.

According to thy word, that is, making thy holy word, O Lord, the rule and
square, according unto the which, we may take heed unto our ways, and redress
the same. We see then here, first, the excellency and great virtue and use of
the word of God; It is a rule, according unto the which, we may and should
redress, purge and rectify our sinful, unclean and erroneous ways: It is
that breath of God, which breaths life in the face of the soul of man, as by
the word of God in the first creation, was man raised out of the earth and
placed in the garden of Paradise, so by this word of God, (which is near us in
our mouth and heart) is the new creation and regeneration of the heart of man,
whereby his soul is raised from earthly and carnal affections, and placed in
the pleasant garden of Christ's church, to eat of the tree of life, and live
with him for ever. It is the voice of God, that is daily heard in the garden of
his Church, not only asking every Adamite and sinner, but showing him also,
where and in what estate he is by sin and Satan, calling him not to a curse
for sin, but a blessing, and inuiting him to come to the seed of the woman,
to that tree of life, and second Adam, Father and Savior of our spirits. Gods
word is a Lamp, that shines ever in the candlestick of his true Church, to
direct our footsteps in the path to life everlasting, with himself. It is that
two-edged Sword, that powerfully proceeds out of his own mouth, which
pierces through the inward cogitations of the heart, to redress the same, and
divides the marrow of the bones, to give fatness to the soul. It is that
seed, which being sowed and laid up in a good and honest heart, makes every
Christian to bring forth acceptable fruit unto Gods glory, and their own
souls comfort. It is the Power of God to salvation, to all them who believe
the same. It is that Instrument or Spade, which diggeth about the roots of our
hearts, to make us sweet and fruitful to our long suffering and patient
Master, lest we should be pulled up by the roots, ere the axe of Gods wrath
should be put to our roots, and we be cut down and thrown over the hedge
of the vineyard into unquenchable fire. Gods word is that Snedding knife, which
cutteth away the rank leaves of sin, which with their darkness do
ouer-shadow our souls, and keep away that comfortable ripening sun of Gods
favor, to shine upon us; that our sour grapes may become sweet. It is a
Hammer, to beat down every high exalted hill, Iere. 23. 29.
or proud cogitation of the heart, that as Giants would rebel and fight
against God: It exalts ever the low valley, or humbled dejected soul, even
to the throne of God in confidence and boldness. It is that s^^ngstone of the
son of David, whereby every Christian and soldier of Israel must kill that
mighty Giant, the reuiler of God, and enemy of his servants, who seeks not
to give their bodies to the fowls of the air, but their precious souls to
the hell-crowes of sin, and the devouring vultures of eternal torments. It
is the knife whereby the foreskin of every Christians heart is circumcised and
cut away, before he can be in the new covenant of grace, or be counted a true
Israelite in spirit: it is the gladdest tidings that ever came to the soul,
and the true testimony or witnesse-bearer of Jesus Christ; search the
Scriptures, for they testify of him: it is a Christians life; My words are
life (says light and life) and without the comfort of the same, our life is
death, and our light Cimerian darkness. Gods word is a looking-glass, wherein
we may see all our spots, from the greatest to the least, where they are, and
how they may be wiped away, with the blood of Jesus Christ, and tears of true
repentance. It is the sweet Manna and food of our souls; Milk to the weaker;
and stronger meat for those who are more confirmed. A Directer in prosperity;
an vpholder in adversity; and abundant comfort in both. It is a Fire, Ier.
23. 2^.
to purge our ways, to burn up the earthly, or rather hellish dross of sin
and stubble of iniquity, and to refine us as pure gold, to be vessels of
honor in Gods house, before our heavenly Father. It is that Rain or Dew that
descended from Heaven, and never returns undone that, for which it was sent;
it fructifieth either the heart, to bring forth pleasant fruit, and softneth it
to repentance; or as water cast upon Iron or Steel, hardens the same; so it
indureth the obstinate and reprobate hearts of them, who are inflamed and
burned in their own sinful lusts. Our souls and hearts are made sauoury
Sacrifices, with all that proceeds therefrom, to present before the
nosthrills of God our heavenly Father, by this preserving Salt of his word,
whereby no stinking corruption of the flesh and of sin, takes hold upon us;
but thereby we are made sauourie meat, to be presented and accepted before our
heavenly Father, such as he ever loves. It is that Water of life, whereof,
whosoever drinks, in his belly shall spring rivers thereof abundantly. It is
a Cloud, to refresh us in our journey in the day, and a fiery Pillar in the
night time, to direct our ways by the light thereof, in the dark desert of
this world, and to consume all our enemies, to the^ it shall be darkness,
but light to the host of Israel: it shall be hid, and is so only, to them
that perish. It is that bright Light, that shall ever shine in the little
G^shan of Gods Church, when all the Egypt beside of this world, with the Pharao
thereof shall be overwhelmed with thick darkness. It is the Rudder of our
Ship, which must direct us aright through the raging beating waves of worldly
persecutions; and our Compass, to keep our course by, until we come to the
haven of heaven, and port of that new Jerusalem. It is that Rod, which must
divide the red sea of temptations, through which narrowly we must pass, to
the spiritual land of Canaan, when in them we shall see the worldlings and
wicked overwhelmed, and altogether drowned. It is the Arc and covenant of God,
at which we only must ask counsel, and it must divide the Jorden of death to
us, making a way, whereby we must follow our Joshua Jesus, to the land of
rest, and our promised inheritance. It is true Riches, and seven times more
pure then the refined gold of Ophir; It cannot corrupt, for heaven and earth
shall perish, before one iotte of Gods word perish. It is the Keys of the
kingdom of Heaven, whereby the gates thereof are opened to every penitent and
believing soul, and shut to every obstinate and endured wicked heart. It is
the Savor of life, unto all those that are appointed for life, and has the
life of Jesus Christ to righteousness in them. It is the chief Shepherds
Hook, that pulls back our straying souls in the by-ways of iniquity, and
brings us in the right way again, subjecting us to the obedience and light
yoke of Jesus Christ, in the sheepefold of his Church. By it we are fished
and drawn out of the salt and stinking sea of this world, to Jesus Christ. It
is the Sword, wherewith we must fight valiantly the Lords battles: A Trumpet,
to encourage us thereto, at whose sound, the walls of every proud Jericho shall
fall, and which subdueth powers and scepters to it self. It is our Pilgrims
staff, which must uphold and defend us in our journey. It is a most bright
Star, which leads not only wise men, but fools also to Christ, where now
he lies, not in a kribbe, but sits on a Throne, and happy are those stars
or Ministers, whom Christ holds in his right hand, whose only care is, by
preaching and practicing this Star, to shine before the flock. And finally,
the Word of God is the sound of that Trumpet, blown by the Angels of his
Church, which gives virtue and power, quickening, and resurrection, to every
dead soul in sin, to rise out of the grave of security, and put on a
sanctified body, that in body and soul at the last resurrection of all flesh
to judgment, they may pass with Christ to eternal glory. It is that Finger,
which points out the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world:
and as Andrew, brought Simon his brother; and Philip, Nathaniel; to Christ: so
the word of God brings and leads us by the hand, to him on earth, and shall
bring us to eternal glory with him in heaven for ever, if we believe the same,
and according thereunto, take heed to redress our ways.

Secondly, seeing the excellency of Gods Word, is such of it self, we may
learn what great estimation and value it should be of, with every Christian,
as we see the value thereof in it self, so our estimation should be
corespondent, we should desire nothing so much, esteem nothing so much, love
nothing so much, nor hunger or thirst after nothing so much. This estimation we
may see in David to have been great, and his love ^eruent, Psalm. 119. 14. 24.
40. 72. 93. 97. 103.
he says; I have had as great delight in the way of thy testimonies, as in all
riches. Also thy testimonies are my delight and my counselors. Behold, how I
desire thy command^ments. The law of thy ^^uth is better to me, th^^ thousands
of gold and silver. I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have
quickened me. O how I love thy law? it is my meditation continually How sweet
are thy promises unto my mouth? yea, more then honey unto my mouth. The
Merchant in the Gospel, when he had found the Jewel in the field, he went and
sold all that he had, that he might buy that piece of ground, wherein that
Jewel was. Of all Jewels that ever man could think upon, this of Gods word,
is the most precious; in it, is eternal light, everlasting life, continual
joy, comfortable contentment, and infinite true riches: Let us therefore follow
the example of this wise Merchant, so that we may have it, and enjoy the
comfort therein contained, care not what we loose, if we have it, we have all
things; if we have all things, and want it, we have nothing. It is not like
other Jewels, for commonly a man that possesses them not, can oftentimes know
the value of the^ better then they who possess them, but with this Jewel it
is not so; the Merchant was never in love with it, until he found it; we can
never, nor will ever know the estimation of it, until we have it in our hearts.
Peter, when Christ before his last Supper, came to him to wash his feet, he
refused; no, Lord, thou shall never wash my feet: but when Christ told him,
that otherwise, he should have no portion with him, and had washed his feet,
then Peter, who refused before, now beggeth, Lord, not only my feet, but my
head and hands also: so it is with us, before we taste of the sweetness and
refreshment of Gods word, to our wearied souls, and the joy thereof to our
wounded and sorrowful consciences, we esteem of it, as Aesops Cock did of the
Jewel, he found in the doung-hill, we had rather have a grain of Barley, or
any thing that testeth to the flesh, or is agreeable to please our affections.
Gods word, is as it were pearls, cast before swine, we are rather ready to
turn back, and tear them in pieces that offered them unto us, then to give
them any thanks: we refuse then with Peter, the water of life, but as soon as
it has touched our hearts, and our souls have found the refreshing sweetness
thereof, then we will beg and importunately entreat, Lord, not only this
measure, but a greater daily of the knowledge and comfort of thy word, fill my
whole soul with the power thereof, and stuff all the corners of my heart,
with the abundance of the same, let it not only be in my head, to talk of
it, but in my hands to do it, and in my feet also, in thy way to walk
according thereunto. This should be our desire and estimation of Gods word:
for if we be sick to death (as it were) we would esteem much of that
Doctor, that could tell and show us, what, and from what cause our sickness
came, and could give us a present remedy to restore us, to the perfect health
of our bodies, that we should live long; but we have the infectious and
deadly sickness of sin, every one of us, in our souls. Gods holy Word does
show us, what our sickness is, and by what way or means we came by it, it
offers to us present remedy, not to restore the body to a kind of health,
that it may live a miserable momentaneall life, for a while, but to restore the
soul to perfect and true health, that it may live a blessed, joyful, and
eternal joy in heaven, with God and his blessed Angels, how then should we
esteem of this Physician and Physic? To such a Physician of the body, we
would think that we did owe our life, who restored us to the same: to such a
Physician of the soul then, how much more do we owe this temporal miserable
life for the defense thereof? and how can we sufficiently value or love the
same; we would account of him much, who would give us such a right, whereby we
should possess the whole kingdoms of the earth peaceably, yea, or to be heir
to any one kingdom: but so it is, that Gods word, if we believe the same,
makes us heirs to the eternal Kingdom of Heaven, and gives us sufficient
right and title, that we shall be peaceable possessours thereof, in
everlasting Joy, and Glory infinite. In a dark perilous way, we esteem much
of a Lantern; such is Gods word, to our ways of this life: in a dange^ous
long journey, we would esteem much of a faithful skillful, vnburdenable and
sufficient guide, ready to overcome and encounter all perils or enemies of
ours; such is Gods word, in the long, wearisome, and dangerous journey of this
life, where, when we meet with any temptation, if we answer, It is written,
and firmly believe the same, in so resisting Satan, we shall overcome his
temptations, and at last make him depart, at least for a while, from us, by the
strength of this our Guide. In a great and doubtful matter, knowing our own
simplicity and foolishness, we would much esteem of a faithful and wise
counselor: two ways are set before our eyes, one leading to death, another to
life, to the wrong we more naturally incline, then to the other: therefore in
this great matter of life and death eternal, and the doubtfulnesse of these
two ways, at one of which enter we must, we have most great need of this
wise and faithful Counselor, whom we should much esteem and follow in all
things. Moses shows Israel, what the value of this word of God is, and what
value they should esteem it of, when he says, It is your life and your
wisdom, whereby you excel all other Nations; therefore he exhorts them,
never to let it depart out of their mouh nor heart, but continually to talk of
it, going in, and coming out, at home and in the fields, night and day to
meditate thereon, to make it a signet upon their finger, a frontlet between
their eyes, and to esteem nothing near unto it* nothing equivalent to it, nor
nothing above it. Of the great estimation of the word and truth of God, we
have one notable example in the Scripture* of the good and godly king Josiah,
2. King. 24.
who, when the book of the Law of God, being found by Hilkiah the Priest, and
presented to the King by Shaphan the Chanceller, he having heard the words
thereof, rent his clothes, and went to the house of God, with all the people of
Judah and Jerusalem, small and great, the Priests and Levites, and there, in
audience of the whole people, did read the law himself in their ears,
showing what estimation and reverence every King and people should have to the
word of God, we must hear and read it with great reverence, as becomes the
word of the King of all kings, and Lord of all lords to be heard, with the
hand of faith we must receive it, and with all estimation, we must lay it up
in the chest and coffer of our hearts, to bring forth the fruit of obedience
thereunto, as becomes good subjects, natural children, and faithful
servants, in our life and conversation. It is the most precious Jewel that a
young man can wear; the greatest riches that he can possess; a chain of gold
about his neck; true wisdom to his heart; the faithfullest tutor to direct
and govern him; and the most delightful pleasure and greatest profit that
ever he could wish; for godliness is profitable unto all things, and has a
promise of this life, and of the life to come. It is to the aged, their
greatest honor, their truest wisdom and gravity, when sickness and age
oppresses them: it is a comfortable salve to their souls, and the best
company they can seek to, or desire: it is the skilfulest Doctor, that can
best ease the^; and it is the strong hand, that brings them safe and sound
through all grief, dolours, temptations, sicknesses, and the passover of death
it self, unto the kingdom of God, and the eternal joys of heaven. Therefore
let young and old esteem of it greatly, and of the bearers thereof highly, as
of the embassage and ambassadors of the Prince of all Princes, and Lord
eternal, over all Lords and Potentates in this temporal and momentaneall
world, that receiving it, and them, with reverent and dutiful estimation,
laying it up in their hearts, and practicing the same in their life and
conversation, by redressing their wais according thereunto; they may be crowned
immortal and glorious Kings in the world to come, and reign with Christ Jesus
eternally, world without end. For who esteems of it, esteems of God, (his
word and himself being all one) as who contemns it to hear or do the
same, contemns God to hear or obey him: who receives it and the Preachers
thereof, receives Christ, as himself testifies: and who rejects it or
them, rejects Jesus Christ, and the mercy, benefits and love of the Father
offered in him, willingly and wilfully giving over themselves to darkness, to
the Prince of darkness, and to the condemnation of, and with, the Prince of
darkness for ever.

Finally to conclude, seeing the excellency of Gods word is such, and the
estimation thereof and reverence in our hearts should be such, we may
perceive the great iniquity and fearful offense of all those who keep the
same secret, and hide from Gods people, lest they finding this jewel with the
wise merchant, should only cleave unto it, and hide it up in their hearts and
souls: it is life, therefore they from whom it is hid, walk in the shadow of
death: it is light, therefore they to whom it shines not, walk in fearful
darkness: it is the food and physic of the sick soul of a sinner only,
therefore they who know it not, nor will not know it, must starve and die
eternally: it is our directer and counselor, to whom then it is hid, they
wander astray in the paths of foolishness. Except this seed be sown, how can
we bring forth good fruit in a true faith, to a joyful harvest? it is the
power of God to salvation to all them who believe; and by faith we are made
members of Jesus Christ: but how can we believe, except we hear, (for faith
comes by hearing; and how can we hear it except it be preached. Therefore,
who takes away diligent preaching, they take away careful hearing, and who
takes away hearing, they take away the faith, in so far as in them lies,
and so shows themselves plainly to be enemies of Jesus Christ, and of his
cross. By it, we are dug about the roots, planted and watered, and made
fruitful vines, and sweet fig trees in Gods garden and vineyard; therefore,
who takes away the same, makes God in his wrath to put to the axe to the
root of the tree, to cut it down, and cast it (being barren and unfruitful)
into eternal fire: being so slow and backward, when we are often invited to
come to Gods house and banquet, how much slower shall we be without the
hearing of the inuitation of Gods word? We are too barren ground even when
that rain and dew falls upon our souls: but how much barrenner shall we
be, and less fructify, when it does not fall? Happy for ever is that
Kingdom or City, that retains the same in the pure sincerity thereof,
without addition, diminution, mixture, or amission, as thrice woeful is the same
that retains not the same so. The most fearful threatening wherewith Christ
Jesus, that Alpha and Omega, threatens any of the seven Churches, is that of
the Church of Ephesus: I will come against thee shortly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of Reu. 2.
his place, except thou amend. The most fearful famine that ever came upon
any Land, Kingdom, City, or soul, is the famine of the word of God, when the
staff of the heavenly bread thereof is broken. This plague or the report
thereof, may make every ear to tingle: for where it is, it is never alone, but
with it, is the infectious plague of the pestilence of sin, suffocating every
soul unto death eternal, not taking men out of worldly misery to eternal
joy, as the bodily plague does many: but from their temporal joy in sin,
unto eternal misery of punishment. And ever with it, or after also follows
the sharp and severe devouring sword of Gods fierce wrath, and consuming hot
displeasure. It is a fearful thing, when the watch or watchman of Gods word
in the head of the Tower is dumb, when there is no barking about the sheep,
how can the sheep be safe. It is a woeful thing to see godly Samuel removed
from Saul, that he dares not speak Gods word plainly, but must tarry at home
all his life, and mourn only for Saul and his doings, when he is compelled
to answer God, how can I go? for if Saul hear, he will kill me. It is woeful
to see Jeroboam the King, put out his hand and bid, take hold of the Prophet
of God, because at the commandment of the Lord, he cried against the Altar of
Bethel. It is fearful to hear that the Lords true Prophets must be hid in
caves, and feed on bread and water, being dumb, when Eliah knows none but
himself left alone, to plead Gods cause boldly, and must be feign to flee
from place to place, in great necessity, from the presence of Ahab and his
false Prophets, because he spoke Gods word truly, therefore he must be
called a troubler of Israel and the estate. It is lamentable to see, that
Michaiah, for not speaking of pleasant things, as the false Prophets of Ahab
did, shall be beaten by Zidkiiah, a false, deceiving, and flattering spirit,
and sent to the prison house by the King to eat and drink the bread and water
of affliction: to see bloody Iehoram send for the head of Elisha in his wrath:
or Herod for the head of John the Baptist, for speaking the word of God freely:
because Vriiah prophesied the truth in the name of the Lord, to be sent for by
I^hoiakim the King, and beheaded likewise: Jeremiah for speaking of that,
whereof God commanded him not to keep a word back, to be apprehended by the
Priests and people, and to be censured worthy to die the death: to see Daniel
cast in the Lions den: and the three children in the fiery furnace, for
professing the service of the Lord their God: is it not a woeful thing to see
Jesus Christ persecuted daily for proclaiming the will of his Father, and that
joyful year of Iubile for the freedom of men's souls? to see Steven stoned
to death for the testimony of Jesus: Peter and John imprisoned, for the
preaching of the Gospel freely, and with threatening, commanded that they preach
no more? to see the Apostles beaten, and oftentimes incarcerated: Paul stoned,
smitten, apprehended, bound? etc. The beloved Apostle of Jesus Christ exiled,
to an I Will Patmos, and Gods servants the bearers of this glorious jewel of his
word, by manifold ways to be troubled, only for the testimony of the truth
and of a good conscience, which the itching ears of these last times cannot
abide to hear, albeit they should most desire the same: For where Gods word
is not preached, the people perishes; as testifies the Preacher. And the
chief cause, that Gods word is so restrained in many places, the mouths of
Gods servants so shut up, and the verity repressed and bound as it were, is,
Alexander the Coppersmiths profit will cease, if Paul preach; where God's Ark
comes in place, Dagon must fall: and if Jesus Christ in such humility be
suffered to be acknowledged the Savior, the Hie Priests honor, jurisdiction,
and profit must cease: if Daniel be suffered, he will discover the Priests
knaueries; and Elias will show that Baal is no God, nor hears not: when Moses
comes with the Tables of the Law from the mount, the golden calfe must down:
if when Michaiah comes to speak the truth freely, he believed: Zidkiiah and
the falsflattering Prophets, with their horns of iron, should be put out of
credit, favor, and authority: if John the Baptist should be obeyed, then
Herod must put away his Herodias. And where Gods sincere and pure word only
getteh place and liberty, down must go idolatry, and not a relict or hoof
thereof remain: tyrannical authority of these, who with Diotrephes, loves
the pre-eminence, and to rule as lords over the Lords inheritance, must be
trod down under the humble feet of Jesus Christ, and of his word; who
pratleth against Gods true servants with malicious words; and not therewith
content, neither they themselves receive the brethren, but forbids them that
would, and thusteth them out of the Church. The triple crown must yield to
the crown of thorns, and al popish, ethnish, and apish ceremonies, must fall
down before this Arc of Gods pure word: where the word of Christ, who came
to serve, gets right place, gracious Lord, must cease; Caeser must have that
which belongs to him: and all pastors with Paul, must grant themselves to
be servants only to Christ's flock for his cause: their right title is the
most honorable that they can have, even the title which Jesus Christ is called
by; to be Sheepheards of souls: where Gods word shines, their shining before
the flock must not be in gold and silks, but in good works: where Gods word
rules, their rule and government must be only by Gods word; their scepter,
that scepter which subjects scepters to it self; their crown, their flock:
you are my crown, says Paul: their sword, not temporal, nor Caesar's, but that
two-edged sword that is in Christ's mouth, Gods; and all their authority from
Christ's commission only, As my Father sent me; so I send you: where Gods
sacred Law comes, there they must not worship the golden calfe of profit
only: neither can Alexanders Diana be so fat unto him, but with Moses they
must look only for the reward of God: Christ's kingdom is not of this world,
in it then they must not look for any recompense: Paul says, I have fought a
good fight, etc. from henceforth is laid up for me a crown, etc. there is the
reward he looked for. I go (says Christ) to my Father to prepare a place for
you: this is Christ's promise; For in the world you shall have affliction: and
if you were of the world, the world should love you, but because you are not,
as I am not, therefore it hates you. In it then, nor of it, Pastors must not
think their reward to be: and if in the world, and of the same, they have
here their reward, it is to be feared that they shall never have any other; but
as the world loves the^, and they the world again, that their condemnation is
like to be with the world also. Therefore, where Christ's word takes place,
worldly profit and full bags must depart: and albeit the Minister must live
of the Altar, to supply necessity, yet Christ, for Christ, and his glory
only, must be preached, pride in the hie Priests; and avarice in Judas, was
the first betraier of Christ: pride and avarice now is, and ever shall be, the
only betraier of Christ and his cause, and they know little the power of Christ
in their heart or soul, as they preach his name with their mouth, who with
Zebedeus sons here, seeks only for their preferme^t, because they have
followed him: but they who truly follow him, must deny here, se suos, and
sua, take up their cross and follow him. The same is his answer to all
Ministers, as it was to Peter, who when he asked what they should have,
because they followed him: he answered, that they should sit on twelve seats
with him, and judge the twelve Tribes of Israel: so he says to every Minister,
that follows him truly as they did, not that he shall be so or so powerful
in the world, for he has chosen the weak ones of the world; but that he
shall sit at his right hand with him in his kingdom, when he shall judge all
the Tribes and Nations of the world: they then who pertain unto that kingdom,
will desire that great reward and honor, only more then all the honor and
kingdoms of the world, with their glory, esteeming all as dung to win Christ,
and many souls unto Christ, to know the power of his death and resurrection in
themselves, and see it in their flocks. But who pertain not to this kingdom,
they will prefer their own profit before all things: and if the preaching of
Gods word hinder or take away their profit, with Alexander; that Diana go not
down, they will stir up kings, kingdoms, cities, rulers and people, against
Paul and his preaching; and if thirty pennies may be had, Christ Jesus shall
be betrayed with a kiss: If this light and fire of Gods word should come in
place, it would consume, like Moses rod or serpent, the serpentine and
profitable fire of purgatory: If it were preached plainly unto Gods people,
and to the souls of men, that we must come only to Christ, who call^th and
commands us; ask of the Father, who can deny us nothing through him,
according to his will; and that the King, against whom we commit the offense,
only can forgive the same. Where should the golden pardons of the Pope go, or
the profit of the confessors, if it be preached, that Christ the Master, had
not a hole to repose his head in, nor so much money as could pay tribute for him
and ^or Peter? And if it be reported how Peter, Acts. 3. said, Silver or gold
have I none; where shall the princely palaces of the servants go, and the
great treasured heaps of gold they lay up? Paul soiourned in a poor Tanners
house that dressed leather, and when he sent for his cloak and his scrolles,
he makes no mention of any great treasure; but he laid up his treasure in
heaven, where the moath, the canker, nor the thief could not come, gaining
and treasuring by his Talent, many souls to God. Peter got a great treasure,
and conquesed much, when at his Sermon so many souls were converted to Christ,
and joined to the Church. But these fat woolues, and dumb dogs, they care
not for such a treasure or conquest; woe be to them, for they do not the work
of the Lord at all, let it be negligently, woe be to the^, for they preach not
the Gospel, they feed themselves and not the flock. It is sufficient for
them to have a Lambs skin, the name of a christian, although they never felt
the power of Christ to be called Bishop, or Pastor, albeit they never
ouer-see, nor can ouer-see, not their flock, but the flocks, the sheep never
heard nor knew their pastoral voice, but their thundering tyrannical
jurisdiction; they call not, nor can they call their own sheep by name,
because they have not any particular flock, they lead them not out to pasture,
neither can their sheep follow the^, because they go not before, except it be
by wicked example, and giving offense, they come not in at the door, by Christ
and his ordinary lawful calling, but climbes up another way, by man^pleasing,
briberie, simonie, honors, to theeue, and to rob, kill and destroy, like that
wicked steward, drinking, eating, and glutting themselves with worldly honors
and riches, and with the blood of the sheep, but beating out of Christ's
sheepfold and house, their painful fellow servants, that seeks the life and
feeding of the sheep only: they will neither enter themselves, nor suffer
others to enter; they will neither come nor bring to Christ, neither will they
suffer others: many souls perish in their default; and great shall be their
condemnation who do so, in the world to come; they have the sheep-hooke in
their hand, but never applies it to bring them into Christ's sheepfold; they
have the form of cloven tongues upon their heads, but not the cloven tongue of
Gods Spirit in their heads or hearts, to divide the word aright, and distribute
the same unto Gods people.

The world with the riches and glory thereof, which Satan offered to Christ,
is sufficient to make them fall down and worship him, the world and the
kingdom thereof, sounds sweetly in their ears, because they are in love one
with another, and their condemnation is all one; but the word of God, It is
written, and the voice of the kingdom of heaven, is as displeasant unto them,
as the same It is written, was to Satan: Sell all and follow me, was a hard
saying to the rich yonug man: they being of the world, to be selected from
the world, is as bitter a saying to them, yea, more bitter to the worldly, the^
that potion, which the world gave to Christ on the Cross, vinegar and gall
mixed together. Flint from flint may be sooner pulled asunder, and the hardest
Adamant or Diamond divided, then to divide and divorce them from their sweet
Dalilah the world, and to do that, Gods word shall never get place by them.
These are the causes, that that bright Candle is put under a bushel by them;
that that glorious City is placed in a low valley; that that precious ^ewell
is hid under the earth, lest it be found, and had only in estimation, to be
hid in men's hearts: for if so be that the stronger man enter, the usurper
shall be bound, and cast out straight; if light come, darkness shall depart,
as the morning clouds are driven before the Sun: set up Gods Kingdom and
Laws, and put down their kingdom and laws: God and Belial cannot be
together: the advancement of the Throne of Jesus Christ the Lamb, is the
detruding of these goats out of their throne; the divulgating of his word, is
the falsifying of theirs; therefore they strive to prolong the night, as long
as they may, that the bright day star arise not, that Light that shines in
darkness, to discover them and their works. The cause also, why many men,
chiefly young men esteem not, nor take such delight in Gods word, as they
should; and care not much, albeit it were hid, that they never heard it much,
is, because man's nature chiefly in youth, affects liberty of the flesh,
which, it (being the word of the Spirit) fights against, and restrains. It
is the limits of that narrow way, which leads to life, and therefore will not
suffer liberty, to wander astray in the wide and wild fields of sin to
death: it is the knife that opens the soar, and will have strictness first,
that ease may follow after: when we sin, never so little, it will, like a
good master, check us, like a loving father, reprove us, and like a wise
counselor, admonish us, which checking, reproof or admonishing, yea, for
great offenses, youth can scarce abide. Jesus Christ commanded the young man in
the Gospel, that he should leave all, and follow him, if he would have
eternal life; Jesus Christ now, commands also in his word, all young men,
that they leave all their pleasures, lusts of youth, and vanities, and follow
his strict and holy life, if they would have eternal life, Knowing, that all
tbat are baptized into Jesus Christ, Romans 6. 3. 4*
are baptized in his death: and like as he was raised up from the dead, by the
glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life. His word
commands us to fly from the lust: 2. Tim 2. 22.
of youth, and follow after righteousness, faith, love and peace, 1. Pet. 5. 5.
the younger to submit themselves unto their elders, and every one to another,
to deck themselves inwardly with lowliness of mind, without fornication,
adultery, drunkenness, whoredom, etc. knowing* that they who do so, Ephesians. 5. 3
4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 7.
shall never inherit the kingdom of heaven: Eschewing all filthiness, (for
God has not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness) all foolish
talking, neither mocking or ieasting, which are things uncomely, and giving no
place unto the devil, putting away all bitterness and anger, with evil
speaking, and all maliciousness, being courteous one to another, and tender
hearted, forgiving one another, as God for Christ's sake forgave us, and iu all
things being followers of God, as dear children, glorifying him in body and in
spirit, for they are Gods. Which commandments of Gods word, are hard and
unpleasant unto youth, except it be seconded with grace. Therefore all young
men should desire this assisting and renewing grace of God. Ephesians. 5. 16.
Redeeming the time, for the days are evil. And that considering the season,
Romans 13. 11.
that it is now time, that we should arise frrom sleep for now is our
salvation nearer, then we believed it; the night is past, and the day is at
hand; let us therefore cast away the works of darkesnesse* and let us put on
the armor of light. So that we walk honestly, as in the day: not in gluttony
and drunkenness neither in chambering and wantonness, nor in strife and
eni^ying: 1. These. 4: 7.
but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and take no thought for the flesh, to
fulfill the lust, of it: and (...), 2. Tim. 3. 21.
as he who despises these things, despises not man but God: So, if any man
purge himself from thes^^ he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and
meet for the Lord, and prepared unto every good work.

Amen.

