A necessary Discourse concerning the right which the house of Guyze pretends
to the Crown of France.

Faithfully translated out of the French



AT LONDON, Imprinted for Edward Aggas. 1586.

A discourse concerning the pretended right of the house of Guyze to the house
of France.
IT is commonly known thorowout this Realm that the house of Lorraine
attributes to it self the right of ye Crown of France, to ye proving whereof
such Chronickles and Genealogies as in ye days of the late King Henry the
second they falsified might easily be recovered, as also the consultations by
them holden concerning their title in the time of the late King Frances the
second, together with those remembrances which in the reign of the late King
Charles the ninth, yea and even unto this day have been scattered among the
people, still advancing by such devises their practizes and devises, according
as the subuertion of this poor Estate does seem to grow on by means of
Civil Wars where through the lawful Princes power being deminished, the
sinews weakened and the path to novelties prepared, they have promised to them
selves place in their pretended seat, by thrusting forth of those whom they
account usurpers. These matters having many times been opened to their
Majesty's, they have been so far from believing them to be other then
sclanders invented upon some similitudes of truth by such as maliced or envied
this famelie, that the same notwithstanding, they have committed into their
hands as well the weapons as authority royal: yea, and under pretense of
Romish Religion have permitted them to practice Leagues in this Estate, that
is, to prepare their factions and partakers to the first occasion, and as it
were to make trial of the Crown upon their heads, which have so hartened
some Doctors of Sarbonne that they have presumed in argument to grant that a
Prince or King failing in his duty to the Romish Church, may by the same be
dispossessed of his Crown: yea and some Munckes to the contempt of the King
and derogation of the Princes of his blood, have preached forth the praises of
those vndertwigges or borgeons (as they term them) of Charlemaigne,
admonishing their auditors to cast their eyes upon them, as upon the perfect
restorers of the Church and Estate, all which notwithstanding, no man has had
regard thereto, or controulled such presumption, as if the fortune of this
Realm were grown fatally to be dismembered in these our days, and that
properly by this famelie.

To the end therefore to cut off all doubts and manifestly to enter into
consideration and notice of this matter, I am most humbly to beseech my Lord
the King and all Princes which have the honor to apperteine unto him diligently
to peruse a Book entitled the Genealogies of Lorrain and Bar which (...)
lately printed at Paris, wherein they shall even word by word find the same to
have been published at this time to the only end to enstruct every one in the
pretended right of the house of Lorraine to this Crown, and of such injury as
they suppose that the house of France does unto them, thereby to prepare the
people against that alteration, which they imagine to be at hand, shall fall
out. But because the vollume is large, the poison diversely dispersed through
all parts, cloked and covered under sundry fables, I have thought good herein
word for word to examine and note the principal points and grounds thereof.
This Book is written in Latin by one Frances of Roziers of Bar-le-duc
Archdeacon of Thoul in Lorrain, and dedicated to my Lord of Lorrain: which also
to the end it may have the more free passage is printed with ye Kings
Privilege by one William Chaudier a Printer. To come therefore to the matter.
It is evidently known yt since the Francons first inhabited France by them
surnamed Gaul, we have had three stocks of Kings to reign over us. viz.
Merouingians descended of Merouee, Carlinghes proceeding from Charlemaigne, and
Capetz whose posterity does yet reign in our Kings: as also it is not
unknown that the Lorraines do pretend to the Crown as heirs to
Charlemaigne, but if this Author may be believed the same is to them due, even
from the Croyan horse, whereof Merouee and his posterity defrauded them before
any of these three families had interest therein, so as by that Law which
says there is no prescription against the Church or Prince all our Kings from
the first to the last have been usurpers, and the true heir to the French
Crown remained in the family of the Dukes of Mosellane from whom the house of
Lorraine do fetch their original. These are the Authors very words in the
third Book Capital jest 44. 45. etc. Pharamond who first brought the Francons
into France, had by his wife Basine daughter to the K. of Thuring sundry
children of whom the eldest was Clodio le Cheuelu or the hearie: This Clodio
among the rest had two sons Ranchair and Alberick. Ranchair had three sons
Ranchair the second, Richer and Rainald, who long time kept the Country of
Cambray against the Merouingians, but were in the end subdued by the power of
Clouis K. of Fran^ce, who with his own hands murdered them as before he had
done their father Ranchair the first. Thus fell the right of eldership to
Alberick the second son of Clodio, who notwithstanding he was K. of the East
Frenchmen, did not nevertheless succeed his father Clodio because Merouee had
gotten the Crown. This poor Alberick after his fathers decease retired into
the lands of Aussois, Moselle, and Arden, etc. where so well as he might, he
kept himself out of the way from their fury. Again. Consider with your
selves the case of this poor Prince, who being of the Royal family was not
only deprived of his Realm, but also through the cruelty of Merouce, who
sought utterly to root out the race of Clodio, forced to hide himself:
wherefore he withdrewe himself to Montz in Henault, there to expect the issue
of the tyranny of Merouee and his posterity, after he had in vain had
recourse to the army of Attila for his reestablishment. But if you ask him of
whence this Merouee the usurper of the Crown from the predecessors of the
Lorrains, and the first original of our Kings of France was, he was (says he)
a bastard to Clodio, or as others affirm a Capteyn or kinsman of his, who by
Clodio him self being made tutor to his children in respect of their youth,
defrauded the pupilles of their estate. Then he goes on and says: Vaubert
discending from Clodio by this Alberick, was overthrown by Clotaire K. of
France, who was in fear least he should obtain the Crown, but was forcibly
again restored by Thierry K. of the Ostrogoths. Likewise that this offspring of
Merouee, namely the race of Clouis seeing Ansbert the son of Vaubert to be a
man of great hope, seking to establish their Kingdom, endeavored to put him to
death, but he being secretly conveyed away was carried to Room, where he was
brought up with the Emperor Zeno. To be brief, that still they lived in
danger of their lives until the marriage of the said Ansbert unto Blitild K.
Clotair the seconds daughter, of whom issued Arnold Duke of Mosellane, to whom
as well for the said alliance, as also that they found their Realm reasonably
established, they showed themselves more courteous. Wherefore now mark after
what sort he brings the house of Lorraine now living to the succession of
this Clodio and his son Alberick, and so consequently of their rights and
titles. From Alberick he leads us as it were by a direct line unto Arnolph
the son of Arnould and Doda the daughter of the K. of Saxony, who among the
rest had two sons: The first Clodulph and Anchises the younger: From the first
he brings the Dukes of Mosellane and Lorraine, and from the other
Charlemaigne and his posterity in this manner.

Clodulph Duke of Mosellane, whose Country was greater then all Lorraine.
Anchises Clodulphes younger Brother married Begghe Daughter to Pepin of the
laundes Duke of Brabant by whom he had. Martin. Pepin Heristell, and so
successively. Eleuthere, dyed without issue. Charles Martel son to Pepin
Heristell by Alpaide his Concubine. Lambert son to Martin and brother to
Eleuthere. Pepin the Short. Frederick. Charlemaigne. Sadigere. Jews the Meek.
Rainier the first Duke of Lorraine, not hereditarie, but invested by Charles
the simple in the said Duchy. Charles the Balde. Jews the Stammerer.
Gilbert, eldest son to Rainier. Jews the fourth. Lothair. Henry, died
without issue Jews the 5. dyed without issue. Bona daughter to Ricint second
son to Rainier and brother to Gilbert married to Charles D. of Lorraine.
Charles D. of Lorraine, brother to Lothaire, and uncle to Jews the fifth after
his Neuewes decease without issue was defrauded of the Crown by Hugh Capet,
married Bona daughter to Ricint Wherefore. Bona, daughter to Ricint descended of
Clodulph the elder son of Clodios family, who pretended them selves to be
robbed of the Crown by Merouee and his posterity. married Charles D. of
Lorraine descended of Anchises the younger family of Clodio, of whom are come
Charlemaign and his offspring. Thus do we by their saying see the line of the
elder house of the Clodios, which had long been preserved in the Dukes of
Mosellane and Lorraine fallen here to the distaffe, so as at this day there
appear no other of this stock but the same which is grafted into ye younger.
That is, the ligne of To this Charles brother to Lothair and the first that
obtained the enheritaunce in the Duchy of Lorrain, after the decease of his
brother Jews belongd ye Crown of France by his succession to Charlemaigne:
Also because he married Bona the Daughter of Ricint the two rights do Clodio
into the house of Charlemaigne, by this marriage of Bona unto Charles Duke of
Lorraine of whom came Ottho, Gerberghe and Hermingarde. Gerberghe in her first
marriage was joined with Rainier Earl of Montz and in second with Lambert Earl
of Louaine, and Hermingard was married first to Albert Earl of Namure, whose
posterity do yet live, says he, in the houses of Lorraine and the Capetz.
But because Hugh Capet obtained the Crown, the house of Lorraine pretend them
selves to be the only aftertwigges and bourgeons of Charlemaigne and in the
right of Charles aforesaid, even from Clodio ye Crown of France. Howbeit, since
they can not deny but this Ottho ye only son to Charles seem to join in the
issue of this marriage, viz. the right pretended by the Dukes of Mosellane
against the Merouingia^s, who, as is aforesaid, seem to have deprived ye
Clodios, and the right of the house of Charlemaigne, which so long time and so
peacealy they had enjoyed: which two rights and titles (to take away all
difficulties) do together comprehend whatsoever may be required: namely, the
propriety belonging to Bona by the succession of Clodulph, the elder of the
family of the Clodios and the possession fallen into ye house of Charlemaign
from the ligne of the said Charlemaigne, drawn from Anchises the younger house
of the Clodios, and thus should these two rightes and titles belong to the
children begotten of the dyed without issue, and so consequently his titles and
pretenses with him, let us see how in their Genenealogies they patch up this
breach. said Charles and Bona, and their posterity who^ this author faineth
those of the house of Lorcaine to be.

Ottho then, says he, son to Charles and Bona being invested in the Duchy
of Lorraine by the Emperor, whose part after his fathers example he took,
seeing himself out of hope of children, did by the said Emperors consent
adopt for his son Geoffrey le Barbu Earl of Arden and brother to his mother
Bona daughter to Recinde, or, as others say, his brothers son, who so
restored the masculine ligne of Clodio in Lorraine. viz. the son of Recinde
the son of Rainier, etc. discending from Clodulph the eldest son of that
family, as is aforesaid: And thus shall we find the two titles united in the
person of Geoffrey le Barbu: that is, the right and title of the Clodios as
being from them issued, and the right of Carlinghes or issue of Charlemaigne,
as being by Ottho Duke of Lorrain adopted into that house. Whereby in case any
of the titles be called in question, they may choose to which they will cleave.
And thus consequently they follow on from father to son in this manner.

Geoffery le Barbu coming of Clodio by Ricinde Rainier, etc. and adopted by
Ottho Duke of Lorrain and son to Charles had issue.

Gothelo, who had

Geoffrey the 4. who had

Geoffrey le Bossue, or with the crouched back, who dyed without issue,
leaving to succeed him one only sister named Itte, by whom both the titles
aforesaid of the Clodios and Carlinghes fell to the Distaffe, who married (say
their Chronikles) with Eustace Earl of Boulogne, whom the said Geoffrey
adopted into his succession.

Thus again because here also is interruption, they supplye their want with an
other adoption as before, saying that Geoffrey le Bossue did by the consent
also of the Emperor adopt this Eustace for his son in consideration of his
marriage with his sister Itte, and the^ by this adoption they mean to give to
understand that the titles and pretenses of the house of Clodio are into him
and his heirs grafted and incorporate. And further for avoiding the objection
that might be propounded: namely, whether the titles and rightes of the
Clodios were not in so long process of time extinguished, especially since the
Popes intermedling and using their authority have declared the said
Charlemaign and his of spring to be lawful Kings of France, they do again for
the uniting of these two families of the Clodios and Carlinges bring in this
Eustace to be of the issue of Charlemaigne both by father and mother in manner
following.

By his father Eustace with the clear sight by a Daughter to Charles the
Bold. Charlemaigne. Jews the Meek. Charles the Bold. Judith, Daughter to
Charles the Bold and wife to Balduin le ferree Earl of Flanders. Baldwin the
balde. Al^^^ce surnamed Ha^equin, brother to Baldwin the third Earl of
Flanders. Rainier. Guydo. Baldwine. Eustace with the clear eye. Eustace Earl
of Boulogne husband to Itte.
By his mother Mary daughter to Henry Earl of Louayne by Gerbergghe Daughter
unto Charles Duke of Lorrain whom Capet robbed. Charlemaigne. Jews the Meek.
Charles the balde. Jews the Stammerer. Charles the Simple. Baldwin the third.
Jews the fourth. Charles D. of Lorrain, as aforesaid, whom Capet overcame and
defeated of his hope. Gerbergghe Daughter to Bona and Charles aforesaid, and
sister to Otho, which Bona (say they) was of the race of Clodio. This Gerbergh
married La^bert le Barbue Earl of Louayne father to Mary mother to Eustace
Earl of Boulogne.


Thus, by their accoumpt, do this Eustace of Boulogne by adoption come to be
heir to the family and titles of the Clodios, and both by father and mother
is enheritour to the house and rightes of Charlemaigne, that is, to the Crown
of France. Also to the end we may the more plainly perceive the Author does
not in vain pretend the noting of these Genealogies, but has some subtle
drift, he shows himself to be often and much offended because we will not
credit this Genealogy of Eustace, as in these words. This is the Genealogy
of Eustace, whereat many do repine, for in troth both by father and mother he
is descended from the house of Charlemaigne. Again, in an other place he
says: Some do dissemble this, meaning to infer that Eustace proceeded not
from so high a degree, but I would such sclanderers might be punished as they
deserve. Out of this marriage of Eustace Earl of Boulogne and Itte came four
sons. Godfrey of Buillon, Baldwin, Eustace and William, who all each after
other were Dukes of Lorraine, and the first at his voyage into the Holy land
took the arms which yet they bear: Howbeit, the three first dying without
issue (notwithstanding the annals of Lorraine do attribute some to Baldwin)
the succession returned to William Baron of Ioninuille the fourth son and his
posterity thus.

In an other place the author brings in the matter more In his summary before
the 4. tome.
plainly. viz. that Geoffrey with the back dying without issue adopted
Godfrey of Buillon son to Geoffrey the 4. son to Gothelo. etc. that is to
say, proceeding directly from the ligne of the Clodios and his own father.

Eustace Earl of Bologne husband to Itte. William his fourth son Baron of
Ioninuille and heir to his three brethren. Theodoricke his son. Simon the
first. Matthew the first. Simon the second dyed without issue, or made them
Religious persons. Frederick the first, brother to Simon. Thibault the first
dyed without issue. Matthew the second brother to Thibault and youngest son of
Frederick. Frederick the second. Thibault the second. Frederick the third.
Rodulph. John. Charles the 2. who by Margaret daughter to the Emperor Robert
had Isabell married to Renee Duke of Anieow, Calabre and Prouence.


And here failed the ligne male of Eustace Earl of Boulogne and his rights do
fall by the Distaffe into the house of Anieow, by the successors of this Renee
of the blood of France, as discending from Jews of Anieow son to King John
the second. Then do follow:

Antony Duke of Lorraine and Bar. etc. Frances, son to Antony. Charles the 3.
now Duke of Lorraine.


Renee D. of Anieow husband to Isabell heir of Lorraine. John son to Renee.
Nicholas son to John who dyed without heirs or friends. Yoland daughter to
(...) of Anieow and Isabell, who the said Renee being overcome in war and
taken by Philip of Burgundy unto who^ Antony Earl of Vaudemo^t was associate,
for his freer delivery out of prison permitted to marry with Frederick the
son of the said Antony. Frederick Earl of Vaudemo^t husband to Yoland
Duchess of Lorraine. Renee their son D. of Lorrain by his mother and Earl
of Vaudemont by his father, whom Charles the 8. forbad to take upon him the
title of King, had 2. wives, the first, daughter to the Earl of Ta^karuill
whom for barrenness he forsook, the second Phillip daughter to Adolph D. of
Gelderland by whom he had 12. children: among the rest. Claude, Earl of Guyze.
Frances, Duke of Guyze. Henry now Duke of Guyze.


Thus is the Duchy of Lorraine at this present in the house of Vaudemont. Now
after so many alterations of the house of the Clodios into the masculine ligne
of the Carlinghes by the marriage of of Bona: from the ligne of the Carlinghes
to that of the Clodios by the adoption of Geoffrey le Barbu: out of the ligne
of le Barbu into yt of the Earls of Boulogne by the marriage of Icte: from the
Earls of Boulogne into the house of Anieow through the marriage of Isabell: Also
out of that of Anieow into the house of Vaudemont by Yoland: All these
beautiful shows and royal pretenses might seem to have been spilled with so
often pouring out of one vessel into an other, as being, even long since, no
further question of the Clodios or Carlinges by either the father or mothers
side, but only of the house of Vaudemont. But, to take away these
difficulties: those of Vaudemont now Dukes of Lorraine and Earls or Dukes of
Guyze are yet (say they) of the house of Charlemaigne: namely, because they say
themselves to be come of the house of the Earls of Alsatzs, they from the
Emperor Conrade, and he of the race of Charlemaigne. That all this is
rehearsed to some intent. viz. to waken and stir up the pretenses of those of
Lorraine against the blood of our Kings comen from Capet, the author does in
his proceedings sufficiently show. For as he has to his power contemned
Merouee the head of the Merouingians, by whom they say themselves to be
defrauded of the Realm of France before the same was in (...) hatched (...)
not likewise absteyne from declayming against High Capet, and blemishing his
whole posterity. This Capet (says he) was a Tyrant, who upon Charles D. of
Lorrayn and his issue usurped by force and frande the Crown of France, and not
content with the emprisoning him at Orleans, did miserably put him to death
with his children Jews and Charles whom he had by his second wife Agnes. If
you ask him of his original, in liew that he draws the others ready crowned
out of the belly of the Troyan horse, be fetches in Ottho great uncle to
Capet from a Witichind banished out of Saxony, and brings him into France
upon a Curtall with one only varlet and a Cloakebagge. Yea, he takes such
felicity in often repeating this story, that it seems (if it lay in him) he
would soon have brought our Kings to the same train. Also, as in his Epitaphs
made upon pleasure and added to the eude of his Book, he brings in this
Albericke Duke of Mosellane whom he pretends to be robbed by Merouee,
speaking in these verses.

Quaeres Alberi, Quae fata parant fili
Tantum dissidium ne imperio patris,
Illustratus agas quod rapiunt truces.
Meruingi?
So does he also induce Charles Duke of Lorraine unploring the aid of all
Christian Princes against Capet and his of spring in these words.

Huc huc adeste ^ortes quique principes
Huc aduolate quaeso, Reges ac Duces.
Ecquis feret vestrum fati insolentiam? etc.
Capetus ille inuasor Regni Gallici
Lothario Francorum Rege mortuo
Heu! me satum quidem antiqua prosapia:
Quondam illius magni ac Insinis Caroli,
Armis volens procul expellere. etc.
The conclusion whereof is

Vnum mihi superest vt vindicem Deum,
Expectem in hisce a^gustijs.
As if with Dido in Virgil he would say

Exoriare aliquis nostris ex ossibus vltor.
I will here omit infinite other speeches which he ouerthwarteth to the
misprision of the race of the Capets, likewise his pretendings to Anieow,
Province, Naples, etc. preiudicially to this Crown, which also he strives for
so much as he may: But the commendations which with the contempt of our King he
attributes to the Guyzes of our time may not be dissembled. The affairs of
France (says he) had good success under the government of the Cardinal of
Lorraine: but after his decease Henry now reigning grew out of favor with his
subjects, because that soon after the Cardinal of Guyze had anointed him,
giving himself to his pleasures he ruled all things after his own fancy,
which are the means to effeminate and abase a Kings heart, and thus began
France to be wrinckled and every thing to run into ruin. Speaking of the
late Lord Prince of Conde, he did says he, all that he might to attain to the
tyranny. Also, after the death of King Frances the second be and his
associates were suffered to depart without correction. Neither does he of the
Kings late brother or the King of Navarre speak much more modestly. But
whereto all this, except to the end to declare the King through his
negligence, and the Princes of his blood for their supposed Rebellion for ever
unworthy the Crown: Also that as their Preachers have sufficiently cried out,
every one may in these miseries, which unto man are as spurs to novelties,
cast their eyes upon these pretended after twigges or bourgeons of
Charlemaigne.

Howbeit, herein I have only undertaken to open the Authors purpose in his
Book, as also the entents of those that procured it to be printed, and
whosoever will take the pain to read it may find much more: Nevertheless,
least any should deceive themselves, I will briefly in few words examine the
grounds of this succession.

He fetches his Dukes of Mosellane out of the Troyan horse with the Francons.
In what credible History has he found it? He makes Albericke Duke of
Mosellane son to Clodio le Cheuelu, and defrauded of the Realm by Merouee:
where can he show that? except in a few supposed Genealogies of Lorrain:
notwithstanding toward the end of his fables he quoteth many Authors to make a
show, who all speak never a word thereof. But what will he say to those
Histories that make Merouee the son of Clodio? or how could he be other then
the eldest, since he was of age sufficient to be tutor to Alberick: And which is
more, how can Albericke complain that Merouee robbed him of the Crown of
France, when (if we will believe the best Historographers) Merouee was the
first Francon that ever bare title of King in France? But let us grant them
all their fables from Clodulph Duke of Mosellane unto Bona wife to Charles Duke
of Lorraine, yet how could the marriage of her bring to him Clodulphes right to
the Crown, when the Salick law which was originary French and made with the
Counsel of Pharamond excludes the female from the succession thereof? Or
admit Charles Duke of Lorraine was wrongfully defrauded of the succession of
Charlemaign by Hugh Capet and his posterity, yet discending they will grant
that Ottho his only son dyed without issue: but if contrary to the Salick
law, they will admit daughters to succeed, let them show us some reason why
the house of Lorraine should be preferred before our Kings, since themselves
hold opinion that they all descended of one and the same daughter? But if they
will hold them to Geoffrey le Barbu Earl of Ardenne whom Ottho adopted, what
need they bring in these daughters? Besides, where find they this adoption,
or in what Court was it ever exe^plefied? yea, or how dare they auowe that it
was then purposed to extend to the Crown of France: And as for that of Eustace
of Boulogne, who sees not therein manifest fraud, since themselves (...)
neither author nor title, yea, and are even (...) who Godfrey of Buillon was,
also (...) were he or Eustace whom Geoffrey le (...). Where also they labor to
prove that this Eustace was both by father and mother discoured of
Charlemaigne, to what purpose may it serve, (...) was but by daughters,
unless, in subuerting the Satick law, to habandon this Realm for a pray, not
to the Lorraines only, or to the Ard^^^^s, but also to all the families in
Europe that have been allied to the house of France? Moreover, although
Isabell married with Renee of Anieow and Poland with Frederick Earl of
Vaudemont, yet who can affirm that thereby they transported to their heirs of
Lorraine or Guyze the rights of Clodio and Charlemaigne, which themselves were
not capable of, neither did transport, although they had had the same? These
therefore are but fables wherewith in the mean time they feed the people
blemishing (so much as in them lies) our Salick law, as false and purposedly
invented. Moreover, notwithstanding all their pretenses (which are most false)
were true, yet after that an Estate is established in a family by lawful
calling and approbation of the Commonwealth and people, and that for so many
hundred years, it is a manifest token that God (against whom it is in vain to
strive, and to whose decree all people ought to co^discend) has transferred
such a Realm or Estate into that family. But because many an evident right
has decayed for lack of power, and many a wrong has prevailed against right
through default of strength to authorize the same, the especial point
consists in debarring them from accompanying their fraud with force,
especially with our own, as many times have fallen out through the calamities
of Civil wars which do yield the people impatient of their present estate
and starueth them after novelties. This discourse have I thought good to direct
to your Majesty, not for your self only, but also for others that have great
interest therein, and to whose lot it will peradventure fall to have the
deciding of this quarrel, or else to leave it ouerstrong for their successors,
unless they before take order for the same. And I beseech God to grant them
good counsel to his glory, the preservation of their greatness and the
benefit of the poor people.

Amen.
FINIS.

