THE SACRIFICE OF Thankfulness.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, the third of December, being the first
Aduentuall Sunday, Anno 1615.

By THO. ADAMS.

Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 35. Gratiarum cessat decursus, vbi recursus non fuerit.
Whereunto are annexed Five other of his Sermons preached in London, and
elsewhere; never before Printed. The Titles whereof follow in the next Page.



LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1616.

The Titles of the Five Sermons.
1. Christ his Star, or the Wise men's Oblation. Math. 2. verse 11. 2.
Politic Hunting. Genesis 25. verse 27. 3. Plaine-Dealing, or a Precedent of
Honesty. Genesis 25. verse 27. 4. The Three Divine Sisters. 1. Cor. 13. verse
13. 5. The Taming of the Tongue. Iam. 3. verse 8.
To the Right Worshipful, Sir Henry Mountague Knight, the Kings Majesty's
Serieant for the Law, and Recorder of the Honorable City of London.
Worthy Sir;
WHere there is diversity of helps, leading to one Intention of good, the
variety may well be tolerated. Who finds fault with a Garden, for the
multitude of flowers? You shall perceive here different kinds; whereof (if
some to some seem bitter) there is none unwholesome. It takes fire at the
Altar of God, and begins with the Christians Sacrifice: the flame whereof (by
the operation of the blessed Spirit) may both enlighten the understanding, and
warm the affections of good men: and in others consumingly waste the dross
and rust of sin, Mat. 3. 11. 12.
which must either be purged by the fire of Grace here; or sent to the
everlasting fire to be burned. The Wisemens Oblation seconds it: what is
formerly commanded in Precept, is here commended in Practice. The Politic
Hunters of the world are discovered: and Plaine-Dealing encouraged. One (almost
forgotten virtue) Charity is praised; and a busy vice is taxed. In all is
intended Lux Scientiae, Pax Conscientiae; Peccati ruina, aedificatio Iustitiae.

Your noble endeavors are observed by all eyes, to be distinguished into this
method: from your virtues there is a resultance of shining Light to
information, from your Office to reformation of others. Go forward so still,
to menage your Place in that honorable City: and let the fire of correction
eat out the rust of corruption. You may punish, even whiles you pity. The
good Magistrate, like a good Surgeon, does with a shaking hand search
ulcers; more earnestly desiring Non inuenire quod quaerit, quam inuenire quod
puniat. The God of mercy and salvation wrappe up your soul in the bundle of
Life; and (when the Lust of the earth shall to the Dust of the earth) fix you
in the blessed Orb of Glory.

Your Worships in all faithful observance. THO. ADAMS.

Ad Lectorem.
Senec. epist. 59. Cupio, si fieri potest, propitijs auribus quid sentiam,
dicere* sin minus, dicam and iratis.

THE SACRIFICE OF THANKFVLNESSE,
Psalm. 118. 27. God is the Lord, which has showed us Light: bind the Sacrifice
with Cords, even unto the Horns of the Altar.
THE first and the last words of this Psalm are, O give thanks unto the
Lord, for he is good: because his mercy endures for ever.

Thanksgiving is the prescript, and the postscript. He that is Alpha and
Omega; the first and the last, requires that our beginning and ending should
be, Praise to the Lord.

You see the head and the foot: the bulk, body, members are not dissonant.
There is scarce any Verse in the Psalm, that is not either an Hosanna, or an
Halleluia; a prayer for mercy, or a praise for mercy.

I have singled out one; let it speak for all the rest. God is the Lord, that
has showed. etc.

Here is somewhat received; somewhat to be returned. God has blessed us, and
we must bless God. His Grace, and our Gratitude, are the two Lines, my
Discourse must run upon: They are met in my Text, let them as happily meet
in your Hearts; and they shall not leave you, till they bring you to Heaven.

The sum is, God is to be Praised. The particulars are Wherefore, he is to
be Praised. Wherewith, he is to be Praised.


Wherefore: God is the Lord, that has showed us light.

Wherewith: Bind the Sacrifice with Cords, even unto the Horns of the Altar.

In the For what we will consider the Author. his Blessing.


The Author: God is the Lord.

His Blessing: That has showed us Light.

The Lord, the Light. The Author is called God and Lord: which lead us to look
upon his Goodness. Greatness.


GOD and Good.
Lo, I begin with him, that has no Beginning, but is the Beginning of all
other Beeinges, God: And would only tell you (for I must not loose my self in
this Mystery) that this God is Good. In himself Goodness; Psalm. 100. 5.
Good to us. Psalm. 100. The Lord is Good: his mercy is everlasting. In Orat.
Dom.
He is True Life, says August. A Quo aucrt^^, cadere: in Quem conuerti,
resurgere: in Quo manner, vinere est. From Him to turn, is to fall: to Him to
return, is to rise: in Him to abide, is to live for ever.

David in the 59. Psalm. 59. 10.
Psalm calls him, his Mercy. Deus meus misericordia mea: my God, my Mercy.
Whereupon Augustine sweetly discourses.

If thou had said my Health, Aug. in Psa. 58. Si dicas Salus mea,
intelligo^quia Deus ^al salutem. etc.
I know what thou had meant; because God gives health. If thou had said my
Refuge* I understand, because thou fliest unto him If thou had said my
strength, I conceive thy meaning; because he gives strength.

But Misericordiamea; quid est? Totum, quicquid sum, de misericordia tua est.
My Mercy, What is it? I am by thy Mercy, whatsoever I am.

Bernard would have us speak of God in abstracto; Sermon. 80. in Cant.
not only to call him Wise, Merciful, good: but Wisdom, Mercy, Goodness;
Because the Lord is without accidents at all: For as he is most Great without
quantity; Ardens.
so he is most Good without quality: Nil habet in se, nisi se, He has nothing
in him, but himself.

God then being Good; not only formaliter, good in himself: but also
effectiue, good to us; teaches us to love him. We should love goodness for
it own sake: but when it reflects upon us, there is a new inuitation of our
love.

The LORD.
We have heard his Goodness; listen to his Greatness. In this Title we will
consider his Majesty, as we did in the other his Mercy.

Lord implies a great State ^ the Title is given to a great man upon earth. But
if an earthen Lord be great; Quantus est Dominus, qui Dominos facit? Aug.
How great is the Lord which makes Lords? yea, and vnmakes them two at his
pleasure.

This is an absolute and independent Lord. 1. Cor. 8. There may be many Gods,
and many Lords. But this is Ille Dominus. The Lord, or that Lord; 1. Cor. 8. 5.
that commands and controlls them all. They are Domini titulares; this is
Dominus tutelaris. They are in title and name, this in deed and power.

There are Many, says St. Paul. Many in Title many in Opinion. Some are Lords
and Gods ex authoritate; so are Kings and Magistrates. Psalm. 82. ^.
God stands in the congregation of Lords: he is Judge among the Gods. Others
will so style themselves ex vsurpatione; as the Canonists say of their Pope
Dominus Deus noster Papa. Our Lord God the Pope. But he is but a Lord and God
in a blind and tetrycall Opinion.

The Lord is only Almighty; able to do more by his absolute power, then he
will by his actual. Able for potent, not impotent works. He cannot lie, he
cannot die. Aug. de Ciuit Dei. Lib. 5. Cap. 10.
Diciter omnipotens faciendo quod vult, non patiendo quod non vult. He is
called Almighty in doing what he pleases not in suffering what he pleases
not.

This is his Greatness. As his Mercy directs us to love him, so let his
Majesty instruct us to fear him. I will briefly touch both these affections;
but Love shall go foremost.

LOVE.
Our God is Good, and good to us; let us therefore love him. 1. It is an
Affection, that God principally requires. 2. It is a Nature, wherein alone we
can answer God.

For the former, God requires not thy Wisdom to direct him, nor thy Strength
to assist him, nor thy Wealth to enrich him, nor thy Dignity to advance him;
but only thy Love. Love him with all thy heart.

For the second; Man cannot indeed answer God well in any other thing. When
God judges us, we must not judge him again: When he reprooues us, we must
not justify our selves. If he be angry, we must answer him in patience; if
he command, in obedience: But when God loves us, we must answer him in the
same nature, though not in the same measure; and love him again. We may not
give God word for word: we dare not offer him blow for blow: we can not
requite him good turn for good turn: yet we may, can, must give him Love for
Love. Nam cum amat Deus, Bern. Sermon. 83. in Cant.
non aliud vult quam amari,

Now because every man sets his foot upon the freehold of Love, and says, it
is mine; let us ask for his Evidence whereby he holds it? We call an
Evidence, a Deed; and Deeds are the best demonstration of our right in Love.
If thou love God for his own sake, show it by thy deeds of Piety: If thou
love Man for Gods sake, show it by thy deeds of Charity. The root of Love is
in the Heart; but it sendes forth Veins into the Hands, and gives them an
active and nimble dexterity to good Works. Ioh. 14. 15.
If you love me, says Christ, keep my Commandments. 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
If you love man, show your Compassion to him: Obedience to our Creator, Mercy
to his Image, testify our Loves. He that wants these Evidences, these Deeds;
when that busy Informer the Devil sues him, will be unhappily vanquished.

FEAR.
LEt us pass from Love to Fear. we must Love our good God: we must Fear our
great Lord. It is objected against this passage of union, 1. Ioh. 4. 18.
that perfect love casts out fear. It is answered, that fear brings in
perfect love; as the Needle draws in the Thread. And it is not possible, that
true Love should be without good Fear; that is, a filial Reverence. For
slavish fear, be it as far from your hearts, as it shall be from my
discourse.

Now this Fear is a most due and proper affection: and (I may say) the fittest
of all to be toward God. Indeed God requires our Love: but we must think,
that then God stoupes low, and bows himself down to be loved of us. For
there is such an infinite inequality betwixt God and us, that without his
sweet dignation, and descending to us, there could be no fitness of this
affection. But look we up to that infinite glory of our great Lord: look we
down on the vileness of our selves, sinful dust: and we will say, that by
reason of the disproportion between us, nothing is so suitable for our
baseness to give so high a God, Psalm. 34. 11.
as Fear. Therefore, Comeye Children hearken unto me: I will teach you the
fear of the Lord. Psalm. 31. 23.
Fear the Lord all ye his Servants; as well as Love the Lord all ye his Saints.

Now this Fear has as many Chalengers as Love had. When this Book is held
out, every man's lips are ready to kiss it; and to say and swear, that they
fear the Lord. Psalm. 2. 11.
Love had the Testimony, Charytie: and Fear, must have his Service. Psalm. 2.
Serve the Lord with fear.

It is man's necessitated condition to be a Servant. Happy they, 1. Ioh. 13. 13.
that can truly call Christ Master: Ye call me Lord and Master, and ye say
well; for so I am.

He that serves the Flesh, serves his fellow: And a Beggar mounted on the
back of Honor, rides post to the Devil. This is a choleric Master; so
fickle, that at every turn, he is ready to turn thee out of doors. We may
say of him, as of the Spaniard, He is a bad Servant, but a worse Master.

He that serves the World, serves his Servant; as if Chams curse was lighted
on him, Seruus seruorum; a Drudge to Slaves, a Slave to Drudges.

He that serves the Devil, serves his Enemy; and this is a miserable service.
Sure it was a lamentable preposterous sight, Ec^l. 1^. 7.
that Solomon saw. Eccle. 10. I have seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes
walking as Servants upon the Earth. And Agur numbers it among those four
things, Pro^. 30, 22.
whereby the World is disquieted: A Servant when he reigns, and a Fool when
he is filled with Meat: an odious woman, when she is married, and a handmaid
that is heir to her Mistres.

Judge then how horrible it is, that men should set (as the Savages of Calecut)
the Devil, or his two Ingles, the world and the flesh in the Throne; whiles
they place God in the foote-stoole. Or that in this Commonwealth of man,
Reason which is the Queen, or the Princes the better powers and graces of the
Soul, should stoop to so base a Slave, as sensual lust. Delight is not
seemly for a fool: Pro* 19. 10.
much less for a Servant to have rule over Princes.

St. Basil (not without passion) did envy the Devils happiness: Who had
neither Created us, nor redeemed us, nor preserves us; but violently Labors
our destruction; that yet he should have more servants, then God, that made us,
then Jesus Christ that with his own precious Blood, and grievous sufferings
bought us. Psalm. 116 16.
Well, he is happy, that can truly say with David; I am thy Servant, O Lord, I
am thy Servant, and the Son of thy Handmayde. This Service is true Honor:
for so Kings and Princes; yea the blessed Angels of heaven are thy fellows.

God is Good, that we may love him: the Lord is Great that we may Fear him.
We have heard, both severally; let us consider them jointly, and therein the
security of our own happiness. It is a blessed confirmation, when both
these, the Goodness and the Greatness of GOD meet upon us. His Greatness,
that he is able* his Goodness, that he is willing to save us. Were he never
so Great, if not Good to us, we had little help. Were he never so Good, if
not Great, and of ability to succor us, we had less comfort. He would
stand us in small stead, if either his Will or his Power was defective; if
either he could not, or would not save us.

His Goodness without his Greatness, might fail us: His Greatness without
his Goodness, would terrify us. It is a happy concurrence, Psalm. 85. 10.
when Mercy and Truth meet together: when Righteousness and Peace kiss each
other. Psalm. 116 5.
So sweetly singes the Psalmist: Graciou^ is the Lord, and righteous: yea our
God is merciful. Whereupon S. Ambros. Orat. de ob^^^ Theodo^^^.
Bis misericordiam posuit, semel iustitiam. He is once said to be Righteous;
but twice in one verse, to be Gracious: It is sweet when both are conjoined,
as in the first and last verse of this Psalm: O give thaenkes to the Lord, for
he is good: for his Mercy endures for ever. The Lord is Good; though Great,
yet also Good: and his Mercy (so well as his Justice) endures for ever. Man
has no such assurance of comfort in God, as to meditate, that his great Power,
and good Will; his Glory and Grace, his Majesty and Mercy met together.

These be Gods two Daughters; Justice and Mercy: Let us honor them both; but
let us kiss and embrace Mercy. But alas, we have dealt unkindly with them
both. God has two Daughters, and we have ravished them.

There is a Story of a man, that meeting in a Desert with two Virgin-sisters;
he did ravish both of them: Afterward on his apprehension, the former
desired, that he might justly die for it. The other did entreat as earnestly,
that he might live, and that she might enjoy him for her Husband.

Man is that rauisher, and those two Virgins are the Justice and Mercy of God.
Against his Justice we have sinned, and provoked his indignation to strike us:
yea, even his Mercy we have abused. For her sake we have been spared, and a
longer day of repentance given us: yet we have despised the riches of this
Mercy; and presuming on Mercy, have dared to multiply our transgressions.
Justice pleades to God that we should die; urges his Law: Who so ever sins,
shall die: And, Death is the wages of sin. Mercy entreats beseeches, that
we may live; and produces the Gospel, Who so ever repents, shall be
pardoned: Who so ever believes, shall be saved: And for further assurance,
brings forth that blessed Pardon, sealed in the Wounds and Blood of Jesus
Christ. God hearkens to Mercy for his Sons sake: though we have ravished
and wronged his Mercy; yet for Mercies sake, we shall be forgiven. But then we
must be married to Mercy; married in our Faith, believing on Christ: married
in our good life, being merci^ull unto men.

The Blessing.
We see the Author, let us look on his Blessing^ Light. He hath-s^^wed us
Light. We are come into the Light, and therefore have light enough of an ample
Discourse. But my purpose is only to show you this Light, (as the word is in
my Text) not to dwell on it; though I pray, that all you and my self may for
ever dwell in it.

LIGHT.
SVch as the Giver is, 1. Ioh. 1. 5. lam. 1* 17.
such is the Gift. 1. Ioh. ^. God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all.
And S. James calls him the Father of Light. God is

So Glorious a Light, that as the Sun dazeleth the eyes too steadfastly fixed
on it: so his incomprehensible Majesty confounds all those, that too curiously
pry into it.

So Clear a Light, that he sees into all corners. The eyes of God are in
every place, P^o. 15. 3.
beholding the evil and the good. He searches more narrowly then the beams
of the Sun: He sees Briberie in the Office, Adultery in the Closs^t, Fraud
in the Shop, though the Pent-house makes it as dark as a room in Bedlam.

So Good a Light, that in him is no darkness; not so much as a shadow. There
is none in him; there comes none from him. Indeed he made outward Darkness of
Hell, the wages of sin: But he never made the inward Darkness of the Soul,
which is sin.

So Constant a Light; that though the Sun be variable in his Course, sometimes
shining bright, often Clouded: yet God is without change as the Moon, without
Eclipsing as the Sun, without Setting as the Stars.

So Spreading a Light, that he communicates it to us. This is the true Light,
Ioh. 1. 9.
which Lights every one that comes into the world. Without whom we should
have been wrapped in an eternal miserable Darkness: but that he sent one To
give Light to them that sat in Darkness, Luke 7. 79.
and in the shadow of Death, to guide their feet into the way of Peace.

And this is the Light, which he here shows us. By the consent of all
Expositors in this Psalm is Typed the coming of Christ, and his kingdom of
the Gospel. This is manifested by an Exaltation, by an Exultation, by a
Petition, by a Benediction.

The Exaltation. Ver. 22. The stone, which the builders refused, is become the
head stone of the Corner. The Jews refused this Stone, but God has Built his
Church upon it.

The Exultation. Ver. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made: we will
rejoice and be glad in it. A more blessed Day, then that Day was, wherein he
made man, when he had done making the world, Rejoice we, and be glad in it.

The Petition. Ver. 25. Save now I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee
send now Prosperytie. Thy Justice would not suffer thee to save without the
Messiah: he is come, Save Now, O Lord I beseech thee. Our Savior is come, let
mercy and salvation come along with him.

The Benediction makes all clear. ver. 25. Blessed be he that comes in the
name of the Lord. For what David here prophesied, Math. 21. 9.
the people after accomplished. Math. 21. Blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord.

The Corollary or Sum is in my Text. ver. 27. God is the Lord that has
showed us light: bind the Sacrifice with Cords to the Horns of the Altar.

It was truly said, Lex est Lux: the Law is Light. But unable to light us to
Heaven; not through it own, but our deficiencie. Hereon it did not save, but
condemn us. Lex non damnans est ficta et picta Lex: Luth in Galate.
That Law that does not condemn us, is a feigned and painted Law. The Apostle
calls it the Ministration of death.

Let then the less Light give place to the greater. Legalia fuerunt ante
passionem Domini vina, Aug.
Statim post passionem mortua, hodie sepulta: The Legal rites were before the
Passion of Christ alive, straight after his Passion dead, now buried. Or as
another; The Ceremonies of the Law were in their prime Mortales, in Christ's
age Mortuae, in our time Mortiferae. They were at first Dying, in our Saviors
time Dead, in ours Deadly. The Law was given by Moses, Ioh* 1. 17.
but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.

We have now found out the Light, and (blessed be God) above these fifty
years we have found it: That if any should say (as Philip to Christ. Ioh. 14.
Lord show us the Father, Ioh. 14. 8.
and it suffices us. To whom Jesus answers. Have I been so long with you, and
yet have thou not known me? Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the
Father: So if any should say) Show us the Light, and it suffices us. I
answer; Have thou been so long in the Light, and have thou not known it? Art
thou one of that Country that, Appollonius writes of, that can see nothing in
the day, but all in the night. Has the Light made thee blind? If no other, the
vicissitude of this Exercise Shows, that the Light is among us.

I should tris^le time to prove by arguments to the care, a thing so visible
to the eye: and waste the Light of the day, to demonstrate the evidence of this
Light being amongst us. Meditation and Wonder better become this subject, then
discourse.

It is the Blessing of Gods Right hand. Prou. 3. 16.
Prou. 3. Length of days is in her Right hand; and in her Left hand Riches and
Honor; says Solomon of Wisdom, he meant it of Christ. This Light shall
procure to a man blessed eternity. All those blessings of the Left hand, as
Riches and Honor, are frail and mortal: Nothing lastes long in this World,
except a suit at Law. But this Light, if our selves fault not, shall outshine
for countenance, and out-last for continuance, the Sun in the Firmament.
Therefore our Psalmographer. ver. 15. having showed, that The voice of
rejoicing and salvation is in the Tabernacles of the righteous he adds, The
Right hand of the Lord has done valiantly. yea he doubles and trebbles it.
ver. 16.
The Right hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the Lord has done
valiantly. This is the God of Lights, Reave* 1. 16.
That had the seven Stars in his Right hand. This Light must enlighten us to
some duties.

1. Rejoice in this Light, ver 24. This is the Light-day that the Lord has
made: let us Rejoice and be glad in it: Not for a spurt, Iath 13. 20.
as the Stony ground* Math. 13. that with Joy receives the Sermon; but goes
home as stony-hearted, as Judas after the Soppe. Nor as the Jews, to whom John
Baptist was a burning and a shining Lamp: Ioh. 5. 35.
and they for a season, rejoiced in his light: But afterward never rested,
till they had eclipsed the Sun on the Cross, and slain his Morning-starre
in the Prison. Nor as Children, that come abroad to play in the Sunshine, and
make no more account of it. Nor as a people, that never saw the Sun, step
out of their doors to gaze upon it, and then turn their backs on it. But
Rejoice with a solid joy, as they whom God has brought out of darkness, into
his marvelous light.

2. Walk worthy of this Light. This was St. Paul's request to his Ephesians,
Ephe. 41.
that they would Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith they are called. Rom*
13. 12.
The Night is past, the Light is come: let us therefore cast off the works of
darkness, and put on the armor of Light. Be children of the Light. As the
Light shines on thee, let it shine in thee. Thou have small comfort to be in
the Light, unless the Light be in thee. Says the Prophet to the Church; Esa.
60. 1.
Arise, shine: for thy light comes, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon
th^e* As God has showed his Light to you: So let your Light shine before men;
Math. 5. 16.
that they may see your good works, and gloryfie your Father, which is in
Heaven. There are some that boast their Communion with God: against S:* John
reasons Anatura Dei. 1. Ioh. 1. 5. 6.
God is Light: if we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie and do not the truth St. Paul's argument is of the same fashion, what
Communion has Light with darkness? The holy writ calls all sins. Opera
tencbrarum, the works of darkness. Because,

1. They are perpetrated against God, who is the Father of Lights. Iam. 1. 17.

2. They are suggested by the Devil, who is the Prince of darkness Ephesians. 6. 12.

3. They are most usually committed in the da^ke Male agens odit Lucem. They
that sleep, sleep in the night: and they that be Drunken, be Drunken in the
night. 1 Thessalonians 5. 7.

4. They are the effects of blindness of mind: and Ignorance is a grievous
inward Darkness. Their fool sh heart was Darkened: and hence issued those
deadly sins Romans 1. 21.

5. Their reward shall be utter Darkness. Cast that unprofitable servant into
utter Darkness. Mat. 25. 30. And Iud* Ver. 13. To them is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever

If then God has showed thee Light; show not thou the deeds of Darkness: but
walk honestly as in the day Romans 13. 13.

3 Take heed of sore eyes. Pleasures, lusts, and vanities, make the eyes sore
that are dotingly fastened on them. The Usurer with telling his Gold: the
haughti^ with contemplating his greatness: the Drunkard with looking at the
Wine laughing in the Cup: the lustful with Gazing on his Painted damnations;
make their eyes so sore, that they cannot look up, and behold this Light.

4. Take benefit of this Light, whiles it shines. It may be clouded, as it was
in the days of Popery. Either this Light may be set to thee, or thou be set
to it. That to thee by Removing the Candlestick: thou to that by the hand of
Death, which shall send thee to the Land of forgetful Darkness. Our Savior
taught us this (not only in precept, but) in practice. John. 9. 4.
I must work the work of him that sent me, whiles it is day: for the night
comes wherein no man can work. Let us not do like some Courtiers, that
having Light allowed them, Play it out at Cards, and go to Bed darkling.

5 Lastly, help to maintain this Light, that it go not out. If you would
have the Lamps of the Sanctuary shine, power in your Oil. Grudge not a little
cost, to keeke this Light clear. The Papists have their Candlemasse: they
bestow great cost in Lights about a Service of Darkness. Repine not you then
at a little Charges, for the everlasting Lamp of the Gospel: Some of you I
bear you witness, do not Grudge it. Go on and prosper: and whiles you make
the Church happy, make your selves so.

Wherewith.
I must now step from Heaven to Earth: I pass from the For what, to the With
what God is to be praised.

He has showed you his Light: show him yours. He has given us an inestimable
blessing, what shall we return him? What? Bind the Sacrifice with Cords even
to the Horns of the Alter.

This is man's Thankfulness, for Gods Bountifulness. We will first cast over
the particulars, and then sum them.

1. Here is Sacrifice to be offered. 2. This Sacrifice must be bound. Bind the
Sacrifice. 3. This Sacrifice must be bound with Cords Bind the Sacrifice with
Cords. 4. This Sacrifice must be bound with Cords to the Alter. Bind the
Sacrifice with Cords to the Alter. 5. This Sacrifice must be. 1. Bound. 2.
With Cords. 3. To the Altar. 4. Yea even to the Horns of the Alter, you see
the Totum is Thankefullnesse; and the Bill has five particulars. 1. The
Sacrifice is Devotion. 2. Binding the Sacrifice, constant Devotion. 3. With
Cords, seruent Devotion. 4. To the Altar, rectified Devotion. 5. To the Horns
of the Altar, confident Devotion. Devotion is the Mother and she has four
Daughters. 1. Constancy, Bind the Sacrifice. 2. Feruencie. Bind it with
Cords. 3. Wisdom. Bind it to the Altar. 4. Confidence. Even to the Horns of
the Altar.


Sacrifice.
Is the act of our Deuote Thankfulness. I might here (to no great purpose)
travel a large field of discourse for Sacrifices. But it were no other, but
where the Scripture offers us the company a Mile, to compel it to go with
us twain.

All Sacrifices are either Expiatorie, or Gratulatorie. Expiatory for the
condonation of sins; Gratulatory for the Donation of graces. So in a word,
they were either Sin Offerings, or Peace-offrings.

The Sin-offrings of the Jews had two maine ends.

1. To acknowledge Peecat^ stipendium mortem; that Death was the wages of sin
due to the Sacrificers, laid on the Sacrificed.

2. Mystically and simbolically to prefigure the killing of the Lamb of God,
that takes away the sins of the world. So Calvin. Semperillis ante oculos
simbola proponi oportu^t. They had ever need of signs, and types, and
figurative demonstrations before their eyes.

But those Saecrifices are abolished in Christ who offered one Sacrifice for
sins for ever; H^b* 10. 12.
and that such a one, as was a sweet smelling Savor to God. Ephe. 5. 2.
It was a pretty observation, that the last Character of the Hebrew Alphabet,
was a plain Figure of Christ's Cross; to show that his Sacrifice ended all
theirs.

Ours is the second kind; a Gratulatorie Sacrifice. Our Prophet here speaking
of the days of the Gospel. Then, Bind this Sacrifice with Cords, etc. Christ
is our Altar, let our selves be the Sacrifice: the Fire that kindles it, the
Love of God; the Smoke that goes up, the consumption of our sins.

That this Sacrifice may be acceptable, I will show you how it must be done,
how it must not be done.

1. What is to be excluded. 2. How it ought to be qualified.
Exclusiuely.
IT must be sine Pelle, sine Melle, sine Fell, sine Macula.

1. Sine Pelle, without the Skin of Ostentation; which indeed makes them not
Sacrificia, but Sacrilegia, Not Sacrifices, but Sacriledges: They are so Opera
muta, Dumb deeds: nay, rather Opera mendacij, Loud lying works; as if they
told God a good tale how they loved him, when they meant to deceive him. God
will require all untruths between man and man; but fallacies and falsehoods
done between the Porch and the Altar, in the shadow of the Church, and under
the pretense of his service, he will sorely revenge.

The casting up of the Eyes, the bowing down of the Knees, the uncovering the
Head, moving the Lips, knocking the Breast, sighing and crying, what mean
they? are they not symptoms and demonstratiue witnesses of an inward
compunction? Are they not a protestation, that the Soul is speaking to God? If
there be not an honest Heart within, this is but the Skin of a Sacrifice: And
they that give God the Skin for the Body, God will give them the Skin for
the Body; the shadow of Blessings for the substance.

It is storied of one that sold his wife Glasses for Pearls: Imposturam
faecit, et passus est, He cossened, and was cossened. They that sell the Lord
of Heaven (how so ever they may deceive his Spouse, the Church on earth)
Glasses for Pearls, Shelles for Kernels, Copper for Gold, Bark for Bulk,
Show for Substa^nce, Fancy for Conscience; God will be even with them, and
give them Stones for Bread, Images of Delight for substantial Joys:
Imposturam faci^^t ^t patienter, They deceive, and shall be deceived.

2. Sine Melle: There must be no Honey of selfe-complacencie in this Sacrifice.
Psalm. 51. 17.
Psalm. 51. The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and contrite
Heart, O God, thou will not despise. A true Sacrifice consistes not only (
Faciendo, but Patiendo,) in doing, but in dying, or suffering for Christ.

In the Law, Beasts appointed for Sacrifice, were first slain, and so offered.
In the Gospel, Christians must first mortify their earthly members, and
crucify their carnal lusts, and then offer up themselves. As Death takes
away the Natural lif^; so Mortification must take away the Sensual life. Aug.
Sermon. 141. de Temp.
Moriatur ergo homo, ne moriatur: Mutetur ne damnetur: Let a man die, that he
may not die: let him be changed, that he be not damned. Only the mortified man
is the true living Sacrifice. It must not then be Honey to our Palates; but
bitter: even so bitter, as Abnegare suos, sua, se: to deny our Friends, to
deny our Goods, to deny our selves, for Christ his cause.

3. Sine Fell: There must be no Amarulentia, no Gall of bitterness in this
Sacrifice. Math. 5. If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, Math. 5. 23.
and remembrest that thy Brother has ought against thee; leave there thy gift,
and go thy way: first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then offer it. If thy
Brother has ought against thee, God has more. If thou have somewhat against
thy Brother, God has somewhat against thee. Math. 9. 13.
Go ye and learn what that means; I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice.

Whiles you trippe up men's heels with Frauds. lay them along with Suits,
tread on them with Oppressions, blow them up with Vsuries, Injuries: Your
Sacrifice is full of Gall. It was said in wonder; Is Saul among the Prophets?
So, what makes a Slaunderer, a Defrauder, an Usurer, an Oppressor, at Church?
They come not sine Fell, without the Gall of Uncharitableness: they shall
return sieve Melle, without the Honey of Gods Mercies. Heb. 13. 16.
To do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such sacrifices God is
well pleased: Merciful works are Pro sacrificijs, imo prae sacrificijs:
Equal to Sacrifices, above Sacrifices in Gods acceptance.

4. Sine Macula. Leuit. 22. God commands, that his Sacrifice be without
Blemish; Leuit, 22. 20. etc.
nor blind, nor broken, nor maimed, nor infected, etc. Therefore a Lamb
without spotte was offered for a morning and an evening Sacrifice. And the
Lamb of God in an antitypicall relation, is truly said, 1. Pet. 1. 19.
Immaculatus, a Lamb without spotte, without blemish.

The Drunkard is without a head, the Swearer has a Garget in his throat, the
Covetous has a lame hand, he cannot give to the poor: the Epicure has a
gorbelly, the Adulterer is a scabbed Goat, the Worldling wants an eye, the
Ruffian an ear, the Coward a heart: these are Mutila Sacrificia, lame,
defective, luxate, imperfect Sacrifices.

The Prophet Esaias begins and ends his Prophecy with a denuntiation of Gods
contempt, and refusal of such Oblations; Who will forget those to be the
sons of grace, that forget his Sacrifices to be the Sacrifices of a God. Esa.
66. 3.
He that sacrifices a Lamb, is as if he cut off a Dogs neck.

Comprehensiuely.
IT must be Cum Thure, cum Sale, cum Sanguine, cum Integritate.

1. Cum Thure: The Frankincense is Prayer and Invocation. Psalm. 141. 2.
Let my Prayer be set forth before thee as Incense: and the lif^yng up of my
hands as the Evening sacrifice.

These the Prophet calls Vitulos Labiorum, The Cal^^s (not of our Fouldes,
but) of our Lips: Whereof the Lord more esteems, then of the Bullock that
has Horn and Hoof.

This is the special Sacrifice here meant. God expectes it of us: De Noah.
cap. 22.
Non vt auarus, (as Ambros.) Not as if he were covetous of it; but ex debito.
Yet as he must give the Beast to us, Joel. 2. 14.
before we can give it to him. Joel 2. For the Lord must Leave a Blessing
behind him; even a Meat Offering, and a Drink Offering for himself: So this
spiritual Sacr^fice of Prayers and Praise, must be Datum as well as Mandatum;
Conferred, as Required. Tribuat Deus, vt homo retribuat: Let God give it to
man, that man may give it to God: He that commands it, must bestow it.

2. Cum Sale: There must be Salt to season this Sacrifice. Leuit. Leuit. 2. 13.
2. With all thine Offeringes thou shall offer Salt.

Salt has been usually taken for Discretion. What S. Paul speaks of our
Words, should hold also in our deeds. Coloss. 4. 6.
Coloss. 4. Powdered with Salt. The Proverb is true; an Ounce of Discretion, is
worth a pound of Learning. Bern. Sermon. 49 in Cant.
Toll hanc, et virtus vitium erit: Banish this, and you shall run Virtue into
Vice, blow Heat into a Flame, turn Conscience into a Fury, and drive
Devotion out of her wits: Zeal without this, is like a keen Sword in a madd
hand.

3 Cum Sanguine. Not literially, as in the Sacrifices of the Law. Heb 9. 22.
Almost all things by the Law are purged with Blood. But spiritually, to make
them acceptable, they must be dipped in our, the Blood of Jesus Christ.

Without this they are not holy: as one expounds Sanctum, quasi sanguine
consecratum. Here is then the necessity of a true faith, to sprinkle all our
Sacrifices with our Saviors Blood; No Sacrifice otherwise good. For whatsoever
is not of faith, Romans 14. 23.
is sin. Therefore if any man comes to the Church, more for fear of the Law,
then love of the Gospel, he offers a thanklesse Sacrifice.

4. Cum Integritate. And this in respect Sacrificij, Sacrificantis.


1. Of the Sacrifice God reproues the Jews, Mal. 1. 7. 8.
that they had laid polluted Bread upon his Alter. If ye offer the Blind for
Sacrifice, is it not evil? If ye offer the Lame and the sick, is it not
evil? The Lords Sacrifice must be fat and fair; not a lean, scraggling,
^tarued Creature.

Paul beseeches his Romans, that they would present themselves a Living (or
quick) Sacrifice to God: Romans 12. 1.
When infirmities have Crazed it, and age almost razed it, then to offer it:
alas; it is not a living, but a dying; not a quick, but a sick Sacrifice.
This must be a whole and holy Oblation.

2. Of the Sacrificer. The life and soul of a Sacrifice, is not the outward
action, but the inward affection of the Heart. Men's cuiusque, is est quisque:
As the Mind is, so is the Man: as the Man is, so is his Sacrifice. If we
bring our Sheep to Gods Altar, and them alone; we had as good have left them
behind us, as an unprofitable Carriage. Mica. 6. 6.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? With burnt offerings, and Calves of a
year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams, or with ten
thousand rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first borne for my transgression, the
fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? No, learn an other Oblation. God
has showed thee, O man, what is good; and what does he require of thee, but
to Do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

The Poet could ask the Priest, Pers.
In Templo quid facit aurum? He bids them bring Compositum ius, fasque animi,
etc. Put these into my hands, et far litabo. Lay upon the Altar of your Heart
Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Patience, Humility, Chastity, Charity; Bona
pignora mentis, and cons^crate these to the Lord.

When the searcher of the Reins shall find a carkas of Religion without a
quickening Spirit, he will turn his countenance from it. Beasts dyed when
they were sacrificed: Men cannot live unless they be sacrificed.

The Oracle answered, to him that demanded what was the best Sacrifice to
please God.

Da medium Lunae, Solemn simul, et Canis iram: Give the half Moon, the whole
Sun, and the Dogs anger: Which three Characters make COR, Greg.
the Heart. Deus non habet gratum offerentem propter munera, sed munera propter
offerentem: God values not the Offerer by the Gift, but the Gift by the
Offerer. Let not then thy Heart be as dead, as the Beast thou immolatest.

So Peter Martyr expounds Paul's living Sacrifice. In Rom, 12.
Those things that can move themselves, are living and quick: they are dead,
that cannot stir themselves, but by others violence. Compelled service to
God; as to keep his Statutes, for fear of Man's Statutes, is an unsound
Oblation, not quick and lively. God loves a cheerful giver, and
thankes-giuer. Non respicit Deus munera, nisi te talem praestes, qualem te
munera promittunt: God regards not thy Gifts, unless thou do show thy self
such a one, as thy Gifts promise thee. Ad te, non munera spectat.

You see the Sacrifice, Devotion. The Mother has held us long: we will deal
more briefly with her Daughters.

Constancy.
THe first borne is Constancy. Bind the Sacrifice. Grace is like a Ring,
without end; and the Diamond of this Ring is Constancy. Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
Deuteronomy. 6. T^ou shall bind my Statutes for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall
be as frontlets between thine eyes. It is the advice of wisdom Let not
mercy and truth forsake thee: Pro. 3. 3.
Bind them about thy neck, and write them upon the Table of thy heart.

The Leaf of a Righteous man never fades, says the Psalm. If it does, then
Lapsus foliorum, mortificatio arborum, says the Gloss. The fall of the leaves
will be the death of the Tree. It is to small purpose, to steer the vessel
safe through the maine, and splitte her within a league of the Haven. To put
your hand to the Plow, and thrive well in the best husbandry; and with Demas to
look back.

Vincenti dabitur; and fulfilled Holin^sse wear^s the Crown. Some have derived
Sanctum, Ren. 2. and 3.
quasi sancitum; an established Nature. All Virtues run in a race: only one
wins the Garland, the Image of eternity, happy Constancy. Wisdom is a
tree of Life to them that lay hold on her: and blessed is he that retains
her: Pro. 3. 18.
Therefore, Make sure your Election; Fast bind, fast find: Bind the Sacrifice.

Feruencie.
THe next D^ughter of this righteous generation, is Feruencie. Bind the
Sacrifice with C^rdes. Thou can not make Heaven too suit. Men use to bind the
World to them, faster then the Philistines Sampson, or the Iaylor his f^gitiue
Prisoner, with Cords, with Cords of Iron; that it may not start from them,
and run away.

Riches is known to be wild Bedlam; therefore they will keep it in Bonds.
They bind their Lands with Intailes, their Goods with Walls, their Monyes with
Obligations, that on no condition they may give them the slip: But they care
not how loose the Conscience be: they that give liberty enough, even to
licentiousnes.

But the Sacrifice of Devotion must be bound with Cords: a Cord of love, a
Cord of fear, a Cord of faith; and this threefold Coard is not easily
broken. Eccle 4. 12.


Wisdom.
A third Daughter, and one of the beautifullest, is Wisdom. Bind the
Sacr^fice with Cords to the Altar. Rectified Devotion, is specially acceptable.

A man may be devout enough: too much, when their zeal is like the horn in
the Unicorns head: it does more hurt then good. You would not have wished Baal
Priests do more for their Master: lo, the gashes and mouths of their
selfe-giuen wounds, speak their forwardness: they wanted a Lamp of
direction, to Guide it to Gods Altar.

Aristotl^ e^lls Discretion, Eth Lib. 6. Cap. 5.
virtutum normam et form^m: the eye of the soul, the soul of virtue. I would
to God, some amongst us had one Dram of this grace, mingled with their whole
handfuls of zeal. It would a little Cool the preter natural heat of the
slng-brand fraternity; as one wittily calls them.

Hollerius writes of an Italian, that by often smelling to the herb Basil, had
Scorpions bred in his brain. Proud Faction is the weed they so much smell on,
and make poesies of, that the serpents bred in their brains, do stinge and
wound the bosom of the Church. These Bind, and with Cords, but not to the
Altar, Devotion is not their scope, but distraction. O may the spirit of
meekness Bind their Sacrifice to the Altar: direct their zeal with
Discretion, to the glory of God. And let us every one say resolutely with
Daui^: I will wa^h my hands in innocence, Psalm. 26. 6.
O Lord; and so will I compass thine Altar. Wisdom is a fair Daughter in
this Progeny. Bind the Sacrifice with Cords to the Altar.

Confidence.
THe youngest Daughter of this fair Sister-hood, is Faith. Copious matter of
Discourse might here be offered me, about the site, matter, fashion, of the
Altar; and to what purpose these four Horns of the Altar served: Bind the
Sacrifice with Cords to the Horns of the Altar.

Perhaps many precious Mines of mysteries might here be found out, which I
digg not for. Among diverse other ends I find, that these Horns of the Altar
were for Refuge; and guilty men did fly unto them for fear of the Law. 1.
King. 1. 50.
Adoniah feared because of Solomon, and arose, and went, and caught hold on the
Horns of the Altar. So Ioab in the next Chapter, ver. 28.
Fled to the Tabernacle of the Lord, and caught hold on the Horns of the
Altar. They fled thither in a hopeful confidence of mercy.

Christ is our Altar, Hebr. 13. 10.
Heb. 13. his Merits the Horns of the Altar. By him therefore let us offer
the sacrifice of Praise to God continually, ver. 15.
that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. Our Faith must
catch hold on these Horns, Christ's merits, that is, our Sacrifice may be
acceptable.

The Law of God shall surprise us, and the Sword of eternal death shall kill
us, if we bind not our Sacrifice to the Horns of the Altar: if we rest not
upon the all-sufficient Merits of Jesus Christ.

This is the Mother of her, whose Daughter she is. It may be said of these, as
the Poet of Ice and Water; the Mother bringes forth the Daughter, and the
Daughter bringes forth the Mother.

All her Sisters are beholding to her: Never a Damos^ll of Israel dares enter
Ahashuerosh Court, but she; She alone must bring all graces to the Horns of
the Altar. O blessed Faith: Many Daughters have done vertuosly, but thou
excellest them all. Pro. 31. 29.
Bind then the Sacrifie with Cords, even unto the Horns of the Altar.

YOu hear the Mother and her Children: These are the Daughters that true
Devotion brings forth. Compare we our Progeny with these, and we shall
find, that we bring forth Daughters of another countenance.

Distinguish this Land of ours (let the word Divide, be held heresy in
manners) into four CC: Court, City, Country, Church.

The Court may be said to have three Daughters; as Fulco boldly told Richard
the first: Acts and Monu page 252.
which are vicious, and of a wicked disposition. The King answered, He had no
Daughters at all. Fulco said, he cherished three in his Court that were no
better then Strumpets; and therefore wished him timely to provide them
Husbands, or else they would undo him, and his Realm. The angry King would
have them named. Fulco told him, they were Pride, Avarice, and Luxury. The
blushing, penitent, and discreet Prince confessed, and resolved to bestow them.
So he gave Pride to the Templars, Avarice to the Cistercians Monks, and
Luxury to the Popish Prelates: the like matches, as fitter then in England
could not be found for them.

The City has four Daughters too: Fraud, Hypocrisy, Usury, Sensuality.
Let me say; the breeding and indulgence to such Daughters, shame you. Shall I
tell you how to cast them away upon Husbands? Marry Fraud to the professed
Cheaters. Bestow Usury upon the Brokers. Banish Sensuality to the Forest, to
see if any Beast will take it up. And for Hypocrisy, wedde it to the
braine-sicke Separatist, though you send it to them with a letter of Mart to
Amsterdam.

The Country has three Daughters; Ignorance, Uncharitableness, and
Ill-custome: Ignorance they might bestow on the Papists, they will make much
of it. Let them send Uncharitableness to the Savages and Saracens. And
Ill-custome to the Jews, who will rather keep their Customs, then their
Savior.

For the Church; we have but two Children, and those none of our own breeding
neither; though we are feign to bring them up with patience, Pouerti^, and
Contempt: and take'hem who will, so we were rid of them.

These are not the Daughters of Devotion, but the wretched brood of our
Indeuotion.

There are amongst us, 1. Some that will not Bind. 2. Some that will Bind, but
not with Cords. 3. Some that will Bind with Cords, but not the Sacrifice. 4.
Some that will Bind the Sacrifice with Cords, but not to the Alter. 5. Some
that will Bind the Sacrifice with Cords to the Altar, but not to the Horns of
the Altar.


1. Some will not Bind; nay they will not be bound. There are so many Religions
in the world, that they will be tied to none of them. Such a one is like a
loose Tooth in the head, of little use, of much trouble. Their trepidations are
more shaking then cold Ague-fi^tes: their staggers worse then a Drunkards.

A Fether in the Air, a Fane on the House, a Cockboate in the Sea, are less
inconstant. The course of a Dolphin in the Water, of a Buzzard in the Air, of
a Whore in the City, is more certain. They are full of farraginous and
bullimong mixtures: power them forth into liberty, and they run wilder then
Quick silver on a table.

But let a good man be (as John Bap was commended by our Savior) No Reed
shaken with the Wind: Let our Actions have ballace, our Affections balance:
be we none of those, that will not Bind.

2. Some will Bind, but not with Cords: they will take on them an outward
profession, but not be fervent in it. they will not bind themselves to
Devotion, as the Philistines bound Sampson, Iud. 16.
with new Withes, or with new Ropes; but only with a Rush, or a Hair, or a
twine Thread of coldness.

A Sermon or a Mass, is all one to them; they come with equal devotion to
either. All the Religion in the World with these Gergesens, is not worth a
slitch of Bacon: Ier. 44. 17.
For handfulles of Barley, and morselles of Bread, you may win them to
worship the Queen of Heaven.

Their lukewarmenesse is so offensive, that they trouble all stomaches: GOD
shall sp^e them out of the Church: the earth shall spue them into the Grave,
and the Grave shall spue them into Hell.

3. Some will Bind, and with Cords; but not the Sacrifice. Such are the
utterly irreligious, the openly profane. They have their Cords to bind; but
they will not meddle with the Sacrifice, Devotion. The Prophet Esaias gives them
a Vae for their labor.

Woe unto them that draw Iniquity with cords of Vanity; Eay. 5. 18.
and sin, as it were with a Cart-rope. But in a just quittance for their
strong-haled wickedness, they draw on their own destruction with Cords, and
damnation, as it were with a Cart-rope. Pro. 5. 22.
So those Funcs peccatorum, that Solomon speaks of, shall be rewarded: His
own iniquities shall take the wicked himself, and he shall be holden with the
Cords of his sins. There is such a concatenation of their wickedness,
rioting, swearing, drunkenness, whoredom, that at last the Cords end reaches
to Hell.

Their whole life is but like a Fire-worke, that runs along the Rope of
wickedness, till at last it goes out in the Grave, and is rekindled in the
slaming Pit. They bind sin sure to them selves with Cords; and with the
same Cords the Devil Binds them as fast to him: they shall speed as himself
does, and be at last Bound with the Cords, or Chai^es of darkness.

The Magistrate should do well (in mean time) to Bind them with Material
Cords, of severe punishments. Chain up their feet from Brothell-houses,
Manacle their hands from slaughters; give them the Cords of Correction, least
at last by a Cord they depart the world.

The three spetiall Twists of this Cord, are Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Cossenage. If you could untwine these three, and separate them; there were some
hope of breaking them all. You say, on their deprehention they have sure
punishment: be as careful to find them out. But it is reported, you have
rowsed these sins from their old nests, and sent them home to your own houses.
Cheating winds into some of your own shops: Adultery creepes into some of
your own Chambers. And I know not how, sometimes Justices and Magistrates have
whipped Drunkenness out of the Alehouse into their own Cellers.

There is one amongst us that is a terrible Binder; and that is the usurer. He
Binds strangely, strongly, with the Cords of obligations. You know he that
enters into obligation, is said to come into Bonds; it is all one, into Cords.
This man's whole life is spent in tying of knots: his profession is Cordage. And
for this cause he is beloved of the Cord-makers, for setting them on work; and
of no body else.

This fellow Binds, but he will near Bind the Sacrifice: his conscience shall be
loose enough. I could say much to this Binder, if there were any hope of him.
But I remember a true story, that a friend told me of an Usurer. There was a
Godly Preacher in his Parish, that did beat down with all just conuictions,
and honest reproves that sin. Many Usurers flocked to his Church, because he
was a man of note. Among the rest, this Usurer did bid him often to dinner, and
used him very kindly. Not long after this Preacher began to forbear Usury;
not in any conniuence or partiallitie; but because he had dealt plentyfully
with it; and now his Text led him not to it.

Now begins the Usurer to be heavy, sorrowing and discontent; And turned his
former kindness into fullennesse. The Preacher must needs observe it, and
boldly asked him the reasons of this sudden auersion. The Usurer replied. If
you had held on your first Course to in^eigh against Usury, I had some hope
you would have put all the Usurers down; and so I should have had the better
Vent and Custom for my Money. For my part, say what you will, I never meant to
leave it: But I should have been beholding to you, if you could have made me an
Usurer alone. You see the hope of an Usurers Conversion.

But I would to God, that every one thus bound with the Cord of his
Wickedness, would consider, that so long as a Cord is whole, it is not easily
broken: but untwist it, and lay it thread by thread, and you my quickly snappe
it a sunder. Beloved, first untwine the Cord of your sins by serious
consideration, and then you may easily break them off by Repentance.

4. Some 1. will Bind, 2. with Cords, 3. yea and the Sacrifice, 4. but not to
the Altar. There are many of these in our Land: they bind the Sacrifice
exceeding fast to Themselves, not to the Altar. All the Altaragia, the dues
that belong to them that serve at Gods Altar, and which the Laws of God and
man Bound to the Altar, they have loosned, and Bound to themselves, and their
heirs.

These Bind the Sacrifice, and with Cords; but not to the right place. Nay, I
would to God, they would Bind no more; But now the fashion is to hold God to
Custom: and if a poor Minister demand those remanents, which are left to the
Altar, he is ou^rthrowne by Custom. Oh the pity of God, that England-should
have any such Custom:

And for you, that never think your selves well, but when you have Bound the
Sacrifice to your selves: and imagine that the Milk or Fleece of your Flocks,
which God has tyth'd for himself, is too good for the Minister; and will
either act^, or armis, with force of Law, or craft of Coosening, keep it to
your selves; that will plead the rate of a penny in Law, for a pound in
concience: Chop and change your Sheep, to defraude Christ of his Tenth sleece:
know that as you Bin^e the Sacrifice from the Altar, so you shall have no
comfort by the Altar, but the Justice of God shall Bind you from his mercy.
Though you may repent: which if you restore not, is impossible: and your
restitution is improbable; yet for the present, the Devil has Eleven points
of the Law against you; that is, Possession.

5. Lastly, some. 1. Bind. 2. The Sacrifie. 3. With Cords. 4. To the Altar. 5
But not to the Horns of the Alter. These are deficient in a spetiall degree of
Devotion, Faith. They have many good moral virtues; but they want that, which
should make both their virtues and themselves acceptable to God; Faith in his
Son Jesus Christ. It is a vain Devotion, whence this is excluded: The Law
finds no works righteous. But Quod Lex operum min^^do imperat, L^x s^dei
credendo impe^rat: What the Law of Works commanded with the threatening, the
Law of Faith obtaines by believing: Affie we then the merits of our blessed
Savior, who is our only Re^u^e; and take fast hold on the Horns of the Altar.
Bind the Sacrifice with Cords even unto the Horn^^ of the Altar

The Sum.
TO gather these scattered Branches to their Root; now we have cast over the
particulars, let us Sum them. The Sum is our Thankfulness: Bind the
Sacrifice with Cords, etc.

Ingratitude has been ever held a Monster, a preternaturall thing: one of
those priuations and def^ciencies which God never made, but the devil thrust
in upon the absence of the positive and primitive virtues. Here upon we call
an Ungrateful person, an unnatural man.

No man wonders at Dogs, and Wol^^^, and Foxes; but at Satyrs and Centaures,
and such Monsters in nature, all gaze upon. Ebrietie, Adultery, Avarice
(though equally heinous) are less odious; because they have Nature and Custom
on their sides. But an Unthankful person named, we all detest, as a sole^isme
in sense, a paradoxe in manners, a prodigy in nature.

To demonstrate this sin to be so far from humanity, that the very Beasts
abhor it. There is a St^ry of a poor man, that went often to a Forest to
gather Sticks; where suddenly one day, he heard the voice of a man in
distress: making toward it, he found a rich Neighbor fallen into a deep
Pit; and together with him an Ape, a Lion, and a Serpent: he made his
moan, being endangerd both of the Pit, and of the Beasts: Pity and
Charity moved the poor man to help the rich, and that seldom mooues the
rich to help the poor; He lets down the Cord, wherewith he bound his
Sticks, and up comes the Ape: Again he puts for the man, and the Lion
ascendes: A third offer he makes, and the Serpent takes the advantage: last
he draws up the man; who freed by his help from instant death, promised him
a bountious requital, if on the next day he did visit him. The poor man
affying his word, came to him accordingly, in a hopeful expectation of reward.
But now the rich man would not know him; he has forgotten that ever he stood
in any need of him, and impudently denies him any recompense. The discomforted
poor man is feign to travel the Forest again for his Fuel, where the Ape
spying him, had ready broken with his teeth and nails, Sticks enough for his
burden: there was his utmost Gratitude. Another day coming, the Lion
approaches him, prese^ting to him diverse laden Camelles; which driving home,
and disburdening, he found precious Treasure, that enriched him. A third time
upon other occasions traveling the Forest, the Serpen^ creeping salutes him
with a Precious stone in her mouth, letting it fall at her sauers feet. The
intent of the Fable is to demonstrate, that Beasts and Serpents condemn Man
of Ingratitude.

You will say, this is but a fiction: then hear a truth. Esaias 1. Esaias 1. 3.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters Scrippe: but Israel does
not know, my people does not consider. The very Beast looks to his Masters
hand that feeds him.

This vice is so horrible, that God need not sit to judge it; the Devil
himself will condemn it: When he reasoned with God about Job, Job. 1. 10.
he pleades that God had set a Hedge about him, and blessed the work of his
hands: And therefore implies, Does Job serve God for naught? If he will be
Unthankful to a God so kind, Satan himsel^e will censure him. It must needs
be a horred sin, that the Devil taxes and abominates. If we be
unthankful, we are sure to be condemned: for if God would not condemn it,
the Devil will. An V^grat^full man then (in some sort) is worse then the
Devil.

Men and Brethren, let us be Thankful: Let our Meditations travel with Da^id
in the 148. ver. 1.
Psalm, first up into Heaven. Even the very Heavens and heights praise him.
Psalm. 14^. 2.
And those blessed Angels in his Court sing his Glory. Descend we then by the
celestial bodies, and we shall find the Sun, ver. 3.
Moon, and all the Stars of light, praising him. Pass we by the Waters,
which the Makers decree has confined there, 4.
and we shall hear those Praising him. A little lower, we shall perceive the
Meteors, and upper Elements; 8.
the Fire and Hayle, Snow and Vapor, magnifying him: even the Wind and
Storm, fulfilling his wo^d. Fall we upon the Center, the very Earth; we shall
hear the Beasts and Cattle, Mountains and Hills, fruitful Trees and all
Cedars, extolling his Name. The chirping Birds sing sweet Psalms and Carols
to their Creators praise, every Morning when they rise, every Evening ere they
go to rest. Not so much as the very Creeping things, says the Psalmist; the
noisome Dragons, and crawling Serpents in the deepes, but they do, in a sort,
bless their Maker. Let not then Man, the first fruits of his Creatures, for
whose service all the rest were made, be unthankful. If these, much more let
all Kings of the earth, ver. 11. 12.
and all people: Princes, and all Judges of the World: Young men and Maidens,
Old men and Children, praise the Name of the Lord.

There are some, Job. 31. 27.
that Kiss their own hands, for every good turns that befalls them. God
gives them blessings, and their own wit or strength has the praise. Other
receive them but as due debt, as if God were obliged to them. But alas! What
have thou (O man, that is good) that thou have not received? Thou have not a
ragge to thy back, nor a bitte to thy Belly, nor a good hair on thy head, nor
a good thought in thy heart, but God gives it.

Our evils are properly our own. Hug^
Omnia mea mala p^re sunt mala, et mea sunt. Omnia mea bona pure, suut bona et
mea no^ sunt: All my evils are truly evil and mine own. All my good things
are truly good, but none of my own. Now is not the Author of all good, good
enough to be remembered? When the Benefits are gotten, must the benefactor be
forgotten? And shall Thanks wax old, whiles gifts are new? Boni siquid
habeo, a Deo sumpsi, Aug.
non a me proesumpsi. Shall we then set the receauers in the place of the
Giver, and worship our selves?

This is a Sacrilegious theft. The stealing of temporal goods may be requited
with restitution: but the purloyning of Gods glory can never be answered. These
are subtle Thieves: for though Heaven be sure and secure enough from violent
robbers, yet these by a wily insidiation enter into it, and rob God of his
Honor. Other Thieves steal for necessity; and but from their equals, men.
These filch from God his holy right, and that out of a scornful pride.

It would here be examined, whether England has any ground in it guilty of
this barren Ingratitude? If I should fall to discoursing the favors of GOD,
rained in such plentiful showers upon us; our peace, plenty, tranquillity,
and all those gifts of his Left hand; together with that grace of his Right,
which blesses all the rest, and without which they were but a Summer without a
Spring; full of heat, but infertile; the Gospel: you would say, Satis haec,
we have heard this often enough. Ad nauseam vsque: A Sermon of such repetition
is but like a suit of the old make. Your curious ears are too fine for such
recognitions. You think we never speak of these things, but for want of
other matter.

The wonders, which God wrought in Egypt by Mose^, in Canaan by Iosuah, were
commanded to be proclaimed to all succeeding generations. How many Psalms did
this sweet Singer of Israel compose of this subject? How many excellent Sermons
did the Prophets preach when they had no other ground or Text, but those
principles? (...) did the people sling away from before the Pulpits, with; We
have heard these things often enough: they are tedious.

Gods mercies to us shall vie weight and number with theirs. We are if not
their parallel; yet their second in the favors of Heaven. God has hedged us
in with his providence, and compassed us about with songs of deliverance. We
are the Plant of his own hand, and he continually waters us with the saving
shewers of his Gospel. We need not travel to our neighbors Cisterns; every
man has his own Well; and such a Well, as yields the Water of life, if we
would bring Buckets with us; Ears of attention, and Hearts of retention to
draw it out withal. What Nation so far as the World is Christened, has so
many learned Divines? Neither is this Learning like a Coal burning to
themselves, but a bright Lamp shining to us: Even those reverend Fathers, that
sit at the Stern of the Church, and charge their minds with her greatest
troubles, are yet continually preaching to some particular Congregation. It
cannot be denied, but the Lord has showed us Light.

Now where be the Fruits that he must look for? I dare scarcely enter into
this search; as the Elephant refuses to drink in a clear Water, least he
should see his own deformity. I fear to find the respondencie of the deeds
of Darkness. I know, God has his number amongst us; I hope it is not small.
God every day increase it, to his glory, and the Churches comfort. Let me have
freedom to speak generally.

Beloved, our lives shame us. If men and Angels should hold their peace, our
own open, and manifest iniquities will proclaim us unthankful. Fraud in
our houses, Drunkenness in our streets, Oppression in our feelds Adultery in
corners, Injustice on seats, Impiety in our Temples, Rapine upon our Temples,
deuastation of our Temples; at least, of the means that God has given them.
These, these are the fruits, too many of us return for Gods mercies. Thus,
thus do we adorn the Gospel.

The greatness of Gods kindness to us, we strive to match with our
unkindness to God. He that in his own person stood for our defense, and bore
the heat and burden of the day for us, has this requital^, to have his cause
put off to others. We dare not stand for his glory. Could we else brook his
holy days profaned, holy name abused, holy Church despised, his ^e^^ants
impouerished; if we were as kind to him, as he is to us?

Whereas every man has a Charge for Gods glory, we put it off from one to
another. The poor man to the Rich, and says he should look to these
disorders: the Rich man to the Minister: the Minister after a hearty
dehortation to the Magistrate. But still wickedness holds up the head, and the
heat of rebellion is not qualyfied.

It is storyed of a Certain King, that fighting a desperate Battle, for the
recovery of his Daughter, injuriously stolen from him; found ill success, and
the day utterly against him. Till by the faithful valor of a strange Prince,
disguised in the habit of a mean Soldiers, (that pitied his loss, and bore
love to his Daugter) he recovered both her, and victory: The Prince
interposing himself to hazard of death, and many wounds, for the others
redemption. Not long after this Prince received some wrong concerning his
Honor, which he deservedly prized: He made his complaint to the King, and
besought him to give a just censure of his cause. The forgetful King put him
over to a Judge. The Prince replies; O King, when thou wast lost, I endangered
my self for thy rescue: I did not bid another save thee, but I saved thee my
self. Lo, the skarres of those wounds I bore, to free thee and thy state from
inevitable ruin: And now my suit is before thee, do thou shuffle me off to,
another?

Such was our case; Satan had stolen our dear daughter, our soul: in vain
we labourd a recovery: principalyties and Powers were against us, weakness
and wretchedness on our sides. Christ the Sun of God took pity on us: and
though he were an eternal Prince of Peace, disguised himself in the habit
of a common Soldier; Induens formam serui, putting on him the likeness of a
Servant, Psalm. 2. 7.
undertook this War against our two strong enemies; set himself betwixt us
and death, bore those wounds, which should have lighted on us. By no Angel,
nor Saint; by no Gold or precious Minerals, did he redeem us; but by his own
grievous sufferings. Now his Glory is in question: his Name, his Honor is
abused, dear to him as his own Majesty: We stand by, and behold it; he
appeals to our censure, remembers us of the Wounds, Passions, Sorrows, he
endured for us: We put him off from one to another, and let the cause of him
that saved us, fall to a loss. Who shall plead for our Ingratitude? Heaven and
earth, Sun and Stars, Orbs and Elements, Angels and Devils will cry shame
upon us.

If we ask now, as the Wicked will at the latter day; Lord, Math 25.
When saw we thee hungry, and did not feed thee? When naked, and did not cloth
thee? When was thy cause before us, which we defended not? I answer; any day,
every day. When we hear Swearers wound and tear his holy Name in pieces:
when we see Idolaters give his Honor to Carved or painted Blocks: When
Ruffians speak contemptibly of his holy rites; when his Saboths, Sacraments,
word, Ministers are vilipended; our selves standing by with a guilty silence.
Oh which of us has not been Guilty of this Ingratitude?

It was the exprobation of Athens, that she suffered those men to die in exile,
ignominy, oblivion, that with their virtuous endeauours had reared her up on
the Pillars of Fame. Miltiades, Aristides, Solon, Phocion; Vbi vixerunt, Vbi
iacent? Where lived they? where lie they? Their worthy Acts gave glory to that
City, and that City couerd them with the inglorious dust of obscurity. So
the Lord Jesus had made us live that were dead, and we do, what we can, to let
his lining name dye amongst us.

The Grecians had a Proverb amongst them, against them.

Pro meritis male tractarunt Agamemnona Gra^i. Agamemnon for the Honor of
Greece, had done great service to the conquest and subversion o^ Troy. And when
he came home, was Slain by his own Wife Clitemnestra, by the help of
Aegistus the adulterer. Christ loved us as his Wife, endowed us with all his
own Riches; Conquers Troy for us, subdues all our Enemies and returning home,
when he expects to find peace, and kind entertainment in our hearts; we fall
to vexing and wounding him; forsaking his love, and cleaving to the world in a
Cursed Adultery. So

Dulcem pro meritis tractamus acerrime Christum., So bitterly do we requite
our sweet Savior, for his mercies.

Scipio had made Rome Lady of Affricke And coming home with Triumph over that
and Hanibal, the Senate banished him into a bace village. where dying he
commanded this sculpture to be engraven on his Tomb. Ingrata Patria, ne ossa
quidem mea habes. Unthankful Country, thou have not so much as my very bones.
Many and mighty deliverances has the Lord given us.

From furious Amal^kites, that came with a Navy as they bragged, able to fetch
away our Land in Turues.

From an angry and raging Pestilence that turned the popular Streets of this
City into solitude.

From a Treason wherein men conspired with Devils: for Hell was brought up to
their coniurations; and a whole brewing of that salt Sulphur was tunn'd up in
Barrels for us to drink.

Behold, and kiss the feet of his Mercy, we are delivered by Jesus Christ
from all these miseries and mischiefs. Oh let us not voluntarily call upon
ourselves, a worse then all these, our own Unthankfulness. Let not Christ
say, Ingrat^ Anglia, ne ossa quidem mea habes: Unthankful England, thou have
not so much as (my bones) the prints, and sensible impressions of these favors
in thy memory. Thou have shut thy Savior out of thy mind, and buried him in
neglectfull oblivion. Take heed, least in a just quittance, he exclude thee
from his thoughts, and forget to do thee any more good: Least he take away his
Name, his Glory, his Light, his Gospel, from thee; and bestow it on those
vnchristned borders, where now his great Majesty is not adored.

How justly might he leave us in our former wretchedness? There is a pretty
Fable, the moral of it will profitably fit our present Discourse. A Serpent
accidentally enclosed, betwixt two great Stones, that he could no way es
extricate himself; made his moan to a man passing by to deliver him. The man
with much force removed the Stone, and set him free. The Serpent now, feeling
his liberty, thus bespake his deliverer. I confess, you have done me a
kindness in helping me out, being almost famished: But now I am out, my hunger
is so violent, that I must needs take the benefit of my fortune, and devour
you. The man urged his Ingratitude; but to no purpose, for the Serpent would
eat him. Instantly he spied an Ass coming, and desired the Serpent to put
it to his judgment. The Serpent was contented, knowing that the Ass durst not
but condemn the man for his prey, least he endangered himself. The case was
pleaded on both sides; the Man urging his kindness, the Serpent his hunger:
But the Ass gave judgment on the Serpents side; who is now ready to set on
the Man. Hereupon flies by an Eagle, to whom the Man appealed for Judgment in
this controversy. The Eagle hearing the cause debated, demanded of the
Serpent, if he could have freed himself, without the man's aid? The Serpent
answered affirmatively, and said, it was only his policy, by this trick to
get the Man within his reach. The Eagle desires to see the place: the Man
shows it. The Eagle bids the Serpent go into the hole again for more
certain demonstration. The Serpent does so; and the Man remooues the other
Stone, as it was before, and reincloseth the Serpent. The Eagle now bids the
Serpent deliver himself: He replied, he could not. Then (quoth the Eagle)
this is my judgment: The next time the Man lets thee forth, do thou take him
for thy prey, and eat him.

It cannot be denied, but we were once surer in Satan's hold, then this Serpent
is imagined to be between the Stones. The Man Christ Jesus in pity redeemed
us, and gave us liberty: We are no sooner out, but we fall to devour him; to
make his poor members, his poor Ministers our Prey; to wound his Name with
Blasphemies, to steal his Goods with Sacrilege; and to give his Honor either
to other Creatures, or to our own Wittes^ as if we could have delivered our
selves. Let any be Judge but the Ass, our own flesh and blood; and we are
sure to be condemned for Ingratitude But if Christ should in his Justice, put
us again into our former hole; leave us in the power of Satan, Who would not
say with the Eagle, The next time he sets us free, let us take him for our
booty, and deuo^^e our Redeemer.

It is recorded of Alexander, an Emperor famoused for his liberality: and of
Julius Caesar, no less commended for his patience: that the former would never
give, nor the other forgive an Ungrateful person. Wretched were we, if the
Lord should withold from us either of these Mercies. If he should shut up the
Flud-gates of his Bounty, and cease giving: or lock up the Treasure-house of
his Mercy, and leave forgiving. If he should neither Donare bona sua, nor
Condonare mala nostra; woe unto us: We might curse our Births, or rather our
Ingratitude.

We hope still, God will be merciful to us for Christ his sake: So God of us,
he hopes we will be obedient to him for Christ his sake. Petimusque, damusque
vicissim: As we expect, God should save us for the merits of his Son: So
God expectes, we should serve him for the merits of his Son. If the bitter
sufferings, and heart-blood of Jesus, cannot get of us the forbearance of
Iniquity; How shall it get for us the forgiveness of Iniquity? As we
entreat God, for his Mercy, to be good to us: So God entreats us, for his
Mercy, to be good to him; and therein most good to our selves.

O let that Goodness, that reconciles us both, prevail with us both. With
God, to bless us by his bountifulness: With us, to bless God by our
Thankfulness. What should I say? For Jesus Christ his sake, let us be
Thankful. It is a good thing to give thanks to the Lord, says our Psalmist.
Psalm. 92. ^.
Good for the virtue of the action: Good for the excellency of the object:
Good for the happiness of the retribution.

For the Action; it is better to Bless, then to curse. Romans 12. Romans 12. 14.
Bless them that persecute you: Bless, and curse not.

For the Object; our Praises are sung to a most glorious God: one that is
Beauty it self; and only worthy to inhabit the praises of Israel. Psalm. 27.
4.


For the Retribution: If we bless God, God will bless us: As one notes, that
all David's Psalms, were either Hosanna, Gueuat.
or Halleluiah; that is, God bless, or God be blessed. Either a Prayer for
Mercy, or a Praise for Merci^. Ascendat ^rgo gratia, vt descendat gratia: Fem.
For, Gratiarum cessat decursus, vbi recursus non fuerit: Grace will not come
down, unless Gratitude go up. All Rivers run back to the Sea, whence they
were first derived.

Let us send up our gifts to God, that he may send down his gifts to us. Let
us not Vti datis, tanquam innatis: But remember that we hold all in Capite, and
are suitors to the Court of Heaven; worthy to forfet our estates, if we pay not
the quit-rent of Thankfulness; acknowledge not Gratitude and Obedience.

God will not long Catulis indulg^r^. Luporum, pamper the Wolves whelps, as the
Proverb: But he will forget them, that forget him. We have a saying from
Aristotle. Nec in puerum, nec in senem collocandu^ esse beneficium: That our
beneficence should not be fixed upon a Child, or an Old man: for the Child
before he comes to age, will forget it; and the Old man will die, before he can
requite it. Are we all either Children or Old men, that we either not
remember, or not return Thankefulnes to God for his mercies? Psalm 148. 12.
Yet says the Psalmist: Old men, and Children, praise the Name of the Lord.

With him let us then say; Psalm. 116. 12.
What shall we render to the Lord, for all his Benefits toward us? David was
inward with God; yet he studied what Present he should offer him. He lights
upon that, which he was only able to give, and God most willing to receive;
Thankfulness. I will take the Cup of Salvation, and bless the Name of the
Lord. Pray we then to GOD, to give us Thankefullnesse, that we may give it
him. For of our selves we have not what to give, unless the Lord give us,
wherewith to give.

Let us Show forth his loving kindness in his Morning, and his faythfulnesse
every Night. Psalm. 92. 2.
Morning and Evening let us praise him, that has made the Day for our labor,
and the Night for our rest: And that not ex vsu, magis quam sensu, but with a
hearty humility Give unto the Lord the Glory due to his Name: Psalm. 96. 8.
Bring your Sacrifi^e, and come into his Courts. Let no opportunity steal by
neglected: but Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous: and give thanks at the
remembrance of his Holiness. Psalm. 97. 12.
No Garment better becomes you; though you have almost put it out of fashion,
then to Praise the Lord: For, Psalm. 33. 1.
Praise is comely for the righteous.

Thanksgiving is the best Sauce to our Meat; and blesses all the Dishes on
the Table. Deuteronomy. 8. 10.
When thou have eaten, and art full, thou shall bless the Lord thy God.
Whether we eat or drink, work or rest, let us set that golden Poesy on all
our labors, Zach. 4. 7.
which the Angel to Zachay gave of the Head-stone: Grace, grace unto it. He
spoke pleasant truth, that said: He that rises from the Table without giving
of thanks, goes his way, and owes for his Ordinary. He is unthankful, that is
unmindful of a benefit: unthankful that requites it not: unthankful that
dissembles it: but most unthankful that denies it. Though we cannot requite
Gods favor, we will neither forget it, nor dissemble it, nor deny it.

I have purposely been liberal in this doctrine: neither beg I pardon for
prolixitie: It was necessary for the Text; no less for our times. God has
showed us his Light, and we bring forth the works of Darkness.

We say, we al are thankful. Our Words will not pass with God, without our
Deeds. Our Words are so fickle and false, that we dare not trust one another
without manuscrips: Scriueners must be employed in all our commerce. And shall
God take our words, with whom we have broke so often? No beloved, we must
set our hands to it: and to speak to our capacity in the City; seal it,
and deliver it, as our act and deed: we must work that which is good.

I appeal from men's Lips, to their Lives: Verba rebus probate, says Seneca:
The form, the life, the Soul of Thankfulness is Obedience. We, like blind
Isaac, cannot see your Hearts; but say, Let me feel thee. my son. If your
Lives be rugged, like the Hands of Esau, we dare not trust your Voice, for the
Voice of Jacob. If your deeds be rough, and sensible of rebellion, in vain
you tell us, you are Thankful. It is somewhat that you Enter into his Courts,
Psalm. 100. 4.
and speak good of his Name: But you must also do good for his Name, and you
shall be blessed. I have begun, and will end with a Psalm: O come then, Psalm.
95 1, 23.
let us fing unto the Lord; let us rejoice to the Rock of our salvation. Let
ve come before his presence with Thanksgiving, and make a joyful noise to
him, with Psalms. For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all
Gods. God is the Lord, that has showed us Light: bind the Sacrifice with
Cords even to the Horns of the Altar.

FINIS.

POLITIC HVNTING: OR, A Discovery of the cunning Esauites of our times. And,
Plain Dealing: or, A president of Honesty.
The Text. Genes. 25. 27. Esau was a cunning Hunter, and a man of the field:
and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in Tents.
WHen God has a long while deferred his actual Blessings to the importunate
suppliants, and extended their desires; at last he doubles on them the
expected Mercy: So he recompenceth the dilation with the dilatation and
enlarging of his favors. Rebecca had been long barren; and now the Lord opens
her Womb, and sets her a teeming, she conceaues two at once.

It is obserueable, that many holy Women, ordained to be the mothers of men
specially famous and worthy, were yet long barren. Sara the wife of Abraham,
that bore Isaac: Rebeccah the wife of Isaac that bore Jacob: Rahel the wife of
Jacob, that bore Joseph: Anna the mother of Samuel, Elizabeth the mother of
John the Baptist: Hereof may be given some reasons.

1. One Chrysostom. Hom. 49. in Genesis
gives, Vt ex mirabili partu stirilium, praestrueretur fides partui virginis:
That by the miraculous Childbearing of barren Women, a way might be made to
believe the birth of Christ by a Virgin.

2. To show that Israel was multiplied, not by N^turall succession, Q^est 7 ^.
in Genesis
but by Grace. So Theodoret.

3. To exercise the Faith; Hope, and Patience of such as notwithstanding a
Promise, had their issue delayed.

But now Isaa^ prays, God hears, Rebecca conceaues: she conceaues a double
burden; a pair of Sons struggling in her womb. Her body is no less
disquieted with this plenty, then her mind was before with the lack of
Children. Esau and Jacob are borne: brethren they are, not more near in birth,
then different in disposition: For Esau was a cunning Hunter, a man of the
Field: but Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in Tents.

These two are the Subject of my Discourse: wherein I will regard their Nomina,
Omina; Names, and Proceedings. Their Names, Esau and Jacob: note their
conditions for opposite. The one a cunning Hunter: the other, a Plain man. Of
both whom I will be bold to speak literally, and liberally: literally, of
their individual persons: liberally, as they, were figures and significations
of future things.

For herein is not only regardable a meer^ History, but a Mystery also. And
as S. Paul applied the true Story of Isaac the son of the free, and Ish^ael
the some of the bondwom^^; that by these things was another thing meant Gal.
4. 24. So I may conclude of these two Brothers in the same manner. ver 29. As
then, he that was borne after the Flesh, persecuted him that was borne after
the Spirit; even so is it now. So it is now, and so it shall be to the end of
the world.

A Discovery of the cunning Esauites of our times.
Genes. 25. 27. Esau was a cunning Hunter, and a man of the field:
I Must speak first of the first borne Esau. It is probable, he was called
Esau in regard of his manner of birth. ver. 25. He that came out first, was
read all over like an hayrie Garment: and they called his name Esau.

Some derive it from the Hebrew word, Quasah, which signifies, To make: and
taken passiuely, it implies a Perfect man. For he came forth read, and hayrie:
Read, to betoken his bloody disposition: Hayrie, to show his savage and wild
Nature. Other Children are borne with Hair only on the Head, Eyelids, and
Brows: but he was hairy all over; promising extraordinary cruelty.

He had three names. 1. Esau, because he was complete. 2. Edom, because he
was red of complexion; or because he coueted the red Pottage. Perer.
3. Seir, that is, Hair.

You hear his Name, listen to his Nature. Gods Spirit gives him this
Character: He was a cunning Hunter, etc. A Name does not constitute a Nature:
yet in holy Writ, very often, the Nature did fulfill the Name, and answer it
in a future congruence.

The Character has two Branches: noting his Dition. Condition.


His Condition or Disposition was Hunting: his Dition, Portion, or Segniory was
the Field: he was a Field-man.

The first mark of his Character is, A cunning Hunter. Wherein we have
expressed his Power. Policy.


His Strength, and his Slight: his Brawne, and his Brain. His Might; he was
an Hunter. His Wit; he was a Cunning Hunter.

His Strength: A Hunter.
Hunting, in it self, is a delight lawful and lawdable: and may well be
argued for, from the disposition that God has put into creatures. He has
naturally inclined one kind of Beasts to pursue another, for man's profit and
pleasure. He has given the Dog a secret instinct to follow the Hare, the
Heart, the Fox, the Bore: as if he would direct a man by the finger of Nature
to exercise those qualities, which his divine Wisdom created in them.

There is no Creature but may teach a good soul one step toward his Creator.
The World is a Glass, wherein we may contemplate the eternal power and
majesty of God. For the invisible things of him, from the creation of the
World, Romans 1. 20.
are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and Godhead. It is that great Book, of so large a Character,
that a man may run and read it. Yea, even the simplest man that cannot read,
may yet spell out of this Book, that there is a GOD. Every Shepherd has this
Calendar, every Plough-man this ABC. What that French Poet divinely sung, is
thus as sweetly englished, The World's a School; where in a gen^rall Story,
God always reads dumb Lectures of his Glory.


But to our purpose: This practice of Hunting has in it. 1. Recreation. 2.
Benefit.

Delight. Though man by his rebellion against his Creator, forfeited the
Charter which he had in the Creatures: and hereon Adams punishment was, that
he should work for that Sudore vultus, which erst sprung up naturally
beneficis Creatoris: Yet this lapse was recovered in Christ to believers, and a
new Patent was sealed them in his Blood; that they may use them not only ad
necessitatem vitae, but also in delectationem animi. So God gives man not only
Bread and Wine to strengthen his Heart, but even Oil to refresh his
Countenance. Let thy Garments be always W^ite, Eccle. 9. 8.
and let thy Head lack no Ointment. When Solomon had found men pulling on
themselves unnecessary vexations in this world, and yet not buying Peace in
Heaven with their trouble on Earth; he concludes: Then I commended Mirth,
Eccle. 8. 15.
because a man has no better thing under the Sun, then to Eat, and to
Drink, and to be Merry: for that shall abide with him of his labor, the day,
of his life that God gives him under the Sun.

But there is a Liberty, the bounds whereof because men's affections cannot
keep, it is better their understandings knew not: For, Melius est nescire
centrum, quam non tenere circulum. I may say of too many, as Seneca:
Nihilfaelicitati eorum deest, nisi moderatio eius: They have happiness enough,
if they could moderate it. Nothing is Magis proprium materiae, (say
Philosophers) more proper to matter, then to flow; nisi a forma sistitur, unless
the form refrain and stay it. Nothing is more peculiar to Man, then to run
out, and to err exorbitantly, if Grace direct not.

Men deal with Recreation, as some Travelers do with another Grounds: they
beg passage through them in Winter, for auoydance of the Miry ways; and so
long use it on sufferance, that at last they plead Prescription, and hold it by
Custom. God allows Delights to succor our infirmity, and we sawcily turn
them to habitual Practices. Therefore Solomon condemns it in some, as he
commendes it in others. Rejoice in thy youth, Eccle. 11. 9.
and follow thy vanities: but know, that for all this, God will bring thee into
Judgment. And our Savior denounces a Vae ridentibus, for they that will
laugh, when they should weep; shall mourn, when they might have rejoiced.

We often read Christ weeping, never laughing: taking his creatures for
sustentation, not for recreation. Indeed he afforded us this benefit; and
what we had lost, as it were ex postliminio, recovered to us. But it were
strange, that Haeres succedens in defuncti locum, should do more, then the
Testator ever did himself, or allowed by his grant: Or that Servants and
Sinners should challenge that, which was not permitted to their Master and
Savior. But thus we prevent our liberty, as the Pharisees did the Law, in
sensum reprobum. These Hunt, but keep not within Gods Pale; the circumferent
limits, wherein he has mounded and bounded our liberty.

Benefit. Recreations have also their profitable use, if rightly undertaken.

1. The Health is preserved by a moderate Exercise. Sedentariam agentes vitam;
They that live a Sedentarie life, so find it.

2. The Body is prepared and fitted by these sportiue, to more serious labors,
when the hand of War shall set them to it.

3. The Mind, wearied with grauer employments, has thus some cool
respiration given it, and sent back to the service of God with a revived
alacrity.

His Policy. A Cunning Hunter.
But we have hunted too long with Esaus Strength, let us learn his Slight: A
cunning Hunter. Hunting requires tantum artis, quantum martis: Plain Force is
not enough, there must be an accession of Fraud. There is that common sense in
the Creatures, to avoid their pursuers. Fishes will not be taken with an empty
hook: nor Birds with a bare Pipe, though it go sweetly: nor Beasts with
Briareus strength only, though he had an hundred hands. Here Actus pollentior
armis. Fishes must have a Bait, Birds a Net; and he that takes Beasts,
must be a cunning Hunter. Can a Bird fall into a Snare upon the earth, Amos. 3.
5.
where no Ginne is for him? Nay, often both Vises and Devices, Toils and
Toylings, Strength and Stratagems, are all too little.

A cunning Hunter.
It appears, that Esaus delight was not to surprise tame Beasts, that did him
service; but wild: For, against the former, there needed no such cunning. How
easily is the Ox brought to the Yoke, the Horse to the Bitte, the Lamb to
the Slaughter? His intention and contention was against wild and noxious
creatures.

This Observation teaches us to do no violence to the Beasts, that serve us.
Solomon stampes this Mark on the good man's Forehead, that he is merciful to
his Beast. And the Law of God commanded, that The mouth of the Ox should not
be mussled, that treads out the Corn. God opened the mouth of an Ass to
reprove the folly of Balaam; who struck her undeservedly for not going
forward, when Gods Angel stood ad oppositum.

Those sports are then intolerable, wherein we vex those Creatures, that
spend their strengths for our benefits. God therefore often justly suffers
them to know their own power, and to revenge themselves on our ingratitude.
The Roman Southsayers diuined; that when Bulls, Dogs, and Asses, (Beasts
created for use and obedience) grew madd on a sudden, Bellum servile
imminebat, it boded some servile War and Insurrection. But we may truly
gather, that when God suffers these serviceable and domestical Creatures, to
make Mutenie and Rebellion against us; that God is angry with our sins: and
that they no otherwise shake off our service, then we have shaken off the
service of God. So long as we keep our Covenant with the Lord, he makes a
League for us, with the Beasts of the field: but when we fall from our
Aleagiance, they fall from theirs; and (without wonder) quit our Rebellion
against God, with their Rebellion against us. We see what we get by running
from our Master; we loose our Servants.

But if they that fly from God by Contempt, shall thus speed, What shall
become of them that fly upon God by Contumacie? If wicked Nabal could blame
the Servants, qui fugiunt Dominos, that run from their Masters; how would he
condemn them, qui persequuntur, that run upon them with violence? But if we
band our selves against God, he has his Hosts to fight against us. Fowls in
the air, Fishes in the sea, Beasts on the earth, Stones in the street, will
take his part against us. So long does the Hen clock her Chickens, as she
takes them to be hers: but if they fly from the defense of her Wings, she
leaves them to the prey of the Kite. So long as we obey GOD, Heaven and Earth
shall obey us; and every Creature shall do us service: But if we turn
Outlawes to him, we are no longer in the circle of his gracious custody and
protection.

A cunning Hunter.
AS Cunning as he was to take Beasts, he had little cunning to save himself.
How foolish was he, to part with his Birthright for a mess of Lentile
Pottage? And since there is a necessary discussion of his Folly, as well as of
his Cunning, I will take here just occasion to demonstrate it: and that in five
Circumstances.

1. He had a ravenous and intemperate desire. This appears by three phrases
he used. ver. 30.
1. Feed me, I pray thee; Satisfy, saturate, satiate me: or, let me swallow
at once, as some read it: The words of an appetite insufferable of delay. 2. To
show his eagerness, he doubles the word for haste: With that Red, with that
Red Pottage. Red was his color, Red his desire: He coueted Red Pottage, he
dwelt in a red soil; called thereon, Idumea: and in the Text, Therefore was
his name called Edom. 3. He says, I am faint: and ver. 32. at the point to
die, if I have it not: Like some longing souls, that have so weak a hand over
their appetites, that they must die, if their humor be not fulfilled. We may
here infer two Observations.

1. That Intemperance is not only a filthy, but a foolish sin. It is
impossible, that a ravenous Throat should lie near a sober Brain: There may
be in such a man, understanding and reason; but he neither hears that, nor
follows this. A City may have good Laws, though none of them be kept. But as
in sleepers and madmen, there is Habitus rationis, non vsus et actus: Such men
have reason, Sen. ep. 21. ad Lucil.
but want the active use. Venture praecepta non audit: The belly has no ears.
Though you would write such men's Epitaphs whiles they are living, yet you
cannot; Id. ep. 60.
for Mortem suam antecesserunt, they have antedated their death, and buried
themselves alive: as the French proverb says, They have dug their Grave
with their Teeth. The Philosopher passing through Vacia the Epicures grounds,
said; Hic suus est Vacia: not here he lives, but here he lies; as it were
dead and sepulcherd. The parcimonie of ancient times has been admirable. The
Arcadians lived on Acornes: the Argiues on Apples: Elian (...). hist. lib. 3.
the Athenians on Figs: the Tyrinthians on Pears: the Indians on Canes: the
Carmanes on Palms: the Sauromatians on Millet: the Persians nasturtio, with
Cresses: And Jacob here made dainty of Lentil^s.

2. That a man may epicurise on course fare: For Lentile Pottage was no
extraordinary fine diet. But as a man may be a Crassus in his Purse, yet no
Cassius in his Pottes: So on the contrary, an other may be (as it is said of
Job) Poor to a proverb; yet be withal, as voluptuous as Esau. Men have talem
dentem, qualem mentem: Such an Appetite as they have Affection. And Esau may be
as great a Glutton in his Pottage, as those greedy Dogs. Esa. 56. 12.
( Esaias 56.) that fill themselves with strong Wines: or those fat Bulls (Am
6.) Amos. 6. 4.
that eat the Lambs and Calves out of the Stall. Thus the poor may sin as
much in their Throat, as the rich: and be Epicures tam Late, though not tam
laute, in as immoderate, though not so dainty Fare. Indeed Labor in many
bodies requires a more plentiful repast, then ease: and the sedentarie
Gentleman needs not so much Meat, as his drudging Hind: But in both this Rule
should be observed; Quantum naturae sufficiat, non quantum gulae placeat; Not
what will please the Throat, but what will content Nature: to eat what a man
should, not what he would. The Poor man that loves delicate Cheer, shall not
be Wealthy: and the Rich man that loves it, shall not be Healthy. As cunning
as Esau was, here is one instance of his folly, An intemperate Appetite.

2. His Folly may be argued, from his base estimation of the Birthright; that
he would so lightly part from it, and on so easy conditions, as Pottage. It
seems, he did measure it only by the pleasures and commodities of this life,
which were affoorded him by it. ver. 32. I am ready to die: and what profit
shall this Birthright do m^e? Which words import a limitation of it to this
present World, as if it could do him no good afterward. Whereupon the Hebrews
gather, that he denied the Resurrection. For this cause the Apostle brands him
with the mark of Profaneness. Heb. 12. 16.
Heb. 12. that he changed a Spiritual Blessing for a Temporal Pleasure.

And what, O ye Esauites, Worldlings, are momentany Delights compared to
Eternal? What is a mess of Gruell, to the Supper of Glory? The Belly is
pleased the Soul is lost. Never was any Meat, except the forbidden Fruit, so
dearly bought, as this Broth of Jacob: A Curse followed both their feedings.
There is no Temporal thing without the trouble, though it be far more worthy
then the Lentile-Pottage. Has a man good things, he fears to forgo them:
and when he must, could either wish they had not been so good, or a longer
possession? Has he evil, they bring grief; and he either wishes them good,
or to be rid of them? So that good things trouble us with fear, evil with
sorrow. Those in the future, these in the present. Those, because they shall
end: these, because they do not end. Nothing then can make a man truly-happy,
but Eternity. Pleasures may last a while in this world; but they will grow old
with us* if they do not die before us. And the Staff of Age is no Pole of
eternity. He then has too much of the sensual and Profane blood of Esau in
him, that will sell everlasting Birthrights and Comforts, for transient
Pleasures.

3. Another Argument of his folly, was Ingratitude to God; who had in mercy
vouchsafed him, (though but by a few minutes) the privilege of Primogeniture:
Wherewith Divines hold, that the Priesthood was also conveyed. The Father of
the Family exercised it during his life; and after his decease the first borne
succeeded in that with the Inheritance. And could Esau be ungrateful to a God
so gracious? Or could he possibly have aspired to a higher dignity? Wretched
Unthankfulness, how justly art thou branded for a Prodegie in Nature? There
are too many, that in a sullen neglect, ouerlooke all Gods favors, for the
want of one of their Affections long after. Non tam agunt gratias de Tribunatu,
quam queruntur, quod non sunt euecti in Consulatum: It is nothing with them to
be of the Court, except they be also of the Council.

4. His Obstinacy taxes his Folly; that after cold blood, leisure to think
of the Treasure he sold, and digestion of his Pottage, he repented not of his
Rashness; But ver. 34. He did eat, and drink, and rose up, and went his way:
Filled his Belly, rose up to his former Customs, and went his way without a
Quid faeci? Therefore it is added, He despised his Birthright. He followed
his Pleasures without any interception of Sorrow, or interruption of
Conscience. His whole life was a circle of sinful Customs; and not his
Birthrights loss can put him out of them. A circular thing implies a
perpetuity of motion, according to Mathematicians. It begins from all parts
alike, et in seipso definit, ends absolutely in it self, without any point or
scope obiectuall to move to. Earth was Esaus home; he looks after no other
felicity: therefore goes his way with less thought of an heavenly Birthright,
then if he had missed the Dear he hunted. It is wicked to sell Heavenly
things at a great rate of Worldly: but it is most wretched to vilipend them.

5. Lastly, his Perfidious nature appears, that though he had made an
absolute Conue^ance of his Birthright to Jacob, and sealed the Deed with an
Oath; yet he seemed to make but aiest of it, and purposed in his heart not to
perform it. Therefore chap. 27. 41. (...) said in his heart, the days of
mourning for my Father are ^t hand, then will I s^ay my br^ther Jacob. He
tarryed but (...) the Funeral of his Father, and then resolved to send his
Brother after him; as Cain did Abel* because he was more accepted. It is hard
to judge, whether he was a worse Son or a Brother: He hopes for his Fathers
death, and purposes his Brothers; and vows to shed blood in stead of Tears.

Perhaps from his example, those desperate Wretches of England drew their
instuction. They had sold their Birthright, and the Blessing which Jesus
Christ, like old Isac dying, bequeathed in his Will to all believers, and all
the interest in the truth of the Gospel, to the Pope for a few Pottage, red
Pottage, dyed in their own blood for seeking to color it with the blood of
Gods Anointed, and of his Saints. And now in a malicious rancour, seeing the
Children of Truth to enjoy as much outward peace, as they were conscious of an
inward vexation: they expected but Diem Luctus, the days of Mourning, when God
should translate our late Queen of eternally-blessed memory, from a Kingdom
on Earth, to a better in Heaven: and then hoped, like Busterds in a Fallow
field, to raise up their heavy Fortunes, ^'^ turbinis, by a Whirlewind of
Commotion. But our Pacator Orbis, (which was the real attribute of
Constantine) beguiled their envious Hopes. And as Pat^rculus said of the Roman
Empire after Augustus death, when there was such hope of Enemies, fear of
Friends, expectation of trouble in all; Tanta suit vnius viri Maiestas, vt nec
bonis, neque contra malos opus foret armis: Such was the majesty of one man,
that his very presence took away all use of Arms. Our royal Jacob precluded
all Stratagems, prevented all the Plots of these malicious Esauites, and settled
us both in the fruition of the Gospel, and peace with it. But in mean time,
God did punish their persidious machinations; as he will do Perjury and
Treason, wheresouer he find them. For he will nail upon the Head of the
Periurer, his Oath traitorously broken.

IN all these circumstances it appears, that though Esau was subtle to take
Beasts; he had no cunning to hunt out his own Salvation. From all which
scattered Stones brought together let me raise this building of Instruction.

The wisest for the World are most commonly Fools for Celestial blessings.
Wicked men can Sentire quae sunt carnis, not, Sapere quae sunt spiritus, Savor
things of the Flesh, not of the Spirit. The Prophet Jeremy compounds both
these, and shows, how Wisdom and Folly may concur in one man. Ier. 4. Ier.
4. 22.
They are Wise to do evil: but to do good they have no knowledge. Let them
War, they have their Stratagems: Let them plot in Peace, they have their
Policies. Hunting, they have Nets: Fowling Ginnes: Fishing Baits: not so
much as even in Husbandry, but the professors have their reaches: they know,
which way the Market goes, which way it will go. Your Tradesmen have their
Mysteries: Mysteries indeed, for the mystery of Iniquity is in them: they
have a stock of good Words, to put off a stock of badde Wares: in their
particular qualities they are able to school Machiuell.

But draw them from their Center Earth, and out of their Circumference Worldly
policies; and you have not more simple Fools: They have no acquaintance with
Gods Statutes, and therefore no marvel, if they misiudge Vices for Virtues; as
Zebul told Gaal, that he mistook Vmbras montium, pro capitibus hominum. A man
may easily run his soul upon the rocks of Rebellion, whiles he neither looks
to the Card of Conscience, nor regardes the Compass of Faith.

A man of the Field.
We have taken the first branch of his Character, the maine proportion of his
Picture: He was a cunning Hunter. There is another color added: He was a man
of the Field. But because I take it for no other then an explanation of the
former attribute, an exposition of the Proposition, saving it has a little
larger extent, I do no more but name it.

We do not think, because he is called, A man of the Field, that therefore
he was a Husbandman: but as the Septuagint call him, A Field-man, in regard
that he was continually conversant in the Field: There was his sport, there
was his heart. Therefore (ver. 28.) did Isaac love Esau, because he did eat of
his Venison: He loved his Venison, not his Conditions. Some would read it
thus, Because Venison was in his mouth; and so turns his Hunting into a
Metaphore: as if by insinuation he wound himself into the favor of Isaac:
But the other reading is better; saving that by the way, we may give a
reprehension to such Mouth-hunters.

If you would know who they are: they are the Flatterers. Of whom we may say,
as Huntsmen of their Dogs, They are Well-mouth'd; or rather, Ill-mouthd* For
an ordinary Dogs biting does not ranckle so sore as their licking. Of all
Dogs they are best likened to Spanyels; but that they have a more venomous
tongue: They will fawn, and fleere, and leap up, and kiss their Masters
hand: but all this while they do but hunt him; and if they can spring him
once, you shall hear them quest instantly, and either present them to the
Falcon, or worrey and prey on them themselves: perhaps not so much for their
flesh, as for their Feathers. For they love not Dominos, but Dominorum; not
their Masters Good, but their Masters Goods.

The golden Ass got into sumptuous Trappinges, thinks he has as many
Friends, as he has Beasts coming about him: One commendes his Snoute for
sayrer then the Lions; an other his Skin for richer then the Leopards; an
other his Foot for swifter then the Hearts; a fourth his Teeth for whiter and
more precious then the Elephants; a last, his Breath for sweeter then the
Ciuet-beastes: And it is wonder* if some do not make him believe, he has
Horns, and those stronger then Bulls, and more virtuous then the Unicorns.
All this while they do but hunt him for his Trappings; uncase him, and you
shall have them baffle and kick him. Prou. 19. 4.
This does Solomon insinuate, Prou. 19. Riches gather many Friends: But the
Poor is separated from his Neighbors. He says not the Rich man, but Riches.
It is the Money, not the Man, they hunt.

The Great-one bristles up himself, and conceats himself higher by the head
then all the rest; and is proud of many Friends. Alas, these Dogs d^e but
hunt the Bird of Paradise for his Feathers: These Waspes do but hoouer about
the Gally-pot, because there is Honey in it. The proud Fly sitting upon the
Charriot-wheele, which hurried with violence huff'd up the Sand gave out, that
it was she, which made all that glorious dust. The Ass carrying the Egiptian
Goddess, ^well'd with an opinion that all those crouches, cryings, and
obeysances, were made to him: But it is the Case, not the Carcass, they gape
for. So may the chased Stagge boast how many Hounds he has attending him:
They attend indeed, as Ravens a dying Beast: Acteon found the kind truth of
their attendance. They run away as Spiders from a decaying House; or as the
Cuckoe, they sing a scuruie note for a month in Summer, and are gone in June
or July: sure enough before the Fall. These Hunters are gone; let them go: For
they have brought me a little from the strictness and directnesse of my
intended speech. But as a Physician coming to cur^, does sometimes receive
some of his Patients infection: So I have been led to hunt a little wide, to
find out these cunning Hunters.

Be pleased to observe two general Notes, and then I will come to the
Application.

1. These two Brethren were borne together, were brought up together; yet how
great difference was there in their composition of Bodies, in their disposition
of Minds, in their events of Life; or as they say, in their Fortunes?

1. For Bodies: One was rough and Hairy, the other was smooth and Plain. This
is seldom seen in Children begot and borne of the same Parents; but seldom^
or never in two borne at one birth. And we may go so far with the
Physiognomer to say, That Complexion (though not guides,) yet inclines the
inward Disposition.

2. For Disposition of Mind; this Text shows a wide and opposite difference:
Esau was a cunning Hunter, a man of the Field: But Jacob a plain man, dwelling
in Tents. And Gregory observes from this example, Lib. 5. moral
the remoteness or contrariety of Worldlings and Holy men's delights. Men of
the World hunt after the pleasures of the World as Esau: Men of Grace give
themselves to the contemplation and study of Virtue, as Jacob.

3. For Events or Success in this World, there was such Distance, as greater
could not be imagined: For it is here said, the Elder shall scrue the Younger.
The privilege of Primogeniture belonged to Esau; yet both that, and the
Blessing went to Jacob. If among us, the eldest Son sell all his Lands to a
younger Brother, many are ready to bless his Stars, and to say, He is borne
to better Fortunes. But this Presiedent will besot that speech: diverse things
are here figured.

1. Literally here is intended, that the Idumeans, the seed of Es^u, should be
subject to the Israelites, the posterity of Jacob. So we read 2 Samuel 8. that
they were subdued to Israel by David. 2. Sam. 8. 14.
All thoy of Edom became David's servants; and so continued to the reign of
Iotham. This gave the Jews not only a superiority in temporal Dominions,
but in spiritual Blessings; the Grace and Mercy of God* for they were the
visible Church, and Edom was cut off.

2. Mystically, this signifies the carnal Jews subdued to the Christians;
though the other were the elder people: Aug. de ^x^it. Dei. lib. 16. c. 25.
Therefore it is obseruable, that in the Genealogy of Christ Math. 1. many of
the first borne were left out. Luke 3. 38.
Luke. 3. Seth is put in for the son of Adam* yet his eldest son was Cain.
So Math. 1. 2. Abraham begat Isaac; yet his eldest son was Ishmael. Isaac
begat Jacob; yet here his first borne was Esau. Jacob begat Judah; yet his
first borne was Reuben. And David begat Solomon in Mathewes Genealogy, Nathan
in Lukes; yet both younger brethren by Bethsheba. Exodus 4. 22.
Exodus 4. Israel is called Gods first borne, and his chosen people, his
appropreation. Populus Iudaeus adumbratus fuit in his primogenitis: The Jews
were figured in these first borne; and we the Gentiles, that were the younger
Brothers, have got away the Birthright. Rom 11. They are cast off, we grafted
in: so that now the Elder se^^eth the younger.

Which teaches us to look well to our Charter in Christ: for it is not enough
to be borne of believing Parents, but we must also be believers. Job may
sacrifice for not expiate his sons sins. It is sinful for men on earth to
deprive the first borne: but God may, Ge^ 48. 14.
and does it. Genesis 48. Israel stre^ched out his right hand* and laid it upon
Ephraims head, who was the younger: and his left hand on Manass^hs head,
guiding his hands wi^tingly: though M^n^sseh was the first borne. And ver. 18
When Joseph said to him, Not so my Father. Jacob answered, I know it my Son,
I know it. Thus Generation may be cut off, Regeneration never. A man may be
lost, though borne in the Faith, unless he be borne again to the Faith.
Neither is it enough for Ishmael, to plead himself the Son of Abraham,
unless he can also plead himself the Son of God, and an heir of Abraham's
faith.

2. Commend me here to all Genethliackes, casters of Natiuities,
Star-worshipers, by this token, that they are all Impostors, and here proved
Fools. Here be Twins conceived together, borne together; yet of as
different natures and qualities, as if a vast local distance had sundred their
Births; or as if the originary blood of enemies had run in their Veins. It is
S. Augustines Preclusion of all Star-predictions out of this place. De cu^it.
D^i lib. 4. cap. 5.
And since I am fallen upon these Figure-casters, I will be bold to cast the
Destiny of their Profession, and honestly lay open their Iuggling in six
Arguments.

1. The falsehood of their Ephimerides. The Prognosticators, as if they were
Midwiues to the Celestial bodies, plead a deep insight into their secrets: or
as if like Physicians they had cast the Urine of the Clouds, and knew, where
the fit held them; that it could neither rain nor hayle, till some Star
had first made them acquainted with it. Demonstration has proved these so
false and ridiculous, that they may rather Commouere nauseam quam bilum, and
risum more then both.

Perhaps when some appoint Rain on such a day, some Frost, others Snow, a
fourth Wind, a last calm and fair weather; some of these may hit, some of
these must hit: But lightly he that against his knowledge told true to day,
lies to morrow: and he that lied yesterday, may happen right next day; as a
blind Archer may kill a Crow.

For this cause (I think) some were called Erring, or Wandering Stars: not so
much that they were uncertain in their own seats and motions, as because
they caused to err their Clients and gaping Inquisitors. And so they are
called Erring in the same phrase and sense, Pallidamors
as Death is called Pale; not that it is Pale it self, but because it makes
those Pale it seasseth on: And Winter durtie, not formaliter, but secundum
effectum, because it makes the Earth durty. So that rather their own
speculations by the Stars, then the Stars, are erring: both Decepto sensu
cum iudicio, et corruptis organis.

Therefore some of the subtler, have delivered their opinions in such spurious,
enigmaticall, dilogicall terms, as the Devil gave his Oracles; that since
Heaven will not follow their Instructions, their Constructions shall follow
Heaven. And because the Weather has not fallen out, as they have before told,
they will now tell as the weather falls out. So that reading their Books you
would think, as the Beggars have their Canting, they had got a new Language
out of the Elements, which the poor Earth never did or shall understand: And
it is thought, that Canting is the better Language, because it is not so
ambitious, as to meddle with the Stars: Whereof the Prognosticators head
comes as short, as his tongue does of the Beggars eloquence.

2. The state of Fortune Tellers, and Prophecie-vsurpers: which is not only
poor and beggarly, as if the envious Earth refused to relieve those, that
could fetch their living out of the Stars; but also ridiculous. Nil habet
infaelix paupertas durius in se,
Quam quod ridiculos homines facit.
This is not all; but they are utterly ignorant of their own destinies. Now
Quisibi nescius, cui praescius? He that is a Fool for himself, how should
he be wise for others? Thracias the South sayer, in the nine years drought of
Egypt, came to Busiris the Tyrant; Monstratque piari
Hospitis effuso sanguine posse Iouem.
and told him, that Jupiters wrath might be appeased by sacrificing the Blood
of a Stranger. The Tyrant asked him, What Countryman he was, of Egypt, or an
aliant? He told him, a Stranger. Illi Busiris; Quid. Am. lib. 3. and in Ibin.
fies Iouis hostia primus,
Inquit, et Aegipto tu dabis hospes aquam.
Thou, quoth the Tyrant, art that lucky guest,
Whose Blood shall wet our soil, and give us rest.
It is reported that Biron, that French Martial, came to an Astrologer, to
know the future success of his Plots; which because he gave disastrous, the
angry Duke begun to his mischievous intendments, in the Fate-tellers blood. Can
they read other men's Fates in the Stars, and not the^s own? Therefore one
wittily wrote on such a Book, after throwing it into the fire:

Thy Author foretells much: alas! weak friend:
That he could not prognosticate thy end.
3. The quick moving of the Celestial bodies, and their remoteness from our
eyes: Both our sense is too weak to pierce into those Fires; and those Fires
are too quick in motion for our apprehension. Therefore says S. Aug. Si tam
celeriter alter post altaerum nascitur, De ciu. D. lib. 5. cap ^.
vt eadem pars Horoscopi manea^, paria cuncta quaero, quae in nullis possu^t
geminis inueniri: If one of the Twins be so immediately borne after the other,
that the same part of the Horoscope abide, I require likeness and equality in
them both; which can in no Twins be found. We see here two Brethren borne
together (it is most likely) under the reign of one Planet or Constellation;
yet as different in Natures, as the Planets themselves.

To this they answer, that even this cause, the swift motion of the Planets,
wrought this diversity: because they change their Aspectes and Coni^ctions
every moment. This would one Nigidius demonstrate, who upon a Wheel turning
with all possible swiftness, let dropat once two aspersions of Incke, so near
together as possibly he could: yet Stanterota, etc. the Wheel standing still,
they were found very remote and distant. Whereby he would demonstrate, that in
a small course of time, a great part of the celestial Gloabe may be turned
about. But this S. Austin soundly returns on them: That if the Planetarie
courses, and Celestial motions be so swift, it can not be discerned under what
Constellation any one is borne. Hom. 10. sup. Eu^ng.
And Gregory wittily derides their folly, that if Esau and Jacob were not
therefore borne under one Constellation, because they came forth one after
another. By the same reason, neither can any one be borne under one
Constellation, because he is not borne all at once, but one part after another.

4. Vitabreuis hominum: Man's short and brittle life. If our age were now, as it
was with the Patriarchs, when the Stagge, the Raven, and long-liu'd Oak,
compared with man's life, dyed very young: They might then observe and
understand the motion and revolution of the Stars, and behold their
effects: when if any Star had long absented it self from their
contemplation, they could stay two or three hundred years to see it again:
But now as an English Nightingale sung; Who lives to age,
Fit to be made Methushalem his Page?


On necessity this Astrologer must live so long, as to have observed the life
of such a man, borne under such a Planet: and after him of another borne in the
like manner. Nay, he must overtake the years of Methusoalem in the successiue
contemplation of such experiments. But this life is not given, therefore not
this knowledge.

5. The infinite number of the Stars take from them all possibility of
infallible predictions. They cannot give their general number, and can they
give their singular natures? To attempt it, is Imprudentia caecissima; to
affirm it, Impudentia effrontissima, blind dotage, shameless impudence.

6. The various Disposition, Conditions, Natures, and Studies, coaetaneorum, of
such as are borne together. So Gregory reasons of these Twins: Hom. 10. in
Euang.
Cum eodem momento matter vtrumque fuderit, cur non vna vtriusque vitae qualitas
(vel aequalitas) fuit? When the Mother brought them both forth at one instant,
How comes it to pass, that they have not the same quality and equality in
their lives? Are not many borne at the same time, and under the same
Constellation, Quorum processus et successus various et saepe contrarios
videmus: Whose proceedinges and events we behold so different?

If we may give credit, that Romulus and Remus were both borne of a Vestall
(defiled by a Soldier) at one birth, both exposed together to a wide Desert,
both taken together and nourished of a shee-Wolfe, both building and
chalenging Rome; yet Romulus slew his brother, and got the Kingdom of that
City, and after his own name called it Rome.

Fraterno primi maduerunt sanguine muri. If Castor, Pollux, and Helena, were
got by Jupiter, and hatched by Laeda out of one Egg, How came they to so
various fortunes?

Cur fratrem Pollux alterna morte redemit? Aenead. b.
Cicero mentions it for the Chaldean folly, De Dininat. lib. 2.
that they would have Omnes eodem tempore ortos, all that were borne
(wheresoever) together, eadem condition nasci: to be borne to the same
condition.

But were all the Infants slain at one time by Herod, borne under one
Constellation? Or all the old World, drowned in the Deluge, under one Star?
Or all Soldiers slain in one field, under the same Sign? The Mathematicians
were wont to affirm, that all borne under the Sign Aquarius, Greg. Hom 10. in
Euan.
would be Fishers: But in Getulia there are no Fishers; was never any there
borne under the sign Aquarius? The Cretians, (says Paul) were always Liars:
What, were they all borne under Mercury? The Athenians greedy of Novelties:
had they all one predominant Star? The Belgick^s Warriors: Were they
therefore all borne under the reign of Mars?

But I have spent too much breath about this folly of Prognosticators. Of whom
it may be said, that not only The Children of this world are wiser in their
generation, then the Children of Light: Luke 168.
But they would be wiser ipsa Luce, then the Light it self. They would know
more then Saints and Angels, and search out the inuestigable things of the
Lord. Pacuv.
Nam si qui, quae euentura sunt, praeuidea^t, aequiparent Ioui: If they could
foresee future things, they would brag themselves equal to God: But Secret
things belong to GOD, revealed to us. The other is both arrogant in man, and
derogant to God. And Greg. says well: If such a Star be a Man's Destenie,
then is Man made for the Stars, not the Stars for Man. The Devils know not
future events: and will these boast it? Sus mineruam scilicet.

THey grew up together: and presently, Esau was a cunning Hunter, Jacob a
plain man. We see that even Youth does insinuate to an obseruer, the
inclination and future course of a man. The Sprigge shooting out of the Tree,
bendes that way it will ever grow. Teach a Child a Trade in his youth, and when
he is old, he will not forget it, says Solomon. Esau entered quickly into the
black way, which leads to the black Gates, that stand ever ready open for
black souls. Palet atri ianua Ditis: As if he should want rather time for
his sport, then sport for his time, he begins early; at the very threshold of
his life, and morning of his years. Nequitiae cursus celerior quam aetatis:
His wickedness got the start of his age.

And did he ever stay his course; that foolish parents should be so indulgent
to their childrens licentiousnes? nay, ready to snibbe and check their
forwardness to Heaven with that curb, A young Saint, an old Devil: and, Wild
youth is blessed with a stayed Age. But indeed most likely, a young Saint
proves an old Angel: and a young Esau, an old Devil.

And hence follows the ruins of so many great Houses; that the young Master
is suffered to live like an Esau, till he has hunted away his Patrimony;
which scarce lastes the Son so many years, as the Father that got it had
Letters in his name. But what cares he for the Birthright: when all is gone,
he like Esau, can live by the Sword: He will fetch Gold from the Indies, but
he will have it. But he might have saved that journey, and kept what he had
at home. If the Usurer has bought it, though for Porredge, he will not part
with it again, though they weep Tears. It is better to want superfluous
means, then necessary moderation. Inse magnarunt, summisque negatum est, Stare
diu: especially when the huge Colosses have not sound feet. Vast Desires, no
less then Buildings, where Foundations are not firm, sink by their own
magnitude. And there comes often Fire Ex Rhamno, Judge. 9. 20.
out of the Bramble, that burns up the Men of Shechem, and sets on fire the
Eagles nest in the Cedars. Psalm. 37. 16.
Psalm. 37. Parumiusto, A little that a righteous man has, is better then the
riches of many wicked. And a plain Jacob will prosper better, then a profane
Hunting Esau. Let a man begin then with God. Wherewithal shall a young man
cleanse his way? Psalm. 119. 9.
by taking heed thereunto according to thy word.

Thus literally: Let us now come to some moral application to our selves.

Hunting is for the most part taken in the holy Scripture in the worst sense.
Genesis 10. 9.
So Genesis 10. Nimrod was a Hunter, even to a Proverb: and that Before the Lord,
as without fear of his Majesty Now if it were so hateful to hunt Beasts,
what is it to Hunt-men? The wicked oppressors of the world are here Typed and
Taxed: who employ both Arm and Brain to Hunt the poor out of their
Habitations; and to drink the Blood of the oppressed. Herein observe the
Persons Hunted. Manner of Hunting. Hounds.


The Poor.
Are their Prev: any man that either their wit or violence can practice on.
Not so much Beggars; yet they would be content to Hunt them also out of their
Coasts: but those that have somewhat worth their Gaping after; and whose
estates may Minister some Gobbets to their Throtes. Aquila non Capit muscas:
the Eagles hunt no Flies, so long as their be Fowls in the Air. The
Commonaltie, that by great Labor have gotten a little stay for themselves;
these they Hunt, and lay along, and Prey on their prostrate Fortunes.

If they be Tenantes, woe is them. Fines, Rents, Carriagas, slaueries shall
drink up the Sweat of their Brows. There is law against Coyners; and it is
made treason justly to stamp the Kings Figure in Mettalles: But what is
Metal to a Man, the Image of God? And we have those that coin Money on the
poores Sins: Traitors they are to the King of Kings.

The whole Country shall feel their hunting. They hunt Commons into
Seueralles; Tilled grounds into Pastures, that the Gleaning is taken from the
Poor, which God commanded to be left them; and all succor, except they can
grase in the Highways. And to others, to whom their Rage cannot extend, their
Craft shall: for they will hoyst them in the Subsidies, or ouercharge them for
the Wars, or vex them with Quarrels in Law, or perhaps their Servants shall
in direct terms beat them. Naboth shall hardly keep his Vinyard, if any
nooke of it disfigures Ahabs Lordship: If they can not buy it on their own
price, they will to Law for it; wherein they respect no more, then to have
a^sam querelae, a colorable occasion of contention: for they will so weary
him, that at last he shall be forced to sell it: Lib. 4. in uer.
But Tully says of that sale; Ereptio non emptio est: It is an Extorting, not
a Purchasing.

Thus the Poor man, is the Beast they hunt: who must rise early, rest late,
eat the Bread of sorrow, sit with many a hungry meal, perhaps his Children
crying for Food, whiles all the fruit of his pains is served in to Nimrods
Table. Complain of this whiles you will, yet as the Orator said of Verres:
Pecuniosus nescit damnari. Indeed a Monny-man may not be damnified, but he may
be damned. For this is a Crying sin, and the wakned ears of the Lord will
hear it: neither shall his provoked hands forbear it. Si tacuerint pauperes,
loquentur Lapides: If the Poor should hold their peace, the very Stones would
speak. The Fines, Rackinges, Enclosures, Oppressions, Vexations, will cry to
God for vengeance. Hab. (...).
The Stone will cry out of the Wall; and the beam out of the Timber shall
answer it.

You see the Beasts they hunt: Not Foxes, not Wolves nor Boares, Bulls, nor
Tigers. It is a certain observation; no Beast hunts the own kind to devour
it. Now if these should prosecute Wolves, Foxes, etc. they should then hunt
their own kind: for they are these themselves; or rather worse then these:
because here Homo homini Lupus. But though they are Men they hunt, and by
nature of the same kind; they are not so by quality: For they are Lambs they
persecute: In them there is Blood, and Flesh, and Fleece, to be had: and
therefore on these do they gorge themselves. In them there is weak Armor of
defense against their cruelties; therefore over these they may domineere. I
will speak it boldly: There is not a mighty Nimrod in this Land, that dares
hunt his equal: But over his inferior Lamb he insultes, like a young Nero.
Let him be graced by High ones, and he must not be saluted under twelve score
off. In the Country he proves a Termagaunt: his very Scowle is a Prodegie,
and breeds an Earthquake. He would be a Caesar, and tax all: It is well if
he prove not a Caniball. Only Macro salutes Seianus so long as he is in
Tiberius his favor: Cast him from that Pinnacle, and the Dog is ready to
devour him.

You hear the Object, they hunt; attend the Manner. And this you shall find,
as Esau's, to consist in two things: Force, and Fraud. They are not only
Hunters, but cunning Hunters.

1. For their Force, they are Robusti latrones, and have a violent impetuous,
imperious Hunting. Esaias 59. 7.
Desolation and destruction are in their Paths. We may say of them, as
Tertullian said of the Montanists. Nontam Laborant vt aedificarent sua, quam vt
destruerent aliena. They seek not so much their own increasing as the
depopulation of others. Philosophers hold the world to be composed of three
concurrent principles, Matter, Form, and Privation: holding the last, to be
rather a principle of Transmutation, then of Establishment. Oppressors besides
the Matter, which is the Commonwealth; and the Form which is Justice; have
devised to make necessary also Privation.

There are sins, which strive only Intra orbem suum urere: Sen.
which have no further latitude then the Conscience of the Committer: They are
Private and Domestical sins: the sting whereof dies in the proprietary. Such
are Prodigality, Envy, Sloth, Pride. Though evil example may do somewhat,
they have no further extention. But some are of so wild a nature, that they are
Mallets and Swords to the whole Country about them. And these are districtly,
the sins of the Hand. So Micah. 2. Mic 2. 2.
They covet Fields, and take them by Violence: and Houses, and take them away:
so they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his Heritage. Why do they
all this, but because Manus potest. ver. 1. It is in the power of their Hand.
And they measure their power, says Seneca, by the Span, De Benef. lib. 1.
by the reach of their Hands. Iniurijs vires metuntur. Anaxagoras thought man
the wisest of all Creatures, because he has Hands, whereby he can express
all signs. He might have concluded him the Wickedest of all Creatures, quia
manuatus, because he has Hands. For no Tiger or Vulture under Heaven is more
hurtful with his Claws and Tallents, then Man with his Hands. Achilles asked
Palamedes going to the Troyan Wars, Why he went without a Servant? He
showed him his hands, and told him they were Loco seruorum, in stead of many
servants. Manus organum organorum. Their dexterity and aptness charge them
with sins, whereof the other parts are no less Guilty.

For the most part, those Beasts have least immanitie that have most strength.
Oxen and Horses and Elephants are tame and seruicable, but Bees and Hornets
have Stings. So wisely has the Creator disposed, that there may not be a
Conjunction et Potentiae et Maleuolentiae: that might and malice may not meet.
So they are suffered to have Will to hurt, and not Power; or Power, and not
will. The cursed Cow has short Horns: But these Hunters have got both. The
Poet says: That Lions do not prey on yielding things,
Pittie's infeoffed to the blood of Kings.


Posse et nolle, nobile: That thou may harm and wilt not, is laus tua, thy
praise: that thou would and can not, gratia Dei, is Gods providence. Haman
would hang Mordecai and cannot: he is a villain in Hell for his intent.
David, when he had Saul in the Cave, could hurt and would not: he is a Saint
in Heaven. Shimei would, but can not kill (though rail on) David: David can,
and will not kill Shimei. The hot Disciples would have Fire from Heaven to
destroy the Samaritans, and could not: Christ could command it, and would not.
How rare is a man of this disposition among us? If advantage has thrust a
Booty into his hands, the Lamb is in the Wolves Cave with more security.
Plead what thou will, prostrate thy own innocence, aggrauate the Oppressors
cruelty: he answers as Esopes Wolf answered the Lamb; Thy Cause is better
then mine, but my Teeth are better then thine; I will eat thee. And this is a
shrewd invincible argument, when the cause must be tried out by the Teeth.
Pactum non pactum est, Plaut.
non pactum pactum est; quicquid illis lubet: Bargain or not bargain; the Law
must be on their sides: Nemo potentes tutus potest aggred^: He comes to his
cost, Sen. in medea.
that comes to complain against them.

2 For their Fraud; they are Cunniug Hunters. They are Foxes as well as Lions
to get their Prey. Nay the Fox-head does them often more stead, then the Lions
Skin. Mical. 7. Mic. 7. ^.
They hunt with a Net. They have their politic Ginnes to catch them. Gaudy
Wares and dark Shoppes, (and would you have them love the light, that live by
darkness, as many Shopkeepers) draw and tole Customers in: where the crafty
Leaches can soon feel their Pulses: if they must buy, they shall pay for
their necessity. And though they plead, We compel none to buy our Wares;
Caveat emptor: yet with fine voluble Phrases, damnable Protestations, they will
cast a mist of error before an Eye of simple Truth; and with cunning devises
hunt them in. So some among us have feathered their nestes, not by open
violence, but politic circumuention. They have sought the Golden Fleece, not
by Iasons Merit, but by Medeas Subtlety, by Medeas Sorcerie.

If I should intend to discover these Hunters Plottes, and to deal punctually
with them, I should afford you more matter, then you would afford me time. But
I limit my self, De vit. et morib. Christ
and answer all their Pleaes with August. Their tricks may hold in iure fori,
but not in Iure poli: in the Common Pleas of Earth; not before the Kings bench
in Heaven.

Neither do these Cunning Hunters forage only the Forest of the world. but
they have ventured to enter the Pale of the Church, and hunt there. They will
go^ near to emparke it to themselves, and thrust God out. So many have done in
this Land: and though it be danger for the poor Hare to preach to Lions and
foxes, I am not afraid to tell them, that they Hunt; where they have nothing to
do. Poor Ministers are dear to them; for they are the Dear they Hunt for:
How many Parishes in England (all most to the number of half) have they
empayled, to themselves, and chased the Lords Dear out? Yea now, if God lay
Challenge to his own Ground against their Sacrilegious impropriations, for his
own Tithes; they are not ashamed to tell him, They are none of his: and what
laws soever he has made, they will hold them with a Non obstante. They were
taken into the Church for Patrons, defenders; and they prove offenders,
Thieves; for most often Patrocinia, latrocinia.

You have read how the Badger entertained the Hedghogge into his Cabine, as his
inward friend: but being wounded with the Prickles of his offensive guest, he
manerly desired him to depart in kindness, as he came. The Hedgehog thus
satisfies his just expostulation; that he for his part found himself very
well at ease, and they that were not, had reason to seek out another place,
that likes them better. So the poor Horse, entreating help of the Man against
the Stagge; ever after Non equitem dorso, non fraenum depulit ore: They have
rid us, and bridled us, and backed us, and spurred us, and got a tyranny over
us, whom we took in for our familiar friends and favorites.

3. Now for their Hounds: besides that they have long Noses themselves, and
Hands longer then their Noses, they have Dogs of all sorts.

Beagles, cunning Intelligencers. Eo laudabilior, quo fraudulentior: The more
crafty they are, Aug. Confess. lib. 1.
the more commendable.

Their Setters, prowling Promoters; whereof there may be necessary use, as men
may have of Dogs; but not tolerable for their purposes.

Their Spanyels, fawning Sycophants, that lick their Masters hands, but are
brawling ever at poor strangers,

Their great Masti^es; surely and sharking Bayliffes, that can set a Rankling
Tooth in the poor Tenants Ribs.

They have their Bandogs, corrupt Soliciters, Parrat-Lawyers; that are their
properties, and mere Trunkes, whereby they inform and Plead before Justice,
against Justice. And as the Hounds can sometimes smell out the Game, before
their Master; as having a better Nose, then he an Eye: so these are still
Picking-holes in poor men's estates, and raking up broken Titles: which if they
justly be defended; Actio fit non Lustralis, sed secularis: Whereif (because
Justice does sometimes prevail) it go against them; yet Mayor est expensarum
sumptus, quam sententiae fructus: The cost is more Chargeable then the victory
profitable.

Some of them, whose Pale is the Burse, have their Bloud-hounds; AElian. lib.
9. Cap. 18.
long-nosd, hooke-handed Brokers, that can draw the sinking estate of poor
men, by the blood of necessity. If they spy Pride and Prodigality in the
streets, they watch over them as Puttocks over a dying Sheep. For Pascuntur
scelere: they are not Doves but Ravens, and therefore sequuntur cadauera,
follow Carcases. O that some blessed medicine could rid our Land of these
Warts and Scabbes; free us from these Currs. The Cunning Hunters could not do
so much mischief, without these Lurchers, these insa^iate Hounds.

Thus I have showed you a Field of Hunters: what should I add, but my Prayers
to Heaven, and desires to Farth, that these Hunters may be hunted. The hunting
of harmefull Beasts is commended; the Wolf, the Boar, the Bear, the Fox,
the Tiger, the Otter. But the metaphorical hunting of these is more praise
worthy: the Country-wolues, or Cittie-Foxes deserve most to be Hunted. Non est
meae Paruitatis, etc. I am to shallow to advise you Demodo: I only wish it
might be done: they that have authority to do it, know best the means, I
will but discover the Game, and leave it to their Hunting: naming the persons
they should Hunt: they know the Hounds where withal.

1 There is the wild Boar, that breaks over Gods mounds and spoils his
Vineyard. Psalm. 80. 13.
Psalm. 80. The Boar out of the Wood does waste it: and the wild Beast of the
Field, does devour it. This is the depopulator, that will forage and lay all
waste, if he be not restrained. What; Do you call him a wasting Boar? he
rather encloseth all, breaks up none. Yes, he lays waste to the
Commonwealth, though he encloseth to himself. He wastes Societies,
Community, Neighborhood of people; turns them out of their ancient Doors,
sendes them to the wide World to beg their Bread. He is a bloody Boar, and
has two damnable Tuskes: Money to make him Friends, and to charm conniuence:
And a wicked Conscience, that cares not to swim to Hell in Blood. The brawny
Shield of this Boar, whereby he bears off all blows of Curses, is the
security of his own dead Heart: He thinks the Cries and Vlulations of
Widows and Orphans, the best Music. When the hand of God strikes him, (as
strike him it will, and that fearfully) he even rouseth and rages on him;
and dies like an angry Boar, foaming at mouth, as if he were spitting
defyance at Heaven. Let this Beast be Hunted.

2. There is the Fox, the crafty Cheater, that steals the Grapes. Cant. 2.
Take in the Foxes, etc. Cant. 2. 15.
It is Gods charge to hunt him. He turns Beasts out of their Dens by
defyling them. He sold his Conscience to the Devil for a stock of villainous
Wit. He has a stinking Breath; Plin.
corrupted with Oaths and Lies: and a ravenous Throat to prey upon men's
simpleness. If all tricks fail, he will counterfeit himself dead, that so
drawing the Fowls to feed upon him, he may feed upon them. The Defrauder puts
on a semblance of great smoothness; you would take him for a wonderful honest
man: Soft, you are not yet within his clutches; when you are, Lord have mercy
on you, for he will have none.

3. There is the bloody Wolf; the professed cutthroat the Usurer. Hunt him,
sease on his Den; it is full of pooremens Goods. What a Golden Law would that
be, which were called a Statute of Restitution: Such a one as Nehemiah
enacted. Neh. 5. that Lands and Vineyards, Nehe. 5. 11.
Houses and Goods, morgag'd into Usurers hands, should be restored. When he
sealed it with a sacramental Oath, and made them swear consent to it. And he
shook his Lap, and said. So God shake out every man from his house, and from
his labor, ver. 13.
that performs not this Promise; even thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And
all the Congregation said, Amen. But if they will not restore by themselves,
they shall by their posterity. For, as Pliny writes of the Wolf, that it
brings forth blind Whelps: so the Usurer lightly begets blind Children, that
cannot see to keep what their Father left them. But when the Father is gone to
Hell for gathering, the Son often follows for scattering. But God is just. A
good man leaves his Inheritance to his Children Children: Pro* 13. 22.
and the Wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just.

4. There is also the Badger, a Beast of rapine: We have his fellows among
us, the Ingrossers of Corn, the Raysers of the price, sweeping away whole
Markets: We call these Badgers. The Poor that comes with a little Money,
cannot speed; but at an unreasonable rate: they ingrosse all. And by their
Capacity, or rather Rapacitie, having so much in their hands, they sell it at
the place of their transporting, at their own price.

5. The Dromedarie would also be better hunted: I mean the vagrant Rogues,
whose whole life is nothing but an exorbitant course: the maine begging, the
by's silching and stealing: Only they are not so serviceable as the Dromedary;
which is a Beast of quick feet, and strange speed. The reason is given by
Aristotle, because the extreme heat of Nature does waste all the vnctuositie
and fatness, and thereby gives greater agilitie. But these Dromedaries are not
swift: Let one charitable Constable amongst a hundred light on him, and give
him correction, and a Pasport to his (false-named) place of birth, and he will
not travel above a Mile a day. Let them alone, and they will trauerse their
way^^; Ier. 2. 23.
which are no ways: for they cannot keep the beaten path: let them be where
they will, they are never out of their way. They boast themselves of the brood
of Cain^ for they are perpetual Runnagats. If the Stoks and Whip-post can not
stay their extrauagancie, there remains ^nely the Gal-house.

6. Let the roaring Bull be hunted; the Bulls of Basan, the Bulls of Rome;
sent over by the Pope ad interitum, either of us or themselves: For their end
is not implere Ecclesiam, but c^miterium; to fill Churchyards with dead
bodies, not the Church with living souls. No Service would be so welcome to
them, as the Sicilian Euensong, or the Parisian Mattens. But since no Drugge is
current in their Shoppes, but Diacatholican, Treason and Ruin; let it be first
ministered to themselves to purge their burning Fevers. And since the Pope sends
his Bulls into England so thick, bellowing to call his Calves together, and
to excite their reuolting from their Sovereign; let them speed no otherwise
then those Bulls once did, that called in an other Bull, which was Bull the
Hangman: to dispatch them all.

If you be disposed to hunt, hunt these Beasts that havoc the Commonwealth:
Let the Lambs alone, they do you much good, no hurt. And to this chase use
all your skill: in this work it shall be your commendation to be cunniug
Hunters. The Lord shall emparke you within the Pale of his own merciful
Providence, and restrain the savage fury of your Enemies. Let those, whom God
has made Masters of this serious game, and given Commission to hunt vicious
persons: Let every particular man hunt Vice out of his own heart. If there be
any violence to get the Kingdom of Heaven, use it: if any policy to overthrow
Satan and his accomplices, against whom we wrestle, exercise it. This War shall
be your Peace. You shall help to purge the Land of noxius Beasts; and cleanse
your own hearts from those lusts; which if you hunt not to death, shall hunt
you to death; as the moral of Acteon. And God that gives you this command and
courage, shall add for it a merciful recompense; taking you at last from this
militant Chase to the Park of his triumphant Rest. Amen.

FINIS.

CHRIST HIS STAR: OR, The Wise-mens Oblation.
Matthew. 2. II. When they were come into the house, they saw the young Child
with Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshipped him: and when they had
opened their Treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense,
and Myrrh.
THE Feast of the Epiphanie, or manifestation of Christ, as it is this days
momorie; so I have purposed this days exercise. As Relatu traditionis
instruimur, There were three principal and notable Appearings of Christ on this
Day. All which, Eodem die contigisse feruntur, sed alijs at que alijs annis,
fell out the same day in diverse years, as they write.

So Maximus Episc. Hom. 1. in Epiph. Hodie stella Magos duxit ad praesepium
Hodie aquae vertuetur in vinum. Hodie baptizatus est Christus.
Tribus miraculis ornatum diem sanctum seruamus. etc. we keep this Day Holy
and Feastiuall, being honored with three Wonders. This Day Christ led the
Wisemen to himself by a Star. This Day he turned the Waters into Wine at
the Marriage. This Day he was Baptized of John in Jordan.

According to these three distinct Manifestations of himself, they have given
this Day, three several names.

1. Epiphania: Because Christ did appear to certain M^gi, by the direction of
a Star: and was by their report, made known to the Fox Herod, and his
Cubbes, many enemies in Jerusalem* (ver. 3.) He was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him.

2. Theophania: Because there was a Declaration of the whole Trinity. Math. 3.
16.
(Math. 3.) Of God the Father, whose voice was heard from Heaven. Of GOD the
Son to be Baptized; of whom was the testimony given, This is my beloved
Sonns, in whom I am well pleased. Of GOD the holy Ghost, who descending like a
Dove, lighted on him.

3. Bethphania: Because, (Ioh. 2.) he showed the power of his Deity, at the
Wedding, in changing their Water into Wine: So the Text (ver. 11.) This
beginning of Miracles did Jesus in Can^ of Gal^le, and manifested his glory.

4. Some have added a fourth name from a fourth Wonder, that they say was
wrought on this Day: Phagi^phania; Because Christ relieved Famem triduanam,
Boski^er Ara. Caeli. Con ^.
the three days hunger of five thousand, with five Barley Loaves, and two
little Fishes.

I confess, this History has many obseruable points in it. It entreates of
Wisemen, of a tyrannical King, of troubled People, and of the King of Kings
lying in swaddling clothes. To discourse all these,

Virtutesque, virosque, et tanti incendia bell^; would exceed the limits of
one cold hour. AE^ead. 1.
I would therefore confine my short speech, and your attention, to the verse
read.

Wherein me thinks, I find a miraculous Wonder: That extraordinary Men, by
an extraordinary Star, should find the King of Heaven in so extraordinary a
place. Wisemen seeking a Star, showing a Savior lying in a Manger: But
cernere oculis, docenter oraculis, the eye of Flesh sees somewhat; the eye of
Faith shall see more.

I may distinguish all into a Direction. Devotion.
The Direction of God, the Devotion of Men. By the Direction, they are brought
to the Messiah. By their Devotion, they Worship him, and present him Gifts,
Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh. For the Direction, we will borrow a little of
the Premises; and therein consider Gods Leading. Their Following.


Gods Leading was by a Star. They that delight to cast Clouds upon the
clear Sun, have here mooted many Questions about this Star.

1. Whether this Star were singular, or an heap of Stars. Our Roman
adversaries, to bring wilful trouble on themselves and us, have coniur'd a
fiction from one Albumazar a Heathen; that the Sign in the Zodiac, called
the Virgin, is composed of so many Stars, as may aptly pourtray Virginem
gestantem inter brachia filium, a Virgin bearing an Infant in her arms: And
some of them have thought that, this Star.

Let Albumazar be the father of this opinion; and for a little better
authority, they have motherd it on a Prophecy of Tiburtine Sibylla when
Augustus boasted his super-humane Majesty, Sibylla showed him Virginem in
coelo Infanti portam, a Virgin in Heaven bearing a young Child in her arms;
with these words: Hic Puer mayor te est, ipsum adora, Yonder Infant is greater
then thou art, O Caesar, worship him.

But because the Father of this toy was an Ethnicke, and the Mother thought a
Sorceresse, they have (as somethinke, spite of his teeth) brought in
Chrysostom Op. imperf. hom. 2. in 2. Math.
for a Godfather to it; or to an opinion, if differing from it, yet also
exceeding the truth of this History. Whether of himself, or on their
teaching, he says thus. This Star appeared to them descending upon that
victoriall Mountain, having in it the form of a little Child; and above him
the similitude of a Cross. But I confess, (and lo the great vaunts of their
unity) that many of them are of another mind.

Howsoever, the Text is plain against it. (ver. 2.) (...). Vidimus Stellam
eius. Aster and astrum differ, as Stella and Sydus. Aster and Stella signify
one Star: Astrum and Sydus, a knot of Stars; as any Sign in the Heaven,
coacted and compounded of many Stars. The Evangelist here uses the singular
and individual word; We have seen his Star, not Stars.

2. They question, whether this was a new Star, created for the purpose; or
one of those co-euall to the World. Chrysostom, Damaseen, Fulgentius, Chrysostom.
Hom. 7. in Math. Dam. ^ib. 2. de^fide. cap. 2. Fulgen. le Epiphan.
with most others, are persuaded it was a new Star. Houdemius an English man
so sung of it, Noua caelum Stella depingitur,
Dum Sol nouus in terris oritur.
It Was fit a new Star should adorn the Skies, Lib. 1. Christiados quatem.
38.

When a new Sun does on the Earth arise.


It is called by Augustine, Magnifica Lingua coeli: The glorious Tongue of
Heaven. Sermon. 3 in loc.
It appears, this was no ordinary Star, ex situ, Motu, Tempore Lucendi.


1. By the Site: The place of it must be ( In aere terrae vicino, non ipsius
meditullio) in that part or Region of the Air, Thom. part. 3. quaest. 35 art. 7
that was next to the Earth; otherwise it could not so punctually have directed
these Wisemen, that traveled by it.

2. By the Motion. The course of other Stars is circular: this Star went
straight forward, as a guide of the way: in the same manner, Exodus* 13. 21.
that the Pillar of Fire went before Israel, when they passed out of Egypt.

3. By the Time of Shining. Other Stars shine in the night only, this Star
gave light in the broad day; as if it were a Star appointed to wait on the
Sun. Stella Luce vincens Luciferum, Houd. vbi supra.

Magos ducit ad Regem Syderum.


Of this Star did that Coniurer prophecy. Numb. 24. 17.
(Number. 24.) There shall come a Star out of Jacob, etc. It was a true Star,
it was a new Star; created by God in Heaven for this purpose: Not that the
birth of Christ depended on this Star, but this Star on his birth.
Therefore it is called Christ's Star, (ver. 2.) His Star.

This Star served To them Ad Ducendum. To us Ad Docendum.
It led them really, let it also lead us figuratively to Christ: Them Per
visum, us Per fidem.

By the consent of Divines this Star did prefigure the Gospel. And indeed:
For what other Light directs us to Christ?

Not the Star of Nature: Did not every step it taught us to tread, bring us
further off? If it heard of him, it sought him, as Laban sought his Idols in
the Tents: or as Saul sought his Asses in the Mountains: or as Joseph and Mary
fought him among their Kinsfolks: Either in the Tents of soft ease and
security: or in the Mountains of Worldly dignity: or among the Kindred of
the flesh, friends and company.

Not the Star of the Law: for this told us of a perfect obedience, and of
condemnation for disobedience; of Gods anger, our danger; of sin and death.
This Star would have lighted us to Heaven, if we had no Clouds of Iniquity
to darken it to our selves. And that which S. Paul speaks (Gal. 3.) Gal. 3. 24.
The Law was our Schoole-maister to bring us unto Christ; is to be understood
of the legal Tipes and Sacrifices. Where, by an Oblation of the blood of
Beasts, was prefigured the Blood of that Lamb, which should expiate all our
sins.

The Gospel is this Star; and blessed are they, that follow it: It shall
bring them to the Babe Jesus. God has fixed this Star in our Orb: but how
few are so wise as these Wisemen, to follow it? That Star was sometimes
hidden, this shines perpetually. It is horror and shame to speak it; we no
more esteem it, then if we were wear^e of the Sun for continual shining.

I am loath to part with this Star; but other Observations call me from it.
You hear Gods Leading, mark their Following. This is described Ex Aduentu,
Euentu.
by their Access. Success.
Veniunt, Inueniunt: They Come, they Find.

Their Access.
Some have thought that these Magi, having so profound skill in Astrology,
might by calculation of times, composition of Stars* and S^ellations of the
Heavens, foreknow the birth of the Mes^ias. But this opinion is utterly
condemned by Augustine, De ciuit. Dei. lib. 5.
and all good men. And it shall only help us with this Observation.

God purposed so plentiful a salvation by Christ that he calls to him at the
first those, who were far off. Far off indeed; not only in a local, but
cere^oniall Distance. For place they were so far; as Persia from India: from
thence most Writers affirm their coming. For the other respect, he calls
those to Christ, who had run furthest from Christ; and given themselves most
over to the Devil. Magi^ans, Sorcerers, Coniuri^s consederates with Satan in
the most detestable art of Witchcraft. These that had set their faces against
heauen' and blasphemed out a renuntiation of God and all goodness: even at
those Doors does Gods spirit Knock, and sends them by a Star to a Savior.

Be our ^innes never so many for number, never so heinous for nature, never so
full for measure, yet the mercy of God may give us a Star; that shall bring
us, not to the Babe Jesus in a Manger, but to be Christ a King in his Throne.
Let no penitent Soul despair of mercy.

Christ manifested himself to two sorts of people in his swathing Cloutes; to
these Magitians, and to Shepherds: the latter simple and ignorant, ^erm. 2. De
Epiph.
the other learned and wicked. So August* In rusticitate Pastorum imperitia
proeualet, in Sacrilegijs magorum imp^etas. Yet to both these, one in the day
of his nativity the other in this Epiphanie, did that Savior, with whom is no
respect of of persons manifest his saving mercy. Whether thou be poor for
Goods of the world, or Poorer for the Riches of grace, be comforted; thou
may one day see the salvation of God.

2. Observe their obedience: they Come instantly on Gods call. They have seen
his Star, and they must go to him. They regard not, that Herod was an enemy
to the King of Persia their Master; they come to his Court to enquire for
Christ. When they are there, let Herod be never so troubled about the name of
the true and newborn King of Jews; they have the inward direction, the
record of an ancient prophecy added by the Priests. ver. 6. from Micah. 5. 2.
Thou Bethlem Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, yet
out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is to be ruler in Israel.
Hereupon they go.

Obedience, when it has the warrant, goes upon sound and quick Feet Necfal^a
fingit, nec vera metuit impedimenta. No obstacles can stay it, no Errors stray
it, nor Terrors fray it: it is not deluded with toys, nor deferred with
joys. It ^arries not with the young man in the Gospel, to kiss his Friends;
nor with the Old man, to fill his Barnes: but Currit per saxa, perignes,
through all dangers and difficulties, with a faithful eye bent upon the
Callers promises. And this is that other Virtue remarkable in these Wisemen.

3. Faith. They come to the Priests made acquainted with the Oracles of God, to
inquire of this King. The Priests resolve the place of his birth from the
Prophet: but though told of his Star, they will not stir a foot toward
him: Perhaps it might cost them their Honors or lives by the Kings
displeasure; therefore they will point others, but disappoynt their own souls.

Here is a strange inuersion, Leo sermon. 3. in Loc. cap. 3.
Veritas illuminat Magos; Infidelit as obcoecat Magistro^: Truth guides the
Magitians, Unbelief blindes the Priests. They that were used to Necromanticke
Spelles and Charms, begin to understand the truth of a Savior: whiles they
that had him in their Books, lost him in their Hearts. Vtuntur paginis, quarum
non credunt eloquijs: They turn over the leaves, and believe not their
Contents. To what end were all their quotidian Sacrifices? If they were not
types and figures of a Mes^ias, what other thing made they their Temples, but a
Butchers shambles?

Now the Mercy and Grace of our Lord Jesus, keep us from this apostate
wickedness. Let Truth never speak it of us, that we have the Book of the
Lord in our Hands, not the doctrine in our Consciences. That we have Gods
Seals, yet vn-marked Souls. That De virtutibus vacui loquim^^: Greg. dial.
lib. 3. cap. 37.
We speak of the Graces, we have not.

It was once spoken of Greece, in regard of the ruins, (^ea of the utter
extinction, for Etiam periere ruinae) Gr^ciam in Graecia quaerimus, non
inuenimus: We seek for Greece in Greece, and can not find it. Let it never be
said of us in respect of our recidiuall disobedience; Angliam in Anglia
quaerimus; et non inuenta est: We seek that famous Church of England in
England, and find it not. Many love to live within the circumference and reach
of the Gospel, because it has brought Peace, and that Peace Wealth, and that
Wealth Promotion: But if this Health or Quiet might be vpheld or augmented by
that Roman Harlot, they would be ready to cry, Great is Diana of the
Ephesians; and Christ might lodge long enough at Bethleem, ere they would go
to visit him. Our lives too prodigiously begin to pretend this: But, O faxit
Deus, vt nullum sit in omine pondus. And for our selves, Bell. Let us not like
the Priests, direct others to a Savior, and stay at home our selves: nor like
the Trumpeter, that encourages others to the Battle against the enemies of
God, and our salvation, Nihil ipse nec ausus, nec potuit: our selves being
Cowards, AEnead.
and giving never a stroke. It is not enough to tell the people of a Savior in
Bethleem: Opus est etiam praeitione, aut saltem coitione, et pari congressu:
We must go before them, or at least go with them.

For this cause I commend the Faith of these Magi: Seeing the Priests doctrine
concurres with the Stars dumb direction, though Herod will not leave his
Court, nor the Scribes their ease, nor the People their trades; yet these men
will go alone to Christ. When thou art to embrace Religion, it is good going
in company, if thou can get them; for the greater blessings ^alles upon a
multitude: but resolve to go, though alone: For thou shall never see the Lord
Jesus, if thou tarry till all Jerusalem go with thee to Bethleem.

We have heard their Aduent or Access; listen to the Event or Success. They
saw the young Child, with Mary his Mother.

God has answered the desire of their hearts: they had undertook a long
Journey, made a diligent inquiry; no doubt their Souls longed with Simeon to
see their Savior. Lo! he that never frustrates the faithful affection, gives
abundant satisfaction to their hopes. They saw the young Child with Mary his
Mother. Observe Whom. With whom. Where.
they saw him.

Whom? The young Child* Meditate and wonder. The Ancient of days is become a
young Child. The Infinitely great is made Little. The sustainer of all things
Suckes. Factor terrae, factus interra. Creator coel:, creatussub coelo. Aug
ser. 27. delemp.
He that made Heaven and Earth, is made under Heaven upon Earth. The Creator of
the world is Created in the world, Created Little in the world; they saw the
young Child.

With whom? With Mary his Mother. Mary was his Daughter, is she now become his
Mother? Yes; he is made the Child of Mary, A^^ de Temp. Ser. (...).
who is the Father of Mary. Sine quo Pater nunquam fuit, sine quo matter nunquam
fuisset. Without whom his Father in Heaven never was; without whom his Mother
on Earth had never been.

Where? It is evident in S. Lukes Gospel, they found him lying in a Cratch.
He, who sits on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Esa. 40. 12.
was lodged in a stable. He that Measures the Waters in his Fist, and Heaven
with a Spa^ne* was now Crowned in a Manger, and swadled with a few Rags. Here
they find neither Guard to defend him, nor tumults of people thronging to see
him; neither Crown on his Head, nor Scepter in his hand; but a young Child in
a Cratch: having so little external glory, that they might have saved their
pain and seen many in their own Country far beyond him. Our instruction
hence is, that.

God does often strangly and strongly exercise the Faith of his; that their
persuasion may not be guided ( Oculis, but Ora^ulis) by their Sight, but his
Word. The eye of true Faith is so quick sighted, that it can see through all
the Mistes and Fogges of difficulties. Hereon these Magi do confidently
believe, that this poor Child, lying in so base a manner, is the great King of
Heaven and Earth. The faith of man, that is grounded on the promises of God
must believe, that in prison there is liberty, in trouble peace, in
affliction, comfort, in Death life, in the Cross a Crown, and in a Manger the
Lord Jesus.

The use of this teaches us not to be offended at the baseness of the
Gospel; lest we never come to the Honor to see Jesus. It was an argument of
the Devils breaching. (...). 7. ^8.
Have any of the Rulers, or Pharisees believed on him? The great, the learned,
the wise give him no cr^dence. But this people that knows not the Law is
Cursed: None but a few o^ the rascal company follow him. (...) hereof Simeon
resolved his mother Mary. (...) set for the fall, as well as the risi^g again
of many (...) for a Sign which shall be spoken against. He should (...) but
woe unto them that so esteemed (...), to work his will by (...) should apply a
medicine contrary to (...) of the patient, he would have little (...) the
disease. But such is Gods m^raculous working that he subdues Crowns to a
Cross, ouercomes (...) poverty, overthrows the (...) of the (...), by (...)
Folishnesse of the Spirit and sets knees a (...) in a Manger.

YOu see their Access, and the Event or Success; which points determine their
Direction: Let us come to their

Devotion.
Herein we shall find a triplicitie; to follow the method of Augustines
Gloss, Sermon. (...)
Adorant corporibus, vencrantur officijs, honorant muneribus: Christ had
bestowed on these Magi three sorts of gifts; Goods Corporal, Spiritual,
Temporal: And all these in a devout thankfulness they return to Christ.

In Falling down, they did honor him with the Goods of the body.

In Worshipping him, with the gifts of the Mind.

In Presenting to him guiftes, Gold, Frankincense, and Mirrhe; with the goods
of the World.

The Body and Mind, I will knit together, (They fell down, and worshipped
him.) It is fit they should be partners in repentance, that have been
confederates in sin. It is questioned, whether in transgressing, the body or
the soul be most culpable? I am sure, either is guilty. It is all one: a man
that wants Eyes, carries a man that wants Feet: the lame that cannot go,
spies a Booty; and tells his blind Porter of it, that cannot see: He that has
Eyes directes the way; he that has Feet travels to it; but they both consent
to steal it. The Body without the Soul wants Eyes: the Soul without the
Body wants Feet; but either supplies the other to purloine Gods glory:
Discuss, whether more, that list; I am certain, both the blind and the lame
are guilty. Both have offended, both must in a repentant Oblation be offered
to God. Therefore says Paul, not only Present your Bodies (...) Sacrifice;
Gal^^^. 2.
but also, Be transformed by the renewing of your Minds. Bodily labor
profits ^tle, without the Soul; and it is a proud Soul that has stiff
Knees. These Magi therefore give both; Procidentes ador^uerunt eum.

Here is one thing sticks horribly in the Papists stomachs; and like a Bone
in the throat, will neither up nor down with them. They fell down and
worshipped him: Not her. This same leaving out of (Her) has much vexed them.
How much would they have given the Evangelist, to put in (Illam.) They saw Him
with his Mother: yet they Worshipped Him, not his Mother.

They have troubled us and themselves with many Arguments, that though this was
concealed, it was not omitted. And they are resolved to believe it, though they
cannot prove it; and that, though it be not so good, shall be as ready.
Howsoever? they will confute the Magi in their practice: for they still Adorare
eam, when perhaps they forget eum, and give the Mother more honor then her
Maker. It was but manerly in Bellarmine, to post-scribe two of his Tomes, with
Laus Deo, virginique matri Mariae: Praise to the Lord, and his Mother the
virgin Mary. Some (setting the Cart before the Horse) have written (Laus beatae
virgini, et Jesus Christo,) Praise to the virgin Mary, and Jesus Christ: And
they have enjoined ten Auemaries, for one Paternoster. It is to be feared at
last, they will adore her for their Savior, as they do for their Mediator,
and shut Christ quite out of doors.

But let me come out of Babel into Gods City. They fell down, and worshipped
Him. Let our Instruction hence be this.

God did ever so strangely qualify the baseness of Christ, that though he
seemed in men's eyes a contemptible object, Esaias. 53. 3.
and abject; (Esa. 53.) yet he was beautified with some certain mark of his
Divinity; that he might be discerned to be more then Man. Here when he had
an Oxe-stall for his Cloth of estate, he had a Star from Heaven to shine
forth his Glory. Now, when generally in the world there was as much thought of
the man in the Moon, as of Christ the Son of Righteousness, behold
Magitians come from the East, and prostrate themselves before him.

The eye of their Flesh, saw his rags of Poverty: the eye of their Faith,
saw his robes of Glory. Instead of the cold Stones and Pauement, they saw his
Sapphires, Iaspers, Chrysolites. Instead of his Manger, they saw his Throne. For
the Beasts about him, they saw armies of Angels attending him. For his base
Stable, they saw Palatium centum sublime columnis; a Palace of many Turrets.
They beheld Magnu^ in paruo latere; that this little Child was a great King,
yea a great GOD, yea a great King above all Gods. Thus, as Thomas in one of his
Himnes. Quod non capis, quod non vides,
Animosa firmat fides,
Praeter rerum ordinem.
What we neither feel nor see,
Powerful Faith believes to be.


When Christ was first revealed to poor Shepherds, he was not without a
Qu^re of Angels singing his Glory. Luke 3.
Let him be in the Wilderness among wild Beasts, Math. 4.
even those glorious Spirits are his Pensioners, and minister to his wants.
Math. 11.
He comes hungry to a Figtree, to demonstrate his natural infirmity: but
finding no fruit on it, he curses the Figtree; Never Fruit grow on thee
hereafter, to declare his Power. Must he pay tribute? Yet the Kings Son
should pay none: but he is content to be a Subject; he will pay it: but he
bids Peter go to the Sea, Math. 17.
and take it out of a Fishes mouth. To show his Humility, he will pay it; but
to show his Divinity, he bids the Sea pay it for him. He that undertook the
Misery to be whipped; Math. 26.
did also to prove his Majesty, whip the Buyers and Sellers out of the
Temple: Mark. 11.
Which was no less then a miraculous Wonder, that a private man should do it
without resistance. Yea, when he was dying between two Thieves, he so
qualifies the baseness of the Cross, that he works in the heart of one,
Math. 27.
to call him Savior, and to desire remembrance in his Kingdom. When his Soul
was leaving his Body, as a man; even then he rent the Veil of the Temple,
shook the Earth, tore the Rocks, opend the Graves; to prove that he was GOD.

Thus in his greatest humiliation, God never left him without some testimony of
his divine power that as beholding him hungry, thirsty, weary, weeping,
bleeding, dying; we say, O homo certe sure he was a Man: So, seeing him to
calm the Seas, command the Winds, heal the Sick, raise the Dead, cast out
Devils, we may say, O Deus certe, sure he was GOD. Thus these converted
Magitians beheld him, Hominem verum, though not hominem merum; a little Child,
a great GOD. To borrow a distich of a divine Poet. O strangest eyes, that saw
him by this Star,
Who, when bystanders saw not, saw so far?


Men are especially taken with three things, Submission, Honor, Gifts. These
Wisemen, therefore having Fallen down and worshipped him, do now open their
Treasures and present him Gifts; Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

Diverse of the Fathers have diversely gloss'd these Wise-mens Gifts.

Bern. They did offer Gold, to relieve Mary's necessity; Frankincense, to
sweeten the Stable; Myrrh, to comfort the swadled Babe. Others thus.

They did offer Gold to Christ, as being a King: Frankincense, as being God:
Myrrh, as being Man, to die for the redemption of the World.

Ambros. An^bros. lib. 2. in. Lu^.
Aurum Regi, Thus Deo, Myrrham Defuncto, or Morituro. Gold for a King, Incense
for God, Myrrh for a Man, that must die: a special Unguent to reserve the
Body from corruption.

So Basil. Basil de homChristi generat.
Vt Regiaurum, vt morituro Myrrham, vt Deo thus obtulerunt.

The same Hillary: H. lar. con. 1. in Matthew.
In auro Regem, in thure Deum, in Myrrha hominem confitentur.

All the Fathers, and other Writers, harp on this string, Naz. orat in Christ
natiu. Cypr. Ser. de stella et Magis, Aug. sermon. de Epip Iero. lib. 1. com. in
Math. Fulg. ser. vnico de Epiph.
and sing the same note. Nazianzen, Cyprian, Augustine, Hierom, Gregory,
Fulgentius; that in Gold, they acknowledged him a King; by Incense, God; by
Myrrh, a passible and mortal Man. So the Christian Poets have sung.

Aurea nascenti fuderunt munera Regi:
Thura dedere Deo: Myrrham tribuere sepulehro.
So another. Sedul lib. 1.
Aurum, Thus, Myrrham, Regique, Deoque, Hominique, Dona ferunt.

In general learn two profitable Instructions.

1. They come not to Christ empty-handed. It was Gods charge to Israel (Deuteronomy.
16.) but we think now, Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
we are delivered from that Law,) Non apparebis in conspectu meo vacuus: Thou
shall not appear before me empty. You plead, God cares not for our Sheep
and Oxen, or the fat of our Rams: for all the World is his. He requires it
not for himself, though due to himself. Give it then to his poor Ministers,
to his poor members here.

I know not how happily, I am fallen into that I would never be out of,
Charity. Most men now-a-dayes (as it is in the Proverb) are better at the
Rake, then at the Pitch-forke; readier to pull in, then give out. But if the
Lord has sown plentiful Seed, he expects plentiful Fruits; an answerable
measure, heapen, and shaken, and thrust together, and running over. If God
has made the Bushel great, make not you the Pecke small. Turn not the
bounty of Heaven, to the scarcity of Earth. We love the retentiue well, but
our expulsive is grown weak. But as God has made you Diuit^^ in arca, so
beseech him to make you Diuites in conscientia. Accept not only the
distributive virtue from Heaven, but affect the communicatiue virtue on Earth.

As in a state politic, the lieger Ambassadors that are sent abroad to lie
in foreign Kingdoms, secureth our peaceable state at home. So, that we
dispearse abroad, makes safe the rest at home. The Prayers of the Poor by us
relieved, shall prevail with God for Mercy upon us. The happy solace of a
well pleased Conscience shall rejoice us: and the never failing Promises of
God, shall satisfy us. We hear many Rich men complain of losses, by Sea, by
Debtors, by unjust Servants: we never heard any man complain of want that
came by Charity: No man is the poorer, for that he gives to the Poor: Let
him sum up his Books, and he shall find himself the richer. As God
therefore has laid up for you In terra morientium, in this World: so lay up
for your-selues Interra viuentium, in the World to come. As you are rich in the
Kings Books, be rich in Gods Book. If it were possible, all the World should
miscarry, your Treasure in Heaven is in a sure Coffer: no Thief, Rust, Moth,
Fire, shall consume that. You shall find God the best Creditor; he will pay
great Usury, not ten in a hundred, but a hundred, a thousand for ten.

2. Their Gifts were not slight and triuiall, lean, meager, staruelings; but
Opimat, optima; every one the best in their kinds. Gold is the best of Metals,
Frankin cense of aromaticall Odours, Myrrh of medicinal Unguents.

Match these Wisemen, O ye miserable times of ours. Raro reddentem, rarissime
optima reddentem profertis. You seldom bring forth a man that will give; but
almost never, one that will offer the best Gifts. Our lame Son must be Gods
Clerk, our starued Lamb, our poorest Fleece, our thinnest Sheafe must fall
for Gods Tenth. If we give him the Shales, the Husks, the Sheards, the
Shreds, of our Wealth, we judge him beholding to us.

God hears the Heavens, and the Heavens hear the Earth, Hos. 2.
and the Earth hears the Corn, Wine, Oil, and they hear us. Our valleys
stand thick with Corn, our Trees groan with the burden of Fruits, our
pastures abound with Cattle and we return God either nothing, or the worst we
can pick out. Take heed, least God curse our Blessings; Mal. 2. 2.
and whiles our Barnes and Garners be Fat, he withal send leanness into our
Souls.

Never think, ye miserable worldings, without openning your Treasures, and
Presenting the Lord with liberal gifts; ever with these Magi to see the face
of the Lord Jesus. Go home now, and make thy self merry with thy wealth,
whiles Christ stands mourning in the streets: applaud thy Wardrobe, whiles he
goes Naked: saturate thy self with thy Fat morsells, whiles he begges
(vnrelieued) for the Crummes: beak thy Pamperd limbs at the Fire, whiles he
shakes through Cold: thy miseries is to come; thou shall not behold thy Savior
in his glory.

Generally their example has taught us somewhat; to be Charitable, 1. Tim. 18.
to be Rich in Charytie. More specially they shall intruct us to particular
Gifts.

Some have alluded these three, Gold, Myrrh and Frankincense, to the three
Theological virtues; Faith, Hope, and Charity. Auro virtus perhibetur Amantis:
In Myrrha bona Spes; Thure beata Fides.
By Incense they understand Faith: because as that is to be offered, so this
is, to be reposed in God alone.

By Myrrh, Hope: that though death lay the body in the Cold earth, and send it
to Putrefaction; yet Hope shall (as it were) embalme it with Myrrh, and give it
expectance of a better Resurrection.

By Gold, Love and Charity; the use of it being such, as it can procure them
to whom we give it, necessary things to the sustentation of their lives. Et
quid non venditur auro?

Others have resolved it thus.

Pro Myrrha Lachrymas; Auro cor porrige purum.
Pro Thure, ex humili pectore funde precet.
Pure Heart thy Gold, thy Myrrh be Penitence:
And devout Prayer be thy Frankincense.
In a word:

1. Offer up to God thy Frankincense, Supplication and Thanksgiving. Psalm. 141.
2.
Psalm. 141.) Let thy Prayer be set forth before him as Incense, and the
lifting up of thy Hands as an Evening Sacrifice. Put this into Christ's Censor,
and it will make a sweet smoke in Gods Nosthrils. Psalm. 50. 23.
Whosoever offers me Praise, glorifieth me. It shall perfume thy Soul,
qualify the stench of thy iniquities, and vindicate thy Heart from the
suffocating Plague of sin. Say then, (Psalm 54.) I will freely sacrifice unto
thee: Psalm. 54. 6.
I will praise thy Name, O Lord, for it is good. Freely, for this must be
Frankincense.

2. Next, present to him thy Myrrh, a chaste and mortified Li^e. Let thine
Eyes, like the (...) of the Church (Cant. 5. 5.) drop down sweete-smelling
Myrrh: Let them gush forth with pen^tent Tears, and thy Soul power out
floods of sorrow for thy offenses We have sinned, we have sinned: O let the
Lord behold our Oblation of Myrrh accept our Repentance.

3. Lastly, thou must give thy Gold also: a pure Heart, tried in the Furnace of
Affliction and sublimed from all corruption. And because God only knows the
Heart, and the World must judge by thy Fruits; give thy spiritual Gold to
Christ, and thy temporal Gold to his poor members. Here take with thee three
Cautions.

1. That all these Gifts be derived from an honest Heart. It is said of these
Magi, They opened their Treasurs, and presented unto him Gifts. Man's Heart is
his Treasury: thou must open that, when thou presentest any Gift to the Lord.
He that comes with an open Hand, and a shut Heart, shall be answered of God, as
Belshazzar was of Daniel; Keep thy Rewards to thy self, and give thy Gifts
to another.

2. That thy Gifts observe the true latitude of Devotion; which endeavors to
extend it self to the glory of God, the good of thy Brother, and the salvation
of thy own Soul. And to all these three, may these three Gifts of the
Wisemen be preferred. The Incense of Prayer, respects God: the Gold of
Charity respects our Neighbor: and the Myrrh of Mortification respects our
selves.

3. That you offer not only one, but all these. It has been questioned,
Whether these Magi did offer Singuli singula, or singuli tria: But the consent
of Divines is, that they gave every one all, Semel et fimul. Thy Oblation will
not be welcome, if any one of the three be missing; Give then all.

Some will give Myrrh, but not Frankincense: Some will give Frankincense, but
not Myrrh: and some will give Myrrh and Frankincense, but not Gold.

1. Some will give Myrrh, a strict Moral life, not culpable of any gross
eruption, or scandalous impiety: but not Frankincense. Their Prayers are thin
sown; therefore their Graces cannot come up thick. Perhaps they feel no
want; and then you know, Rarae fumant faliorbus Arae: In their thought, they
do not stand in any great need of God: when theydoe, they will offer him some
Incense. These live a morally honest life, but are scant of religious Prayers:
and so may be said to offer Myrrh without Frankincense.

2. Some will give Frankincense: Pray frequently, perhaps tediously; but they
will give no Myrrh, not mortify or restrain their Concupiscence. The
Pharsses had many Prayers; but never the fewer sins. These mock God, when
they so often beg of him, that his Will may be done, when they never subdue
their affections to it. There are too many such among us, that will often join
with the Church in common Devotions, who yet join with the world in common
vices. These make great smoakes of Frankincense, but let not fall one drop of
Myrrh.

3. Some will give both Myrrh and Frankincense, but by no means their Gold. I
will give (says the Worldling) a Sober life; there is my Myrrh: I will say my
Prayers, there is my Frankincense: but do you think I will part with my Gold?
This same Gold lies closer in men's Hearts, then it does in their Purses: You
may as well wring Hercules Clubbe out of his Fist, as a Penny from their
heaps, to charitable uses.

You have read (2. Sam. 24. 24.) how Areunah, like a King, gave to the King
Oxen for Sacrifice, and the Instruments for Fuel: But David answered, Shall I
offer burnt Offerings unto the Lord my God, of that which does cost me
nothing? These men will give God Oblations, and enough; provided they cost them
nothing. The Usurer must save his Gold for his idolatrous Eye, the Drunkard for
his Host, the Lustful for his Whore, the Proud for his Back, the Epicure for
his Belly: Can you hope they will part from their Gold?

Aurum omnes, pulsaiam pietate, colunt, O this damned sin of Covetousness;
how many it keeps from the Grace of God, and the Gates of Heaven? Men think
they can never have Gold enough. They write of the Toad, that she eats of
nothing but the Earth; and thereof no more, then she can hold in her foot at
once: and the reason they give is, that she fears the Earth would be wasted,
and none left. A fit emblem of the Covetous, who fear to take their Portion
of the things God has given them under the Sun, least they should want:
when the vnrauelling the bottom of their Patrimony, would last to ten frugall
Generations.

How this Sickness grouels a man! how it stoupes him into Earth, into Hell!
This Disease lies in men's Bones. I have read of a Beggar, that passed by a
company of Rich men, and earnestly besought their Alms, complaining that he
had a secret Disease lying in his Bones, that he could not earne his living:
They in charity gave him somewat, and let him go. One among the rest following
him, would needs know of him, what that secret Disease should be, seeing that
outwardly he seemed to ayle nothing. Quoth the Beggar, you cannot see it, for
it lies in my Bones; and some call it Idleness. You see many a Rich man, whose
cup of Wealth runs over: you wonder to see him so miserable, both to
himself and others. Why, there is a Disease that lies in his Bones; that
keeps him from working the works of Charity, from relieuing his distressed
Brethren: you may call it Covetousness. They will part with any thing, so they
may keep their Gold. But we must give our Gold too, with the rest: If we
offer not all, Christ will accept none.

I will end with a Consolation; for who can shut up this Story with
aterrour? The Lord will so graciously provide for his, that in their greatest
ext^emitie they shall not be destitute of comfort. Though Mary travel in her
Travel; for she was delivered in Bethleem, whither she came to be taxed
(Luke 2.) and (likely) wanted necessary provision for her Infant and her
self: behold GOD will relieve their poverty, and send them Gold from the
East. As he once in a Dearth, provided for Jacobs Family in Canaan, by a
store of Bread in Egypt. Comfort shall come when, and whence we least expect
it. Rocks shall yield Water, Ravens shall bring Meat, rather then we shall
perish; even our Enemies shall sustain us. I have been young, Psalm. 37. 25.
and now am old; yet have I not seen the Righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging Bread.

By whom all things were made, and since have stood:
By him they all shall work unto our good.
To whom be praise for ever. Amen.

FINIS.

PLAINE-DEALING, OR, A Precedent of Honesty.

PSALM. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of
that man is peace. August. in Ioh. Hom. 2. Simplex eris, site mundo non
implicaueris, sed explicaueris. Explicando enim te a mundo, simplex;
implicando, duplex eris.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Clement Knight, and are to besold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1616.

PLAINE-DEALING, OR, A PRECEDENT OF HONESTY.
GENESIS 25. 27. Jacob was a Plain man, dwelling in tents.
THE world (I take it in Paul's sense, Romans 12. 2.) is grown at once deformed
and subtle. And, as it is commonly seen, that misshapen trunckes are houses of
the sharpest wits: as it was said of the Emperor Galba, Ingenium Galbae male
habitat; because he had an acute wit, with an uncomely body: nature
recompencing her defection one way, with perfection another way. So the world
is become ill-fauoured, and shrewdpated; as politic in brain, as it is
stigmatike in limbs. Honesty, though it be elder then fraud, yet has lost the
privilege in men's estimation: It may keep the prioritie, the superiority is
gone; and it must be feign to serve the younger.

Plaine-dealing was held a good cittisen, a good townsman: but Double-dealing,
since he came blustering in, has thrust him sedibus, aedibus; out of house and
home; out of repute among men, out of succor of friends; out of Commons, and
almost out of Canons; out of his house in the Town, and seat in the Church.

I will therefore call back antiquity, and present to your eyes the purity
of the Primitive times. For I may say with Tertullian; Perfectiora prima: the
nearer the springhead, the purer streams. Men, quo minus ab ortu aberant,
might more perfectly discern, and more constantly follow the truth. Jacob is
our exemplar, and pattern of Plaine-dealing. He was a plain man, dwelling in
tents.

Jacob,
TAken in the proper sense, signifies to supplant. Indeed Esau abuses it,
Genesis 27. 36. Is he not rightly named Jacob? for he has supplanted me these two
times. He took away my Birthright, and behold, now he has taken away my
Blessing. But Jacob did not steal away his birthright; but only took the
advantage to buy, what careless Esau was willing to sell. And having the
Birthright, the Blessing did justly belong to him: for the birthright and the
blessing were not to be separated. But this name was a prediction of that fell
out afterward, for Jacob indeed supplanted and overthrew his brother.

The Character gives him a Plain man, dwelling in tents. This is a manifest
description of Jacobs Conversation. Profession.


For his Life, he was a Plaine-dealing man; simple, and without fraud. Though
some autithetically oppose it to Esau's roughness. That Esau was an hairy man,
but Jacob was Plain and smooth; without any semblance to his brothers
ruggedness. We deny not, that Jacob was so: that exposition is true, but not
enough. It falls short of that praise, which Gods spirit here means him. He
was a Plain man; without craft or subtlety.

For his delight and profession, He dwelt in tents. Which though the Hebrews
expound of frequenting the tents of Sem and Heber for knowledge; is indeed
only a description of such as live in the fields, and employ themselves about
cattle: and this we frequently find to be Jacobs desire and practice. The
good Patriarchs were plain men: plain in their clothes; no seas crossed for
strange stuffes and fashions: plain in their houses, which were mere Tents;
not gorgeous parlors without hospitality: plain in their diet, as Jacob
here, that fed on Lentil-pottage.

But having thus proposed Jacob for a Precedent of Plaine-dealing: it is
primarily necessary to prove him clearly so. Otherwise the Original being
faulty, there can hardly be taken a good copy out of it. There are exceptions
made against Jacobs Plainness; and that in regard of his dealing, both with his
Own brother, Esau. Father in law, Laban.


I will briefly examine either; and how far he may be justified. In regard of
Esau, it is objected, that he strove against him Before At After
his birth.

Before.
It is said, verse 22 The children struggled together within their mothers
womb. Never brothers begun so early a liti^ation. These two were the
Champions of two mighty Nations, successively to be derived from (...) ^omes:
and they begin this opposition in a duel, or single combat: when the field
was their mothers womb: the quarrel, precedencie and chiefedome.

This was not a pleasant and merry contention; as some would read it. De
ciuit. D^i lib. 16. cap. 33.
Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine so give it: exultare, gestire, ludere: to leap,
skip, or play: but it was an earnest struggling, as we translate it; the word
signifying to beat, hurt, or bruise one another.

It was not a natural strife, or ordinary motion. Aristole affirms, De
histor. animal, lib. 7. cap. 3
that male twins do strive in the right side upon the 40. day; and females in
the left, on the 90. day. But by Aristotle's leave, what woman, except Rebeccah,
ever complained of so strange and early a contention! Nature was not here
alone, if at lest she was here at all.

Nor yet was this struggling voluntary and considerate. They did not strive
scientia certandi, with a knowledge capable of what they did: or with any skill
of wrestling. No, it was extraordinary, moved by a higher cause, not without
the presage and signification of a great effect. It portended the future
concertation of two great people: neither if it had been pleasant, natural,
or usual, would Rebecca have been so strangely affected, or troubled with it;
as to cry out Why ^m I thus? or to solicit God by prayer, to kno^ what it
mea^t.

And is it any wonder, Aug. Ser. de Temp. 78
that Jacob and Esau wrestle in their mothers womb; when their seed,
especially after a spiritual signification, must for ever wrestle in the
world? Shall the womb of the Church on earth be ever free from ca^nall
professors mingled with holy? And is it possible these should live together in
perfect peace, that are of so contrary natures? The wolf shall sooner dwell
with the lamb, and the leopard play with the untroubled kid, and chil^ren sit
vnstu^g at the holes of aspes The sons of Behel will not (...) sons of God
live in quiet: that enmite, which was once put between the seed of the Woman,
and of the Serpent, will not so easily be reconciled. Indeed the seed of Esau
is the greater, but they serve the less. They are more in number, stronger in
power; et cannot extend it further then the permitting hand of heaven (...) it.
And even whiles they do persecute the righteous, Quibus nocere volunt, prosunt
plurimum, sibi autem ipsi maxim nocent: they hurt only themselves, and
benefit those to whom they intended nothing less. They are our Apothecaries,
to minister us bitter pills, but so, that they cannot put in one ingredient
more then the Lord allows them.

Origin draws from this a mystical sense; Hom 12. in Genes.
and understands these two combatants to be within us. As if it had
presignified what Pavl affirms, Galat. 5. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the
other. Rebecca Galat. 5. 17
may well thus figure the state of a regenerate soul; wherein, till this
mortal shall put on ^^^ortalitie, and glory swallow up corruption, there must
be a perpetual conflict. In men unconverted on earth, in Saints glorified in
heaven, there is no such unquietness: the former being without a Jacob, the
latter without an Esau: these having no flesh. the other nothing but flesh. But
in men called and justified by the blood of Christ, yet in a m^litant estate,
there is a necessity of this combat. No strife, no christian. Before
sanctification there is all peace in the soul. How should there choose, when
there is no enemy to resist? The unregenerate heart ha^h only an Esau in it:
what strife can there be without a Jacob? Nature can very easily agree with it
self. Disturbance is a sign of sanctification: there is no grace, where there
is all peace. No sooner is the new man formed in us, but suddenly begins this
quarrel. The remaining corruption will fight with grace, and too often
prevail against it. Indeed it has lost the dominion, but not the opposition;
the soueraignetie, not the subtletie: Rom 7.
it will dwell, though it cannot reign. Never any Rebecca was so happy, as to
conceive none but a Jacob: Esau, the flesh will be there also, to give trial
and exercise. If grace alone sat in the heart, the hopeless devil would
forbear his tentations: he knows, he has a friend in our house, that will
be ready to let him in. So long as there is a Judas with Christ, he will not
despair of betraying him. It is our corruption he works upon: if it were not
for this Esau, he would not proffer assault. We see our combat; let us fight,
and conquer. Our flesh is the elder brother; grace is borne after nature: but
when this Jacob comes, he will get the superiority: the elder shall serve the
younger. This strife begins betimes: there is no Israelite, but must be
content to commence this war with his being. Regeneration and contention
salute us at once: we cannot enter our names into Christ's muster-booke, but we
must fight. Let the secure worldling live at his cowardly ease, we must look
for a skirmish. Herein stands our comfort, Romans 8. 37.
We shall be more then Conquerours, through him that loved us.

At his Birth.
THe strife is not ended at once; but continues, or rather is renewed at the
birth. Afterward came his brother out, and his hand held Esau by the heel:
Lest Esau should out-runne his brother into the world, Jacob catches fast hold
of his heel. So that though Esaus body have the primogeniture, yet Jacobs Hand
was borne before his Heel. Razi has a conceit, that though Esau was first
borne, yet Jacob was first conceived: and therefore the Birthright did of right
belong unto him. But it is without question, that Esau had the start of nature,
though Jacob of grace: and therefore Jacob holds him by the heel, as if he
would stay him from possessing that privilege, which Nature (God afterward
disposing otherwise) bestowed on him.

After the Birth.
ANd herein there are two impeachments laid to Ia^cobs plaine-dealing. He is
accused with fraudulent stratagems concerning the Birthright. Blessing.


For the Birthright.
ESau is by some few minutes the elder; and that was enough to give him just
title to the Birthright. That Jacob therefore might have the better claim to
it, he buys that which he could not win: and by an honest art redeemes the
losses of nature. But this action smells of cunning, and seems to mar the
credit of his Plaine-dealing.

1. Jacob is accused for cruel and uncharitable dealing with his brother. Esau
comes hungry from the field, he is ready to die for want of sustenance; he sees
his brother (in no such exigent) with food in his hand; he breaks forth into
an earnest complaint, entreating his commiseration: now, shall a brother deny
relief to his brother being ready to die, except upon such intolerable
conditions? Sure it could be no less then a hard measure, to take such
advantage of a brothers necessity. But it is answered, that there could not be
any such necessity of Esaus coveting Jacobs pottage; for there was (if not
lentile pottage) store of as good meat in the house; able to have given
satisfaction to his hunger, and ready enough at his request, being the elder
son. It was not then distressed needinesse, but insatiate greediness, that
wrought Esaus lust to Jacobs pottage. And it is not unfit, that the luxurious
appetite should pay for his folly.

2. But Jacob cannot be excused of covetousness; that would set no lower a
price on his pottage, then the Birthright. Which comprehended many privileges;
prioritie, government of the brethren, a double portion to the rest, the
Priesthood and right to sacrifice, and (what yet further commended it) a type
and figure of everlasting life. And will Jacob require such a Birthright,
including all these privileges for a mess of pottage? what tyrant could set
such an Impost on a merchandise! what citizen such a price on his engrossed
commodities? Here was an exaction beyond the taxing of Tiberius: an extortion
more extreme then an Usurers. We answer, Not as the Hebrews conceit, that
Jacob afterward gave a greater sum, and paid this but as an earnest: the
Scripture neither expressing directly, nor inferring by consequence any such
matter* But we say, that Jacob, by the instruction of his mother, knew that the
Birthright did justly belong to him, by the preordination of God: therefore now
wisely takes this opportunity to r^ cover that to himself, whereof his brother
was but an usurper: For though Esau could plead the right of Nature, Jacob
could the right of grace; and he knew this would at last prevail. Neither yet
must this particular fact of Jacob be drawn into a general imitation. His
warrant was a divine revelation; the silence whereof in these days sends us
for direction to the written Truth, Esaias 8. 20
To the Law, to the Testimony: let this resolve and instruct thee.

3. But this Birthright was a holy thing, and therefore the Apostle calls him
a Profane person for selling it: Hebr. 12. 16
Now there is no profaneness in selling a thing not sacred. But if sanctified
things cannot be sold without sin, can they be bought without sin? Did
not Jacob offend as much in the one, as Esau in the other? It is well answered,
that Jacob intelligi potest suam redemisse vexationem: he did but buy his own
vexation. He buies not simply a thing, whereunto he had no right; but only
takes this occasion to recover his own: whereof the appointment of God had
made him a possible, yea certainly future proprietary. It was never held
Simonie, for a spiritual man to buy his own peace. Many things are detained
from the clergy unjustly, which Gods law has made sacred and theirs: they
may therefore without touch of Simoniacall dealing, redeem their own
quietness, and purchase a peaceable possession. I say not, that any man may
buy a spiritual endowment before he has it; but when he has it in right, he
may purchase his own peaceful and quiet enjoying it. All that can be said, is
this: Esau preferred his belly before his Birthright: Jacob his Birthright
before his belly. The one sold spiritual things for temporal, the other with
temporal things bought spiritual.

And who will not part with transient benefits for eternal blessings? If
either by suite, or strife, or purchase we can attain Heaven, we are happy.
For suite, there is no hour unseasonable, no prayer unwelcome, no importunity
troublesome. The unjust Judge could give relief to the importunate widow: Luke
18. 5.
and shall not our just God give ear and ease to our incessant plaints? Spare
to speak, and spare to speed: the timorous requester teaches the inuocated a
denial. For strife; we know who taught us, that the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and must be attained by a holy kind of force. Jacob must wrestle
for the Blessing before he has it: and so wrestling he shall have it, though
he be sent halting to his grave. The Lord knows our strength, yet he loves
our violence and importunity: and therefore has so conditioned the gate of
heaven, that without our Striving, we must not look to enter it. For purchase,
had a far higher rate been set on the Birthright, Jacob would not have
grudged to give it. He has too much of the blood of Esau in him, that will not
forgo all the world, rather then the Birthright. The wise Merchant, when he
knew the field wherein lay that hidden treasure, sold all he had to buy it.
He is a besotted Cosmopolite, that refuses to purchase such spiritual
Friends by his riches, as may procure him a place in the celestial
habitations. Grudge not him a portion of thy temporal wealth, that is able to
minister everlasting comfort to thy conscience. Thou art no looser, if thou
may exchange earth for heaven.

For the Blessing.
WHat has secure Esau lost, if having sold the Birthright, he may reserve the
Blessing? Behold, of this he assures himself: his Father has sent him for
venison, Genes. 27. 4.
that his soul might bless him. To hunting he is gone in haste; meaning to
recover that again by his own venison, which he had lost by his brothers
pottage. Isaac being now blind in his eyes, but yet blinder in his affections;
forgetting what decree and sentence God had formerly passed of his two sons
for some temporal regard does favor Esaeu, and intends to bequeath unto him,
that spiritual and happy legacy of the Blessing. God had said, that the elder
shall serve the younger; yet forgetful Isaac purposes to bless his first
borne Esau. How easy is it even for a Saint, to be transported with natural
affections! he could not but remember, that himself (though the yoonger) was
preferred to his elder brother Ishmael: he knew that Gods command prevailed
with his Father Abraham above nature, when he bound him for a sacrifice: he
saw Esau lewdly matched with the daughters of Heathens: yet he will now think
on nothing, but Esau is my first borne; and if it be possible, he will pour
the benediction upon a wrong head.

But God is often better to us then we would; and with his preventing grace
stoppes the precipitation of erring nature. So sweet is the ordination of the
Divine providence, that we shall not do what we would, but what we ought; and
by deceiving us, turns our purposed evil into euentuall good. We are made to
do that good, which we not intended. God has ordained the superiority to the
younger; he will therefore contriue for him the Blessing. Whatsoever Isaac
affected, this God will have effected.

To bring the Lords will to pass there never wanted means. Sinful man may
have his hand in this: the just de^ree of God stands untouched. He determined
the death of his Son, without favor to their guilt that murderd him. The
affections of Parents are here divided: Isaac loves Esau, and Rebeca Jacob:
this difference shall make way to the fulfilling of the Promise. Neither parent
neglected either son: but Rebeccah remembered the Lords purpose better then
Isaac. Neither is it enough what Ambrose heereon says, Lib. 2. de Iac. cap. 2
Matter affectum, pater iudicium indicat: matter circa minorem tenera pictate
propendit, pater circa seniorem naturae honorificentiam seruat. The mother
shows affection, the father judgment: she tenderly loves the younger, he
gives the honor of nature to the elder. Nay rather, the mother shows
judgment, and the father affection. For what was Jacob to Rebecca more then
Esau? or why should she not rather love her first borne? It is God that
inclines the mothers love to the yoonger against nature, because the father
affects the elder against the promise. Hereupon she will rather deceive her
own husband, then he shall deceive his own chosen son of the decreed
blessing. The wife will be subtle, when the husband is partial: her honest
fraud shall answer his forgetful indulgence. Isaac would turn Esau into
Jacob: Rebecca does turn Jacob into Esau.

The discourse or contemplation of the provident mother, and her happy sons
passages in this action, I find set down by so divine and accurate a pen; D.
Hall Contemp. volum. 1. libr. 3
that despairing of any tolerable imitation, I shall without distaste to the
Reader, or imputation to my self, deliver it in his own express words.
Rebecca presuming upon the Oracle of God, and her husbands simplicity, dares be
Jacobs surety for the danger, his counselor for the carriage of the
business, his cook for the diet; yea dresses both the meat and the man. And
now puts dishes into his hand, words into his mouth, the garments on his back,
the goats hair upon the open parts of his body, and sends him in thus
furnished for the blessing. Standing no doubt at the door, to see how well her
lesson was learned, how well her device succeeded. And if old Isaac should by
any of his senses have discerned the guile, she had soon stepped in, and
undertaken the blame, and urged him with that known will of God, concerning
Jacobs dominion, and Esaus servitude; which either age or affection had made
him forget And now she wishes, that she could borrow Esaus tongue as well as
his garments, that she might securely deceive all the senses of him, which had
suffered himself more dangerously deceived with his affection. But this is
past her remedy: her son must name himself Esau with the voice of Jacob.

We see the proceeding: it is now examinable, whether this does not somewhat
impeach the credit of Jacobs Plaine-Dealing. There have been undertakers of
Jacobs justification, or at least excusation in this fact. Let us hear what
they say. Hom. 6. in Ezekiel.
1. Gregory thus excuses it: that Iahob did not steal the Blessing by fraud,
but sibi debitam, accepit, took it as a due to himself, in respect that the
primogeniture was formerly deuolued to him. The truth is, he that ought the
Birthright, might justly challenge the Blessing: but this does not wholly excuse
the fact. Hom. 53. in Genes.
2. Chrysostom thus mitigates it; that non studio nocendi contexit fraudem,
he did not deceive, with a mind to hurt; but only in respect of the promise
of God. But this is not sufficient; for there was an intention of hurt, both to
Isaac in deceiving him, and to Esau, in depriving him of the Blessing. But
whatsoever may be pleaded for the defense of Jacobs dissimulation in outward
gesture, there is no apology for the words of his tongue. The meaning of the
speech is in the speaker; therefore his tongue cannot be guiltless, when it
goes against his conscious heart: but the meaning of the gesture, is in the
interpreter, who gives it a voluntary construction. Gesture is more easily
ruled then speech: and it is hard, if the tongue will not blabbe what a man is,
in spite of his habit. Isaacs eyes might be deceived, they were dim: his
hands, by the roughness of the garments: his nosthrills by the smell of them:
his palate, by the savor of the meat. All these senses yield affiance, what
then shall drive Isaac to a suspicion or incredulity? None but this, the ear
sticks at the judgment; that says, the voice is the voice of Jacob. To help
forward this deceit, three lies are tumbled out, one in the neck of another.
1. I am Esau thy first borne. 2. I have done as thou badst me. 3. eat of my
venison. To clear him of this sin of lying, has been more peremptorily
undertaken, then soundly performed.

1. Chrysostom, Hom. 5. in Genes.
with diverse others, think that though he did lie, he did not sin; because
he did it by the revelation and counsel of God. So that God willing to have
the prediction fulfilled, dispensing and disposing all things, is brought in as
the preordainer of Jacobs lie, that I say not the Patron. But not without
derogation to his divine Justice. For first, it appears not that this was the
counsel of God, but only Rebeccaes device, verse 8. Hear my voice my son,
in that which I command thee. My voice, not Gods; what I command, not what GOD
approoues. 2. If Jacob had received any oraculous warrant for this project, he
would not have had so doubtful an opinion of the success. The matter was
forseene of God; not allowed: for God never inspireth lies. Gods wise
disposition of this means, affords no warrant of his approbation. He orders
many things, which he ordained not. The means were so unlawful, that Jacob
himself does more distrust their success, then hope for their blessing. He
knew that good Isaac being ^o plaine-hearted himself, would severely punish
deceit in his son. Men in office truly honest, are the sorest enemies to
fraudulent courses in others. He therefore carries his meat in trembling
hands; and scarce dares hope, that God will bless such a subtletie with good
event. Yet he did; but how! Here was prodigal dissembling: a dissembled
person, a dissembled name, dissembled venison, dissembling answer; yet behold
a true blessing; to the man, not to the means. Thus God may work his own
will out of our infirmities; yet without approuall of our weakness, or
wronging the integrity of his own goodness.

2. Some have confessed it a lie, but a guiltless he; by reason of a
necessity imagined in this exigent; as if GOD could not have wrought Isaacs
heart to bless Jacob in this short interim, whiles Esau was gone a hunting for
venison. Origin says, that Necessity may urge a man to use a lie, as sauce to
his meat: Another; as Physicians use Hellebora. But that which is simply
evil, can by no apology be made good. Causa patrocinio non bona, peicr erit.

3. Some take from it all imputation of alie, and directly justify it.
Augustine thinks Jacob spoke mystically, and that it is to be referred to
Jacobs body, not to Jacobs person; to the Christian Church that should take
away the Birthright from the elder. But we may better receive, that Jacob fell
into an infirmity, then the color of an allegory. Neither does the success
justify the means. As some Philosophers have delivered, that Prosperum,
scelus vocatur virtus; luckie wickedness merits the name of goodness. But
Jacobs one act of falshoode, shall not disparage wholly that simplicity the
Scripture gives him; He was a plain man. To be unjust condemns a man, not
the doing of one singular act unjustly: therefore God casts not off Jacob for
this one infirmity: but makes use of this infirmity to serve his own purpose.
If Esaus and Jacobs works be weighed together in a balance; one would think
the more solid virtue to be in Esau's.

Esau obeys his fathers will, painefully hunts venison, carefully prepares
it: here is nothing but praiseworthy. Jacob dissembles, offers kids flesh for
venison, counterfets Esau, beguiles his father: here is all blameworthy. I will
not heereon speak as a Poet: Committunt eadem diuerso crimina fato,
Ille crucem sceleris pretium tu^it, hic diadem.


But infer with the Apostle. Romans 9. 11
The purpose of God shall remain by election; which stands not in works,
but in grace. Therefore, howsoever Jacob got the Blessing against Isaacs will;
yet once given, it stood: neither did the father recant this act as an error,
but saw in it the mercy of God, that prevented him of an error: so verse 33.
I have blessed him, therefore he shall be blessed. When afterward Esau came
in, Isaac trembled: his heart told him, that he should not have intended the
Blessing where he did; and that it was due to him, unto whom it was given, not
intended. He saw now that he had performed unwilling justice; and executed
Gods purpose against his own. He rather cries mercy for wrong intending, then
thinks of reuersing it.

Yet then may Jacob stand for our precedent of Plaine-Dealing; notwithstanding
this particular weakness. Who has not oftener erred without the loss of his
honest reputation? Not that his fact should embolden an imitation: let us not
tell Jacobs lie, to get Jacobs blessing. It would be presumption in us, what
was in him infirmity: and God that pardond his weakness, would curse our
obstinatenesse. There is yet one cavil more against Jacobs integrity concerning

Laban,
ABout the parti-colored sheep; whether it were a fault in Jacob, by the
device of the pilled and straked rods to enrich himself. The answer is
threefolde.

1. This was by the direction of God, Genesis 31. 11. who being an infinite and
illimited Lord, has an absolute power to transfer the right of things from
one to another: as he might justly give the Land of Canaan to the Israelites,
from the usurping Cananites.

2. Jacob apprehends this means to recover his own; due unto him by a double
right: first, as the wages of twenty years service, Genesis 31. 7. yet unpaid.
Secondly, Genesis 31. 15
as the dowry for his wives; whom miserable Laban had thrust upon him without
any competent portion. Thirdly, especially Gods warrant concurring; it was
lawful for him to recover that by policy, which was detained from him by
injury. So did the Israelites borrow of the Egyptians, their best goods,
jewels, and ornaments; and bore them away as a just recompense of their long
service.

3. Lastly, he is quitted by that saying, Volenti non fit iniuria. Laban sees
that he was well blessed by Jacobs service: the increasing his flocks makes
him loath to part. But Jacob has served long enough for a dead pay; somewhat
he must have, or be gone. His hard uncle biddes him ask a hire: you know
Jacobs demand: Laban readily promoues this bargain; which at last made his
son in law rich, and himself envious. So says Calvin, Tractatus est prosuo
ingenio; Laban is handled in his kind. He thought by this means, to have
multiplied his own flocks: but those few spotted sheep and goats, upon this
covenant, as if they had been weary of their old owner, alter their fashion,
and run their best young into party-colours; changing at once their color,
and their master. So that this means, which Jacob used, was not fraudulent or
artificial, but natural; not depending upon man's wit, but Gods blessing:
who considering his tedious and painful service, pays him good wages out of
his uncles foldes. For fourteen years the Lord has for Jacob enriched
Laban: therefore for these last six he will out of Laban enrich Jacob. And if
the uncles flock be the greater, the nephews shall be the better. Most justly
then is Jacob cleared from injustice; and no aspersion of fraud with Laban can
be cast to discredit his Plaine-Dealing.

He dwelt in Tents.
TWo things are obseruable in the holy Partriarchs, and commendable to all that
will be heirs with them of eternal life.

1. Their contempt of the world. They that dwell in Tents, intend not a long
dwelling in a place. They are mouables, ever ready to be transferred at the
occasion and will of the Inhabiter, Hebr. 11. Hebr. 11. 9
Abraham dwelt intents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
Promise. The reason is added. For he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is GOD. These Saints studied not to
enlarge their barnes, as the rich Cosmopolite, Luke 12. or to sing Requiems to
their souls, Luke 12
in the hoped perpetuity of earthly habitations. Soul live; thou have enough
laid up for many years: Fool! he had not enough for that night. They had no
thought, that their houses should continue for ever, Psalm. 49. 11
and their dwelling places to all generations; thereuppon calling their lands
after their own names. God conuinceth the foolish security of the Jews, to
whom he had promised (by the Messiah to be purchased) an everlasting royalty
in heaven; Ierem. 35. 7
by the Rechabites; who built no houses, but dwelt in Tents; as if they were
strangers, ready on a short wa^ning for remouall. The Church esteems Heaven
her home, this world but a Tent. A Tent, which we must all leave, build we as
high as Babel, as strong as Babylon. When we have fortified, combined,
feasted, death comes with a Voyder, Ierem. 22. 15.
and takes away all, Do thou think to reign securely because thou closest
thy self in Cedar? Friends must part, Jonas and his gourd, Nebuchadnezzar and
his palace, the covetous churl and his barns. Arise, Micah 2. 10
and depart, for this is not your rest. Though you depart with grief, from
Orchards full of fruits, grounds full stocked, houses dightly furnished, purses
richly stuffed; from music, wine, iunkets, sports: yet go; you must go,
every man to his own home. He that has seen heaven, with the eye of Fath,
through the glass of the Scripture, slippes off his coat with Joseph, and
springs away. They that lived thrice our age, yet dwelt in Tents; as Pilgrims
that did not own this world. The shortness and weakness of our days,
strengthens our reasons to vilipend it. The world is the field, thy body the
Tent, heaven thy free-holde. The world is full of troubles; winds of
persecutions, storms of menaces, cold of uncharitableness, heat of malice,
exhalations of prodigious terrors, will annoy thee. Love it not: 1. John 2. 15
Who can affect his own vexations? It is thy through-fare; God loves thee
better, then to let it be thy home. Every misery on earth should turn our
loves to heaven. God gives this world bitter teats, that we might not suck
too long on it. Satan, as some do with rotten nutmegs, guildes it over, and
sends it his friends for a token. But when they put that spice into their
broth, it infects their hearts. Set thy affections on heaven, where thou shall
abide for ever. This life is a Tent, John 14. 2
that a Mansion. In my Fathers house there are many mansions. Hebr. 12
This casual, that firm: a kingdom that cannot be shaken. This troublesome,
that full of rest. This assuredly short, that eternal. Happy is he that here
esteems himself a Pilgrim in a Tent, that he may be hereafter a citisen in
a stable kingdom.

2. Their frugallitie should not pass unregarded. Here is no ambition of
great buildings; a Tent will serve. How differ our days and hearts from those!
The fashion is now, to build great houses to our lands, till we leave no lands
to our houses: and the credit of a good house, is made, not to consist in
inward hospitality, but in outward walls. These punkish outsides beguile the
needy Traveler: he thinks, there cannot be so many rooms in a house, and
never a one to harbor a poor stranger: or that from such a multitude of
chimneis, no meat should be sent to the gates. Such a house is like a painted
whore: it has a fair cheek, but rotten lungs; no breath of charity comes out
of it. We say, frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. What
needs a house more rooms, then there is use for? A less house, and more
hospitablenesse would do a great deal better. Are not many of these glorious
buildings set up in the curse of Jericho: the foundation laid in the blood of
the eldest, the poor: the walls reared in the blood of the yoongest, the ruin
of their own posterity? This was one of the Travelers observed faults in
England; camini mali; that we had ill clockes, and worse chimneis; for they
smoaked no charity.

We see the Precedent: the application must teach us to Deal plainly. Here is
commended to us Plainness in Meaning Demeaning.
Which instructs us to a double concord and agreement: In Meaning betwixt the
heart and the tongue. In Demeaning betwixt the tongue and the hand.

In Meaning.
THere should be a loving and friendly agreement between the heart and the
tongue. This is the minds herald, and should only proclaim the senders
message. If the tongue be an ill servant to the heart, the heart will be an ill
master to the tongue; and Satan to both. There are three kinds of
dissimulation held tolerable, if not commendable: and beyond them, no^e without
sin.

1. 1. Sam 21
When a man dissembles to get himself out of danger, without any prejudice to
another. So David fained himself mad, to escape with life. So the good
Physician may deceive his patient, by stealing upon him a potion which he
abhors, intending his recovery.

2. When dissimulation is directly aimed to the instruction and benefit of
another. So Joseph caused the money to be put in his brethrens sackes, thereby
to work in them a knowledge of themselves. Luke 24
So Christ going to Emaus with the two Disciples, made as if he would go
further; to try their humanity.

3. When some common service is thereby performed to the good of the Church.
Such are those stratagems and policies of war, that carry in them a direct
intention of honesty and justice, though of hostillity; as Iosuah's, Joshua 8
whereby he discomfited the men of Ai.

Further then these limits no true Israelite, no Plaine-Dealing man must
venture. Plato was of opinion, that it was lawful for Magistrates, Lib. 3. de
rep.
Hosium vel Ciuium causa mentiri; to lie, either to deceive an enemy, or save a
citisen, I might against Plato set Aristotle; Ethic. li. 4 c. 7
who says expressly, that a lie in it self, is evil and wicked. And another
Philosopher was wont to say, Pithag. ex Aelian lib. 12
That in two things a man was like unto God; in bestowing benefits, and
telling the truth. Nor will we infer with Lyranus, because there is a Title
in the Civil Law, De dolo malo, of evil craft, that therefore it is granted,
there is a craft not evil. But let us know, to the terror of liars, that the
devil is the father of lying; John 8. 44
and when he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own. And beyond exception,
they are the words of everlasting verity; 1. John 2, 2
No lie is of the truth. Therefore into that heavenly Jerusalem shall enter
none, Revel. 21. 27
that works abomination, or makes a lie. A lie must needs be contrary to
the rule of grace, for it is contrary to the order of nature: which has given
a man voice and words to express the meaning of the heart. As in setting
Instruments, they refer all to one tune: so the heart is the ground, which
all our Instruments should go by. If there were no God to search the heart, he
was a fool that would not dissemble: since there is, Job 27. 3
he is a fool that does. Therefore Job excellently, All the while my breath is
in me, and the spirit of God is in my nosthrills: my lips shall not speak
wickedness, nor my tongue utter deceit. Psalm. 45. 1
The sweetest Psalmist insinuates no less. My heart is inditing a good matter,
my tongue is the pen of a ready writer. When the heart is a good Secretary, the
tongue is a good pen: but when the heart is a hollow bell, the tongue is a loud
and a lewd clapper. Revel. 4. 5
Those undefiled Virgins, admitted to follow the Lamb, have this praise. In
their mouth was found no guile.

In Demeaning,
WHich is the good harmony betwixt the tongue and the hand. The righteous man,
to whom Gods celestial Tabernacle is promised, speaks the truth in his
heart: Psalm. 15. 4
and when he has sworn, though to his own hurt, he changes not. The
paucitie of these men makes the Church of God so thin of Saints, and the
world so full of Dissemblers. As the tongue must not speak false, so the hand
must not do unjustly: injustice is the greatest dissimulation. We live under
Libra, Justice and Equity: who knows whether the nights or the days pass
over his head more happily: we fear not Taurus the Bull, that shoots his
horns from Rome: nor Scorpio, that sends his venomous sting from Spain: nor
the vnchristned Aries of Infidels, profane and professed enemies to engine and
batter our walls: if the Sagittarius of heresy do not wound us in the reins:
nor the Gemini of double-dealing circumuent us in our lives. The world is full
of tricks: we will not do what we ought, yet defend what we do. How many
spend their wits to justify their hands? Through the unlucky and unnatural
copulation of fraud and malice, was that monstrous stigmatike Aequiuocation
engendered: a damned egg, not couerd by any fair bird; but hatched, as Poets
feign, of Osprayes, with a thunderclap.

I will now only seek to win you to Plaine-Dealing, by the benefits it
brings: the success to God.

1. The principal is to please God; whose displeasure against double dealing,
the sad examples of Saul for the Amalekites, of Gehezi for the bribes, of
Ananias for the inheritance, testify in their destruction. Whose delight in
Plaine-dealing himself affirms. Behold an Israelite indeed, Ioh. 1. 17
in whom is no guile.

2. The credit of a good name, which is a most worthy treasure, is thus
preserved. The riches left thee by thy Ancestors may miscarry through others
negligence; the name not, save by thy own fault. It is the Plaine-dealers
reward; his name shall be had in estimation: whereas no faith is given to the
dissembler; even speaking truth: every man is more ready to trust the poor
Plaine-dealer, then the glittering false-tongued gallant.

3. It preuents and infatuates all the malicious plotts of enemies. God, in
regard to thy simplicity, brings to naught all their machinations. Thou, O
Lord, had respect to my simple pureness. An innocent fool takes fearelesse
steps; and walks as securely, as if it stood girt with a wall of brass.

4. It preserues thy state from ruin. When by subtlety men think to scrape
together much wealth; all is but the Spiders web, artificial and weak. What
Plaine-dealing gets, sticks by us; and infallibly deriues it self to our
posterity. Psalm. 25. 13
Not only this man's own soul shall dwell at ease: but also his seed shall
inherit the earth. Wicked men labor with hands and wits, to undermine and
undo many poor; and from their demolished heaps to erect themselves a great
fortune: but GOD blows upon it a Nonplacet: and then, as powder does small
shot, it scatters into the air, not without a great noise; and they are blown
up. If thou would be good to thy self and thine, use Plainness.

5. It shall somewhat keep thee from the troubles and vexations of the world.
Others, when their double dealing breaks out, are more troubled themselves,
then erst they troubled others: for shame waits at the heels of fraud. (...)
But blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

6. The curses of the poor shall never hurt thee. Though the causlesse curse
shall never come; yet it is happy for a man so to live, that all may bless
him. Now the Plain man shall have this at last. Gallant prodigality, like
fire in flax, makes a great blaze, a hot show: but Plain hospitality, like
fire in solid wood, holds out to warm the poor: because God blesses it. So
I have seen hote-spurres in the way gallop amain; but the Iuy-bushes have so
stayed them, that the Plain traveler comes first to his iournies end.

7. It shall be thy best comfort on thy deathbed; Conscientia been peractae
vitae, the conscience of an innocent life. On this staff leanes aged Samuel:
Whose Ox er Ass have I taken? To whom have I by fraud or force done wrong? On
this pillow does sick Hezekiah lay his head. Esaias. 38. 3
Remember Lord, that I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. So Job solaceth himself.
My heart shall not condemn me for my days. When no clogges of usury with
their heavy pressures, nor foldes of injustice with their troublesome
vexations, disquiet our peace-desiring sides, or lie upon our consciences. When
thou have no need to say to thine heir, Restore this or that which I have
fraudulently or unjustly taken away. You see how false the Proverb was;
Plaine-dealing is a Jewel; and he that uses it shall die a beggar: But it is
well returned in the supplement; he that will not use it, shall die a dishonest
man.

8. Lastly, thou shall finderest for thy soul. Thou have dealt plainly, so
will God with thee; multiplying upon thee his promised mercies. If thou had
been hollow, not holy; fraudulent, not plain; thy portion had been bitter;
even with hypocrites. But now of a plain Saint on earth, thou shall become a
glorious Saint in heaven.

FINIS.
THE THREE DIVINE SISTERS.

JOHN. 13. 34. A new commandment give I unto you, That you love one another:
as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. AUGUST. Domus Dei fundatur
credendo, sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1616.

THE THREE DIVINE SISTERS.
1. COR. 13. 13. Now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these three: but the
greatest of these, is Chatitie.
WHen those three Goddesses, say the Poets, strove for the golden ball, Paris
adjudged it to the Queen of Love. Here are three celestial graces, in an holy
emulation, if I may so speak, striving for the chiefedome; and our Apostle
gives it to Love. The greatest of these is Charity.

Not that other Daughters are black, but that Charity excels in beauty. We
may say of this Sister, as it was said of the good Woman, Pro. 31. 29.
Prou. 31. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou surpassest them all.
Paul does not disparage any, when he says, Charity is the greatest. All
stars are bright, though one star may differ from another in glory. 1. Cor.
15.
We may say of graces, as of the Captains of the sons of Gad; the least can
resist a hundred, the greatest a thousand. Or as the song was of Saul and
David. Saul has slain his thousand, David his ten thousand. Faith is
excellent, so is Hope; but the greatest of these, is Charity.

Me thinks these three Theologall Virtues may not unfitly be compared to
three great Feasts, which we celebrate in the year; Easter, Whitsuntide, and
Christmas. Faith, like Easter, believes Christ dead for our sins, and risen
again for our Justification. Hope, like Pentecost, waits for the coming of
the holy Ghost, Gods free Spirit of grace to come into us, and to bring us to
Heaven. And Charity looks like Christmas, full of love to our neighbors,
full of hospitality, and mercy to the poor.

These are three strings often touched; Faith, whereby we believe all Gods
promises to be true, and ours: Hope, whereby we wait for them with patience:
Charity, whereby vee testify, what we believe and hope. He that has faith
cannot distrust: he that has hope, cannot be put from anchor: he that has
charity, will not lead a licentious life; for, Love keeps the commandments.

For Methods sake, we might first confer them all, then prefer one. But I
will speak of them according to the three degrees of comparison. 1.
Positiuely. 2. Comparatively. 3. Superlatiuely. The greatest of these is
Charity.

Faith
IS that grace, which makes Christ ours, and all his benefits. 1. Cor. 12. 9.
God gives it. Romans 10. 17.
1. Cor. Phil. 1. 29.
12. Faith is given by the spirit. By the Word preached. Romans 10. Faith comes
by hearing. For Christ his sake. To you it is given for Christ his sake, to
believe in his name. This virtue is no sooner given of God, but it gives God.
So soon as thou beleeuest, Christ is thine and all his. For he that gives us
Christ, To. 8. 22.
will also with him give us all things.

Without this, Heb. 11. 6.
it is impossible to please God: Let us not otherwise dare to come into his
presence. There is nothing but wrath in him, for sin in us. Joseph charged
his brethren, that they should come no more in his sight, unless they brought
Beniami^ with them. We come at our peril into Gods presence, if we leave his
beloved Benjamin, our dear Jesus behind us. When the Philosopher heard of the
enraged Emperors menace, that the next time he saw him* he would kill him;
he took up the Emperors little son in his arms, and saluted him with a
potes ne? Thou can not now strike me. God is angry with every man for his
sins; happy is he that can catch up his son Jesus: for in whose arms
soever the Lord sees his son, he will spare him. The men of Tire are feign to
intercede to Herod by Blastus. Act. 12. Act. 12. 20.
Our intercession to God is made by a higher and surer way; not by his servant,
but by his son.

Now this Mediator is not had without a medium, Faith. Fides medium, a quo
remedium. Faith is that means, whereby we lay hold on this Christ. Diffidence
shall never have Jesus for the Advocate. Though every man may say; I believe,
Lord help my unbelief.

Saint Paul uses one word, that very significantly expresses Faith; calling
it the Evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11. 1. Heb. 11.
Fides est credere quod non vides; cuius merces est videre quod credis, Faith
is to believe what thou see; whose reward is to see what thou beleeuest. Now
the Metaphore may be extended thus.

1. Christ dying, made a Will or a Testament, scaling it with his own blood,
wherein he bequeathed a certain Legacy of Inheritance to his brethren with
himself. Ioh. 17. John. 17. 24.
Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me where I am,
that they may behold my glory which thou have given me. This is the substance
of his Will and Testament.

2 The Conueyance of this Will is the Gospel, Whosoever believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. A large Patent, a free and full grant. There is no
exception of persons; either in regard of state, quality, or Country. There is
neither Jew nor Greek, Galat. 3. 28.
bond nor free, male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. The
conueyance is of an ample latitude.

3. The Executor or Administrator of this Will, if I may so speak, is the holy
Ghost: that Comforter which Christ promised to send, Ioh. 14. 16.
that should lead us into all truth. This Spirit begets faith and
sanctification in our hearts, puts Abba into our mouths, applies the merits
of our Savior to our souls; and indeed seals us up to the day of redemption.
Ephesians. 4. 30.
Without his assistance we could appropriate no comfort by his Will; nor
challenge any Legacy therein bequeathed.

4. Lastly, the Evidence, whereby every particular man apportions to himself
this title and interest, is his Faith. Thou unregenerate soul pleadest a
Legacy in this Will: Go to, let us join issue, and come to trial. Where is
thy Evidence? Here it is, my Faith. This Evidence, as all other, must have some
witnesses: produce thine; and before the Bar of the great Chief Justice, the
Kings Bench of Heaven, let them not lie.

The first is thy Conscience. Alas! give this leave to speak without
interruption (and one day it shall not flatter thee.) This says thy Evidence,
is false and counterfeit; forged by a wretched Seriuener, flesh and blood: for
thy heart trusts in uncertainly good riches, or in certainly bad vanities,
more then in the living God.

The next, is thy life. Alas! this is so speckled with sins, so raw and sore
with lusts: that as a body broken out into blaines and biles, argues a
corrupted liver or stomach within: so the spots and ulcers of thy life
demonstrate a putrified heart. Lo now thy witnesses. Thou art gone at the
common Law of Justice: It is only the Chancerie of mercy that must clear
thee. What will thou now do? What, but humble thy self in repentance for thy
false faith; take prayer in thy company, for pardon of former errors; go by
the word preached; for the Minister is, as it were, the Register, to ingrosse
the deed; and desire God on the humbled knees of thy soul, to give thee a new
and a true Evidence. Let this instruct us to some uses.

1. Be sure that thy Evidence is good. Satan is a subtle Lawyer, (and thou
do not doubt of his malice) and will soon pick holes in it; find out
tricks and cauils against it. He will winnow and sift thee, grain after grain:
take heed, lest thou run not all to chafe. There is a Faith of Saints. Gal. 2.
20.
Gal. 2. Now live not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life that I live, I
live by the Faith of the Son of God. And there is a faith of Devils. Iam. 2.
Iam. 2. 19.
Thou beleeuest, thou do well: the Devils believe and tremble. There is a
faith, which cannot perish. Ioh. 3. Ioh. 3. 15.
Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish. And there is a faith, that in
the time of temptation falls away. Luke 8. Luke 8. 13
The rockie ground receives the Word, and for a while believes, but in the
time of temptation fall away. There is a faith which the world overcomes;
such was the faith of Demas. And there is a faith that overcomes the world.
1. Ioh. 5 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
This is the victory whereby we overcome the world, even our faith. There is
a dead, idle, and infructuous faith, Iam. 2. 14. And there is a lively, active,
working faith. Gal. 5. Gal. 5. 6.
Faith works by love. Be sure then, that thy faith will endure the toucheuen
the fiery trial.

2 Do not loose such a Legacy, as Christ has bequeathed, for want of faith.
Glorious is the inheritance, but where is thy Evidence? Flatter not thy soul
with hope of this possession, without the assurance of faith. Christ gives his
life for his sheep: What is this to thee that art a Wolf, a Swine, a Goat?
God dresseth his Vineyard, pruneth it, waters it, is provident over it:
What Is this to thee, that art a thorn, and no branch of the Vine? Look thou
to be weeded up, and thrown out. The blood of Christ runs fresh: but where
is thy pipe of faith, to derive it from his side to thy conscience? Say, it
should shower mercy, yet if thou want faith, all would fall besides thee.
There would be no more favor for thee, then if there was no Savior.

Let then no miseries of earth, much less pleasures, quench thy faith. Satan
seeing this spark of fire kindled in thy heart, would blow it out with
storms, or work thee to smother it thy self with vanities, or to rake it up
in the dead embers of cold security: but believe against sight and sense. As
David prophesied, that he should be a King. Eo plus habet fides meriti, quo
minus argumenti. Faith shall have so much the more recompense, as it had the
less argument to induce it.

Hope.
IS the sweetest friend, that ever kept a distressed soul company: it beguiles
all the tediousness of the way, all the miseries of our Pilgrimage. Iam mala
finissem letho; sed eredula vitam
Spes fouet, and melius cras foresemper ait.
Therefore dum spiro spero, says the Heathen: but dum, expiro spero, says the
Christian. The one, whilst I live, I hope; the other, when I dye, I hope: so
Job, I will hope in thee, though thou killest ^ee. It tells the soul such sweet
stories of the succeeding joys; what comforts there be in heaven; what peace,
what joy, what triumphs, mariage-songs, and Halleluiahs, there are in that
Country, whether she is traveling; that she goes merrily away with her
present burden.

It holds the head whilst it takes, and gives invisible drink to the thirsty
conscience. It is a liberty to them that are in prison, and the sweetest
Physic to the sick. Saint Paul calls it an Anchor. Let the winds blow, and
the storms beat, and the waves swell, yet the Anchor stays the ship. Heb.
6. 19.
It breaks through all difficulties, and makes way for the soul to follow it.
It teaches Abraham to expect fruit from a withered stock; and Joseph in a
dungeon, to look for the Sun and Stars obeisance. It counsels a man, as
Esdras did the woman; 2. Esd. 10. 17.
that having lost her son, would needs dye languishing in the disconsolate
fields. Go thy way into the City to thine husband. Mourn not wretch for the
loss of some worldly and perishing delight: sit not down and die, though the
fruit of thy womb be swallowed into the earth. But go home to the city, the
City of mercy; to thine husband, even thy husband Jesus Christ; let him comfort
thee: This is the voice of hope.

Though misery be present, comfort absent, though through the dim and
waterish humor of thy heart, thou can spy no deliverance; yet such is the
nature of Hope, that futura facta dicit: It speaks of future things, as if
they were present. Romans 8. Romans 8. 24.
We are saved by hope. Yet sic liberati, vt adhuc speranda sit haereditas,
postea possidenda. Nunc habemius ius adrem, nondum inre. We have our
inheritance, in hope; which gives us the right of the substance, though not the
substance of the right: assurance of the possession, though not possession of
the thing assured. This tells us, that Nemo valde dolebit and diu, no man should
grieve much and long. God making our misery, aut tolerabilem, aut breuem,
either sufferable or short.

These are the comforts of Hope. Now, that you may not be deceived, there is
(as I said before of Faith) a thing like Hope, which is not it.

There is a bold and presumptuous Hope, an ignorant security, and ungrounded
persuasion, the very illusion of the Devil; who, when he cannot prevail with
downright evil, cozens with the shadows of goodness: that how wickedly and
wretchedly soever a man shall live, though he suck the poisonous dugs of
lust, though he surres himself warm with poor men's hearts, though he
forbids his brains (as on covenant) one sober hour in the yeaae to think of
heaven, though he thirst for carowses of blood, though he strives to powder a
whole Kingdom with the corns of death and massacre, though he carries half
a dozen impropriate Churches on his sacrilegious back, though he out-thunder
heaven with blasphemies, though he trample under his profane foot the
precious blood of Gods son; yet still he hopes to be saved by the mercy of
God. But we will sooner cast pearls to swine, and bread to dogs, then the
comforts of Sion to such. We say not, Rejoice and tremble, but tremble without
rejoicing. We sing not to them, with the Lord is mercy, that he might be
feared: but with the Lord is judgment and vengeance, with him is plague and
pestilence, storm and tempest, horror and anguish, indignation and wrath,
that he may be feared. Against this Hope, we shut up the bosom of
consolation, and the promise of safety by the merits of Christ; and so far
as we are charged, the very gates of everlasting life.

There is an Hope, sober, faithful, well grounded, well guarded, well assured.
This is like a house built on a rock. The rock, is Gods promised mercy; the
building, Hope in Christ: it is (as it were) moted or entrenched about with his
blood, bulwarked and rampirde with the Sacraments, assured by the sweet
testimony of Gods Spirit to the Conscience: known by the Charity of the
Inhabitants; for it keeps bread for the hungry, clothes for the naked,
entertainment for strangers. To this Hope we open the doors of the kingdom of
Heaven; and so far as the Commission of the Keys Ieades us, we unlock the
gates of eternal life, and allow entrance. We call this the Blessed Hope.

Charity
IS an excellent virtue, and therefore rare: if ever in this contentious age;
wherein Fratrum quoque gratia rara est: the unfeigned love of brothers is
strange. Woe is me; before I am come to define what love is, I am fallen into a
declamation against the want of it: what is here chiefly commended, is chiefly
contemned: as if we had no need of mutual succor; nor could spare a room in
our hearts to entertain Charity, lest we should expel our old loved guests,
fraud, malice, and ambition. Love has two proper objects, the one immediate
and principal; the other, mediate and limited.

The proper and immediate object of our Love, is God. This is the great
Commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, with all
thy soul, with all thy strength. As if he would not leave out the ^east sinew
or string of the heart, the least faculty or power of the soul, the least
organ or action of the strength. So Bern. With all the heart, that is,
affectionately. With all the Soul, that is, wisely. With all the strength,
that is, constantly. Let the zeal of thy heart inflame thy love to God, let
the wisdom of thy soul guide it, let the strength of thy might confirm it.
All the affection of the heart, all the election of the soul, all the
administration of the body. The Soul judges, the Will prosecutes, the
strength executes. God can brook no riualles: no division betwixt him and
Mammon, betwixt him and Melchom, betwixt him and Baal, betwixt him and Belial.
Causa dilige^di Deum Deus est, modus sine modo. The cause and motive to love
God, is God: the manner, is without measure. Minus amatte, qui aliquid amat
praeterte, quod non amat propter te, He poorly loves God, that loves any
thing besides him, which he does not love for him.

The subordinate object of love, is man: and his love, is the effect of the
former cause; and an actual demonstration of the other inward affection.
Waters coming from the sea, boil through the veins of the earth, till they
become springs, and those springs rivers, and those rivers run back to the
sea again. All man's love must be carried in the stream of Gods love. Blessed
is he that loves Amicum in Domino, inimicum pro Domino; his friend in the
Lord, his enemy for the Lord. Romans 13. Romans 13. 8.
Owe nothing to any man, but this, that ye love one another. Other debts, once
truly paid, are no more due: but this debt, the more we pay it, the more we
owe it; and we still do acknowledge our selves debtors to all, when we are
clear with all; proverbially: I owe him nothing but love. The communication of
this riches does not impouerish the proprietary: the more he spends of his
stock, the more he has. Pro. 1^. 24.
There is that scatters, and yet increases. But he that will hoord the
treasure of his Charity, shall grow poor, empty, and bankerout. There is that
withholdeth more then is meet, but it tends unto poverty. Love is the
abridgement of the Law, the new precept of the Gospel. Luther calls it the
shortest, and the longest Divinity: short for the form of words; long, yea,
everlasting for the use and practice; for Charity shall never cease.

Thus for the first degree of compariion, Positiuely. The second is
Comparatiue; where, though it be said, Virtues and great men must not be
compared, yet we may without offense, bring them to a holy conference; else how
shall we perceive the Apostles intended scope, the transcendency of Charity? I
will therefore first confer Faith with Hope; and then with them both Charity.

The distinction between Faith and Hope, is nice, and must warily be
discovered. I will reduce the differences into three respects, of Order,
Office, and Object.

For Order, Paul gives Faith the precedencie. Hebr. 11. Faith is the ground of
things hoped for. Faith always goes before, Hope follows after; and may in
some sort be said to be the daughter of Faith. For, it is as impossible for
a man to Hope for that which he believes not, as for a Painter to draw a
picture in the air. Indeed, more is believed then is hoped for; but nothing is
hoped for, which is not believed. So that on necessity, in respect of order,
Faith must precede Hope.

For Office; Faith is the Christians Logic, Hope his Rhetorike. Faith
perceiues what is to be done, Hope gives alacrity to the doing it. Faith
guides, advises, rectifieth; Hope courageously encounters with all
adversaries. Therefore Faith is compared to a Doctor in the Schools, Hope to a
Captain in the wars. Faith discernes the truth, Hope fights against
impatience, heaviness of Spirit, infirmity, deiectednesse, desperation.
Divines have alluded the difference between Faith and Hope in Divinity, to
that between wisdom and valor in Philosophy. Valor without wisdom, is
rashness: wisdom without valor, is cowardice. Faith without Hope, is
knowledge without valor to resist Satan: Hope without Faith, is rash
presumption, and an indiscreet daring. You see their different Office.

For Object; Faithes object is the absolute word, and infallible promise of
God; Hopes object, is the thing promised. Fides intuetur verbum rei, Spes vero
rem verbi: Faith looks to the word of the thing, Hope to the thing of the
word. So that Faith has for the object, Alsted Syste^. Theolog. lib. 3. Loc.
17. Aug.
the Truth of God, Hope the Goodn^sse of God. Faith is of things both good and
bad, Hope of good things only. A man believes there is a hell, as truly as he
believes there is a heaven; but he fears the one, and hopes only for the
other. Faith has objected to it things past, present, future. Past, it
believes Christ dead for our sins, and risen again for our Justification.
Present, that he now sits at the right hand of his Father in heaven. Future,
that he shall come to judge quick and dead. Hope, only respects and expects
things to come. For a man cannot hope for that which he has. You see how in
some sense, Hope excels Faith. For, there is a faith in the Devils; they
believe the truth of God, the certainety of the Scriptures, they acknowledge
Christ the Judge of quick and dead, therefore cry, Why tormentest thou us
before the time? They have faith joined with a Popish preparatory good work,
Fear; the Devils believe and tremble: yea, they pray: they beseech Christ not
to send them into the deepes; what then want they? Hope, a confident
expectation of the mercy of God: this they can never have. They believe, they
cannot hope. This is the life of Christians, and the want makes Devils. If it
were not for this hope, 1. Cor. 15. 19.
we of all* men were most miserable.

Charity, differs from them both. These three divine graces, are a created
Trinity; and have some glimmering resemblance of the Trinity uncreate. For, as
there, the Son is begotten of the Father, and the holy Ghost proceeds from
them both: so here, a true faith begets a constant hope, and from them
proceeds Charity. Thus is Gods Temple built in our hearts, says August. The
foundation whereof is Faith, Hope the erection of the walls, Charity the
perfection of the roof.

In the godly all these three are united together, and cannot be sundred. We
believe in Gods mercy, we hope for his mercy, and we love him for his mercy.
Faith says, there are good things prepared: Hope says, they are prepared for
me: Charity says, I endeavor to walk worthy of them. So that, what good Faith
believes, shall be, Hope expects for her self, and Charity aims at the way
to get it, by keeping the commandments. Faith apprehends both reward and
punishment: Hope only looks for good things for our selves: Charity desires
the glory of God, and the good of all our Brethren.

The second degree, gives way to the third, last, best; the Superlatiue. But
the greatest of these is Charity. Time will not afforde me to answer all the
objections, which subtle wits have inconsequently deduced from these words.
Neither were it to other purpose, then to write Iliades after Homer: they have
been so soundly and satisfyingly answered already. I will only mention two, and
but report a responsiue Solution.

1 The principal promises are made to believers. Whosoever believes, and is
baptized, shall be saved. So no less a promise is made to Lovers, Romans 8. 28.
Romans 8. All things shall work together to the best, to those that love God,
etc. God, says the Psalmist, is near to those that call upon him. He is
close by all those that suffer for him: but he is within those that love him.
Here is Prope, ^uxta, Intus. This same Intra, within is of the highest degree.
1. Ioh. 4. God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, 1. Ioh.
4. 17.
and God in him. O unspeakable felicity!

2 If Charity be greater then faith, then is not man justified by faith only.
Inconsequent illation. Saint Paul commends not love for the virtue of
Justification: it may fail in that particular action, yet receive no
impeachment to the excellency of it. By demonstration. A Prince does excel a
peasant: shall any man therefore infer, that he can plow better, or have
more skill in tillage. A Philosopher does excel a Mechanicke; though he cannot
grind so well as a Miller, or lim so cunningly as a Painter. A man is better
then a beast: who but a madman will therefore conclude, that he can run
faster then a horse, draw more then an ox, or carry a greater burden then an
Elephant. Though he fail in these particular arts, yet none will deny, but he
is better then a beast.

The truth is, that in Faith stands originally our fellowship with God. Into
that hand he powers the riches of his mercy for salvation: and were the
actions of Charity never so great, and (foolishly thought) meritorious; yet, if
not the effects of a true saving Faith, they are lost, and a man may for his
Charity go to the Devil. And though they would plead from the form of the
last judgment, Math. 25. that God accepts men to life for their deeds of
Charity: feeding, clothing, releeuing. Yet the Scripture fully testifies, that
God neither accepts these, nor our selves for these, further then they are the
effects of a true faith. Our persons being first justified by faith in Christ,
then God will crown our works. Yet a Christian must work: for no nudifidian,
so well as no nullifidian, shall be admitted into heaven. Therefore says the
Apostle, Gal. 5. 6.
Faith works by love. For Faith is able to justify of it self, not to vorke
of it self. The hand alone can receive an Alms: but cannot cut a piece of
wood without an axe or some instrument. Faith is the Christians hand, and can
without help receive Gods given grace into the heart: but to produce the
fruits of obedience, and to vorke the actual duties required, it must have an
inst^ument; add Love to it, and it works by love. So that the one is our
Justification before God, and the other our Testification before men. Wherein
then consists this high transcendency of Charity? In two privileges,
incommunicable to Faith and Hope; Latitude and Perpetuity.

1. For Latitude, Love is the greatest. Faith and Hope are restrained within
the limits of our particular persons. The just man lives by his own faith: and
hopes good to himself; but Love is like the Vine, which God brought out of
Egypt, Psalm. 80. 8.
and cast out the heathen to plant it, which covers the mountains with the
shadow of the boughs, and spreads the branches unto the sea and the rivers: It
is like the Sun in the sky, that throws his comfortable beams upon all;
and forbeares not to warm even that earth that bears weeds. Love extends to
earth and heaven. In heaven it affects God the Maker and mover: the Angels,
as our Guardians; the triumphant Saints, for their pious sanctity. On earth,
it imbraceth those that fear the Lord especially: it wishes conversion to
those that do not: it counsels the rich: it comforts the poor: it reverenceth
superiors, respects inferiors: does good to friends, no evil to foes:
wishes well to all. This is the latitude of Charity. The property of faith, is
to receive into it self: the property of love, to lay out it self to others.
So that faith has but narrow limits, but the extent of Love is universal, not
bounded with the world. Faith believes for thy self, but Charity deriues, and
drives the effects of thy faith to others. Thy faith relieues thy self, thy
charity thy brother.

2. For perpetvity and continuance. Faith lays hold on Gods gracious promise
for everlasting salvation: Hope expects this with patience: but when God shall
fulfill his word, and us with joy, then Faith shall be at an end: hope at an
end: but Love shall remain between God and us, an everlasting bond. Therefore
says the Apostle, Now abides faith, etc. Now. Now three, then one: and that
is Charity. When we have possession of those pleasures, which we hoped and
believed, what longer use is there of Faith or Hope? But our loves shall not
end with our lives. We shall everlastingly love our our Maker, Savior,
Sanctifier, Angels, and Saints; where no discontent shall breed any jar in
our Halleluiahs. If the use of love be so comfortable on earth, what may we
think it will be in heaven!

Thus says Chrysostom: Only love is eternal. Now Faith and Hope hold up the
hands of Charity, as Aaron and Hur held up the hands of Moses: but then their
use and office shall cease. Tunc non erit spes, quando erit spes. Hope shall
not be, when the thing hoped is. Hope shall bring in possession, possession
shall thrust out Hope. Therefore says Augustine, is Charity greater; Et si non
propter eminentiam, tamen propter permanentiam; If not for the excellency, yet
for the perpetuity.

Thus to justify a man, Faith is greater, but in a man justified, Charity is
greater. Let Faith alone with the great work of our salvation: but that
finished, it shall end, and so yield superiority to Love, which shall endure
for ever.

Thus you have commended to your souls these three sisters, Faith, Hope, and
Charity. Faith we must have, or we are reprobates; Hope, or wretches, Charity,
or not Christians. There is a promise made to Faith, that it shall have access
to God. Heb. 11. Heb. 11. 6.
To Hope, that it shall not be ashamed, To. 5. 5
Romans 5. But to Charity, that it shall dwell in God, and have God dwelling in
it, 1. Ioh 4. 16.
1. Ioh. 4. 1. Ioh 4. 16.


I should now tell you, that as these three fair Sisters come down from
heaven; so in a cross contrariety, the Devil sends up three foul fiends from
hell. Against Faith, Infidelity: against Hope, Desperation: Against Charity,
malice. He that entertaines the elder sister, unbelief, I quake to speak his
doom, yet I must; He is already condemned. He that embraces the second ugly
Hagge, Ioh. 3. 18.
Despair, bars up against himself the possibility of all comfort: because
he offends so precious a nature, the mercy of God, and tramples under his
desperate feet that blood, which is held out to his vnaccepting hand. He that
welcomes malice; welcomes the Devil himself: he is called the Envious, and
loves extremely to lodge himself in an envious heart. These be fearful,
prodigious sisters; fly them, and their embraces: and remember, O ye whom
Christ concerns, the commandment of your Savior; Love one another.

I will end with our Apostles exhortation to his Philippians. Ph^l 2. 1.
If there be any consolation in Christ; and there is consolation in him, when
the whole world cannot afford it: If any comfort of love; and he that knows
not the comforts of love, knows no difference betwixt man and beast: If any
fellowship of the spirit, by whom we are all knit into one Communion, and
enriched with the same treasures of grace: If any bowels and mercies; if
uncharitableness and avarice has turned our intrals into stone and iron; if
we have not forgotten the use and need of mercy. Fulfill my joy, that ye be
like minded, and have the same love. Fulfill the Apostles joy only? the joy of
the Bride and Bridegroom, of the Church on earth, of the Saints in heaven; of
the joy of the blessed Angels; the joy of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit;
and last of all, the joy of your own hearts; that you Love one another. Forget
not that trite, but true saying.

They shall not want prosperity,
That keep Faith, Hope, and Charity.
FINIS.
THE TAMING OF THE TONGVE.

MATH. 12. 37. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
shall be condemned. BERN. Lingua, quae facile volat, facile violat. TP

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purfoot, for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Holy Lamb. 1616.

THE TAMING OF the Tongue.
IAM. 3. 8. But the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison.
HEre is a single Position, guarded with a double reason. The Position is, No
man can tame the Tongue. The Reasons, 1. It is unruly. 2. Full of deadly
poison. Here is busy dealing with a wild member: a more difficult action,
and intractable nature could not have met. Tongue is the Subject (I mean in
the discourse;) and can you ever think of subiecting it naturally to reason,
or taming it to Religion? Go lead a Lion in a single hair, send up an Eagle
to the sky to pecke out a star, cope up the thunder, and quench a flaming
City with one widows tears: if thou could do these, yet nescit modo
lingua domari: the Tongue can no man tame. As the Proposition is backed with
two reasons; so each reasons; so each reason has a terrible second, The Evil
has for the second unruliness: the Poisonfulnes has deadly. It is evil, yea
unruly evil: it is poison, yea, deadly poison. The Fort is so barricadoed,
that it is hard scaling it: the refractary Rebel so guarded with Evil and
Poison, so warded with unruly and deadly; as if it were with Giants in an
vnchanted Tower, as they fabulate; that no man can tame it. Yet let us examine
the matter, and find a stratagem to subdue it.

In the Proposition.
We will observe, 1. The Nature of the thing to be tamed. 2. The difficulty
of accomplishing it. The insubiectible subject is the Tongue: which is, 1. a
member, and 2. an Excellent Necessary Little Singular
Member,

It is a Member.
He that made all, made the Tongue: he that craves all, must have the Tongue.
Quicreavit necessariam, postulat creatam. It is an instrument, let it give
Music to him that made it. All creatures in their kind bless God. Psalm. 148.
They that wanttongues, as the heavens, Sun, Stars, Meteors, Orbs,
Elements; praise him with such obedient Testimonies, as their insensible
natures can afford. They that have tongues, though they want reason, praise him
with those natural Organs. The birds of the air sing, the beasts of the earth
make a noise; not so much as the hissing Serpents, the very Dragons in the
deep, but sound out his praise. Man then, that has a tongue, and a reason to
guide it, (and if more, a religion to direct his reason) should much, much more
bless him. Therefore says the Psalmographer, that for the well tuning of his
Tongue, is called the sweet Singer of Israel, I will praise the Lord with the
best Instrument I have; which was his Tongue.

Not that praises can add to Gods glory, nor blasphemies detract from it. The
blessing Tongue cannot make him better, Aug. in Psalm. 134
nor the cursing, worse. Nec melior si laudaueris, nec deterior si
vituperaueris. As the Sun is neither betterd by birds singing, nor battered
by dogs barking. He is so infinitely great, and constantly good, that his glory
admittes neither addition, nor diminution.

Yet we that cannot make his name greater, can make it seem greater: and
though we can not enlarge his glory, we may enlarge the manifestation of his
glory. This both in words praising, and in works practicing. We know it is
impossible to make a new Christ, as the Papists boast the almightinesse of
their Priests: yet our holy lives, and happy lips (if I may so speak) may
make a little Christ, a great Christ. They that before little regarded him, may
thus be brought to esteem him greatly: giving him the honor due to his name,
and glorifying him, after our example.

This is the Tongues office. One member, without arrogating any merit, or
boasting the beholdingness of the rest unto it, is to do that duty which is
assigned it. The eye is to see for all, the ear to hear for all, the hand to
work for all, the feet to walk for all, the knees to bow for all, the Tongue
to praise GOD for all. This is the Tongues office, not unlike the Towneclarkes,
which if it perform not well, the Corporation is better without it. The Tongue
is man's clapper, and is given him, that he may sound out the praise of his
maker.

Infinite causes draw deseruingly from man's lips, a devout acknowledgement of
Gods praise. Quia Creator ad esse. Conseruator in esse. Recreator in been esse.
Glorificator in optimo esse.


He gave us being that had none; preserved us in that being; Hug. Cardin.
restored us voluntarily fallen, unto a better being; and will glorify us with
the best, at the day of the Lord Jesus. August.
Then let the Tongue know, Si non reddet Deo faciendo quae debet, reddet ei
patiendo quae debet: If it will not pay God the debt it owes him in an active
thankefulnes, it shall pay him in a passive painefulnes. Let the meditation
here of put our tongues into tune. A word fitly spoken, Prou. 25. 11
is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver.

It is a member you hear: we must take it with all the properties; Excellent,
Necessary, Little, Singular.

1. Excellent. Abstractiuely and simply understood, it is an exceeding
excellent member, both Quoad Maiestatem. Incunditatem.


For the Majesty of it, it carries an imperious speech: wherein it has the
preeminence of all mortal creatures. It was man's Tongue, Genes. 2. 19
to which the Lord gave license to call all the living creatures, and to give
them names. And it is a strong motive to induce, and to beget in other terrene
natures, a reverence and admiration of man. Therefore it is observed, that God
did punish the ingratitude of Balaam, when he gave away some of the dignity
proper to man, which is use of speech, and imparted it to the Ass, man alone
speaks. I know that spirits can frame an aeriall voice, as the Di^ell when he
spoke in the Serpent that fatal temptation, as in a Truncke; but man only
has the habitual faculty of speaking.

For the Pleasantness of the tongue; the general consent of all gives it the
truest Melos, and restraines all musical organs from the worth and praise of
it: Eccles. 40. Eccl. 40. 21
The pipe and the Psalterie make sweet melody: but a pleasant tongue is above
them both. No instruments are so rauishing, or prevail over man's heart with so
powerful complacencie, as the Tongue and voice of man.

If the Tongue be so excellent, how then does this Text censure it for so
evil? I take the Philosophers old and trite answer. Linguanihil est, vel bona
melius, vel mala peius. Then a good Tongue, there is nothing better; then an
evil, Hieron.
nothing worse. Nihil habet medium: aut grande bonum est, aut grande malum. It
has no mean; it is either exceedingly good, or excessiuely evil. It knows
nothing but extremes: and is or good best of all, or bad worst of all. If it
be good, it is a walking garden, that scatters in every place a sweet flower,
an herb of grace to the hearers. If it be evil, it is a wild Bedlam, full of
gadding and madding mischiefs. So the Tongue is every man's best, or worst
moveable.

Hereupon that Philosophical servant, when he was commanded to provide the
best meat for his Masters table, the worst for the family: bought and brought
to either, neates tongues. His Moral was, that this was both the best, and
worst service; according to the goodness or badnesse of the Tongue. A good
Tongue is a special dish for Gods public service. Parsoptima hominis, Prud.
digna quae sit hostia. The best part of a man, and most worthy the honor of
sacrifice. This only, when it is well seasoned. Seasoned, I say, with salt; as
the Apostle admonishes: not with fire. Let it not be so salt as fire, Coloss.
4. 6.
as that Proverb, which no man living has tasted. There is a City of salt,
mentioned, Joshua 15. Let no man be an Inhabitant of this salt-citie. Josh. 15.
62
Yet better a salt-tongue, then an oily. Rather let the righteous reprove me,
then the precious balmes of flatterers break my head; whilst they most
sensibly sooth and supple it. We allow the Tongue salt, not pepper: let it be
well seasoned, but not too hot. Thus a good Tongue is GODS dish, and he will
accept it at his own table.

But an evil Tongue is meat for the Devil, according to the Italian
Proverb: The Devil makes his Christmasse pie of lewd Tongues. It is his
daintiest dish, and he makes much of it: whether on earth to serve his turn as
an instrument of mischief, or in hell to answer his fury in torments. Thus
says Solomon of the good Tongue. Pr. 10 20, 21
The tongue of the just is as choice silver, and the lips of the righteous
feed many. But Saint James of the bad one: It is an unruly evil, full of
deadly poison,

2. It is Necessary; so necessary, that without a tongue I could not declare
the necessity of it. It conuerseth with man, conueying to others by this organ
that experimental knowledge, which must else live and die in himself. It
imparts secrets, communicates joys, which would be less happy suppressed,
then they are expressed: mirth without a partner, is hilaris cum pondere
foelicitas. But to disburden griefs, and power forth sorrows in the bosom
of a friend, O necessary tongue! How many hearts would have burst, if thou
had not given them vent! How many souls fallen groueling under their load,
if thou had not called for some supportance! How many a panting spirit has
said, I will speak yet ere I die; and by speaking received comfort! Lastly, it
speaks our devotions to heaven, and has the honor to confer with God. It
is that Instrument which the holy Ghost uses in us, to cry Abba Father. It is
our spokesman: and he that can hear the heart without a tongue, regards the
devotions of the heart better, when they are sent up by a diligent messenger, a
faithful tongue.

3. It is Little. As man is a little world in the great* so is his tongue a
great world in the little. It is a little member, says the Apostle, verse 5.
yet it is a world; verse 6. yea prauitatis vniuersitas, a world of iniquity.
It is parnum, but prauum; little in quantity, but great in iniquity. What it
has lost in the thickenesse, it has got in the quickenesse: and the defect of
magnitude is recompensed in the fortitude: an arm may be longer, but the
Tongue is stronger; and a leg has more flesh then it has, besides bones
which it has not, yet the tongue still runs quicker and faster; and if the
wager lie for holding out, without doubt the Tongue shall win it.

If it be a talking tongue, it is mundus garrulitatis, a world of prating. If
it be a wrangling tongue, it is mundus litigationis, a world of brabbling. If
it be a learned tongue, it is as Erasmus said of Bishop Tonstall, mundus
eruditionis, a world of learning. If it be a petulant tongue, it is mundus
scurrilitatis, a world of wantonness. If it be a poisonous tongue, it is
mundus infectionis, says our Apostle, verse 6. it defiles the whole body. It
is Little.

So little, that it will scarce give a Kite her breakefast, yet it can
discourse of the Sun and Stars, of Orbs and Elements, of Angels and
D^uells, of Nature and Arts: and has no straiter limits, then the whole
world to walk through. Homuncio est, gigantea iactat, verse 5. It is a Little
member, yet boasts great things.

Though it be Little, yet if good, it is of great use. A little bitte guydeth a
great horse, adequitis libitum, to the Riders pleasure. A little helm, rules
a great vessel: though the winds blow, and the floudes oppose, yet the helm
steares the ship. Though little, yet if evil, it is of great mischief. A
little leaven sowres the whole lump. 1. Cor. 5. 6
A little Remora dangers a great vessel. A little sickness distempereth the
whole body. A little fire sets a whole city on combustion, verse 5. Behold
how great a matter a little fire kindles!

It is Little in substance, yet great ad affectum, to provoke passion; ad
effectum, to produce action. A Seminaries Tongue, is able to set Instruments on
work, to blow up a Parliament. So God has disposed it among the members,
that it gouernes or misgouernes all; and is either a good King, or a cruel
Tyrant. It either precedes to good, or peruerts to evil; purifieth, or
putrifieth the whole carcass, the whole conscience. It betrayeth the heart,
when the heart would betray God: and the Lord lets it double treason on it
self, when it preuaricates with him.

It is a little leake that drowneth a ship, a little breach that loses an
army, a little spring that powers forth an Ocean. Little; yet the Lion is more
troubled with the little Waspe, then with the great Elephant. And it is
obseruable, that the Egyptian Sorcerers failed in minimis, that appeared
skillful and powerful in maioribus. Exodus 7. 22
Does Moses turn the waters into blood? the Magicians did so, with their
Enchantments. Does Aaron stretch out his hand over the waters, Exodus 8. 7
and cover the Land with Frogs? The Magicians did so with their Enchantments.
But when Aaron smote the dust of the Land, and turned it into Lice, Verse 17. 18
the Magicians could not effect the like. Nor in the Ashes of the Furnace
turned into boiles and blaines. In Frogs and Waters, Chap. 9
they held a semblance, not in the Dust and Ashes turned into Lice and soars.
Many have dealt better with the greater members of the body, then with this
Little one. Defecerunt in minimis: Virtus non minima est, minimam compescere
linguam.

4. It is a singular member. God has given man two ears, one to hear
instructions of humane knowledge, the other to hearken to his divine precepts;
the former to conserve his body, the latter to save his soul. Two eyes, that
with the one he might see to his own way, with the other pity and
commiserate his distressed bre hren. Two hands, that with the one he might
work for his own living, with the other give and relieve his brothers wants
Two feet, one to walk on common days to his ordinary labor: Psalm. 104. 23
Man goes forth in the morning to his labor, and continues till the evening:
the other on sacred days to visit and frequent the Temple, and the
congregation of Saints. But among all, he has given him but one Tongue: which
may instruct him to hear twice so much as he speaks; to see twice so much as
he speaks: to work, and walk twice so much as he speaks. Psalm. 139. 14
I will praise thee (O Lord) for I am fearfully and wonderfully made:
maruaillous are thy works, and that my soul knows right well. Stay, and
wonder at the wonderful wisdom of God.

1. To create so little a piece of flesh, and to put such vigor into it: to
give it neither bones nor nerves, yet to make it stronger then arms and
legs, and those most able and serviceable parts of the body. 1 Cor. 12. 23
So that as Paul says, 1. Cor. 12. On those members of the body, which we
think less honorable, we bestow more abundant honor: and our uncomely parts
have more abundant comeliness. So on this little weak member has the Lord
conferred the greatest strength; and as feeble as it is, we find it both more
necessary, and more honorable.

2 Because it is so forcible, therefore has the most wise God ordained, that
it shall be but little, that it shall be but one. That so the parvity and
singularity may abate the vigor, the rigor of it. If it were paired, as the
arms, legs, hands, feet, it would be much more unruly. For he that cannot
tame one tongue, how would he be troubled with twain! But so has the
Ordinator provided, that things of the fiercest and firyest nature, should be
little, that the malice of them might be somewhat restrained.

3. Because it is so Unruly, the Lord has hedged it in, as a man will not
trust a wild horse in an open pasture, but prison him in a close pownd. A
double fence has the Creator given to confine it, the lips and the teeth; that
through those mownds it might not break. And hence a threefold instruction for
the use of the Tongue, is insinuated to us.

1. Let us not dare to pull up Gods mownds; nor like wild beasts, break
through the circular limits, wherein he has coped us. Eccl. 28. 24
Look that thou hedge thy possession about with thorns, and bind up thy
silver and gold. What, does the wise man intend to give us some thriftie
counsel, and spend his ink in the rules of good husbandry, which every
worldling can teach himself? No; Yes: he exhorts us to the best husbandry,
how to guide and guard our Tongues, and to thrive in the good use of speech.
Therefore declares himself; Weigh thy words in a balance, and make a door
and bar for thy mouth. Let this be the possession thou so hedgest in, and
thy precious gold thou so bindest up. Beware thou slide not by it, lest thou
fall before him that lies in wait. Commit not ^urglary, by breaking the
doors, and pulling down the bars of thy mouth.

Much more, when the Lord has hung a lock on it, do not pick it with a
false Key. Psalm. 51. 15
Rather pray with David, Psalm. 51. O Lord open thou my lips, and my mouth
shall show forth thy praise. It is absurd in building, to make the Porch
bigger then the House: it is as monstrous in nature, when a man's words are too
many, too mighty. Every man mockes such a gaping boaster, with Quid feret hic
dignum tanto promissor hiatu? Saint Bernard gives us excellent counsel. Sint
tua Verba rara vera ponderosa
contra multiloquium falsiloquium vaniloquium.


Let thy words be few, true, weighty, that thou may not speak much, not
falsely, not vainly. Remember thy bounds, and keep the non vltra.

2. Since God has made the tongue one, have not thou a tongue and a tongue.
Some are double-tongued, as they are double-hearted. But God has given one
tongue, one heart; that they might be one indeed, as they are in number. It is
made simple, let it not be double. God has made us men, we make our selves
monsters. He has given us two eyes, two ears, two hands, two feet. Of all
these we will have, or at lest use but one. We have one eye to pry into others
faults, not an other to see our own. We have one ear to hear the Plaintiff,
not the other for the Defendant. We have a foot swift to enter forbidden
paths, not another to lead us to Gods holy place. We have one hand to extort,
and scrape, and wound, and not another to relieve, give alms, heal the
wounded. But now whereas God has given us, but one tongue, and one heart, and
bidden us be content with their singularity; we will have two tongues, two
hearts. Thus cross are we to God, to Nature, to Grace: monstrous men;
monoculi, monopedes; bicordes, bilingues: one-eyed, one-footed; double-tongued,
double-hearted. The slaunderer, the flatterer, the swearer, the talebearer are
monstrous (I dare scarce add) men: as misshapen Stigmatickes, as if they had
two tongues, and but one eye: two heads, and but one foot.

3. This convinces them of preposterous folly, that put all their malice into
their tongue, as the Serpent all her poison in her tail. And as it were by a
chymicall power, attract all vigor thither, to the weakening and enervation of
the other parts. Their hands have chiragram; they can not stretch them forth
to the poor, nor give relief to the needy. Their feet podagram, they can not
go to the Church. Their eyes opthalmiam, they can not behold the miserable and
pitty-needing. Their ears surditatem, they can not hear the Gospel preached.
Oh how defective and sick all these members are! But their Tongues are in
health; there is blithnesse and volubillity in them. If they see a distressed
man, they can give him talkative comfort enough; Iam. 2. 16
Bewarmed, be filled, be satisfied: they can fill him with Scripture-sentences;
but they send him away with an hungry belly. Whereas the good man's hand is as
ready to give, as his tongue to speak. But the fools lips babbleth
foolishness; volat irrevocabile verbum. Words run like Hazael; but good
works, like the Creeple, come lagging after.

We see the nature of the thing to be tamed, the tongue: let us consider the
difficulty of this enterprise. No man can do it. Which we shall best find,
if we compare it with other members of the body. creatures of the world.
With other members of the body: which are various in their faculties and
offices; none of them idle.

1. The eye sees far, and beholds the creatures in coelo, solo, salo: in
the heavens, sun and stars: on the earth birds, beasts, plants, and
mineralls: in the sea, fishes and serpents. That it is an unruly member, let
our Grandmother speak; whose roving eye lost us all. Let Dinah speak, her
wandering eye lost her virginity, caused the effusion of much blood. Let the
Jews speak concerning the daughters of Madian; what a fearful apostacy the
Eye procured. Yea let David acknowledge, whose petulant eye robbed Vriah of his
wife and life, the land of a good soldier, his own heart of much peace. Yet
this eye, as unruly as it is, has been tamed. Did not Job make a covenant
with his eyes, Job 31. 1
that he would not look upon a maid? The eye has been tamed, but the
tongue can no man tame; it is an unruly, etc.

2. The ear yet hears more, then ever the eye saw: and by reason of the
patulous admission, derives that to the understanding, whereof the sight never
had a glaunce. It can listen to the whisperings of a Doeg, to the susurrations
of a Devil, to the Boyse of a Siren, to the voice of a Delilah. The Parasite
through his windore creepes into the great man's favor: he tunes his warbling
notes to an enlarged ear. It is a wild member, an Instrument that Satan
delights to play upon. As unruly as it is, yet it has been tamed. Mary sat
at the feet of Christ, and heard him preach with glad attention. The ear has
been tamed, but the Tongue can no man tame, etc.

3. The foot is an unhappy member, and carries a man to much wickedness. It
is often swift to the shedding of blood: and runs away from God Ionahs pace;
flying to Tharshish, when it is bound for Nineveh. There is a foot of pride,
Psalm. 36. a saucy foot, Psalm. 36. 11
that dares presumptuously enter upon Gods freehold. There is a foot of
rebellion, that with an apostate malice kickes at God. There is a dancing
foot, that paceth the measures of circular wickedness. Yet as unruly as this
foot is, it has been tamed. David got the victory over it. I considered my
ways, Psalm. 119. 59
and turned my foot unto thy testimonies. The foot has been tamed, but the
Tongue can no man tame, etc.

4. The hand rages and rangeth with violence, to take the bread it never sweat
for, to enclose fields, to depopulate Towns, Micah 2. 2
to lay waste whole countries. They covet fields, and houses, and vineyards,
and take them, because their Hand has power. There is a hand of extortion, as
Ahabs was to Naboth; the greedy landlords to the poor tenant. There is a hand
of fraud, and full of Liegerdumaine, as the usurers to his distressed borrower.
There is a hand of bribery, as Judas, with his Quantum dabitis; what will you
give me to betray the Lord of Life. There is a hand of lust, as Ammons to an
incestuous rape. There is a hand of murder, as Ioabs to Abner, or Absolons to
Ammon. O how unruly has this member been! yet it has been tamed: not by
washing it in Pilates basin, but in David's Holy Water, Innocence. I will wash
my hands in innocence, and then, O Lord, will I compass thine altar.
Heereuppon he is bold to say; Lord, look if there be any iniquity in my
hands. God did repudiate all the Jews sacrifices, Psalm. 7. 3.
because their hands were full of blood. David's Esaias 1
hands had been besmeared with the aspersions of lust and blood; but he had
penitently bathed them in his own tears: and because that could not get out
the stains, he faithfully renseth and cleanses them in his Sons and
Saviors fountain, the all-meritorious blood of Christ. This made them look
white: Psalm. 18. 24.
whiter then Lillies in Gods sight. Therefore has the Lord recompensed me
according to my righteousness: according to the cleanenesse of my hands in his
eyesight.

Thus the eye, the ear, the foot, the hand, though wild and unruly enough,
have been tamed; but the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, etc.

With other creatures of the world; whether we find them in the earth, air, or
water.

1. On the earth, there is the man-hating Tiger; yet man has subdued him; and
(they write) a little boy has led him in a string. There is the
flocke-devouring wolf, that stands at grinning defiance with the shepherd;
mad to have his prey, or loose himself; yet he has been tamed. The roaring
Lion, whose voice is a terror to man, by man has been subdued. Yea, serpents,
that have to their strength two shrewd additions, subtilty, and malice; that
carry venime in their mouths, or a sting in their tails, or are all over
poisonous; the very basiliske, that killes with his eyes, as they write, three
furlongs off. Yet all these savage, furious, malicious natures have been
tamed, but the tongue can no man tame: it is an unruly evil, etc.

2. In the sea there be great wonders. Psalm. 108. 24
They that go down to the sea in ships, and do business in great waters.
These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. Yet those
natural wonders have been tamed by our artificial wonders, ships. Even the
Leviathan himself; Out of whose mouth go burning Lamps, Job 41. 19
and sparks of fire. Out of his nosthrils goes smoke, as out of a boiling
Caldron. Squama squamae couiungitur; the flakes of his flesh are joined
together; they are firm in themselves, and cannot be moved. Yet we know, that
this huge creature has been tamed; but the tongue can no man tame, etc.

3. In the air, the Birds fly high above our reach, yet we have ginnes to
fetch them down. A lure stoops the highest-soaring hawke. Nay, Art makes one
foul catch another, for man's delight and benefit. Incredible things, if they
were not ordinary. Snares, limetwigges, net^es tame them all: even the Pelican
in the Desert, and the Eagle amongst the cedars. Thus says our Apostle, verse
7. Every kind (not every one of every kind, but every kind or nature of all)
of beasts, of birds, of serpents, and of things in the Sea, is tamed, and has
been tamed of the nature of man: but the Tongue can no man tame, etc.

Thus far then Saint James his proposition passes without opposition. The
tongue can no man tame. The tongue is too wild for any manstaming. It would be
a foolish exception, (and yet there are such profane tongues to speak it) that
woman stands without this compass and latitude: and to infer, that though no
man can tame the tongue, yet a woman may: It is most unworthy answer. Woman,
for the most part, has the glibbest tongue: and if ever this impossibility
preclude man, it shall much more annihilate the power of that weaker sex. Prou.
7. 11 and 9. 13
She is loud, says Solomon: a foolish woman is ever clamorous. She calls her
tongue, her Defensive weapon; she means offensive: a fire brand in a frantic
hand does less mischief. The Proverb came not from nothing; when we say of a
brawling man, he has a woman's tongue in his head.

The tongue can no man tame. Let us listen to some weightier exceptions. The
Prophets spoke the oracles of life, and the Apostles, the words of salvation;
and many men's speech ministers grace to the hearers. Yielde it; yet this
general rule will have no exception: no man can tame it: man has no stern
for this ship, no bridle for this colt. How then? God tamed it. We by nature
stammer as Moses, till God open a door of utterance. Esaias 6. 5
I am of unclean lips, says the Prophet, and dwell with people of unclean
lips. God must lay a coal of his own altar upon our tongues, or they can
not be tamed.

And when they are tamed, yet they often have an unruly trick. Abraham lies,
Moses murmurs, Elias for fear of a Queen and a queen wishes to die, Jonas
frets for the Gourd, David cries in his heart, All men are liars: which speech
rebounded even on God himself; as if the Lord by Samuel had deceived him:
Peter forswears his Master, his Savior. If the tongues of the just have thus
tripped, how should the profane go upright? The tongue can no man tame.

The instruction hence rises in full strength; that God only can tame man's
tongue. Now the principal actions hereof are: first, to open the mouth, when
it should not be shut: secondly, and to shut it, when it should not be open.

To open our lips when they should speak, is the sole work of God, Psalm
51. 15 O Lord open thou my lips, and then my mouth shall be able to show
forth thy praise. God must open with his golden key of grace, or else our
tongues will arrogate a licentious passage. We had better hold our peace, and
let our tongues lie still, then to set them a running, till God bids them go.
God commands every sinner to confess his iniquities: this charge, David knew,
concerned himself: Psalm. 32. 3
yet was David silent; and then his bones waxed old with anguish. His adultery
cried, his murder cried, his ingratitude cried for revenge: but still David was
mute; and so long, day and night the hand of the Lord was heavy upon him. But
at last God stopped the mouth of his clamorous adversaries, and gave him leave
to speak. I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not
hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou for
gave the iniquity of my sin. It is Christ, that must cast out this dumb
Devil. The Lord is the best opener. He did open Lidia's heart, to conceive.
Acts 16 2 Kings 6 Esaias 50. 5 Coloss. 4. 3
He did open Elishaes servants eyes, to see. He did open the Prophets ears to
hear. He did open Paul's tongue, to speak.

To shut our lips, when they should not speak, is only the Lords work
also. It is Christ that casts out the talking Devil: he shuts the wicket of
our mouth against unsavory speeches. We may think it a high office (and
worthy even David's ambition) to be a doorekeeper in Gods house, Psalm. 84.
when God vouchsafes to be a doorekeeper in our house.

Thus all is from God. Man is but a lock, Gods Spirit the key; that opens,
and no man shuts; that shuts, and no man opens. Reu elat. 3. 7.
He opens, and no man shuts. I must speak, Ierem. 20. 9*
though I die, says Jeremy: his word is like fire in my bones, and will make
me weary of forbearing. He shuts, Luke 1. 22
and no man opens; so Zachary goes dumb from the Altar, and could not speak.

Away then with arrogation of works, if not of words. When a man has a good
thought, it is gratia infusa; when a good word, it is gratia effusa: when a good
work, it is gratia diffusa. If the man cannot produce words to praise God,
much less can he procure his works to please God. If he cannot tune his
tougue, he can never turn his heart. Two useful benefits may be made hereof.

1. It is taughtvs, whether we have recourse to tame our tongues. He that
made the tongue, can tame the tongue. He that gave man a tongue to speak, can
give him a tongue to speak well. He that placed that unruly member in his
mouth, can give him a mouth to rule it. He can give Psalms for Carrols; the
Songs of Sion for the ballads of hell. Man has no bridle, no cage of brass,
nor bars of iron to tame it: God can. Let us move our tongues, to entreat
help for our tongues: and according to their office, let us set them on work
to speak for themselves.

2. We must not be idle our selves: the difficulty must spur us to more
earnest contention. As thou would keep thy house from thieves, thy garments
from mothes, thy gold from rust; so carefully preserve thy tongue from
unruliness, Psalm. 141. 3.
As the Lord does set a watch before thy mouth, and keep the door of thy
lips, Psalm. 141 So thou must also be vigilant thy self, and not turn over
thy own heart to security. Math. 12. 34.
How can ye being evil, speak good things: for out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. Look how far the heart is good, so far the
tongue. If the heart believe, the tongue will confess: if the heart be meek,
the tongue will be gentle: if the heart be angry, the tongue will be bitter.
The tongue is but the hand without, to show how the clock goes within. A vain
tongue discouers a vain heart. But some have words soft as butter, when their
hearts are keen swords: be they never so well traded in the art of
Dissembling, sometime or other the tongue, Iu das-like, will betray the
Master: it will mistake the hearts errand, and with stumbling forgetfulness
trip at the door of truth. Eccl. 21. 26.
The heart of fools, is in their mouth: but the mouth of the wise, is in their
heart. To avoid ill communication, hate ill cogitation: a polluted heart makes
a foul mouth. Therefore one day, Ex ore tuo, Out of thine own mouth will God
condemn thee.

I have with some prolixity insisted on the Position; the reasons shall be but
lightly touched.

1. It is an unruly evil.
The difficulty of taming the tongue, one would think were sufficiently
expressed in the evil of it: but the Apostle seconds it with an other
obstacle, signifying the wild nature of it, unruly. It is not only an evil,
but an unruly evil. I will set the Champion and his Second together in this
fight; and then show the hardness of the combat.

Bernard says: Lingua facile volat, and ideo facile violat. The tongue runs
quickly, therefore wrongs quickly. Speedy is the pace it goes, and therefore
speedy is the mischief it does. When all other members are dull with age, the
tongue alone is quick and nimble. It is an unruly evil to our selves, to our
neighbors, to the whole world.

1. To our selves. Erasm.
Ver. 6. It is so placed among the members, that it defiles all. Though it
were evil, as the plague; and unruly, as the possessed Gergeseus, Math. 8 yet
if set off with distance, the evil rests within it self. A Leaper shut up in
a Pesthouse, ranckleth to himself, infects not others. A wild Caniball in a
prison, may only exercise his savage cruelty upon the stone walls, or iron
grates. But the tongue is so placed, that being evil and unruly, it hurts all
the members.

2. To our Neighbors. There are some sins that hurt not the doer only, but
many sufferers. These are districtly the sins of the tongue and the hand.
There are other sins private and domestical: the sting and smart whereof
dies in the o^ne soul; and without further extent, plagues only the person of
the committer. So the Lavish is said, no man's foe but h^s own: the proud is
guilty of his own vanity: the slothful bears his own reproach: and the
malicious wastes the marrow of his own bones, whiles his envied object shines
in happiness. Though perhaps these sins insensibly wrong the commonwealth,
yet the principal and immediate blow lights on themselves. But some iniquities
are swords to the Country; as oppression, rapine, circumvention: some
incendiaries to the whole land; as evil and vnrnly tongues.

3 To the whole world. If the vastate ruins of ancient monuments, if the
depopulation of Countries, if the consuming fires of contention, if the land
manured with blood; had a tongue to speak, they would all accuse the Tongue for
the original cause of their woe. Slaughter is a lamp, and blood the oil; and
this is set on fire by the tongue.

You see the latitude and extention of this unruly evil; nor evnraly then the
hand. Slaughters, massacres, oppressions are done by the hand: the tongue does
more. Parcit manus absenti, lingua n^mini. The hand spares to hurt the absent,
the tongue hurts all. One may avoid the sword by runni^g from it; not the
tongue, though he run to the Indies. The hand reaches but a small compass,
the tongue goes through the world. If a man wore coat of armor, or maile of
brass; yet, Penetrabunt spicula linguae; The darts of the tongue will pierce
it.

It is evil, and does much harm; it is unruly, and does sudden harm. You
will say, many wicked men have often very silent tongues. True, they know their
times and places, when and where to seem mute. But Jeremy compounds the
wisdom and folly of the Jews: That they were wise to do evil, Iere. 4. 22
but to do good they had no understanding. So I may say of these, they have
tongue enough to speak evil, but are dumb when they should speak well.

Our Savior in the days of his flesh on earth, Luke 11. 14
was often troubled with dumb Devils: but now he is as much troubled with
roaring Devils. With the fawning Sycophant, a prattling Devil. With the
malicious slaunderer, a brawling Devil. With the unquiet peace-hater, a
scolding Devil. With the auarous and ill-conscious Lawyer, a wrangling Devil.
With the factious Schismaticke, a gaping Devil. With the swaggering ruffian, a
roaring Devil. All whom Christ by his ministers does conjure, as he once did
that crying Devil; Hold thy peace, and come out. These are silent enough to
praise God, but loud as the Cataracts of Nilus to applaud vanity. Psalm. 32. 3
David says of himself, Psalm 32. that when he held his peace, yet he rored
all the day long. Strange! be silent, and yet roar too, at once? Gregory
answers; h^e that daily commits new sins, and does not penitently confess
his old, roares much, yet holds his tongue. The Father pricked the
pleurisie-vaine of our times. For we have many roarers, but dumb roarers:
though they can make a hellish noise in a Tavern, and swear down the Devil
himself; yet to praise God, they are as mute as fishes.

Saint James here calls it fire. Now you know fire is an ill master: but
this is unruly fire. Nay, he calls it the fire of hell; blown with the
bellows of malice, kindled with the breath of the devil. Nay, Stella has a
conceit, that it is worse then the fire of hell: for that torments only the
wicked, this all, both good and bad. For it is Flabellum, invids, and
Flagellum, iusti. Swearers, railers, scoldes have hellfire in their tongues.

This would seem incredible, but that God says it is true. Such are hellish
people, that spet abroad the flames of the devil It is a cursed mouth that
spets fire: how should we avoid those, as men of hell! many are afraid of
hell fire, yet nourish it in their own tongues. By this kind of Language, a
man may know who is of hell. There are three sorts of languages observed.
Celestial, terrestrial, and infernal. The heavenly language is spoken by the
Saints, Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: Psalm. 84. 4
they will be still praising thee. Their discourse is habituated, like their
course or conversation; which Paul says is heavenly. Philip. 3. 20.
The earthly tongue is spoken of worldlings, He that is of the earth, is
earthly: and speaks of the earth. John 3. 31
Worldly talk is for worldly men. The infernal language is spoken by men of
hell; such as have been taught by the devil: they speak like men of Belial.
Now, as the Country man is known by his language: and as the Damsel told
Peter; Sure thou art of Galile, for thy speech bewrays thee: so by this rule,
you may know heavenly men by their gracious conference: earthly men by their
worldly talk: and hellish, by the language of the low Countries, swearing,
cursing, blasphemy.

Well the efore did the Apostle call this Tongue a fire; and such a fire, as
sets the whole world in combustion. Let these unruly tongues take heed lest by
their roarings they shake the battlements of heaven; and so waken an incensed
God to judgment. Zechar. 5. 4
There is a curse that goes forth, and it shall enter into the house of the
swearer, and not only cut him off, Iere. 23. 10
but consume his house with the timber, and the stones of it. It was the
Prophet Ieremies complaint; that for oaths the Land mourned. No marvel, if
God curse us for our cursings; and if the plague light upon our bodies, that
have so hotely trolled it in our tongues: no wonder if we have bl^sterd
carcases, that have so blisterd consciences; and the stench of contagion punish
us for our stinking breaths. Our tongues must walk, till the hand of God walk
against us.

2. Full of deadly poison.
POison is h^omini i^imicum, loathsomely contrary to man's nature: but there is
a poison not mortal; the venime whereof may be expelled; this is deadly
poison. Yet if there was but a little of this resident in the wicked tongue,
the danger were less; nay, it is full of it; full of deadly poison.

Tell a blasphemer this, that he vomites hell fire, and carries deadly poison
in his mouth; and he will laugh at thee. Beloved, we preach not this of our
own heads; we have our infallible warrant: Psalm. 14
God speaks it. The poison of Aspes is under their lips, says the Psalmist.
It is a loathsome thing, to carry poison in ones mouth: we would fly that
serpent, yet willingly converse with that man. A strangely hated thing in a
beast, yet customable in many men's tongues. Whom poison they? First,
Themselves; they have speckled souls. Secondly, They sputte their venime
ab^oad, and bespurtle others: no beast can cast his poison so far. Thirdly,
Yea, they would (and no thanks to them that they can not) poison Gods most
sacred and feared nam^. Let us judge of these things, not as flesh and blood
imagines, but as God pronounces.

It is obseruable, that which way soever a wicked man uses his tongue, he
cannot use it well. Mordet detrahendo, lingit adulando. He bites by detraction,
lickes by flattery; and either of these touches ranckle: he does no less hurt
by licking, then by biting. All the parts of his mouth are instruments of
wickedness. Logicians in the difference betwixt vocem, and sonum, say that a
voice is made by the lips, teeth, throat, tongue.

The Psalmographer on every one of these has set a brand of wickedness. Psalm.
120 2
1. The lips are labia dolosa, lying lips, Psalm. 120. 2. The teeth are
frementes, frendentes, g^ashing teeth. Psalm. 120. 3
3. The tongue, lingua mendax, lingua mordax. What shall be done unto thee, Romans
313
thou false tongue? 4. The throat patens sepulchrum. Their throat is an open
sepulcher. This is a monstrous and fearful mouth: where the porter, the
porch, the entertainer, the receiver are all ^icious. The lips are the
Porter, and that is fraud: the porch the teeth, and there is malice: the
entertayner, the tongue, and there is lying: the receiver, the throat, and
there is devouring.

I cannot omit the Moral of that old Fable. Three children call one man
Father, who brought them up. Dying, he bequeaths all his estate only to one of
them, as his true natural son; but which that one was, left uncertain.
Hereupon every one claims it. The wise Magistrate for speedy decision of so
great an ambiguitie; causes the dead father to be set up as a mark; promising
the chalengers, that which of them could shoot next his heart, should enjoy the
Patrimony. The elder shootes, so does the second, both hitte: but when it came
to the yongers turn, he utterly refused to shoot: good nature would not let
him wound that man dead, that bred and fed him living. Therefore the Judge gave
all to this son, reputing the former bastards. I he scope of it is plain,
but significant. God will never give them the Legacy of Glory, given by his
Son Will to children; that like bastards shoot through, and wound his blessed
Name. Think of this, ye swearing and cursing tongues

To conclude, God shall punish such Tongues in their own kind: they were full
of poison, and the poison of another stench shall swell them. They have been
enflamed, and shall be tormented with the fire of hell. Burning shall be added
to burning; save that the first was active, this passive. The rich glutton,
that when his belly was full, could loose his tongue to blasphemy, wanted water
to cool his tongne. His tongue sinned, and his tongue smarted. Though his
torment was universal, yet he complains of his tongue. That panted, that
smoked, that reeked with sulphur and brimstone: that burns with the flame of
hell dead, that burned with it living. For a former tune of sin, it has a
present tune of woe. It scalded, and is scalded: as it cast abroad the flames
of hell in this world, so all the flames of hell shall be cast on it in the
world to come. It has fired, and shall be fired, with such fire as is not to
be quenched.

But blessed is the sanctified tongue. God does now choose it as an instrument
of music, to sing his praise; he does water it with the saving dewes of his
mercy, and will at last advance it to glory.

FINIS.

