THE ^VMBLE ADDRESS Both of Church and Poor, To the Sacred Majesty of Great
BRITANES Monarch. ^or a just redress of the Uniting of Churches, and the Ruin
of Hospitalls.

By WILLIAM GUILD, Minister of ABERDENE.

PSALM. xx.9. Save, LORD, and let the King hear us in the day that we call.

Imprinted in ABERDENE, by Edward Raban, 1633.

To the most Reverend Fathers in GOD* JOHN, By the Mercy of GOD, L.
Archbishop of Sainct-Andrewes, Primate, and Metropolitan of SCOTLAND: And
PATRICK, By the same Mercy of GOD, L. Arch- Bishop of Glasgow, etc. the maine
opponer to these Unions.

D. D. A.

THE ^VMBLE ADDRESS both of Church, and Poor, to the Sacred Majesty of their
dread Sovereign, CHARLES, Great Britannes Monarch, etc.
For a just redress of the Uniting of Churches, and the Ruin of Hospitalls.
WHen old Israel (most Sacred Sovereign) Propheticallie pronounced this Doom
concerning his son Issach^r, Genes. 49.14.
that he should co^ch down between two burdens, he likened him to a strong
Asse^s needing much strength to bear so great a burden. And it was thought of
old, that the burden of the Ministry, Vni praeesse Ecclesiae, (...) have the
charge of one Church, and was d^^bus subesse Ecclesus, and not (...) be
overcharged with vnder-going two, was such, that in the bal^nce of the
Sanctuary, weigh the burden with the strength, the one ^^rpassed the other,
(...) and who is of suffi^^encie for discharge of that Calling?

But now-a-dayes the cure of Souls, Daniel, 5. Judge. 16.
is either weighed in Belshaz^^rs balance, and found too light: or men's backs
are thought like ^^mpsons sholders, strong anough to bear two Churches at
once, as he ^^rried the two Posts of the gates of Azzab, to the top of the
Mount which is before Hebron.

A strange thing, that men's policy should so meet a Princes piety, (...)
where he intended the bettering of the Churches impoverished ^^ate, by some
competent provision, at least, to each one: If Patrons can (...) evite the
necessity of obedience to that law of his Royal Parlia^ent, and Decree of
his honorable Commission, they shall find out ^^ch a politic course, as in
effect the same shall be but frustrate, how^^-ever: for where two Churches are
to be provided severallie, getting (...) charges united, and making one sing
dumb, they have made the ^oore petty portions, united together likewise, to
equal that measu^ed mean competencie of provision appointed in the Act: as if
bette^^ng of provisions for several Churches had not been meant; but that
(...) the Kingdom the impairing of the few number, both of Churches (...)
Pastors, had been intended. And making thereby some Ministers that it may be
said of them, as of Hercules Pillars, Nil ultra, beei^^ lyfe-renters only to
wear off, and none there-after in those places and more to succeed them.

Because (forsooth) men are so loath to part with the Churches Patrimony,
should therefore be made such an illicite matrimony and conjunction, as is
much less tolerable than with the Jews under the Law, Deuteronomy. 22.10. Nehem. 13
to have plowed with an Ox and an Ass together? or a-like unlawful, as when
they coupled themselves with the Women of Ammon and Ashdod?

Or should such a monstrous metamorphosis be made, that so many Churches, and
Congregations, which before were Substantives, and stood by themselves, shall
be now so woeful and variable Adjectiues, as a sound agreement and happy
consolidation is never to be expected, and as their ruinate Cases shall
here-after declare?

We detested before Idols in Churches, but we are making now Idole-Churches,
hence-foorth not to be ob solatia vivorum, but to be ca^^teria mortuorum, the
sound of Gods Word no more to be heard in their Pulpits, but of the dead
tolling of the Bell at Burials in their Steeples.

Genesis 26.18
As the Philistims filled up Isaaks Wells of springing water, which his father
Abraham had dug in his time: so hereby closing up the Cisternes and Conduits
of that still and living water which gave refreshment to the Lords flock:
Psalm. 23.
and incroaching upon the limits of that green Pasture wherein the Lords
Sheep were duly made to feed.

As if there were no means how the Churches of this Kingdom here, could be
other-wise to such a mean competencie of mayntenance provided, out of their
large and sacrilegiouslie detayned Patrimonies, that by making the Israelite
and Egyptian, Exodus 2.11
who in Moses time strove together of them, killing one of them, to preserve
another.

Judge. 12.
Or as the Ephraemites, who could not so grossly pronounce Shibboleth* but
Siboleth, with a smaller voice, were all slain by the Gileadites, at the
passages of Iordane: Eve^ so, that al such Churches that are not excessive in
burden and bounds, and of the grossest and greatest in the Land; but of (...)
meaner and lesser sort or syze, should be so extinguished, swallowed up* and
devoured, Number. 16.31. Genesis 41.17 Math. 13.1^. 2. Sam. 7.
as with Korabs punishment, or Pharaohs dream, they should symbolize, men
miss-construing herein (as seems) the words of our Savior, That to him that
has, more shall be given: and from him who has (...) even that which he
has shall be taken from him.

David, when he sat in his house, and had rest given him round about from all
his enemies, did advise to build Gods House: So his peace (...) him piety; and
his rest, religion. But it is contrary with us: our peace (...) such policy,
and the fruit of our rest, is the robbery first, and next, the ^uine of GODS
House, Genes. 25.
counting Kirkes to be like Esau to us, not to be Planters, but Supplanters
thereof: Contracters, and not In-largers of the Kingdom of CHRIST. Micah. 7.3
And thus (as the Prophet Micah says) the great man spoke out of the
corruption of his soul, and so they wrapped it up.

But assuredly, such Appendices as they have made many Kirkes of, will be
seen at length, never to have proceeded of a good T^esis: neither will ever
such a perilous Copulative Conjunction, do what they lift, admit of, nor take
places in a good Construction.

Before Pastors were impoverished, Pastors made fewer.
and now shall their number thus ^ee diminished? The Kirk first stripped (like
Joseph) of her Coat, which should warm her: Genes. 37.
and next, of her Watchmen, which should arm and defend her: under pretense
of some Restitution of means, to make her woefullie destitute of Men: Is not
this the vilest sort of Sacrilege? Or how far is it from the practice of
Julian in likeness, qui extinxit non solum Praesbyteros, sed Praesbyterium.
Advantage to seducers.


And how agreeable this Syncope, or Contraction, is now to Piety, or Reason,
may be clearlie discerned, that when not only the Sheep of the LORDS
Pasture are increased, 2. Sam. 24.
and the People (as in David's time) are multiplied exceedingly; but the
number also of the Wolves, who assault the LORDS Flock, daily like-wise
grows: and the Foxes, who destroy the Vines, Cant. 2.15.
even the Vines which have small Grapes: (to wit, simple and unlearned
Christians.) Should then the number of the careful and watchful Shepheardes,
be diminished, and made fewer?

It was the Precept of our Savior, Matthew. 9.37.
because the Harvest was great, and the Laborers were few, That we should
pray the Lord of the Harvest, to thrust out many faithful Laborers in-to His
Harvest. But to this Precept of His our practice now-a-dayes is flat contrary,
and contradictour: yea, absurd, and against common Reason, where much work is,
there fewer Worke-men to be.

It was Pharaoh's working-wiselie (in-deede) to augment the Israelites Task,
Exodus 1.10
and to impair their strength, and means to perform the same. But such
policy, being void of piety, did procure plagues only, and drew on misery.

And as the Kirk, to the great advantage of her enemies, receives (as is
said) heere-by a notable injury, what wrong is like-wise done to Learning and
Universities, any one may easily perceive.

Colleges and Schools, Colleges hurt.
the Seminaries of Sciences, and Nurseries of Religion, (like Goshen in Egypt,
where the light of the Land is) they shall carefully train up, and yearlie
send forth, a more and more numerous Offspring, Genesis 49.7.
at Parents large expenses, like Levi to be divided in Iaacob, to teach the
LORDS judgementes, and to be scattered in Israel, to teach the people His
Law; and yet the places which they should fill, and live by, by a new practice
of Annexation of Kirks, next unto Kirke-Rents, shall be occupied Titulo oneroso
only, for the most part, and taken up by others.

Parents discouraged.
If this then be a way, either to encourage Parents, and hearten Youth; or a
practice to replenish the Schools of the Prophets heere-after: and so
consequently be profitable either to Kirk or Policy: or rather be not a
mean to effectuate the contrary, and make Bethel a Babel, let any
indifferent or pious mind judge.

The Country harmed.
The Country in like-manner, how with Kirk and Schools it may many ways
cry out, the apparent scarres of her deep in-flicted wounds shall
heere-after offer them-selves conspicuous, and make the truth here-of more
than clear and manifest.

At the time of that Reformation of our Country, where rather a Deformation
was in many parts, through populare and unruelie confusion, (Greede, and not
Godliness, possessing the minds of many) it was not anough then, to the
grief of the godly, to level with the ground, deface, and cast down Kirks
through the Land, and other Religious places, which might have served (beside
the Ornament of the Country) for other better uses crying only in the
language of Edom, Psalm. 137.7. Levit. 14.41.
Raze them, raze them, even to the foundation: as if (against the Law) the
House, having the Leprosy, could not be purged, but by pulling down: so that
as yet in many places there remains but the monuments of headless Fury, and
seges ubi Troia fuit: But also men now-a-dayes, and goodly Professors
(forsooth) thinking that there are too many Religious places as yet in the
Land, and Houses of GODS Worship, have redacted two till one: and made there-by
a second Defalcation, to abridge the sum.

Cic. de divi. Lib. 1.
It is reported of Hannibal, a Captain of subtle policy, that he saw in a
dream, being in Italy, which he intended to subdue to himself, a monstrous
Image appearing before him: at the sight where-of being amazed, asked what it
was that so ghastly appeared? The Image answered, Vastitas Italiae. But this
Image deceived Hannibal: for after the sight of his Brothers head, sent unto
him by the Romans, he was forced to flee from Italy to Carthage: and so
frustrate of his expectation.

It shall prove lyke-wyse but an unluckie prodigy to them, the devastation of
their Country: who by laying waste so many Kirkes of goodly and godly
Ornaments, shall make the same, in short time, to become like Achan or
Absolons Burials: Joshua, 7. 2. Sam. 18.
heaps of Stones, here and there through the whole Kingdom.

Our Savior was much moved, and as a great motive it was also used by the
Elders of the Jews, to persuade and induce CHRIST to grant the Centurions
petition, Luke, 7.
and heal his Servaunt, Because he loved their Nation (said they) and had
built to them a Synagogue. Where they make there this outward action a sure
testimony of his sincere and in-ward affection toward their Religion.

Then what can be the affection or zeal that many Professors now bear to
the Wo^ship of GOD which they profess, when in place of building Synagogues,
or Temples, and multiplying their number, where-of this Kingdom stands so
much in need; they rather by such Uniting have impaired the number, and
exposed the edifices to ruin and contempt? Thus (as the Prophet says) while
every one of them runs to build up his own house, Agg. 2.
and prepare Galleries syled with Cedar to himself, the House of GOD is not
only left, but made forsaken and desolate.

Civilitie has ever also been seen to have been the Daughter of Religion:
Civilitie hindered.
which as she pointed out, Quae DEI sunt, so lyke-wyse Quae Caesaris: teaching
to be holy toward GOD, and righteous toward Man: and so to give each one
their due, and observe both Tables. And Experience has taught, where Piety
has bid Farewell, there Civilitie and comely Policy has, Ruth, 1.16. 1.
Pet. 2.17.
like Ruth, inseparably followed Naomi, and godless Barbaritie taken up their
rowme. And where GOD is not feared, the King can not be rightly honored: for
these two, like Gemini, both go together: and the strongest In-forcer is
known to be the Conscience: which, where it is not informed, no marvel that
deformity of manners, and breach of duty be both to GOD and Man.

Now, where it was requisite then, more Kirkes for this effect in sundry parts
of our Country to have been erected, should such a concise abridgement of the
number of these been made, which were auncientlie for several Service
appointed, and had several maintenance for that cause allotted, as
now-a-dayes, (necessity flat contrary requiring) two to be redacted to one,
especially their bounds being become more habitable, and more people now
in-dwelling also the same?

Poor people in like-manner in many places, Poor people and Subjectes, both
miseased, and scandalized.
how they are heere-by wronged, their grieved hearts furnishing matter of
regrate to their plain and pleaning tongues, and their sad querimonies powered
forth in-to the ears of every man, indifferently give sufficient proof:
when by the toylesome labor of the six days commanded, their bodies being
worn and wearied, they shall be made, up-on the Lords Sabbath, with grieved
hearts, and grudging speeches, to pass by, and desert their own commodious
and kindly Parish Kirks, where-in so frequentlie they had received the comfort
of the Word and Sacraments; and to trudge further to these new made Mother (I
had almost said Stepmother) Kirks: where, in discontenting amazement, after
they have heard a Stranger-seeming voice, returning home-ward, and
backe-treading their tedious and uncouth way, after ^^^tuall regrating, they
may justly say, That they have gotten both Preaching and Penance together.

And what scandal and offense it is to those simple ones, when they shall see
Religion thus so little regarded by goodliest Professors, and great men of the
Land, the exercises of the Worship of GOD in so many places extinguished, so
many Lamps of the Candle-sticke of the Sanctuary plainly put out, Mammon to
have subjected men's hearts so to her slaverie, that she has made their hands
to pull down the Lords Houses, and Manour-places of His Divine Worship, the
publishing of His Gospel so to be confyned, the number of His Ministers so to
be impared, the Kirks Patrimony, still to be retained, and now eternized, as
it were, to the Posterity, and i^ place of Restitution, Genesis 9.22. 2. Sam. 16.
nothing to be either had, or heard, but mockage, or railing, as if Cham were
revived, or Shimei set on foot again.

If this be not matter to scandalize weak ones: (and woe be un-to him, who
gives offense to such:) or if this be an examplare persuasion to such, who
are given most to follow the example of their Superiors, to respect
Religion, to reverence the Worship thereof, to regard Pastor or Place, or to
be un-fallen away, either in Error, or in mere Atheism, let any one of
judgment discern.

Yea, I dare boldly and confidentlie, with conspicuousnesse of truth and
equity, avouch, Where two Parishes are made one, that it had been more
urginglie necessary, of such Parishes that are but one, and where-of there is
a great number in the Land, a division there of to have been made, each one in
two or three competent and sufficient ample parishes at least: the most of such
great parishes, rather like petty Shyres, (...) Countries, in their several
Circuites, being in the Inne-Countrey, and most populous, and best in-habited
parts of the Land. In which hudge parishes of so many thousands of
Communicantes, and of such far and large extended bounds, those that dwell
in the utmost and remotest parts thereof, 1. Sam. 1.21. Luke 2.41.
are like the Jews, who once in the year only came up from their Borders
and Coasts, to the Temple of Jerusalem, to worship. Such is their
anniversarie visiting of their parish Kirkes only: it being not (...)
Sabbath-dayes, but a Weeke-dayes journey, to go thither, tho not the same day
to return.

Joshua, 23.
And as Reuben and Gad, and the half Trybe of Manasseh, when they were
dissmis^ed by Joshua, and had returned to Gilead, the Land of their possession,
were forced for the longinquitie, and far distance of plac^ from Shiloh,
where the LORDS Tabernacle was, to build an Altar, for a memorial, to
them-selves: even to testify, That they had part in the GOD of Iaakob, and
were not aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel.

So, I say, many one, and much people, in such parishes a-fore-sayde, and in
many parts of the Land, have more than great necessity, in respect of their
far and remote habitations from their parish Kirkes, to have erected amongst
them-selves Temples of GODS Worship, and exercise of Religion: Seeing that in
most of these parishes, the poor people, other-wyse remain, through want
thereof, like blind Idiots, nusled up in Ignorance, and Atheism: whose
reuthful condition, like that Vision of the man of Macedonia, Acts, 16.
to the Apostle Paul in the Acts, does plead for like aid, and in-vocateth
like pity. And amongst whom, if our blessed SAVIOVR were corporally, as
He was amongst the Jews, He should be seen with like pity, Matthew. 9.36.
and sighs to complain, and bewail them: because He saw them like Sheep
wanting a Shephearde: it passing the power of any one man, tho never so
diligent, to discharge a Pastoral duty; no, not to the half.

Hence it is, that not only, as by the Prophet the LORD complains, That for
want of knowledge His people perish, and pitiful ignorance is seen in their
minds: but also, that such Barbaritie and vitiousnesse is seen in their
manners. Hence it is, that more are often-tymes seen in their Kirke-yardes
gazing, than with-in their thronged Kirkes gathering. Hence it is, that poor
Infantes, especially in Winter season, have died without Baptism, before
that either the Pastor could be advertised, in such a long and lingering way,
up-on necessity to come; or the Infant by any means, quarter way, could be
brought. And hence it is, that many a poor Soul, without Pastoral
praesence, or notice, has died without comfort: beside the many fayntinges
of poor and silly ones, by a wearisome way, which made CHRIST to be
compassionate toward the Multitude, Mark. 8.2.
and there-fore would not send them away empty: For some of them came from
a-farre (says the EVANGELIST.)

Where other-wyse, through putting up, and not pulling down of Kirkes:
Raising, and not razing Christian Synagogues: Pastoral duty in in-forming
Ignorantes: Reforming the vicious: Comforting the distressed: and watching
over all, should this way be better discharged, Subjectes and poor people
more should be eased, the Country and Kingdom more should be decored, the
fewer starting Holes ^eft to the subsidiarie Seminaries of the envious
Adversaries, Popple and Tares in the LORDS Field, and the glorious GOSPEL of
JESUS CHRIST, more plenteouslie should abound, and shine in the Land.

But what shall I say? Too doleful experience of this clayie Age, has too
well taught the facility of pulling down: but the too great difficulty in
their places of putting up of Kirkes, and the Ablative, has ever been in
far easier use with us, than any ways the Dative: Practizing so the first
part of Zaccheus life, but not acting the last part of his restitution: and
to impede heere-after any expectation of the same; converting now, by a
Retrograde, the plural number of Kirkes, in-to a simple singular.

Yea, to speak to such men, of building of Kirkes, where in such populous
a-fore-sayde places there is more than need: or, as Salomons Precept is, Prove.
3.9.
of honoring the LORD so with their Riches; a man shall seem to them, to be
a Barbarian, whose Language they know not: or like Joseph with his Brethren,
Genes. 42.
as needing an Interpreter: yea, they shall think, as is said of Peter, That
he wist not what he said, when on Mount Tabor he would have builded one
Tabernacle to Moses, Luke 9.33.
and one to Elias, and one to CHRIST: or as Festus objected to Paul, That too
much Learning had made him mad: Acts, 26.
So that they who mind such things, too much Zeal has made them frantic.
But speak of casting down two Kirkes, to make up one: or annexing one unto
its neighbor Parish, hence-foorth ever to be but one Cure, and in sundry
places: as it were alluding to Trinity and Unity, to cast three in one, they
will straight ways applaude, with that of the Poet, Vnio divina est, etc.


Polion. Lib. 1. strat.
It is reported of Pericles, that being asked by Alcibiades, Why so often he
seemed so sad and pensive? Who answered, Because (said he) I remember
up-on that Account which I have to make for that which I have received to build
a Portch to Minervas Temple in Athens. But how few are now like to Pericles,
who mind how much they are addebted to GOD, to build His Kirk, or maintain
His Service: or what Account they have to make before GOD, and His Angels, for
the Means which they with-holde, and where-on the same should be done? But on
the contrary, make no conscience, zeale-less-lie, through Greede, to ruinate
those which zealouslie, through Godliness, were formerlie by others already
erected.

Go to the Yles of Chittim, and behold: send unto Kedar, and inquire of the
Nations round about, Ier. 2.9.
If any such thing be done: let be by Christians, but by very Turks and
Paganes, to their Gods, as to the true GOD, whom in CHRIST we worship
a-right. What Temples, or Religious places of theirs, once dedicate, deface or
expose they, to contempt, ruin, and daily decay, as named Christians
now-a-dayes, who will not only first rob the Rentes from them; Dan. 8.1^.
but next (like (...), who made the daily Sacrifice of the Temple to cease)
will abrogate and exile the Exercise of GODS Worship, in Word and Sacraments,
out of them; and set up the Abomination of Desolation in the places where it
ought not? An ill Positive (for-soothe) admitting no where a Comparatiue.

Let this clayie Age look back also to their Forefathers zeal, and be
ashamed: with their Chapels without their Houses, and Oratories within: with
their Churches piouslie respected, and their Hospitals plenteouslie then doted:
the swarms of Churchman within Towns, 1. King. 18 Genes. 47*
like Baals Prophets, sitting at plentiful Tables: and those without, like
Aegyptes Priests, abundantly provided for: Erecting also daily, and not, as
now, dejecting, Religious Temples: and, like Nebuchadnezar, 2. Chron. 36.
first spoiling the Vessels, and Treasury of the Temple; and then razing the
Edifices thereof: first to be Church-robbers, and then, ere they restore, to be
Church ruinaters.

Consider also in that flowrishing and Reverende Neighbor Church of ours,
where far less Parishes are in sundry partes^ and search as narrowly as
Labau searched the Stuff of Iaakob, Genes. 31.
if this be their practice: or anie-where else, where GOD in mercy has
restored His Gospel, to bury the memory of so many ancient Churches, as
Iackob buried the strange gods of his House-holde under the Oak^ which is
beside Sechem. Genes. 35.


Not that any way I speak against such Uniting as is permitted* and clearlie
mentionate in that Statute of Parliament: to wit, using the very words of the
Act it self, Where the Fruits of any one alone will not suffice to
entertain a Minister: and that the Reutes and whole Patrimony thereof are no
ways aunswearable to the portion or quantity of fi^e Chaulders Victual, or
five hundredth Marks of Silver in yearlie commodity, and value: and where for
distance of place, and other lawful causes, they are not also found
incommedious so to be united (Of which sort there are few, if any, within
the whole Kingdom) But where beside distance of place, and other lawful
causes, why they are imcommodious, fair Parishes and famous Benefices are
united together, the value of the Rentes, Fruits, and Patrimony of any one
whereof, will exceed far the meanest fore-sayde proportion: to wit, of five
Chaulders Victual, or five hundredth Marks Silver: yea, equal, and surmount
the highest quantity: to wit, of ten Chaulders Victual, or a thousand Marks
Silver* and double, if not triple, the same.

Where such as these then are coupled together, like Ratches for a Game of
Hunting, what imports such a smoothering Union, but the fore-sayde sad
Sequeles? Or what better Fruit can such a bitter Tree produce, but sour
Grapes, to set the Teeth on edge?

Exodus 2.19
As Moses then (SIR) commiserating the estate of the wronged Daughters of the
Priest of Midian, who were driven away from the Troghs of Water, which they had
filled to water their Fathers Flocks: As he, I say, defended, and brought
them back again to those places, and gave their Sheep refreshment: So (SIR)
pity the wronged estate in like manner of the Church in your Land: defend it
lyke-wyse, and make patent again the Doors of so many Christian Temples,
Joshua* 10
shut up like the Caves of the Canaanite Kings: that comfort again may be
within them ministered to the LORDS people* Micah, 4.14.
that the Flock of His Heritage (as the Prophet speaks) may be fed with the
Rod of His own Mouth, as in the midst of Carmel: and that they may pasture in
Bafhan, and Gilead, as in old time.

Luke. 1.
And as Zacharias, the Baptists Father, tho for a short time be was stricken
dumb, yet as at last his mouth was again opened, by sensible and clear
speeches to prophecy, and proclayme that Horn of Salvation, that was raised
out of the House of David; and D^yspring, which from on high had visited his
people Israel: So (SIR) restore in like manner, to speech and prophecy again
these dumb, yea, dead-stricken places of GODS Sacred Worship: that the same
Gospel may be as yet published, and that the same tender mercy in them may
still be manifested through all the corners of your Land; to give light to
them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and to guide their
feet into the way of peace.

Jonas, 8.
Or as the Whale, how-so-ever she swallowed up Jonas, disg^^ged him again upon
the dry land: Even so (SIR) how-so-ever this Uniting of Churches, through the
moyen and greed of me^, has past the true Cases of many whereof were never (I
am persuaded) clearlie known to your Honorable Commission: I yke a wise
Solomon, then, pronounce the Sentence of Division: and that as the two Women
which pleaded before him, were each one restored to her own Child; so that
every Church may be restored with a competent mayntenance, to its own former
and primitive condition: Else, it had been better both for Church and
Kingdom, that, poor as they were, still as yet they had remained several.

Genesis 13.5.
And let not (SIR) Abraham's Altar be as it were (...) that GOD should be left
to plead for Himself: Judge. 6.30
(...) that Scepter of Royal power, which, one after another, for the defense
of His Cause, He has put into your hand.

Let not Christian Temples go down into your Kingdom, which were as the
Tents of the Shepheardes, Ca^^. 1.7.
where the LORDS Well beloved went forth by the steps of the Flock, and there
fed her weak and tender Kids, with the Spiritual Food of the Bread of Life.
Especially where greater need is to put up more.

Neither let the Watchmen, which go about the City, of whom the Spouse in
the Canticles seeks her direction, Ca^^. 3.3.
where she may find him whom her Soul loves, be diminished in number,
where there is more necessity they should be augmented.

Let not Na^ash his enter-pryse come also now-a-dayes in practice: 1. Sam. 11.
where two eyes are to pull out the one: and bring a shame so upon the LORDS
Israel. Neither let the barking Dogs be remooved from the LORDS Flocks:
except thereby we would please the devouring Wolves.

But let the Walls of JERUSALEM still be going up, maugre all opposition:
Repare the ruins of your Church restore the rapines thereof: Nehem. 8.8.
and in the well ordered House of GOD, let the Levites, being restored to
their Portions, be reponed also, and set in their places: who may read in the
Book of the Law of GOD distinctlie, and give the sense, and make the people to
understand the same: Nehem. 13.14.
that so your GOD may remember you still in Goodness, and not wype out your
kyndnesse, which you have shown upon His House, and upon the Officers thereof.
AMEN.

FINIS.
The Poores Complaynt, For a just Redress of the ruin of Hospitalls.
NO sooner (Dread Soveraygne) was the voice of the Turtle heard in our Land (as
the Spouse speaks in the Canticles) or did the Gospel of Grace make a
Goshen; Cant. 2.12
but as soon was that speech, Up, Moab, to the spoil, put in speedy
practice; and (as the name of the Prophets son was) li^e speedy Robbers,
they were swift to the Prey: So that the zeal of God's House (with David) did
not eat them up; but their zeal did eat up the Lord's House, while as they
hungered, not for the Good, but the Goods of the Church, and made the Lords
Patrimony to be like the Baptist, who said of himself, Me aportet ^inni.

Neither were they content to do so to the Lords Ambassadors, as Hanun did in
curtayling the Garments of David's servants, and making the Church (as the
Prophet speaks) like a Widow left to the spoil; but the very Hospital
Oratories, where the poor members of Christ were placed and planted, comforted
and relieved, have not escaped their supplanting, and ^apacious devouring: so
that what former Pity and Piety did in Endowing such Places, latter impiety
has done clean contrary, in Undoing thereof. Not remembering that speech of
holy Augustine, Si sterilitas in ignem mittitur, rapacitas quid meretur? and
si qui sua non dedit semper ardebit, quid recipiet ille qui aliena abstulit?

Yea, not only have they robbed Christ Jesus more cruelly of his Coat than
those Roman Soldiers who did cast lots thereon, but also for extinguishing
the memory of such mortifications, upon these very Houses to which they did
belong. They have practiced that speech of Edom, Raze them, raze them, even to
the foundation, making cursed Jericho of such blessed places, which was sacked,
and sown with Salt, and which is so evident in the truth thereof through the
Land, that in place of Proof, it needs rather Reproof, and forces this
humble Address to Your Majesty at this time for a speedy Redress.

Consider then (Sacred SIR) how horrible a Sin this is, which cries so in
GODS Ears for revenge, and in Yours for reparation, what ingratitude is it to
GOD, what stayne to the Gospel, how ignominious to this Nation, injurious to
the Poor, hurtful to themselves, scandalous to others, prejudicial to
posterity, and in a word, every way damnable.

And as David when he came to his Kingdom for the kyndnesse that he found at
the hands of Jonathan, kythed his thankful affection to his son whom he
left behind him, poor lame Mephibosheth: Even so (SIR) seeing the LORD has
advanced your Royal Majesty, and brought you safely to your native Kingdom,
for this kyndnesse of His to you, show your thankful affection to the Poor,
Lean and Lame Members of CHRIST JESUS, whom he has left behind him in his
stead to his second coming: and remember that the cry of their robbery and
oppression cries to your Sacred Majesty, as the saved Thief did to CHRIST on
the Cross, saying, LORD remember me when Thou come ^o Thy Kingdom.

And at worthy and wise Solomon, at his entry of sweying the Scepter of
royal authority, redressed both prudentlie and powerfullie the wrong that was
done to the true Mother of the living Child, which was theftuouslie
interchanged and stolen away from her, and a dead Child left in its rowme:
Even so (SIR) let this distressed Mother that pleanes and pleades now before
you find the like comfort, even those Nurseries of the Poor, piouslie
founded, but impiouslie subverted and confounded, which cry now and crave to
be restored to that which theftuouslie in like manner has been taken from
them, and nothing at all left, in the towme thereof, no, not so much as the
empty walls of their habitations.

Neither let such a Guilt (SIR) lie on your Land, nor Stayne on the Gospel,
that the Church should not only be seen Sacrilegiouslie robbed of her due
Patrimony; but also beside the Vintage of Abiezer, that the very Gleanings of
Boaz, or Ephraim, should not be left; and not only the Childrens Bread taken
away; but, not so much left as the very Crumbes of the Poores Alms vnsnatched
up greedily.

Indeed, the LORD, these many years bygone, has continued with us the
Gospel of Peace; and, with it, an happy Peace and Plenty; the Comfort of the
one, and Commodity of the other: and shall He be^ so requyted for all that
he has done to his Vineyard; that in place of the sweet Fruit of the Works
of Charity, He shall find the sour Grapes of the works of Cruelty? And
like the sin of the sons of Eli, shall the LORDS. Offering, by such
rapacitie, be abhorred, to cause fearful wrath at last seize on your Land?
and shall this not be shown to our Zealous Sovereign?

Has not th^s caused the taunting obloquie of the Adversary, that o^r
Profession is not only a solitidian Religion, but that our Faith (like Pharaos
lean Kye) has devoured the fat of the Fruits of the Charity of others,
which should have been adorned and perfected by our own, to others? Hence is
it that our good^est Proof ^ours are said to b^e (and are too well seen) most
powerful only like the Lodestone in the attractiue faculty; skillful in the
Ablattue, but ignorant in the Dative Case; Arithmeticians only in s^^^traction
from GOD, to make up an addition to themselue, whose hearts are as Nabals, or
Dives, destitute of Pity, and whose hands are as Hopb^ies flesh-hooks, nimble
in rapacitie: but as Ieroboame arm, dried up, and destitute of charity.

It was the former glory (SIR) of your native Kingdom, that no Nation did
over-match it (according, yea beyond the power thereof) in stately Erections,
and rich endowments of religio is Places: But now her glory is turned to her
shame; while as the eye of the most curious survey shall not in any Country
or Kingdom, round about, behold so many religious Places and Hospitalls
promisc^o^slie demolished; as in this our Nation* and not only CHRIST'S
Patrimony devoured, appointed for His Worship; but the Poores also, ordained
for their comfort: whereby those who should be in these places supported, and
relieved (like A^no^, looking leaner from day to day) are now forced in their
feeble Strayings, and bedfast Starvings, to post up such Groans, and
Grievances, to the Throne of Justice, as may be fittest Pleaders of their
Cause, and playners on their Wrong.

This is the Cause (SIR) of such Desolation in the Land, and that it staggereth
and reeleth to and froe, like a drunken man. This is the Cause why so many
ancient and noble Houses draw near the period of utter Exterminion: and that
the line of Desolation is spread over them, and the stones of emptiness are to
be found in them. This is the cause that such a visible Curse is seen to
follow upon the eating of the Fruit of this forbidden Tree. For assuredly the
LORDS Portion will be unto them, and their estates, as that Worm which was at
the root of Jonas Gourd, which caused a speedy fading, and final decay, like
Achans ex^crable thing, which was his ruin, and his whole Families: or as the
Arc to the Philistines which never ceased to plague them, till it was sent
back to the right owners. And as Jacob supplanted Esau, the holy thing will
be ever the supplanter of the unholy V^urper: the bread of deceit will turn
into gravel in the mouth: and tho stolen waters be sweet, yet like the
accursed water to the guilty party, although they cause swelling of their
Rents at first, yet they shall bring upon them a consumption at last.

But fearfuller shall be their dittie hereafter, when Christ's words not only
of, Non pavistis, but pabul^m abstulistis, shall be prono^nced against them:
and most fearful shall be their doom of e^e^nall damnation, which like that
threatening against the House of Eli, shall make their ears to tingle; and make
them more dreadfullie astonished, than ever was Balthassar. The imprecation
whereof is set down as the sententiall and usual clause and clausule of such
Mortifications* saving thus* and as from Eball thundering, If any shall take
away, or apply to any other use, that which I have mortified and bequeathed to
the indigent, (as I hope none will dare ever to attempt) let him be ANATHEMA,
and let his count be without Mercy at the dreadful day of Judgment, when he
shall compeare and receive his doom at the hand of the Judge both of Heaven
and Earth, to whom I dedicate the same.

This (Sir) is the Cause likewise why so few new Erections of such Places are
in the Country, or charitable Dotations, out of men's devotion, while as they
see how the liberal donations of others, and pious erected Hospitals are so
grossly devoured and ruinated remediless: and thereby vehemently suspect,
yea, assuredly expect, that it would no otherwise fare with that which they
would in like manner out of pity and piety ^rogate and consecrate to God.

Neither have Laics only had their hands in this cursed Crime, but Levi has
also joined with Simeon, to be Brethren in evil* and both have linked
together, as Sampsons Foxes, to waste the Lords Field: so that Judas, quid mihi
dabitis, et ego tradam e^m? has not died with him: but without Sense, or
Shame, has been the manner of latter bargaining by his Soule-lesse successors;
their conscience being more leper than the body of G^b^zi: and a more
dreadful judgment abiding such, no^ that for the receiving of the gift from
Nama^: for as Lamech said to his wives, so may I, if this horrible Crime in
Laics be avenged seavenfolde, doubtless^ in such who should be Trumpets, to
cry aloude against the same, and should be preservers of such places, it will
be avenged seaventie fold. And be he of what degree soever, who for Bribe,
(...) favor, like Judas, or Pilat, has betrayed or delivered Christ i^ his
poor members, and their Rights, to the barbarous and crue^^ hands of those who
have Canniball-like devoured them, with Judas and Pilat, such should be justly
repute to have no Place in so holy, a ministration, and may with them fear the
like woe and judgment.

Let not then (Sir) your land herein be an Aceldama, or the blood of the poor
(like that of Abels) cry still against the same for vengeance. Deliver your
subjects from such a fearful curse: and cause their mawes (like the belly of
Jonas Whale) to disgorge the poores portion, who have swallowed up the same,
that (as Job says of himself) the blessing of him who was ready to perish,
may come upon you, Job 19.13 14, etc.
and ye may cause the hearts of the poo^^ to sing for joy. Put on
Righteousness then, and let it cloathe you, Judgment, and let it be a Robe
and a Diadem unto you: be Eyes to the Blind, and Feet to the Lame: and the
cause of the poor, which ye know not, search it out. For it is your part
(Sir) to purge the land of such blood-guiltinesse, and to make a strait
inquisition with Joshua, concerning the execrable thing: to break the jaw^^ of
the wicked, and to pluck the spoil out of their teeth, and to the poor at
this time to leave a blessed memorial behind you (...) So may ye promise to
your self, that ye shall die in your (...) and multiply your days as the
sand: your Root also shall spread^ out by the Waters, and the Dew shall lie all
night upon you^ Branch: Your Glory, in like manner, shall be fresh in you,
and your Bow shall be renewed in your Hand: and amongst all the Titles of
Honor and Dignity, which the Lord has multiplied* and heaped upon your
sacred Majesty, this shall not be the leas^ wherewith your Royal Grandsire,
of blessed memory, was styled* to be called, THE POOR MAN'S KING.

FINIS.

