TWO Guides to a good LIFE.

The Genealogy of Virtue AND The nathomy of Sin.

Lively displaying the worth of the one, and the vanity of the other.

virtute duce non errabis.

LONDON Printed by W. Iaggard 1604.

To the reader,
There is no metal so pure but has some dross, and therefore (Gentle Reader) I
will not excuse this Book of faults: such as it is, I lay it open to thy view,
wishing thee rather with the Be to gather honnye, then with the Spider poison;
not that the Flowers of this poor garden include any such danger, but that the
mind of the beholder (if not rightly tempered) may like the Spider turn that
to poison, which a better disposition digests for honny: I will hope the best,
and so farewell.

Nihil tam probe, quod non vellicare malignitas: The Anathomy of Sin,
discovering the whold body of Imperfection and pollution,
THat captain that looks for victory, will strive to know the number,
strength and fortification of his enemies, the better to prepare his force
against them: the like may be said of a Christian Soldier, in the conflict of
this life, when he once perceives the sleights and oppugnations wherewith his
enemies, the world, the Flesh, and the Devil astaile him he will provide
himself accordinglye, to withstand their violence: This cannot better be
performed, than by consultation, first, to understand what sin is, and the
diverse branches thereof, and then to be well acquainted with his opposites.

What Sin is.
Sin may be definde to be the transgression of the Law, his Capital heads
are in number seven: namely, Pride, Covetousness Luxury, Envy, Gluttony,
Wrath, and Idleness: which are avoided by seven contrary virtues: as humility,
liberality, Chastity, Charity, Abstinence, Patience, and Devotion.

Thus knowing what sin is, we must next seek and study how to shun it,
which cannot better be effected then by learning how to detest it.

How to detest Sin in general.
COnsider that it is as venomous as Hydra, as prodigious as the head of Gorgon,
as infectious as the blood of Nessus, as fatal as the Night Raue^, as
loathsome as the Leprosy, as full of torment as the heart of Titius, as
greedy as the Jaws of a hungry Lion, and as devouring as the deep sea.
Beside all this, the World erected to us for a blessing, through sin becoms a
curse: that created to the Image of God, thorough sin, we are made as ouglie
as Devils; that so often as we sin we strike our maker on the face, and
finally being adopted heirs of heaven, thorough sin, we are cast out as
bondemen for hell.

How to avoid Sin in general.
THe first remedy against sin, is poverty, because Riches are the Wings
and arms of Concupiscence, which being clipped and restrained by want, we
cannot so easily fly into the bosom of pleasure, nor apprehend her
dalliance: provided that it be true and godly poverty, which never diuerts
from Faith, upon any extremity whatsoever.

The second remedy is comtempt of the World, least opening our ears to the
vain praises of men's lips, or advanced to sudden honor and estimation, our
heart suck in the poison of self conceit, whereby we think our own
excellency a sufficient dispensation for sin.

The third remedy, is to make election of such a State of life, as offers
the least occasion of il; for whosoever follows the common course of the
World, can hardly perform any action tending to the sincerity of life.

The fourth remedy, is the avoiding of perverse company, for the wicked will
infect the godly, as one bough of a tree, being set on fire, consumes the
rest.

The fifth remedy, is to shun the opportunity of time and place, as he that
sees not riches, nor commes into the house of Lust, is less troubled with
their several temptations.

The sixth remedy, is the breath of often and devout prayer, which like unto a
sharp Northeast wind, nips sin in the very spring and blossom of his
strength.

The seventh remedy, is tribulation and adversity, for as black pitch being
bruised becomes white, so the spots gotten by sin, are purged clean away by
tribulation.

The eight and last remedy, is a continual meditation, that we must all
once die, and after come to judgment, where every one shall be rewarded
according to his works, they that have done well with eternal happiness, and
they that have done ill, with torments that never shall have end.

Of virtue in general.
VIrtue, is a proportion and uprightness of life agreeable to reasonne, and
consists in mediocritie, as Vice does in excess or defect: It is neither
subject to Fortune, sclander, sickness, olk-age, adversity, or tyranny.

Of virtues there are two kinds, contemplative and morrall: contemplative,
which is a quiet and settled beholding of all those good things gathered
together by reason, and approved by judgment: and morrall, which consists
in the practice and dispersing of those good things to the benefit of humane
society; so that it is not sufficient to think well, but to do well. And the
body of virtue is of that nature, that it must be complet, not found of one
lim, and lame of another.

For if either chastity shall be without humility, or humility without
chastity, when god does as well detest pride as uncleanness, by what means
shall proud chastity be acceptable in his sight, or unclean humility, good
things are not pleasing to God, which are spotted with the commixture of evil:
as for example, to live soberly, and to be asleep to good works, or to
execute good works and live licentiously are both vain.

Therefore the tree of virtue must flourish in every bra^ch, In which sense it
will be as a shelter in time of necessity, and a haven of peace to the
conscience. Now to the particular weapons, wherewith sin assaileth the
sacred person of virtue.

Of vice in particular, and first of pride.
PRide is said to be the tympanie of the soul, because it is a puffing up of
the heart and mind, proceeding from the opinions of some good thing in us more
then in others.

The root of pride is riches, Nobility, Fame, Knowledge, Strength, Honor,
Beauty, good success, Delicate feeding, fine clothing, Health, sharpness of
wit, and such like.

His companions are Envy, Anger, Impatience, Indignation, Self-will,
Obstinacy, etc.

Pride is said to be full of Envy, because the proud man thinks himself
only the worthiest, and that every man's greatness is a hindrance to his. Of
Anger by supposing himself never so well thought of as he deserves.

Of Impatience, in that he will not suffer himself to be reproved, but will
have his vices accounted virtues, and look to be commended for them.

Of Indignation, as esteeming (in comparison of himself) every man unworthy
of any good that befalls him.

Of Obstinacy, by stiffely holding of his own opinion, notwithstanding any
authority or proof alleged to the contrary.

Those men are most subject to pride, that are most rude, most abject, most
inconsiderate, most hasty and headstrong: for such as are wise, sharpewitted,
considerate and well stayed, do look into themselves, and find nothing in
them worthy to make them swell or look big with pride.

This sin of all other sins is the most dangerous, because other sins
proceed from evil deeds, but pride is to be feared, even in good and virtuous
actions.

Of pride there are nine branches.
PResumption, Obstinacy, Hypocrisy, Boasting, Ingratitude, contempt of
others, Disobedience, Ambition, and Curiosity, and of every of these in
particular.

Presumption what.
Presumption is taken three manner of ways. First, when a man rashly by any
interior quality or exterior act, does enterprise a work that is above his
skill or calling.

Secondly, when a man thinks him self better, or more wise or worthy of
temporal gifts than another.

Thirdly, when a man will not be reprehended by another, of any thing that he
has either done or said amiss, but blindly goes on in his sins, and
thinks himself most safe, when he is in most danger.

Obstinacy what.
Obstinacy is, where a man esteming himself better than another, holds his
own opinion hard (as it were) by the teeth, and will not submit unto the
judgment of the wiser.

Obstinacy is of two sorts: first, when a man refuses to confess his falt,
how gross or palpable soever it be.

And secondly, when he strives to make it lighter than it is, or lay it upon
the back of another.

Hypocrisy what.
Hypocrisy is, when a man is inwardly in himself wicked, and yet would
outwardly seem virtuous.

Hypocrisy is of three sorts: first when a man for fear of worldly shame,
seeks to cover and dissemble the circumstance of his sin, when he ought
rather to confess it.

Secondly, when a man does accuse himself in the ptesence of others for a
notable sinner, that so he may seem devout, religious, and humble, when as in
heart he is full of deceit, violence and craft.

And thridly, when a man will endeavor himself to do good works, to no other
end but to be praised of the World.

Boasting what.
BOasting, is to extol our selves in words more than cause is, or that we are
worthy of.

Boasting is of three sorts, first, when we do show our selves proud and
arrogant in respect of temporal goods, as of wealth, great offices, costly
raime^t, or in respect of gifts of the body, as of beauty, strength, health,
and such like: or in respect of the guiftes of the mind, as of knowledge,
sharpness of wit, perfection of memory, etc.

Secondly, when we make a repetition of our good works, or graces, more for
vainglory and to win reputation in the world, then for good example or to
the glory of God.

And thirdly, when we publish out of our own mouths in ostentation, how rich
we are, of what authority and dignity, thereby to terrify others and make
them to submit unto us, which kind of pride is most odious, insomuch as God
has not bestowed those blessings upon us to boast of, but to relieve the
wantes of others, and to defend their necessities and wrongs.

Ingratitude what.
INgratitude is a sin, whereby we suffer the remembrance of a benefit or
good turn to slide away or be forgotten.

Ingratitude is of twoe sorts, first when we neither acknowlegde nor requite
a good turn.

And secondly, when we are not so contented, but we hate and secke to hurt
him that has done us good: for this we need no further example then of those,
that neither acknowledge nor give God thanks for his benefits bestowed upon
them, but go about to return his love with blasphemy and contempt.

Contempt of others what.
COntempt of others, is to despice all men in respect of our selves.

Contempt is of two sorts, first when through a certain niceness we contemn
such as are poor sickely, ignorant and sinners, because we are not, or at
least think we are not touched with any such imperfection.

But to check this kind of pride, let us consider and we shall find these
things ordinarily incident to al men, and that we either have or may be subject
unto them as well as others.

Secondly, when we depise the authority of our superiors: and to check this
kind of pride, we may take the example of brute beasts, the horse will
acknowledge his rider, and the dog will fear his master.

Ambition what.
AMbition, is an inordinate desire to enjoy honor, dignity and great places,
thereby to be predominant and above others, not for their good, but to the
satisfieng of our own private appetite: it was a thing that Christ and his
Apostles hated, and therefore we ought to take heed of it.

Ambition is of two sorts, one when private men contend for superiority,
another when princes aspire.

The fruits of ambition are sedition, war, ruin, bloodshed and cruelty.

Curiosity what.
CVriositie is an vnusiall preciseness, or unnecessary superexcellence in any
thing.

There are six kinds of curiosity, first when we covet precious ornaments
exceeding our estate and calling: or when we covet them in superfluity, or with
a greater care then we ought.

Secondly, when through a vanity of spirit we strive to find out the
understanding and sense of frivolous matters, which when we know, do us more
hurt then good.

Thirdly, when we spend more time or take more delight in amorous and idle
Pamphlets, or in the works of poets and Philosophers, than in the book of God.

Fourthly, when we presume to interpret the holy Scriptures after our own
fantasies, and not according to the ancient Fathers of the church.

Fiftlie, when we pry narrowly into the life and doings of other men never so
much as once looking back into ourselves.

And lastly, when we presume to search into the secrets of God, which in no
wise belong unto us.

Disobedience what.
DIsobedience, is a neglecting of that which is commanded, or a wilful
spurning against authority.

Disobedience is of three sorts, either when we despise our Prince, Parents,
masters or governors, or when we deprave their worth by our malicious words,
or when we wish or practice their ruin, so to procure an alteration in the
state.

The contrary to this is Obedience, which is of two sorts: active, in doing
all such things as are commanded (so they concur with virtue) and passive, in
suffering patiently whatsoever is imposed upon us, not repugning the honor of
God and the health of our souls.

How to detest Pride.
PRide if we consider the cause thereof, is fluxiue, momentarie and very
uncertain: for if it proceed from Riches, who knows not riches may wast
either by sureti-ship, riot, lost by Sea or Land?

If from Nobility or great birth, it may be stained.

If from knowledge, knowledge is full of error: If from strength, strength may
son decay; If from honor, Honor is but a ceremony: If from beauty, age may
wrinckle it: If from good success, Fortune may alter it: If from dainty food,
it may breed surfeiting, and surfeiting commonly brings death

If from clothing, what is it but the skins, wool, nay the very excrements of
brute beasts and stones of the earth? If from health, sickness may destroy it

If from multitude of friends, are they not like water brooks, that in summer
become dry, and in winter frozen?

If from sharpness of wit, Semel infaniuimus omnes, there is no man living but
is guilty of Folly.

Pride likewise considered by his effects, will appear far more dangerous, as
the thing that bringes with it, contempt both of God and men: contempt of God,
as appears by his word and by his judgments: By his word, in that he says,
He will resist the Proud and give grace to the humble: By his judgments, in
that he spared not his glorious Angels, but for their pride threw them out of
heaven to the bottom of hell. Amongst mortal men also, how severely has he
punished pride? Pharao and his host for that sin were drowned in the Red sea,
Iessabel had her blood lapped up of Dogs, the King of Babell for seven
years space, was companion with brute beasts, and Hammon executed upon the
same gibbet, which he had prepared for Mardocheus, the proverb is, Pride goes
before, and shame follows.

Among men there is nothing likewise more odious: for whom do we more
despise, more fear, more grudg or repine against, than the haughty and
intolerable humor of proud men. Nay it makes us hateful to our own selves,
when looking back into our corrupt nature, we find nothing whereof to be
proud: for our conception is sin, our birth pain, our life labor, and our
death necessity.

How to avoid Pride.
The only and chief remedy against pride, is humility; for as by pride we
are banished from the presence of god so by humility we are recald unto him
again, because without humility, no other virtue whatsoever is acceptable in
his sight.

What humility is.
HVmilitie is the contempt and loathing of proper excellence: of humility
there are three degrees.

The first is, to submit our selves unto our superiors, and not presume above
our equals. The second is, to submit our selves to our equals, and not to pre
sum above our inferiors; The third is, to submit our selves to our inferiors,
and to presume above no body; The humility likewise of Christ and his holy
saints, being set before our eyes, may serve as a powerful remedy against
the infection of pride. For when we consider that our savior Christ for our
sakes left heaven for earth, of God became man, of a Lord a servant, and of the
most almighty and most honorable, suffered himself to be trode^ down and
crucified of the most abject, vile and base; what reason have we to be puffed up
with arrogancy, knowing that if we mean to reign with him, we must
likewise suffer with him.

Finis pride.
Of Covetousness.
COuetuousnes is said to be the dropsy of the soul, because the Couetuous
man, the more he has the more still he desires. It is also a kind of bad
motion, whereby the devil intiseth us unlawfully to withold our own goods, or
unjustly to covet other men's.

There are four sorts of Couetuousnesse, the first is to desire that which is
another man's, not caring how we get it, by right or wrong: or when with a
deliberate mind we hunt after wealth and honor, that so we may the more
commodiouslye feed and cocker our own pleasures.

The second is, when we study to get money, wealth or favor, by wicked or
filthy means.

The third is, when we will not restore that which we know to be another man's,
whether we either found it, or that it was co^mited to our trust to keep

The fourth is, when we treasure up much wealth, and neither use it our
selves, nor employ it to the benefit and releiuing of others.

Covetousness has nine hands or hooks by which it snatcheth at the trash of
this world.
NAmely Fraud, Unquietness, perjury, taking of bribes, Sacrilege Theft,
Usury, Rapine and Symonie.

Fraud what.
FRaud, is by all kind of crafty and coulourable means, to usurp that which
belongs not unto us.

Unquietness what.
AS well night as day to be continually possessed with care how to enrich our
selves, not relying upon the providence of God, who has commanded us to cast
our care only upon him.

Perjury what.
Perjury, is when we call God to witness in a false and untrue matter, thereby
to win either credit or commodity, as very often times falls out amongst
merchants and tradesmen, and in persons that give in evidence before
maiestrats: or in our private conference, when without dread or reverence to
the name of God, we swear by it.

Taking of bribes what.
TAking of bribes is to swerue from the true course of Justice for the love of
gold, or for reward to bear false witness against any man: whereby three
persons are at one time damnified and abused, first God whose holy name is
profaned.

Secondly the Judge, whom a lieng witness deceives: and thirdly the
innocent person against whom he testifies, who commonly by that means is
vttterly undone.

Sacrilege what
Sacrilege is through a greedy desire of temporal goods not to forbere the
defacing of Gods Temple, nor the robbing of his ministers.

Theft what.
THeft is, when we either privily purloine, or openly extort from any man
(whether it be by the high way side, or in contention of law) that so we may
have to satisfy our own covetous humors.

Usury what.
Usury is when upon the loan of any thing, whether it be money, meat,
drink or apparel, we do covenant before hand to receive back again more
than the principal was, which we delivered forth, thereby to enrich or
maintain our estate and calling: or when we ingrosse commodities, or forestall
markets, thereby to procure a dearth, and then to raise the prices of things as
we list our selves.

4. Reasons to disprove Usury.
FIrst it is against the law of Charity, for whereas we are bound to do good
one to another, the Usurer contrariwise, hurts, where he seems to help.

Secondly, it is against the law of Nations, in that there is no nation, but
has some Iniunction, statute, or law against it.

Thirdly, it is against the law of nature, for in nature it is monstrous, that
money should beget money, being in it self a dead and senseless substance.

Fourthly, it is expressly against the Law of God, for he has said, Thou
shall not hurt thy brother by Usury of money, nor by usury of corn, nor by
usury of any thing that he may be hurt withal, Deuteronomy. 23.13.

Five other reasons to show the vileness thereof.
The first is, because it is worse than theft for a thief steals but now
and then, but usury is a continual robbery.

The second is, because it is worse then Judas, for Judas sold Christ but
once, but the usurer sells him every minute.

Thirdly, because Judas restored the money again which he took, but the
Usurer will never restore that which he has unjustly taken.

The fourth is, because it is worse than death, for Death kills but the
body only, but Usury kills both body and soul.

The fifth and last is, because it is worse then hell, for hell torments the
wicked only, but usury scourges and afflicts both good and bad.

Rapine what.
RApine is a forceable and violent extorting of other men's goods, thorough the
vehemency of a greedy mind, as by oppression and such like: the condition of
which sin is most damnable, in that it is always subject to the curse and
exclamations of the wronged and oppressed, whose sighs and groans day and
night solicit heaven for vengeance and revenge.

Simonie what.
Symonie is when we give or take reward for an entrance or admission into the
ministry of God, or the profit thereof.

How to detest Covetousness.
COnsider that the matter thereof (which is riches) is most vile and abject,
or else our Savior would never have committed the purse to Judas

That Christ chose not his Apostles and best beloved from amongst Princes, but
poor fishermen.

That no man can serve two masters, God and the world, no more tha^ the eye
can at one time behold heaven and earth.

That riches for the most part are gotten with pain, preserved with fear, and
lost with sorrow, that many times they forsake us living, and never accompany
us being dead.

That how much soever we covet for possess, we can rightly say no more is
our own, than what will serve to feed and cloth us.

That the most covetous or wealthiest man is but as the mil wheel, which
though it turn all day about, yet at night is found where it was in the
morning: so howsoever we run about this world for wealth, yet at our deaths,
we shall be found as poor as we were at our birth,

That as great burdens laid upon the backs of travelers hinder them in their
journey: even so, much wealth cannot be but a let and hindrance to us, in our
voyage and pilgrimage to heaven.

That covetous men are but as camels that all day carry the kings treasure,
and at night are turned into a filthy stable, being able to show no sign or
appearance thereof, but their galled backs.

That the death of a covetous man is ridiculous, considering that al which he
has so carefully scraped together, may fall into the hands of his enemies, or
be spent of such as will never give him thanks, whilst he himself sittes in
the shadovv of death, and can show no remembrance of his great possessions,
but the gauls and sores of a disquyet conscience.

The misery of a covetous person is very well described by the Heathen Poet
Plautus, under the person af Euclio, who having hid much treasure in his
house, durst not go abroad for fear of robbing, nor stay at home for fear of
killing.

But with much more terror is it set forth in the book of god, where it is
said by the mouth of our savior, that it is easier for a Cammel to pass
through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven.

Achab desiring to be master of poor Naboths vineyarde, was punished not
only with the loss of his kingdom, but with the dear forfeiture of his
life.

The rich glutton in the gospel was so near himself, that he would not
spare the crummes which fell from his table, but in the end was carried naked
to his grave, and his soul was left destitute in the flames of hell fire,
without any hope of redemption.

How to avoid Covetousness.
The only remedy against Covetousness is liberallity, which is a
distribution of those good things that are in our possession, to the benefit of
others: for we have nothing which we have not received from god, over which we
are but as stewards, and therefore the bread which we couetously deteine in our
hands, is the bread of the hungry; the garments which we lock up in our chests,
the clothing of the naked: and the money in our bags, the treasure of the
poor, the blood of which if they perish through our lack of pity and
compassion toward them, will be required at our hands.

In Liberality 10. circumstances are to be considered.

Frist we must (so near as we can) give to none but such as want.

Secondly our gifts must be profitable and not hurtful.

Thirdly they must proceed from a merciful affection and not from vainglory.

Fourthly we must not be more bountiful then our ability will suffer.

Fifthly, we must give in due time without protraction or delay.

Sixly it must be done in secret.

Seauenthly, we must be liberal of our own proper goods, lawful not
wrongfully gotten.

Eighthly, our charity must be voluntary, and from the heart, not upon
compulsion or constraint,

Ninthly, we ought not to vpbraid him at any time to who^ we have bin liberal.

Lastly, what we give we must give freely, and not in hope of reward, or
further recompense, for so to give, bewraieth a covetous desire and no true
devotion.

Finis Covetousness.
Luxury.
LVxury may be called the leprosy of the soul, and is an inordinate appetite
of lascivious and fleshly pleasures.

There ate six kinds of Luxury.
The first is Fornication, which is the unlawful coyture or society of one
single person with another.

The second is Rape or rauishment, when a virgin is defloured, either with her
consent or against her will: for although it be with her consent, yet it is
counted rauishment, in respect of the ^ainousnesse thereof, by reason it
violently breaks the lists of chastity, and opens a gap many times to further
uncleanness.

The third is Adultery when the marriage bed is defiled, and this is of twoe
sorts, either simple, as when the married sins with the unmarried, or double,
when the married sins with the married.

The fourth is incest, when the abuse of fleshly lust is committed by such as
are of one kindred, blood, or affinnity: which sin makes men of the nature of
brute beasts.

The fifth, is Zodomy, which is of two sorts, when man lusts after man, or
man after beast, and this sin in the holy scripture is ranckt with murder and
called a crying sin, as continually soliciting and calling for vengeance upon
the offenders.

The sixth is the excess of carnal action even amongst the married; which
although it seem lawful, yet it offends god, if it exceed measure or modesty.

There are nine forerunners of Luxury.
The first is voluptuous eating and drinking, the 2. scurrilous talk, the 3. a
discovered dug, the 4. a naked breast, the 5. frizled hair, the 6. artificial
painting, the 7. costly perfumes the 8. a rolling eye, the 9. an unsteady foot.

Appendants to Luxury.
The appendants to Luxury are these, love, desire, concupisence, and jealousy.

Love what.
Love is an affection of the heart, whereby it lusts after something to have
the use thereof, if the thing be good it is called true love, if bad, it is
called concuspisence, which is the mother of luxury.

Concupisence what.
Concupisence is that kind of love which is accompanied with lust.

Love is of two sorts.
True love which is the love to virtue, or such an affection of the heart,
that imbraceth a man more for his own sake then for any commodity, may be
expected from him; and mercinary love which is likewise of two sorts: the
first, in respect of him that receives a benefit, loving the person for the
profit that comes from him: and the second in respect of him that bestows a
benifit, when he does it more for reward and recompense, then for the love of
him to whom he does it.

The difference between the love of virtue which is called true-loue, and love
of Concupiscence.
THe love of virtue is without irksomeness or intermission: the love of
Concupiscence is momentarie and oftentimes breeds a loathing in the mind.

The love of virtue is without fear, or care: the love of Concupiscence is
accompanied with grief, vexation, and labor.

The love of virtue wishes a like affection in all others, as is in it self:
but the love of Concupiscence harbors evil Jealousy.

Jealousy what.
Jealousy is a fear which a man has least another whom he would not,
should enjoy something which he strives to keep peculiar to himself: and
this may be good or bad, according to the object, whereon our fancy or desire
is fixte.

Desire what.
DEsire, is the delay which is made between our liking conceived of some good
thing, and the fruition of the same.

The effect of Love.
The effect of Love is, of many to make one, as chiefly appears bv marriage,
whereof there are four kinds Marriage of honor, marriage of love, marriage of
labor, and marriage of grief.

Marriage of Honor.
Marriage of honor, has three degrees, the highest, between good and man's
nature: the middle most, between God and the soul of man united by grace and
the fruition of glory: the lowest, between God and his Church, when they are
both made one mystical body: and these three kinds of marriage are
supernatural, and appointed of god after an unspeakable manner.

Marriage of love.
Marriage of Love, is a faithful contract between a good man and a virtuous
Woman: or the conjunction, unity and society of religious and zealous people,
grounded upon Grace, peace and Concord.

Marriage of Labor.
Marriage of labor is, when any man or woman marries more for covetousness
and lust, than for Virtue, chastity, or good report; or where two are matched
together, betwixt whom there is no equality of age, birth or manners.

Marriage of grief.
Marriage of grief, is the conjunction and familiarity between the Wicked and
reprobate, whereof still ensues wretchedness and misery.

The preservation of marriage.
THe preservation of marriage, consists in the duty of the Husband to the
Wife, and of the wife to the husband.

The duty of a Husband.
THe duty of a Husband toward his wife, must be confirmed by these nine
circumstances. First, in loving her above other women. Secondly, in governing
her graciously, Thirdly, in persuading her more by reason than authority.
Fourthlye, in not using her roughly or iniuriouslye before others. Fifthly, in
admonishing her often. Sixthly, in reprehending her seldom. Seauenthly, in
striking her never. Eighthly, in prouidnig for her carefullye, and lastly, in
lovingly dividing of his authority with her, especially in matters that
concern her sex.

The duty of a wife.
The duty of a wife toward her husband, stands in these observations
following.

First, she must love him, and none other but him.

Secondly, she must not depend too much upon her wealth, beauty, or nobility
of birth, but have her chiefest care bent upon those things, that sit nearest
to her husbands heart; as the integrity of manners and mildness of behavior
and conversation.

Thirdly, as the Persians when their enemies came rushing upon them, received
them with silence: and contrariwise, if they were set upon with silence, made
head against them with open mouth: even so, a discreet Woman must hold her
peace when her husband exclaimes with choler: and contrariwise if he utter
not a word, she must labor to cheer him with comfortable speeches.

Fourthly, she must not discover her husbands imperfections.

Fifthly, she must not upon any displesure forsake her husbands bed.

Sixthly, she must be free from all suspicion of incontinencie.

Seuenthlys she must be no gadder abroad.

Eighthly, she must be modeh in attire

Ninthly, she must be secret as touching household wants and affairs.

Tenthly, she must be ashamed to utter any dishonest speeches, floutes or
iestes, or to give ear unto them.

11. She must be patient and wink at many things done by her husband.

12. She must be careful to bring up her children.

13. She must be fair spoken and courteous to her neighbors.

14. She must apply her hands to good huswiferie, and her mind to the knowledge
and understanding of gods word.

Lastly, she must not forsake her husband, either for sickness, poverty, or
any other casual affliction.

How to detest luxury.
COnsider that the object whereto it tends (which is the corporal fruition
of unchaste persons) is, though candied with a fair outside, inwardly the
receptacle of vile and corruptible baseness.

That lust is never satisfied, but alwais poor even in plenty.

That the pleasure thereof is momentary, but the punishment eternal.

That it defiles the temple of the holy ghost, which is man's body
consecreated unto Christ by his precious blood.

That it is no sooner enjoyed, but it breeds annoy: that it weakens the powers
of the soul, and filles the body with many diseases, that it shortens the life
and shadows a good report.

That there is not so rich a treasury, but Luxury will draw it dry: that it
is a fire, whose substance is Gluttonye, whose flame is pride: whose sparcles,
are corrupt speeches, whose smoke infamy, whose ashes filthiness, and whose
end is hell.

Remember the judgments of God executed upon lustful persons: as the sudden
death of Onan, the plagues sent upon Abimeleck king of Egypt, though but in
thought he pretended lewdnes toward Sara Abrams wife, the sword of dissension
that never departed from the house of David, for taking the wife of Vriah: the
violent death so Ammon by his own brother, and many other examples, which may
terrify and bring us in detestation of his sin.

How to avoid Luxury.
The best remedy against Luxury is Chastity, which is of four sorts: either
of Nature, as of such as are borne Chaste: or by Arts of such as are made chaste
by men: or by prayer and industry, as of such as have made themselus chaste for
the kingdom of Heaven: or by marriage, as of such as live chastely in Wedlock.
Mat. 19.12.

Chastity what.
Chastity is the brideling of lust under the yoke of reason, or a clear
disposition of the body without the filth of concupiscence: it is the beauty
of the soul, the joy of heaven, and the best Jewel on earth.

To preserve which Jewel without flawe or blemish, is to avoid the causes
wherewith it is foild, as first to cast out of the mind all wicked and
unchaste thoughts.

Secondly, to avoid filthy communication.

Thirdly, not to frequent the company of lewd and lascivious persons.

Fourthly, to be temperate in diet, and modest in apparel.

Fifthly, to refrain the hands from unseemly touching and handling.

Sixthly, not to covet the sight of things that may tempt to uncleanness.

Seventhly and lastly, to keep the mind and body continuallye practiced in
godly and virtuous exercises: For idleness is the gate that lets in the
infection of the soul, and the Devil is most ready to assail, when he
finds us most unprovided to resist, which is, in the time of idleness.

There are other remedies also for the avoiding of Luxury, as when we feel
it creep upon us, not to yield or give way unto it, but to strangle it, eue^
in the cradle and first birth: to think when we intend any unlawful and
corrupt enterprise, that how close or secret soever we keep it from the eye
of man, yet it lies open (as the noonday) to the sight of God: and therefore
if we be ashamed that men should see our uncleanness and beastlye behavior,
much more ought we to tremble and be ashamed that god should behold us, who
is our judge, and a judge of that nature, that not only afflicts our bodies
with temporal punnishment, but can if it please him, cast our souls into
everlasting torment.

Finis Luxury.
Of Envy.
Envy may be said to be the canker of the soul, for that it eats and frets
into the inward man, no otherwise than rust does into iron; it is a rejoicing
at another man's hurt, and a sorrowing for his good.

Envy is of two sorts good and bad, good envy is that, when behoulding the
perfections of another, we are angry with our own imperfections, and labor
seriously to be equal, or at the least to imitate the virtuous and good
qualities, which we see to flourishe more in others than in our selves, and
this is calde emulation: provided that we speak not our own glory, but the
glory of God.

Bad envy is, when we grieve that the like profit or good qualities are not
in us, or not as well in us as in any other: And of this there are five
branches, Detraction, discord, murmuring, hatred and hurt.

Detraction what.
DEtraction, is the blemishing of another good name, which may be done six
manner of ways; first when privily or openly, we maliciously impose a crime
upon another, whereof he is not guilty.

Secondly, when we do aggrauate and increase other men's faults or offenses by
our spiteful reports.

Thridly when without any necessity our just cause we take occasion to speak of
other men's vices, publishing them to the world though nothing urge us
thereunto: and therefore the backbiter is compared to a Butchers cur, whose
lips are always bloody with the slaughter of some beast or other.

Fourthly when we interpret in the worse part the good deeds and words of
others, and give a badde censure of them.

Fifthly, when we deny any virtue, good quality, power or authority to be in
another whom, notwithstanding our conscience knows, is well furnished to the
contrary.

Sixthly, when we see any virtues or good qualities in a man or woman,
worthy of commendations and we conceal them and leave them unspoken of, but
if we spy the least vice or imperfection in them, we straightway with a kind
of greediness, reprehend and discover it: and in this sense an envious
detracter may be compared to a Swine, that coming into a garden where he sees
sweet flowers and stinking ordure, neglectes the flowers and runs presently to
the dung: or to him that snuffes a candle with his bare fingers: for although
his fingers be defilde thereby, yet the candle gives the cleerer light: even
so, he that traduceth the virtuous, defiles his own conscience, but makes him
a great deal the more glorious.

Discord what.
DIscord is the violating of the bond of Charity: which may happen 3. manner of
ways, First, when through hatred and envy, we will not reconcile and set at
unity such as we see to be at variance.

Secondly, when we labor spitefully to break off the love and amity of such
as before were friends, and to sow contention and debate between them.

Thirdly, when we scoste, deride, or give ignominious names to men, thereby to
bring them into hatred and contempt.

The fruits of discord.
Discord brings forth quarrels, murder, cursing, swearing, perturbation of
soul, and the ruin and destruction both of commonweales and families.

Therefore contend not at al, specially with these five kinds of people.

1 Not with a mighty man, least you fall into his hands.

2 Nor with a rich man, least with his gold he weigh down your right: for
bribes peruerts the hearts even of princes, and magistrates.

3 Nor with a talkatiue person, for he will hear no reason.

4 Nor with an angry man, least you increase his fury.

5 Nor with your wife or familiar friend because such strife and contention, is
as thorns in the bosom, smoke to the eyes, vinegar to the teeth, and gall to
the state.

Murmuring what.
MVrmuring is a repining of the heart or a speaking of the tongu against god or
our neighbor.

To murmr against god is of three sorts. First when we grudge at our own
infirmity or poverty: that we have not as perfect and sound bodies or as well
beautified minds, or as great plenty of wealth, reputation, and friends as
others have; forgetting that God has said with his own mouth, that before
him, there is no respect of persons: that he has not regard to the outward
disposition of the body, but to the inward zeal and godlynes of the heart:
that whom the lord loves he chasteneth: that he has chosen the poor of
this world, to be rich in faith and heirs of his kingdom, whereunto we
cannot enter, but by many trybulations and afflictions.

Secondly, we murmur against god, when we find falt at the course of time or
the vnsesonablenes of the weather, knowing that in all things we ought to
submit to his will and providence; so that neither for the oppression of wicked
men, nor the distemperature of drouth, moisture, cold or heat, oght we to be
dismayde, but faithfully believe that God will at length remember us.

Thirdlye, when we seem to reprove the justice of god, for sending prosperity
to the wicked, and adversity to the godly, which is a great madness and lack of
faith, considering the wicked are made happy in this world, but to their
further condemnation, and the godly miserable, to their further justification:
the one being very aptly compared to the laboring Ox, that every morning is
fetched out of the pasture and brought to the yoke; the other to the Ox
appointed for the slaughter, who is suffered to lie still and feed at his owe
pleasure.

To murmur against our neighbor, is likewise of two sorts, first when we judge
them unworthy of those good blessings which are bestowed upon them.

And secondly, when we cannot endure to hear them commended for any thing, but
strait, we either contradict their praise, or else by froward words do
disable them, that so they may seem contemptible rather then deserving any
good opinion.

Hatred what.
HAtred is an offense rooted in the heart by continuance of time, where we study
to do hurt and mischief to him with whom we are offended.

The ground and roots from whence it springs are Offense and anger.

Offense, is a certain grief of the heart, which comes thorough the touch
of some evil, that agrees not with our nature.

Anger is a boiling of the blood about the heart, from which ascend fumes and
hot vapors that disturb the brain, and distract the countenance, so that the
party so inflamed, becoms frantike and beside himself, till he be revenged on
that which was the cause of his anger: and hereupon anger is calde a short
madness; but if it be more then momentarie, it is called no longer anger but
hatred,

There are two kinds of hatred, good and bad: good, when we hate the Vices
which we perceive to be in our selves, or in others; and bad, as is before
defined.

How to suppress hatred.
TO suppress hatred is to moderate anger, and to be troubled with neither, is
to take heed that we be not thirsty after revenge, for as anger goes before
it, so revenge follows, if in time it be not prevented.

Revenge what.
Revenge is a motion of the heart, whereby it does not only turn aside from
that which offends, but labors withal either to repel and vanquish it, or
to punnishe him that is the cause thereof.

For two causes men ought not to desire revenge.

First, because God has said vindicta mihi, vengeance is mine, and therefore it
is rebellion to offer to pull that privilege out of his hands.

And secondly, because it is a great part of folly and injustice, to think we
are revenged of an iniurye, when we have punnished the body of him, that
offered it, knowing the soul and affections are the chief cause (which are
out of our reach) and the body but the souls instrument, and therefore he that
in fury and rage tyranizeth over the body for any offense is offered him,
does as the dog, that bites the stone, and suffers him that cast it, to pass
away untouched.

Hurt what.
HVrt is, when in our own person or by the means of others thorough malice
or envy, we study to empouerish, wound, maime or hinder another man, whom in
duty and religion, we are bound, to pardon, help and succor: for he that
will forgive, shall be forgiven, and he that will show mercy shall have mercy;
but to the cruel, like measure of cruelty shall be extended.

This branch of Envy differs from revenge in this, that revenge always
follows upon some offense, but hurt is oftentimes practiced upon a malicious
and hateful stomach without any precedent quarrel or displeasure; and
therefore this kind of envy is called the envy of the devil, who hates and
strives to hurt the whole race of mankind, not for any damage they can do
unto him, but upon an inueterate hatred.

Why it is easier to hate then love.
BEcause hatred finds a better soil in our hearts, and a more apt foundation
to be laid upon, than love does: and that for two reasons. First, because of
the corruption of our nature, which savors more of Satan who is envious,
hateful, and a liar, then of God, who is love, truth and charity.

And secondly because the infirmity of our nature will not permit us to enjoy
any good thing in this world, that is pure and of long continuance, but
suffers us only to have a little taste and sense thereof: hereupon men say
that pleasures, services, and good turns are made of feathers, and therefore
easily carried a way by reason of their lightness: but offenses, evils and
displeasures, are made of lead, and therefore by reason of their weight, they
sink down and lodge in the bottom of the heart.

How to detest envy.
Consider that envy is the badge and cognizance of the devil, for the devil
is not better known then by his envious disposition, and therefore such as
give place in their hearts to this vice, are discovered to be the servants of
the deuell: if servants of the devil, they are enemies to god, if enemies to
god, they become subject to eternal damnation.

Consider likewise that envy is the transformer of men from the perfection of
their first creation: in their first creation, they are amiable, mild and
gentle but through envy they grow stern, rough and impatient, having their
eyes sunk into their heads, their brows wrinkled, their cheeks pale and
wanne, their teeth grinning like dogs, their tungs hissing like serpents,
their joints trembling, and their whole body lean and unsightly.

Envy is also termed the mansion of error, the hell of mind, the prick of
conscience, and the sting of corruption and by the opinion of some, held for
sin against the holy ghost, for that it wilfully and of malicious stomach
impugneth the graces bestowed upon gods children.

Yet of all other sins, it is accounted the iustest, for that it takes
vengeance upon it self; for although it level the dart of mischief against
others, yet it wounds it self, ann is to the heart of man, as the worm bred
in the tree to the wood thereof, by whom at last it is devoured: but say it
were not of that nature, but that envy were very pleasing and plausible in it
self, yet knowing that God will be reue^ged upon it, as appears by the example
of Caine, for his envy toward Abell; of Saul, for his envy toward David; of
the sons of Jacob for their envy toward their brother Joseph: of Ammon, for
his envy toward Mardocheus, it is to be loathed and abhord: but being so, that
it consumerh the heart, dries up the body, vexes the mind, and indangereth
the soul, what can be thought more detesteable?

How to avoid Envy.
THe only remedy against Envy, is charity, to do unto others as we would
be done unto our selves: this virtue of charirie spreades it self into two
parts: first, into the love which we owe unto God, and secondly, into the
love which we owe unto our neighbors.

How we ought to love God
With all our soul, with all our strength with all our power: that is, chiefly
and above all other things; for he says our savior Christ) that loves not
me more the^ eithes father or mother, wife, children, sister or brother, has
no part in me, nor I in him.

Five reasons why we ought to love God.
First, Iure preceptions, because he has commanded it.

Secondly, Iure creations, because he has created us.

Thirdly, Iure redemptionis, because he has redeemed us.

Fourthly, Iure sanctificationis, because he has sanctified us.

Fifthly, Iure Amoris, because he has so loved us, that he has not only given
us all things necessary for this life, but has prepared eternal happiness
for us in the life to come.

How to love our Neighbor.
We must love our neighbor as our self: for he that says he loves God and
hates his brother, is a liar, and there is no truth in him.

Four reasons why we ought to love our Neighbor.
First, because we are all of one brotherhood in the flesh.

Secondly, because we are of one regeneration in spirit.

Thirdlye, because of the words of Christ, who has commanded that we love one
another as he has loved us.

And fourthly, because we are members of one and the same mystical body,
whereof he is the head.

Finis Envy.
Of gluttony.
GLuttony may be called the Deluge or inundation of the soul, because it is a
ravenous desire to feed and fill the stomach, beyond the rule or bounds of
nature.

There are two sorts of gluttony, the first, consists in greedy, often, and
immoderate desire of delicate meats, and variety of dishes.

The second is, when in stead of refreshing the body with sufficient moisture,
we drown it in the superfluity of drinking.

We may eat or drink immoderately, seven manner of ways.
FIrst when we our selves in our own persons do surfit in excess, or so load
and ouercharge the stomach as we devise means by hot drinks or otherwise to
cause digestion.

Secondly, when we our selves observe a moderation, yet in vainglory and
ostentation provide such superfluity at our feasts and banquets, as others
thereby become immoderate eaters or drinkers.

Thirdly, when (though we have but moderate provision) we rack the invention
and art of cookery for strange compositions, unusual sauces, and prouocations,
thereby to please and delight the appetite.

Fourthly, when we eat or drink more upon wantonness, then any necessity.

Fifthly, when we are more costlye in one dish of meat, or one draught of wine,
then would suffice for the value to sustain many multitudes, as the dissoluing
of gold and precious stones to that purpose; by the example of Cleopatra to
Antony, and Mulcasses King of Tunis, the one carrowsing to her love at one
draught, a jewel of inestimable price; the other, bestowing a hundred crounes
upon the dressing of a peacock for his own diet.

Sixthly, when our tables are full, and we well satisfied, we rather couetously
lay up the remainder, than charitablie bestow it to the relief of the hungry.

7. and lastly, when we use delicate meats and drinks for the provocation and
stirring up of the body to lust, and performance of the act of venery.

The effects of Gluttony.
THere are many dangerous effects that follow Gluttony: especially these
eleven ensuing.

First, stupidity or dullness of wit, for the stomach being filde and the
brain trobled, we are unfit to pray, or use any other duty of good Christians.

The second impotency, when thorough Gluttony our bodies are infected with many
diseases: as the dropsy, palsy, feauers, inflammations, and diverse others; so
that our limbs become weak and feeble.

The third scurrilitye, which is an impudent behavior or disordered gesture of
the body, whereby we provoke men to laugh us to scorn; as appears in
drunkards, when their toongs stammer, their feet stagger, or any other
unseemly and ridiculous action proceeds from them.

The fourth Fury, when through the ill disposition of excess, we spurn at
reason and good counsel, wounding, killing, and doing deeds of mischief, we
care not unto whom.

The fifte loquasitie or superfluous talk, when through the force of wine, we
vomit out detractions, curfinges, horrible oaths and blasphemies, filthy,
idle, and unchaste words.

The sixth drowsinesse, when through ravenous eating or drinking, we are fit
for nothing but for sleep.

The seventh, beastly nastinesse, when for want of other utterance, our
surcharged stomache bewraies our intemperance, by vomiting, belching and
stinking of the breath.

The eight, lust; for belli-cheere and drunkenness, are the bellows to
concupiscence: and as the pampered horse will cast his rider into the mire, so
the flesh being pampered, will hurl the soul into the lake of all uncleanness

the ninth poverty, when for abusing of plenty we are plagued and pinched with
penury.

The tenth, loss of credit and estimation in the world.

11. And last, the wraith and indignation of God, whom (thorough our
Gluttony) of a merciful and louinge father, we make a rigorous and punishing
Judge.

Less content in superfluity than sobriety.
BEcause superfluity and intemperance prevent the sweetness and pleasure of
the sense, having no feeling of hunger, thirst* or any other motion of the
body: but sobriety forbearing the fruition of pleasures a long time, receives
a far more perfect taste of them for saciety makes pleasant things become
loathsome and unpleasant.

How to drink Wine.
THe first draught is for thirst, the second for nourishment, the 3. of
pleasure, and the fourth of madness.

How to detest gluttony.
Beside the reasons before mentioned, there are eight other circumstances
inducing us to the detestation of gluttony.

First, because it hasteneth the dissolution of the body.

Secondly, because it takes part with the flesh, in the combat between it
and the spirit: so that there is twoe against one*

Thirdly, because it invreth the body to an evil custom, which will afterward
very hardly be forsaken.

Fourthly, because it plays the hyppocrite with us, appearing sweet and
pleasant at the first, but in the end it biteth like a Scorpion, and is as
fatal as poison.

Fifthly, because it lives continually under the curse of God, who pronounces
a woe unto them that rise up early to follow drunkenness, and continue in it
till night.

Sixthly, because it discipateth and destroys the sense, for drunken men
neither know what they do themselves, nor what is done unto them.

Seventhly, because he that is subject to the desire of the belly is in
perpetual slavery by reason the belly does always crave and is never
satisfied.

Eightlie, because of the judgments of God inflicted upon offenders in this
kind, as upon Noah being derided of his own sons, and of Lot that in his
drunkenness committed incest with his daughters; whereof did spring a most
wicked and pernicious generation.

How to avoid Gluttony.
TO avoid Gluttony we must embrace temperance and sobrietye: which consists
in chastening and taming the desires of the body, by fasting and abstinence.

There are two kinds of fasting, the first is, to abstain from meat and
drink; the second, to refrain from sin, and the corrupt affections of the
heart, the first is good, but the last is better than the first.

The properties of true Fasting.
THere are four things required of him that will truly fast.

The first is a voluntary motion he must not do it upon constraint. The
second, is zeal without vainglorie, he must not do it to be praised or seen
of men.

The third, prayer, he must call for the assistance of god.

The fourth, almes-deedes, he must give to the poor, to show the fruits of
his fasting: for to fast or use a sparing diet, not to the intent that we may
be the better able to relieve others, but to enrich our selves, is no fast, but
rather a chief point of avarice.

The better to encourage us to exercise fasting and to avoid gluttony, is to
lay before us the example of Christ, who notwithstanding he were Lord of al
treasure both in heaven and earth, yet voluntarily fasted forty days, and
fortye nights: and of John Baptiste, whose best delicates was but Locustes and
wild honny: And of the apostles, that so awed their bodies with temperate
diet, as they were glad to pull the ears of corn to satisfy hunger.

We read that Gallen was a hundred and twenty year old, and when it was
wondered how he lived so long, he made answer, that he never rose from his
table with a full stomach.

The Egyptians used in the midst of their banquets, to bring in the anathomy of
a dead body dried, that the horror thereof might keep them within the bounds
of temperance: so that for the bodies health, and for the vigor and alacritye
of the soul, there is nothing better then fasting, nor any thing worse or more
fatal than this sin of gluttony.

Of Wrath.
WRath may be called the frenzy of the soul, and is defined to be a vehement
motion of the heart tending to revenge, whereby the blood boiling exceedingly,
sends up hot and burning vapors to the brain: so that reason is smothered,
and the will made obedient to the affections.

Of Wrath there are eleven branches.
Malice, Fury, Impatience, Malediction, Blasphemy, Reproach, Revenge,
Contention, Threatening, Cruelty, and Murder.

Malice what.
Malice, is a kind of anger deeply rooted in the heart, and closely
concealed, til opportunity serve to do mischief: the contrary to this, is
clemency, soon forgetting and easily pardoning an offense.

Fury what.
FVrie, is a chollericke passion of the mind, which presently breaks forth
into violence, either by word or deed, and is deaf to all truth and reason,
during the time it is in heat: the contrary to this is meekness, whereby we
are hardly moved to anger.

Impatience what.
Impatience is an easy inclination to wrath or anger, and it happneth three
manner of ways. First, when the mind stirred up by offense inuolueth it self
in many bitter cogitations, studying how he may be revenged on him with whom
he is displeased.

Secondly, when the mind surcharged with unkindness, breaks forth into
disordered clamors, and confused speeches.

Thirdly, when we grudge and repine at the harms, calamities, sickness, or
other evils inflicted upon us by god; not remembering that for three causes we
ought rather to rejoice: first, because tribulation is the badge of a christian
soldier; and it is more honor for a souldior to be in battle, then to hide
his head in a Castle or fortress.

Secondly, because in patient suffering of afflictions, we are made like unto
our captain Chirst, and to be like him is the greatest glory.

Lastly, afflictions are a sure testimony unto our consciences, that we are
the beloved of God, for whom the lord loves he corrects.

The contrary to impatience, is patience, which is a voluntary and long
suffering of affliction and hard extremities, for the love of virtue and
honesty.

Malediction what.
Malediction is, when through wrath or anger, we curse, banne, or wish evil to
another: which sin I find to be very detestable for these three reasons.

First, in that for the most part curses redound upon the head of him that
curses.

Secondly, in that the evil doer is rather to be prayed for than to be cursed,
considering that to curse, is to heap more evil upon him, whereas he had
enough and too much before.

And thirdly, in that it is so unlawful a thing, as that it is not permitted
against the devil, much less against any christan; as appears by the
example of Michael the Archangell, who when he strove with the devil about
the body of Moses, he did not reprove him with cursed speaking, but only
said; The Lord rebuke thee Satan.

The contrary to malediction is benediction or blessing, when we wish well to
all men, yea unto our enemies. Bless them that curse, Do good to the^ that
hate.

Blasphemy what.
Blasphemy, is a reuengefull intent uttered against God himself, thorough
opprobrie and contumelious speeches; which for five causes is held a most
horrible sin.

First, in respect of the grievous punishment which god himself did set down
against it in the old Tastament, which was stoning to death

Secondly, in respect of the ingratitude of the blasphemer, that dishonoreth
god with that member of his body, in which god has honored him above all
other creatures, namely, his tongue.

Thirdlye, in that the blasphemer is more wicked and rebellious then al other
creatures, for all other creatures do praise and magnify their creator,
according to their kind, declaring his power, wisdom, goodness and
omnipotence, but the blasphemer does not only neglect that dewty, but what in
him lies, contriueth to make a scorn of his name and dignity.

Fourthly, in respect of the perverse disposition of the blasphemer, which
attributes to himself that good which he does, but the evil which befalls
him, he ascribes unto God: whereas contrariwise, evils do fall upon us
thorough our own desert, and whatsoever is good proceeds only from god

Fifthly, in thar the devil speaks in blasphemers, for their words are so
horrible and full of terror, as no man of any conscience, or hart-feeling
pity, can endure their speeches, but will be moved to stop their ears
against them; the contrary to blasphemye, is Sanctification, adoring and
worshipping the name of God, never presuming to have it in our mouths, but
with great and singular reverence: for as it is written; our God is a consuming
fire, and will not hold them guiltless that take his name in vain.

Reproach what.
Reproach is an imperfection, whereby we are moved to scorn, check, or deride
another man, either for the defect of mind or body; or when we study to
detract or speak evil of a man behind his back: the contrary unto this, is
humility or vprightnes of heart and tongue, giving to every one a good report;
for therefore has god in the creation of the tongue, observed these four
things. First, he has made it tender and soft, to signify our words should
be of like temper.

Secondly he has tied it with many threades and stringes, to restrain and
bridle it.

Thirdly, it is every way blunt, where by we are admonished that our words
ought not to be pricking or hurtful.

And fourthlye, it is enclosed with a quicke-set and strong rampire of teeth
and gummes, and with lips which are as gates to shut it up, for fear it
should take too much liberty.

Revenge what.
Revenge is, to take the rod of Justice out of gods hand, and our selves to
render evil for evil, which is very absurd, considering that it is the soul
which offends, and we have power over nothing but the body; like him that
breaks the sword and suffers him that gave the wound, to pass away without
blame or prejudice: the contrary to revenge is lenity and mildnes, forgiving
every one as we look to be forgiven our selves.

Yet is not revenge altogether forbidden, maiestrates may use it; for they are
as Gods substitutes; provided they do not execute it, as carried away by their
own affections of wrath or anger; but as te^dring the glory of god, the course
of Justice, and the safety of the Commonwealth.

Contention what.
COntention is when through the chollericke disposition of nature, we are
always apt to fight, quarrel, or contend, for every light occasion; the
contrary to this, is peace or placcability of mind, rather resolving to lose
our right, then by vain cauiling, to break the bond of charity.

Threatening what.
TO threaten is to pronounce mischief and hurt unto another, not in respect of
justice and correction, but only in desire to satisfy revenge. The contrary
to this, is friendly admonition, aduising our adversary, and rather reclaming
him by fair persuasions and faithful counsel, then bending the brow, or
whetting the tongue against him.

Cruelty what.
CRuelty is a privation of pity and compassion, whereof there are three sorts,
the first is, to procure mischief, the second is, to execute it without
mercy, and the third, not to defend cruelty, and oppression from others,
whom we see extremely dealt with, if it lie in our power to help them: the
contrary to this, is mercifulness and compassion; which is a like sense and
feeling of evil and grief which others suffer, as if we were touched with the
same; or a mittigation of the extremity of that which one has deserved, upon
the consideration of our own frailty and selfe-guiltinesse.

Murder what.
MVrder, is so far to be enraged with wrath, as to wish or not be satisfied
till we have the blood of him that offended.

Murder is of two sorts; internal, conceived tn the heart; and external, brought
forth in action, so that to kill is not simply understood of the shedding of
blood only, but by every occasion tending thereunto: as taking away of a man's
good name, his house, goods, or any thing else, whereby he preserues his being
here in this world.

How to detest Wrath and Anger.
THe circumstances whereby we are taught to detest anger are these: first, by
the example of brute beasts, who though they be never so fierce or cruel,
yet amongst such as are of their own kind they will always show themselves
meek and gentle, as the Lion will not hurt the lion, nor the Draggon the Dragon.

Secondly, in respect that by nature we are brought forth naked and unarmed;
which signifies we ought to loath all barbarous cruelty.

Thirdly, to remember what we were when Christ laid down his life for us, with
what gentleness he suffers our daily multiplying sins, and to think that if
we can exspect mercy at his hands, that we ought to show mercy to others.

Fourthly, so long as we are in wrath and displeasure with our btethren, so
long neither prayers, nor alms deeds, nor any thing else that we do is
acceptable in the sight of god, but we stand as exiled from his favor and
loving kindness.

Fifthly, our anger howsoever is abursd, for if we malign the just, then we
strive against god, who stands with the just: if the unjust, it is a means
rather to increase their lewdenes then to diminish it; and so our anger proves
hurtful to ourselves and profitable to no body else*

Sixthly, if we look well about us, it is more then we can well do to be at
peace within our selves, and therefore great improuidence to make war upon
others.

Seauenthly, whilst through wrath we strive to tyranise over others, and we
our selves like base cowardes are trodden down of our own affections.

Eighthly, the wrathful man lives in a continual purgatory and hell of
conscience, sometime afflicted with injuries, and many times smarting with
wounds and blows.

Lastly, we must not let the sun go down upon our anger: for our Savior
has said, Whosoever says unto his brother, thou fool; is in danger of hell
fire.

How Anger is good.
When it breeds dislike in us of other men's vices, or stirs us up to the
desire of excellent things, as when we see our selves contemned for base
actions, and loathing them, we addict our selves to things that are better, and
more noble; and hereof comes indignation; which is a grief wrought in us, when
we behold some good thing befall an unworthy person, and he that is worthy,
deprived thereof.

The difference between Indignation and Compassion.
INdignation, is in regard of some good that happens to one that is unworthy
of it. Compassion or pity, arises of some evil that befalls or is procured
to him that has not deserved it: and of these twoe mingled together, springs
zeal; which is an indignation of heart conceived in reguarde of those things,
that are unworthily don against him that is dear unto us, and whom we love;
as appears by the example of Christ, who was so much moved with the
indignity offered to god the Father, when he came into the Temple at
Jerusalem, by such as sold Doves and changed money in it; as in great
indignation, he took a whip and scourged them out, tellinge them his fathers
house was a house of prayer but they had made it a den of theeus.

We must beware that our indgnation spring not of envy, not our zeal of
ignorance.

How to avoid Anger.
ANger is to be avoided two manner of ways: first, in respect of others; and
secondly, in respect of our selves.

How to avoid the anger of another man.
We shall the sooner avoid the anger of another man, if either we give place
to his fury, or staieng by him use mild and gentle speeches.

How to reconcle an enemy,
AN enemy may be reconciled three manner of ways: first, by craving pardon in
words; secondly, by showing signs of humillitie by the body; as by kneeling
or prostrating our selves upon the ground; and thirdly, by the service of
charity, according to the saying; If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he
thirst, give him drink.

How to avoid anger in our selves.
THe principal means to avoid anger in our selves is patience, in
tollerrating and suffering of evil with a quiet mind, thinking that whatsoever
is laid upon us in this life, whether it be affliction, persecution, or
reproach, that there is nothing can touch our soul, but our own iniquitye:
and so long as our souls are safe which are truly our selves, whatsoever
happens to our bodies, we ought to esteem as not happening unto us; and
therefore not to be regarded of us.

Beside, to bridle anger, consider the party by whom we are displeased: if it
be a stranger that mooues us, impute it to his ignorance; if a Child, to his
folly; if a Maiestrate or father, to his authority; if a wife, to her Love; if
a friend, to his care; if a brother, to his boldness; if a servant, to his
negligence; if a neighbor to his rashness, not doubting but upon better
consideration, they will all repent them of their oversight.

The example of Moses avails very much to the avoiding of anger, who
notwithstanding that he had been many times reviled and exclamed upon, by his
country men the Israelites and that without cause, yet was so far from being
angry with them, as when the Lord for their rebellion against him, determined
to cut them off, Moses rather besoght him that his name might be wipte out of
the book of life, then any such harm should befall that people. David a man
chosen of God, and an anointed king, even in the midst of his guard and men of
war, suffered a base fellow to revile him and throw dust in his face.

Finally, let us always observe this one rule, that when soever we find our
heart kindled with anger, we devise some means to prolong the time before we
strike or make reply, as Theodosius and other virtuous men have done, that
would either read the Alphabet over, play upon some instrument, or make a
certain space before they would reply upon their offenders and by this means,
as they, so shall we the more easily subdue and vanquish this wild and sauadge
passion.

Finis Wrath.
Of Sloth.
Sloth may be called the lethargy of the soul, being a lither deiection of
the whole man from the laudable exercise of virtue, so that in a manner he
becomes senseless, but in truth altogether unprofitable.

There are eleauen branches of sloth, protraction, Remisnes, Negligence,
improuidence, indeuotion, sluggishnesse, pusilanimity, irresolution,
disperation, misprision of time and omition.

Ptotraction what.
PRotraction, is that defect of mind, which when a man is to enterprise or
take in hand some good work or other, makes him defer the time, and use much
delay ere he attempt it; and this is the fault of those that know, that with
out repentance we shall die in our sins, and yet defer their amendment of life
from day to day.

Remissness what.
Remissness, is where having begun a good work, we quicklye are moved to
leave it off again; and this is the fault of such, as entering into religion,
and resolving upon a Godly course of life, by the vain inticements of the
world, or the corrupt pleasures of the flesh, fall to their old bias again.

Negligence what.
NEgligence, is when we enter upon a good work, and proceed in it, but
without care whether it be well done or no; and this is the fault of such as
are content to come to church to pray, hear sermons, and give to the poor,
but do it more for fashion sake and fear of punishment, then upon any true
zeal: or labor not effectually to deserve the name of Christians, but think
it sufficient, howesoeuer they perform the outward ceremony.

Improuidence what.
IMprouidence, is when a man does not provide aforehand against that which is
like to happen, but stands still, or spends the time carelessely, till an
inconvenience take hold upon him, and this is the fault of those that never
forsake sin, till sin forsakes them, nor have any thought to live well,
until they see they must die presently, thinking their rotten old age
sufficient for God, whereas they have spent their lusty youth in the service of
the devil: but there are five reasons to move us to beware of improuidence and
that we defer not our conversion to virtue and godly life.

The first is induration, for that old age having a long time continued in the
custom of vicious life, like a stiff tree is hardly bowed or brought to
better order.

The second, is the longer a man abides in sin; the greater will be the
burden of sin, the greater the burden of sin is, the more hardly will he
rise from under it; especially considering his chief strength and vigor is
before wasted and consumed.

The third, the more strange we are to virtue and godly life, the larger
expense of time will be required; for our entertainment and familliar
acquaintance, so that having alyenated our selves all our life time, death in
our old age lays hold upon us, before we can put forth our hand to
apprehend the benefit of her presence.

The fourth, the difficulty and unaptness upon our death bed to turn unto the
Lord, by reason of the torment of sickness, the care of our goods, the clamor
of wife and children, and the terror that death brings with him.

The fifth, because at the hour of death the devil is more ready to assail us
the^ at other times, knowing that if he then fail, his pray is ever after past
recovery, and we then most unable to resist.

Indeuotion what.
INdeuotion, is the spiritual drouzines of the soul; when neither through
weakness or want of power, but by a certain wearisomnesse in the execution
of good works, we cast them behind our backs, and leave them undone; and
this is the imperfection of those, whose faith is wavering and inconstant,
loosing the heat and vigor thereof.

Sluggishnesse what.
SLuggishnesse, is a kind of heavy, and lumpish unwillingness to any good or
commendable practice, and it is of two sorts; corporal, or spiritual;
corporal sluggishnesse, is when we had rather endure any necessity, the^ by
industry to pain the body, for the avoiding thereof.

Spiritual sluggishnesse, is when we had ratherlie walloing in the pleasures
of this life, though to our destruction, then wander thorough the thorny and
bitter path of affliction, though to our eternal happiness: and this is the
falt of those, that so their bodies be secure and at ease, have no further
care, but think all things well with them.

Pusillanimity what.
PVsillanimity, is a faintness of heart, whereby we become slack even in
things, which we are sufficient able to perform. And this is the fault of such
as hyde their tallant, or shrink back from the way of virtue, because they
presume it is to hard for them to follow and so consequently fall into distrust
of the help and assistance of God.

The cause of Pusillanimity.
THe cause of pusillanimitye is fear, which is of two sorts, one good, the
other bad.

Good fear what
To stand more in awe of blame, reproach and dishonor, then of death or grief.

Bad fear what.
BAd fear is a false opinion of evil, imagining it to be greater the^ it is,
and this is of two sorts, first when the soul thorough a cowardlye dispotion
bocomes idle, dead and void of every good effect. Secondly, when the wicked
through horrout of pain and punishment, and not for love of godliness, are
bridled and restrained from their villainies.

Irresolution what.
IRresolutio^ is a hanging of the mind between two opinions, now determining
this, now that, yet in the end attempteth nothing at all. And this is the fault
of such, that would feign enjoy the blessedness prepared for true christians,
and yet are loath to forsake their carnal affections; like the young man in the
gospel, that came to our Savior with a desire to obtain heaven, but when he
was bid to sell all he had and give it to the poor, he went away very sad
and pensive, making no reply, whether he would at such a rate purchase the
kindome of heaven or no.

Desperation what.
DEsperation is a kind of sloth, where by the soul waxes fainte under the
burden of sin, or of any good work, and thinks there is no hope of
pardon, or possability to prosper, because she wants will to ask the one,
or courage to attempt the other; as appears by the example of Kaine, Judas,
and such like, who offended god more in dispairing of his mercy, then in the
committing of their offenses: for the first step to salvation is to decline
from sin, and the second not to despair of mercy.

Misprision of time what.
MIsprision of time is a kind of sloth mixte with vnnessessarye labor, whereby
time is otherwise spent then it should, and therein although we seem
industrious, yet because our labor both of mind and body is either about
trifles or unlawful actions, therefore such labor is accounted idleness: And
this is the fault of such, as break their brain about the study of
mischife, and wicked inventions, discourse upon vain and filthy matters,
seriously read profane books, practice unlawful games, gad up and down upon
no ocasion of business, spend time in daliance, drinking and eating, or make a
continual custom of such excersices as are appointed only for recreation:

Omission what.
OMission is a kind of sloth, whereby we let slip the knowledge of such
things as we ought to know, or the prosecution of such things as we ought to
do, and this is the fault of those that being commanded to watch and pray,
ouerpasse that duty by the means of being employed about worldly vanities, or
of such as know that god is the gracious giver of all those benefits which
they enjoy, and yet forget to give him thanks for the same, or resolving upon
some good work to the advancement of gods glory and the profit of the common
wealth, are carried away through the stream of their own affections and so
leave it unfinished.

THis sin touches all sors of people; as magistrates when they omit the
administration of justice, ministers when they omite the preaching of the
word, parents when they neglect their children especially in matters touching
their souls health, children when they despise the discipline of their parents
and so forth, through all degrees and callings where there is any neglect of
duty.

Duty what.
DVety is the bond of the soul, whereby we cheerfully and willingly without
force or constraint give to every one that which belongs unto him, as honor
to whom honor, reverence to whom reverence, tribute to whom tribute, and
succor to whom succor belongs: it is of two kinds, duty toward god, and
duty toward our neighbor, duty toward god is love testified by obedience,
duty toward our neighbor is love testified by upright dealing.

How to detest Sloth.
REmember that sloth is a vice which impouerisheth both soul and body, the
soul of internal graces, the body of external goods, as appears by the
words of the gospel: to him that has shall be given, and to him that has not
shall be taken even that which he has; and by the wisdom of Solomon the idle
hand is filde with penury.

Remenber likewise that it is a vice, which captiuates and brings us under
the slavish tyranny of our worldely enemies, the world, the flesh, and the
devil: for whilst through a careless and negligent regard, we make slight
acount of their temptations, or valiantly persevere not in fight agaiust them,
we lose the honor and reward of victory, and ever after lie bound in the seru
le chains of darkness.

Remember also it is a vice which is the root and nurse of many other vices,
as appears by the example of David, who no sooner gave himself to rest after
his painful wars, but he fell into the sins of adultery and murder.

Saloman so long as he was busy in building the Temple and other houses,
continued zealous in the service of God; but waxing negligent, he fell strait
to lust after women, and commit idolatry.

Fourthly, remember that it is held a vice so detestable in nature, as very
brute beasts abhor it: as we may gather by the industry of the Ant, Be, and
other small and contemptible creatures.

Lastly, let us consider that all other creatures not having life, are so
opposite to sloth, as they continually keep the first course wherein they were
created without intermission or ceasing, unless it be upon some violent and
accidental cause, as we see by the revolution of the sun, moon and stars,
by the ebbing and flowing of the sea, and by the just return of summer and
winter, spring and Autumn; nay the very stones of the earth, though they be
senseless and lie still, yet have they in them a kind of working faculty which
gives them groath and increase; if then these, much more ought men, endued with
reason and understanding, to decline from sloth and embrace the labor whereunto
they are ordained; for man is created not to take rest but to travel, and he
lives most happily, who as little as may be lives to himself.

How to avoid Sloth.
COnsidder that we enter into this world as it were to run a race, or fight a
battle, if therefore we run not so, as we may get the gole, we lose the
reward; or if we fight not so, as we may prevail, we loose the reward and
honor due to victory.

Consider likewise, that we neither run this race nor fight this battle in
private to our selves, but in the open sight of him, that will one day call us
to a reckoning how we have bestowed every hour and minute allotted us for that
purpose: pronouncing in the mean space, a curse upon them that do this work
negligently.

The best remedy therefore against sloth and ydlensse, is devotion, which is a
ready and willing performance of the service of God, and of all other duties
required of us in the course of this life. Devotion is of two sorts, the one,
belonging to the mind, which contains the exercise and labors of the mind,
as prayer, praise, thanksgiving and such like: the other, to the body, which
comprehends the works of charrity, abstinence, humility, and such like
corporal functions.

To be incited the rather herunto, let us call to mind, the examples of such
persons as for the love of virtue, have refused no pains cost or industry:
what momuments may we behold erected by the diligence of our fore fathers?
what large revenues left to the reliese of the poor? What books and volums
written for our instruction? which we had never been happy by, if they had
delighted more in sloth then diligence.

The Queen of Saba, traveled ftom the furthest part of the south to Judea, to
hear the wisdom of Sollomon: S. Paul neglected no perril nor persicution in
many countries, for the daily and hourly planting of the holy Gospel: even
heaven men are lively patterns unto us for the avoiding of sin. Plautus by
day writ his commedies, and in the night ground in a mill, that so he might
have wherewith to maintain him at his study.

Apelles for the desire he had to excel in the art of paintng, would let no day
pass wherein he drew not some line or other. If these men were so desirous of
wordly honor, and the transitory commodities of this life, how much more
paineful ought we to be for the obtaining of heavenly honor and the wealth and
riches that shall never fade. To the which, God for his mercy bring us, Amen.

The Genealogy of VERTVE.
THe first thing that requires our consideration in this Genealogy of virtue,
is to know the parent or first original, from whence this glorious Impe and
offspring of happiness takes her being. For as in the descent and pedigree of
men, it is held an honorable thing, to be derived from worthy parents: so, to
make the excellency of Virtue more noble and respective in men's eyes, is to
show that she is no mean borne personage, but sprung from the mighty king of
heaven and earth, even God himself. For proof hereof, we have both Nature and
Scripture: Who has ever seen Figs to spring of Thistles, or grapes of
thorns? Good fruit is gathered from good trees, no man ought to think that any
perfection or excellent gift, tending to the beauty and blessedness of this
life (such as virtue is) does proceed or has his beginning from any other
then the father of lights: which being so, let us pay unto her that tribute of
love and reverence which we owe unto her, let us reverence her for her
nobillity, and love her for the infinite treasure of goodness that she brings
with her

Coming thus like a royal princess, the second thing to be considered is,
where she makes her throne of rule and government: not in any base corner of
the world, but in the heart of him that is the ruler of the world: Soloman
would not erect a throane unto himself but of pure gold, no more will virtue,
but of the heart of man; as she is her self excellent, so will she have her
seat agreeable: for of al creatures man is most excellent.

The third, thing to be considered is, the quality of her government: she is
not tyranous, bloody, or cruel, but gentle, meek, and gracious: making the
place where she reigns, a paradise, and the parties over whom she reigns,
Peerlesse. She bringes with her peace of conscience, and quiet of soul,
arming her subjects with invincible power against the force both of
domestical and foreign enemies: Domestical, which are the perturbations and
wild affections of the soul, as Ambition, Anger, Sloth, Pride, Covetousness,
and such like, and foreign, as shame or sickness, poverty, persecution, old
age, imprisonment and death, etc.

The 4. thing to be considred, is the continuance of her Kingdom: it is not
momentarye but eternal, and to such as embrace her for their Sovereign, she
plats a wreath of immortality: earthly Princes may give external happiness,
which for an age or so, may happilye endure; but she investeth her friends and
lovers with that blessedness, that never shall have end. Plato was wont to
say, that the difference of Virtue compared with the Pomp of the world, is so
great: that if it were put into one skale of the Balance, and virtue into the
other, this would ascend up to heaven, and the other touch the center of the
earth.

The fifth thing to be considered, is her Laws and statutes, they are not (such
as Dracos were) writ in blood, but drawn with a soft and gentle hand, using
rather persuasion than compulsion, fair entreaty, rather than foul
inforcement.

The sixth and last thing to be considred, is to whom she prescribes her Laws
and Statutes, which is not to a creature dull and incapable, but to an essence
divine and apt to conceive, which is the soul of man, created after the Image
of himself. And this is the kingdom she labors to beautify, and the Gardens
she feign would plant with all manner of sweet and odoriferous flowers. Nor
does she stand in need as other Princes do, for the help of nature, or any
conjugal society of a second person, to the propagation of her posterity; but
is in her self (like a fountain) fruitful and full of increase. But before
we come to the particular issues that flow from this rich spring, it shall not
be amiss, to consider how necessary it is for man to be made a subject of
virtue.

How necessary it is to be made a subject of Virtue.
THe sin of disobedience (committed in paradise) having deprived all mankind
of that happiness whereunto they were first created, as their bodies by that
occasion, were left a prey to manifold misseries and infirmities, so their
souls (before in their affections upright and without blemishe) have ever
since undergone so great a change and alteration, as in stead of quiet and
settled contemplation they are filled with many furious and turbulent
perturbations: Love turns to lust; Anger, to fury; Justice, to severity;
Wisdom, to curiositye, Desire, to covetousness; Hope to presumption;
Liberality to Prodigallity: all which being in their own Nature good, do
ever since that first corruption lay hold upon us, tend to the worser part
and are become evil: So that least man should faint under this heavy burden
of calamitye, and fall headlong into destruction, God of his infinite mercy
has ordained a means (if not altogether to cure) yet to redress these
imperfections, which is virtue. For with virtue and the instructions proceeding
from her, we learn to moderate our passions and affections, by keeping them,
that they break not out into excess or defect, as when we so bridle love, that
it tend not to lust; Anger, that it turn not to fury; Hope that it presume
not, and liberality that it play not the prodigal, and so of all other
affections; For which cause it is very requisite we should submit, to be under
the rule and authority of so happy a guide and Schoole-Mistris.

How to be prepared to come to Virtue.
THere are 2. principal good things to be followed and pursude of men in this
life, under which all other good things are contained: God which is our
sovereign good, and virtue which is the means to attain to that good. As the
Romans did build their Temple of honor in such sort, that no man could have
access into it, but first he must come through the temple of virtue: even so
we may say of the temple and palace of heaven: there is no looking for
entrance there, except we first pass thorough the gates of piety and virtue
here. This was the reason that moved Aristotle to say, that man was borne Ad
intelligendum and agendum, Man by creation had this propriety assigned him, to
labor for knowledge, and not so only, but being furnished therewith, to
endeavor to set it forth by action and conversation. For as to be ignorant is a
thing contemptible, so is it far more odious to know much and practice
little; to be rich in Science, and poor in Conscience. The means therefore
wherewith we must be furnished to come to virtue, is a willingness and love to
the study of Philosophy.

What Philosophy is.
PHylosophie, is a profession and exercise of that wisdom, which is the
knowledge of Divine and human things: which we may divide into twoe parts,
Contemplative, and Moral. Contemplative, which contains the knowledge of God
and his works, and morrall, which teaches us how to live well, and how to
show our selves helpefull and officious to the world.

How to know God.
GOd does reveal, and as it were make himself visible unto us after two
manner of ways: first, in the book of his word, by the mouths of his holy
prophets, Apostles, and Patriarchs: and secondly, by the book of nature, in
the whole frame of heaven and earth, which we cannot behold, but we must needs
confess, that neither heaven has his motion, the sun and moon their light,
the earth, his fruitfulness, nor the sea his waters, but it comes to pass by
the power, wisdom, and providence of one supreme creator and preserver, which
is God. And as the contemplation of his creatures, is a forcible argument to
beat into us the knowledge of his deyty; so the behoulding of no one creature
helps more to that end, then the consideration of our own nature.

How to know our selves.
SOcrates the Prince of Philosophers, greatly condemned the students of his
age, in that they toyled so much about the knowledge of external things and
never had any care to cast an eye unto that which was internal; meanning,
that all their study and labor tended to the marking of the revolution of the
heavens, and other natural causes upon earth, but never were solicitous or
troubled about their own nature: but as his opinion was, so let ours be, that
we cannot come to the knowledge of God (which is the end of our cteation, and
being known to glorify him) than by the knowledge of our own nature.
Therefore to know our selves and our own nature, is to consider that we are
compounded of a body that is earthly, and a soul that is heavenly; of a body
that is palpable, to be felt and scene, and of a soul that is invisible, and
not subject to external sense: of a body that is mortal and must die, and of
a soul that is immortal, that shall never dye: and that at first, we were
created upright both in soul and body, but since through sin, we are become
deformed both in soul and body. And although we might here take occasion to
speak of the excellency of the composition of the parts of the body, as a
thing full of admiration, and many deep secrets in nature; yet because the
more principal part of man, which is the soul, is the only object of the
matter we have in hand, we will pass over the great knoweledge that might be
had in viewing the corporal frame, and only tie our discourse to the
spiritual essence: which being the harder and more difficulte matter (by how
much it is more excellent than the other) therefore once looked into (though but
slightly) we shall the sooner come to the knowledge of the whole.

What this knowledge of ourselves does work in us.
THe knowledge of our selves does work in us a two-folde effect, a means to
be humbled, and a means to glory and rejoice. To be humbled, in respect of the
sense and feeling of our vanity; and to glory, in respect of the mercy of God,
by whose grace we recover our selves from the danger of vanity: for our sick
soul being lost to perdition, is revived and quickened again by regeneration.

What the Soul is.
THe soul cannot be known as it is, but by the craetor that made it by reason
that in us there is no nature more high or excellent to comprehend it: all the
knowledge that we can have of it, proceeds from those effects which it does
manifest in us, and therefore we cannot give any absolute definition of it, But
according to the effects we may thus describe it. The soul is a spirit, which
gives life to the body whereunto it is joined, and which is capeable of the
knowledge of God, to love him as being meet to be united unto him to eternal
happiness. In that it is a spirit, it confutes their oppinions, that thought
the soul did proceed from the te^perature and harmony of the parts of the
body, but in that it gives life, it confutes their oppinion, that thought it
was mortal, and that with the death of the body it likewise perished. But the
soul is as far from perishing (being separated from the body) as an expert
musition, from losing his skill, being bereft of his instrument. Others there
are that think, because man lives no longer then he has breath; on because
loss of blood brings the loss of life; or because in death they perceive no
difference between men and beasts; that therefore the soul is nothing else
but blood, or a puff of wind. But these men have no further insight into the
soul, than is conceived by their external sense. A mind refynde and elevated
above the earth, finds that the soul is the Image of God, who is a spirit and
eternal, therefore the soul of man must be a spirit and eternal; for there
is always an agreement between the Image and the thing of which it is an
Image.

How the soul is celestial.
THe soul is celestial, not in that sense, as if it were a part of the
substance and nature of god him self, but it is said to be celestial in 3.
respects. First, to show a difference between the soul of men and the soul
of beasts. Secondly, in regard of the agreement which it has with the divine
nature through immortalitye. Thirdly, in respect it approaches nearer to the
nature of god, the^ any other creature except Angels, and yet Angels are not of
the nature of God neither; for, they are not immortal of themselves but have
their immortaltty and their superexcellencie of God, who both gives it unto
them, and preserves them in it, and can if it please him deprive them of it.

How the soul is in the body.
THe soul is in the body not* as proceeding from the generatiue seed, or the
commixture of the humors, for then the soul should be corruptible as they
are: but the soul is in the body by infusion of God the creator, after that
the parts of the body are already framed and fashioned, and that by no other
virtue, but by his own omnipotent power: so that we must think when God
inspired a soul into Adam, he made not a blast of his own nature, nor of the
air round about him, but even of nothing: who being himself incorporall, made
the soul also incorporall; but yet he being unchangeable, made the soul
mutable, because himself being uncreated, made the soul a creature. Upon this
may rise a question, that if the soul be infused and created of God, and comes
not by propagation from our parents, whence has it then the pollution which we
call original sin? It were horrible to say it were so created, knowing that
all the works of God are pure and holy; and from the body it cannot come, for
the body infectes not the soul, but the soul the body, whose instrument it
is. We answer, that as the soul is infused by god, in that respect it is
clean and without spot, but so soon as it is entered under the line of the
children of Adam, it is presently made subject to the curse which God laid
upon Adam and his posterity, and so becomes guilty of original sin.

The difference between soul and Spirit.
BEcause these words are often times, confounded, it shall not be amiss to
know their difference. By the soul we may understand man as he is born, having
the use of the annimal, natural, and vital powers, and by the spirit,
whatsoever grace and knowledge is given unto man by God: so that by soul we may
understand man as he is in the corruption of his nature, and by spirit as he is
regenerate and borne anew. There is also another difference, which may give
some light in manner to discern between these twoe names, which is this; Soul
is a word more general than spirit, for it may be attributed to other creatures
as well as to man. As herbs, plants and tree, have have only a vegetative
soul, Sea-spounges, cockles, and such like, have only a vegetative and
sensetiue soul: brute beasts have a vegetative, sensetiue, and cogetatiue
soul; for they do not only grow, increase; and have sense and feeling, but
they likewise are endued with cogitation, knowledge, and memory, how to
preserve their lives, guide and govern themselves according to natural
inclination: but the soul rational and regenerate by the grace of adoption,
and therefore called a spirit, is only proper to men and enriched with
immortality.

How the soul is immortal.
THat the soul is immortal, appears by some reasons before aleadged, as that
it is the Image of god (who is imortal) and therefore has some agreement with
him in that respect: but for further assurance, we have scripture and her own
properties. In the book of Genesis 2.7. it is said, God made man a living soul,
that is immortal. In the gospel after S. Matthew, Christ admonishes his
disciples, that they should not stand in fear of those that kill the body
(meanning bloody tyrants) but could not kill the soul: whereby it is manefest
the soul lives after the body. Likewise in the gospel after S. Luke, 16.22.
the beggar dyed, and his soul was carried into Abraham's bosom. And in the 23.
of the same gospel the 43. verse our savior christ said to the repentant
thief, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, (meaning his soul and not
his body) which words he would not have uttered if the soul had perished with
the body and not been immortal. Many other places might be recyted, but if
these seem insufficient, so will the rest. Further, the soul appears to be
immortal by her own properties: first, in that it gives life to the body,
and is so far from corruption, that so long as it bides therein, it preserues
the body from corrupting; Secondly, in that it is in continual motion, and
never cease (whether we sleep or wake, walk or sit still) to apprehend,
think, or ponder upon something; in a moment it wanders through the heavens,
compasses the earth, and crosses the broadest Seas. Thirdlye, it may be
thought immortal, in respect of that propertye which it expresses in the
minds even of Atheistes and heathen men, who notwithstanding they not believe
or deny the immortality of the soul, yet ye deuinity of their souls with in
them working to the contrary, make them balke their own opinions, and by the
momuments which they set up to continue their name and remembrance, bewraies
the soul to be immortal because in that respect they plainly show a fervent
desire to live for ever.

Why some believe not the immortallity of the soul.
THe reason that moves them heareunto, in some, is the blockishnes of nature;
who obstiniately refuse to believe any thing but what they may be able to
comprehend by their outward sense. And again, some are so perverse, as they
wish not only their souls were not immortal, but that there were no god nor
any other life, to the end they might have no Judge, but that this life might
end with their delight, and the soul vanish with the body. But here may rise
an objection, If the soul be immortal, why is it said in scripture; every
soul that sins, shall die the death? And again, it appears by many
places, that the souls of the wicked shall suffer eternal death. We may
answer, that the soul is said to dye (not that it is quite bereft of any
being) but for that it is for ever bannished the joys of heaven, which unto
the soul is accounted death, as the bannishnement of the soul from the body
is accounted the bodies death.

What makes the soul mortal and in danger of such a death.
THe first thing that indangers the soul with mortality is original, sin,
which sin by regeneration of holy baptism being removed, the next thing
that indangers it, is the passions and affections of the soul, which fall
back into their first corruption, by spurning against understanding and
reason, the sovereign faculties of the soul, which are spiritual and
intelligigible, stirring us up to virtue, to pietye and godliness; and by
yielding obedience to the sensual and inferior faculty of the soul, which is
the will, who by reason it is nearer and more famillier with the corporal
senses then understanding, therefore rather consents to the Laws of the
members, which are full of ignorance, frowardness, misery, shame, death and
condemnation; than to the works of the spirit, which are love, joy, peace,
long suffering, gentleness, faith, meekness, temperance and such like.

The difference between understanding and the will and affections.
FIrst, they differ according to the place and situation which they have in the
body of man. Secondly, according to the time wherein they are imploide, and
thirdly according to the dignity of their offices. They differ according to
their situation, in that understanding has his seat in the brain, and the
will and affection in the heart: And this is the reason that we se many men
endued with great knowledge of diverse good and virtuous things, but have no
willingness or affection to follow after them, or to show them in their life and
conversation, because their heart and their brain, their will and their
understanding agree not: Likewise we see others to have a will to do well, yet
because they want vnderstaning and knowledge to discern what is just, they fail
of the execution thereof.

Secondly, they differ according to the time wherein they are imploide, in that
understanding always goes before, and the affections follow. For we cannot
hate or love, unless we first know the thing which is to be hated or loved.

Thirdly, they differ acording to the dignity of their offices, in that
understanding sits as a King to command, and the will and affection, stand as
subjects to obey. For as God has given us an understanding to know his law,
so has he given us a will to follow him and his law so far forth as our nature
is capable thereof.

When understanding and the affections agree.
THe understanding and affections do agree, when the will follows or forsakes,
shuns or receives nothing, but what judgment has first determind to be good or
evil: and when judgment determines nothing before it be advised by reason:
and who^ reason advises not before she have conferred things one with another,
and thoroughly examined them. Which property she takes from consideration: and
when consideration has nothing without requiring it of memory: And when
memory will keep nothing but what is committed unto it by knowledge and
understanding. These rules observed, there is an upright government in the
soul, which otherwise by the affections, comes to ruin and subversion.

What the affections are.
WE may call the affections those motions of the soul, whereby the heart is
stirred up to the following after good and eschewing of evil; as love, hope,
joy, sorrow, indignation, compassion, Ielousy, fear, and many such, the
number where of is infinite, not in respect of their own nature, but in respect
of us that are not able to comprehend them. These affections have great
agreement with the quality and temprature of the bodies wherein they are, and
therefore as the bodies wherein they are, do more or less perticipate of
heat, cold, drouth, or moisture; so do the affections rise or decline,
according to the nature of the forsaid qualities. For which cause, we ought to
be moderate in eating and drinking, for as we are either temperate or
intemperate, so the affections of the soul will be more moderate or
immoderate, and the perturbations which they bring with them, will also be
greater or less, more easy or uneasy to be provoked or appeased.

Why affections are in the Soul.
AFfections are appointed of god to remain and have residence in the soul for
two causes: first, to the intent they may as pricks waken and stir it up from
being asleep and oppressed with the heaviness of the body, least peradventure
it should be negligent in the care of good things, and such as are most
expedient and profitable for it. And secondly, to the intent they might as
bridles, stop the hasty course wherinto the soul is some time carried, so that
it were like to perish, but for the hand of some other affection that
restraines it: as we see in the desire of of wealth, or coveting of honor, we
may run into auarise or ambition, both which unless they be moderated with
judgment and discreation, prove dangerous enemies to the tranquillity both of
soul and body. For even as by the corruption and inequality of the humors,
are ingendered those diseases that infect and annoy the body; even so, by the
disorder, corruption, and uneven proportion of the affections, do spring the
maladies and diseases that pervert and contaminat the soul. Which diseases,
are far more dangerous and mortal then those of the body, in so much as they
are not so easily discerned, and therefore not so easily nor so soon cured as
the other may be. What grief is it lurking in the body, but will at sometime
or other, either by the countenance or some other accident discover it self,
that a remedy may be sought for it: but the soul being invisible and not
subject to external sense, lies many times in many persons dangerously
sick, having her glorius essence spoild and defaced by vice, and yet those that
are the owners of such a soul, think themselves the soundest men in the
world. This happens by the headstrong wilfulnes of the affections, who are
oftentimes so feirce and vnco^trolable as they ouerwhelm reason and virtue by
which the soul receives medicine and preservation: but then they are no more
called affections, but passions or perturbations.

What Passions or perturbations are.
PAssions or perturbations, are vyolent motions which (unless restrained)
carrye the Soul headlong into many mischiefs. The grounds that they proceed
from are false opinions, which persuade us otherwise of things then they are in
deed. And these false oppinions are always accompanied with these four
things, immoderate desire, unbridled joy, immeasureable grief, and extreme
fear, which do carry the soul hither and thither, and in the end so subdue
the reasonable power thereof, as they make it servile and obedient unto the
sensual appetite of the will; as we have examples in Histories, how some have
grown mad through anger, some kilde themselves for grief: some died with
immoderate joy, and other some languished through a fond and impatient desire.
But all passions which are in the body are not of this nature, there are some
which are good and necessary, and do properly belong unto the body, even from
the first creation, which are not to be reproved, nor can be taken away without
the utter ruin of humane nature: as the desire of eating, drinking, and such
like: yet these are not so necessary neither, but that they likewise stand in
need of government, or else they quickly run into superfluity.

How affections become passions.
AS the earth when it swalloweth in stead of supporting; the water when it
drownes, in stead of refreshing: the air when it stifles, in stead of
comforting: and the fire when it burns in stead of warming: are no longer
accounted profitable but pernicious; eue^ so the affections, when they once
turn from that good end and purpose, for which they were annexed to man's
nature, they are no longer profitable, but hurtful, nor any longer to be
called affections, but perturbations. As for example, hope was given us to
seek after God our sovereign good, in whom alone we find all delight, rest,
and pleasure: but if this hope presume too far, it is no longer hope but
presumption. In like manner, fear is given unto us, to stand in awe of Gods
judgments; but if this fear pass his appointed limits, it is no longer fear
but despair.

How to remedy passions.
THe last remedy against the passions of the Soul, is to prevent and hinder
them that they take not root in us, but so soon as they begin to stir, to
bridle them by the authority of virtue and reason, which we shall the sooner
accomplish, if we persuade our selves that the good and evil of this life
(which are the causes that our minds are deprived of all content) are indeed
neither good nor evil, and consequently that they ought not to breed passions
within us. For to judge uprightly, what is honor, wealth, riches, beauty, and
such like, but good things in opinion only, and not in deed? And what is
poverty, sickness, impriso^ment, and such like, but evil only because we
imagine the^ so to be, and not that they are so in their own nature? It was
never or very seldom seen, that passions did arise in us for that which is the
true good of the soul, but only for that which fools do falsely call good,
and Philosophers term the goods of the body, and fortune. No man does so
desire virtue, as that when he has obtained it, he reioiceth excessiuely
therein, nor does any man so fear the obtaining of her, as that the fear
thereof drives the soul from her settled quietness. But since the having of
her is the true happiness of the soul, freeing our minds from all
perturbations, and enduing us with a firm and stable possession; against which,
neither Fortune, slander, death, nor old age can prevail; let us (to return
at last to that from which we have all this while digrest) embrace her as the
Sovereign ruler of our thoughts, who together with the grace and spirit
Divine, is only sufficient to give the soul in this life peace and rest, and
in the life to come immortal glory.

What Virtue is.
Virtue (according to the opinions of Philosophers) is a disposition and power
of the reasonable part of the soul, which brings into order and decency the
unreasonable part thereof, by causing it to propound a convenient end to it
own affections and passions, whereby the soul abides in a comely and decent
habit, executing that which ought to be don, and declining from that which
ought to be shunned. And therefore it is said, that he which has virtue is only
happy, though he be plunged in a thousand miseries: and he that is accompanied
with vice is only unhappy, although he have the wealth of Cresus, the empire
of Cyrus, or the glory of Alexander.

The effects of Virtue.
Virtue may be said to be the haven of the soul, the nurse of piety, the
mother of content, the root of blessedness, the shield against adversity, the
stay in prosperity, the beauty of cities, the glove of kingdoms. The holy
patriarch Abraham, got himself more honor by his virtue of obedience* in
showing himself ready (at the commandment of God) to offer up his only son
Isaac, then by the great victory which he obtained against diverse powerful
kings, in redeeming his brother Lot, when he was taken prisoner Genesis 14.
Joseph was more renown for his continency in withstanding the (...) of
Potiphars wife, then by being made high stuard of king Pharaos house. Genesis 39.
If the power of virtue in these men be so greatly to be admired that knew the
immortal god, and were guided and led forth by his holy spirit* how much more
than may we stand confounded at the example of others, that neither know God
nor the (...) immortality of the soul, and yet prefer the regard of virtue
before al other things in the world, yea before life it self. Anacharsis led
with the love of virtue, left the kingdom of Scithia to his younger brother*
and traveled into Grecia, where he learned Philosophy of Solon: Anaxarchus
chose rather to die, than to be thought so inconstant as to bewray the counsel
that was held against the tyrant Nero. So that virtue at all times and in all
persons, is the most excellent and happy thing that may be.

Why some men regard not virtue.
THere are three principal excuses or pretenses, wherewith some men would fain
color their negligence, in not regarding the study or practice of virtue. The
first, is the difficulty thereof; they say it is a hard and laborious matter to
attain to the knowledge of it, using the same persuasion that the Athenians did
in their proverb: Non licet cuiuis adyre Corynthu^. It Was not for every one to
arrive at Corynth; even so say they, it is not for every one to be a student in
Philosophye, nor stands it with the dexterity of every ones wit, or the
abillitie of his mind, to traffic with so magnificent a prince, as virtue
is, therefore say they, it is better to content our selves in the course of
meaner matters. How absurd a starting hole this is, appears in that, even in
those weak matters which they prefer before the study of virtue, for the
most part, they spend more time and adventure more danger to compass their
desire, then they should have done in any point of the discipline of virtue,
and yet when they have what they would have, it is rather their destruction
then their happiness, their disturbance the^ their quiet: as we see in the end
of riches, how will the covetous man, labor and sweat, spare and pinch
himself, to the intent he may have his bags cramd and his coffers stuffed?
and yet when they are so, his fear is greater to lose them, then his care was
before to get them; nay oftentimes he is constrainde to forgo them, even with
the forfeyture of his life. Even so in honor, the ambitius man will refuse no
pains, think much of no extremity, but be ready to endure the heat of
summer, the cold of winter, to watch, attend, ride and run, in hope to reach
at last the top of preferment: which when he once has got, and thinks to
sleep securelye, some sinister blast or other shakes his tottering state and
hurles him suddenly down into the pit of all disgrace and obloquy. But these
are indifferent things, and in some sort tolerable enough for men to spend
time about them, but in cases altogether condemnable, is it not an usual or
ordinary thing, to see and hear of men that do take more pains to tread the
path that leads to hell, than the godly do to find the way, that guides to
heaven? we need no far fetched examples for the proofs ^^^erof; it is thought
the Guisians before they brought to pass the bloody massacre at Parrisse,
were eight or nine whole year busied and employed in meetings, consultations
and beating their brains about it. Richard the third king of England was almost
twenty years in plotting and complotting bloody and secret murders, to make
the way smooth for him to come unto the diadem. Herodes thoughts were never
quiet, after he heard of the birth of Christ, til the hour of his death, how
he might disstroie and shed his guiltless blood: in less than half which
time he might have learned the grounds of true christianity, and have saved his
own soul. The like we may conclude of al others that think the knowledge of
virtue tedious and hard to attain (the end whereof is happiness and peace) whereas
they are content to spend more time and sweat, under the burden of greater
labor, to attain to those (...) whose end is misery and destruction. The ^color
or pretense whereby men labor to cloak their slacknes in the study of virtue is
poverty we find (say they) by experience, that virtue gives her lovers and
welwillers abundance of knowledge, but very little wealth: plentiful
brains, but very needy and penurious backs: admit it were so, yet let me
ask this question; whether is better the riches that shall never vanishe, or
the riches that daily are subject to casualtie? whether more excellent, the
possession whose fruit is eternal, then the possession, whose profits are
momentarie and ever fading? I think there is no man so void of reason, but
will say the former: but notwithstanding this difference it is manifest that
such carpers and detracters do walk in a very palpable and gross error. For
why, virtue is so far from leaving her friends destitute and contemptible, as
she is the cause continually both of wealth, honor and promotion. Did not
Jacob prosper and grow rich in the service of his Uncle Laban because of his
virtuous disposion? was not Alexander surnamed the great, rather for his
virtues than his victories? And what I pray brought Ester and Mardocheus in
grace and favor with king Ahashueros but their virtues?

The third and last pretenced cavil against the study of virtue, is the
perrils which it bringes men into, by reason it hazardes their lives,
liberties, and welfares: for say they, to reprove men's behauiours whereunto they
are natureally inclinde, or to find fault with their delights, or condemn
their actions (as commonly the virtuous are stirred up to do) is but a means
to make the^ incur hatred, lie open to checkes and tauntes, and be subject to a
perpetual warfare of an infinite number of such like inconveniences. I
answer, that through the malice of the devil and of the world, it is true in
deed, that virtue is many times liable to such afflictions: but withal we must
remember, that as the measure of calamity which insistes upon virtue is great,
so the measure of patience which accompanies her, is likewise great; yea so
great, that it makes those things which seem sour and unpleasant, to have a
most sweet and delectable taste: hence it is, that many virtuous men have
suffered a thousand outrages with such constancy, that tyrants have binsooner
weary in persecuting, than they in suffering: naie they have undergone their
martirdomes with such joy, as in behoulding of them, you would either have
thought they had been sensles, or that in seeing them, you did not see them.
Witness the example of Ignatius, a holy and religious man, who being
condemned and thrown into a cave to be devoured of wild beasts, when he felt
their teeth take hold in his flesh, cried cheerfully out, as if he had felt no
pain, grind small, and make sweet manchet for my God to feed upon To come
nearer home. By. Cranmer Archb. of Cant. (as we read) was a man of that vertous
resolution, that without shrinking, he suffered his right hand to burn off,
with the lingering flame of a torch; and therefore we see, as virtue is subject
to calamity, so is she strong to make a scorn of calamity.

What Vice is.
AS no man can love virtue or any other good thing, before he know the
goodness thereof; no more can we hate vice or any other evil, except we first
understand what it is. Therefore we do here oppose these contraries together, to
the intent, as thereby virtue will appear more excellent; so Vice may be
known to be more loathsome, vile and detestable. Vice is said to be a iarring
or inequality of manners, the true essence of unhappiness, the sickness of the
soul, proceeding from a nautie disposition of the will and affections, to al
corruption of pleasures and unbridled desires, so that in the end we become
most unhappy, yea more wild and sauedge then brute beasts themselves.

The effects of Vice.
BEside, that vice is the mother of all disorder, rancour, murder, contention,
perjury, lust, and such like, it has four other principal and most dangerous
effects. First, it is the deprivation of grace, it robs a man of the favor of
God, and leaves him in the power of the devil: and what it is to be forsaken
of god, appears by the example of saul that slew himself, and Judas that hanged
himself. Secondly, shame in the world, for it leads men blindfold (as the
Prophet did the Aramits 2. king. 6, 20. til it has brought them into the midst
of al infamy, and then it opens their eyes and lets them see their ignorance
and folly.

The third is torment of conscience, which is equal with vice, both for birth
and age, and follows it no other wise than the shadow does the body. For even
at the same instant that wickedness is committed, she frames in and for her
self her own punishment, which begins to afflict and torment her with the
remorse thereof; and this is it, which the Divines call the worm of conscience
that never dies, but continually (like Titius vultur) tyreth upon the heart of
a malefactor, accompanyeng his miserable life with shame, confusion, frightes,
and continual disquietnesse, even to his latest gasp: so that his whole life
is nothing else but a figure of eternal death: as is made apparent unto us by
the example of Nero, who when he had slain his own mother, could never sleep
quietly in his bed, but always thought he saw her follow him and torment
him with firebrandes. We read another strange example to the like effect in our
english Chronicles, of king Richard the second, who having put to death the
Earl of Arundel and other noblemen, (rather for that they reproved his vices,
and sought to bridle his headstrong youth, than for any capital point of
treason) was so troubled afterward with remorse of his bloudye fact, as that
one night he started out of his bed, and being in great agony and passion of
soul, would not be persuaded but that the Earl of Arundell was reuiud and
sought to persecute him, til such time as he had opened his grave, and saw that
his dead body lay there still without a head.

The fourth and last effect of vice and wickedness is infection, for it is not
only noisome and pernicious to him in whom it remains, but it also uses him
as a means to corrupt and spoil others: the proof hereof we see daily, in
that there is not any wicked person, but he will labor to make others like
himself, which it he cannot bring to paste, yet he will think them to be such,
and seek to persuade the world that they are such, or rather worse than he
himself is.

Why men are more prone to Vice then Virtue.
THere are five motives that stir up men rather to consent and follow after
vice than virtue. The first, is the cursednesse of our nature, which like the
earth, unless it be manurde and tilled, will bring forth nothing but weeds and
brambles.

The second, is the disguise which vice puts upon her, blearing men's eyes with
false and fained shows, so that she creepes into them and bewitcheth them,
under the title and cognisaunce of virtue; as when she persuades them and sets
before their eyes the things of this world as their true and only felicity.

The third is authority; some men will be the more audatious and ready to
commerce with Vice, for that they think their high birth or calling may be a
privilege for their lewd behavior: but such men forgette, that to whom more
is given, of him more shall be required, and that the greater shame and scandal
shall redound to such a one, who being borne to command men of all estates and
conditions, and like a Lamp to give light unto them; does notwithstanding
suffer himself to be made seruyle to such vile and abject things, as are
sensuality, ignorance, concupisence, and other like effects wrought and
brought forth by Vice.

The fourth is wealth, which oftentimes makes men dreadlesse to run into
unlawful practices, for that they know they can purchase impunitie, and bear
away the matter with their money: but this proceeds from the corruption of
the age wherein they live, for if there were no bribe-takers, there would be no
bribe-giuers.

The fifth and last, is close conueiance: many think because they can hide
their uncleanness from the eye of the world, and so escape the temporal
pu^nishment, that therefore they are safe, and need not fear to wallow in
their vices: but I would wish the^ to consider, that although their clossets
and secret corners, are hid from the world, yet not only those places; but the
very reins and center of their hearts lies open as noondaie to the sight of
God, who will one day become a sharp censurer of their secret filthiness.

Virtues first issue.
THe first issue that virtue makes, is twofold, Theological and Moral;
Theological, spreads it self into three branches, Faith, hope, and charity.
Morrall into four; Prudence, Temperance fortitude and Justice. And from these
as from so many lively and ever flowing fountains, do issue and proceed
all kind of duties required of us either toward God, toward men, or toward
our selves.

What Duty is.
DVtie is the bond, or obligation of the soul, whereby we are inioind
cheerfully and willingly, without force or constraint, to be to every one that
which we should be, and that which we are borne to be; namely that we should
be holy to God, righteous to the world, and sober to our selves. The
performance of which duty in these several points, makes our life perfect,
and acceptable, but failing in any one of the^, we fail in that for which we
were created, and so consequentlye shall never attain to that end and
sovereign good, for which these duties were appointed, namely eternal
happiness. Therefore it is a fond opinion of those men, that think al is well
with them, when they have well provided for themselves: a further charge is
laid upon them, they must also be careful for others, and labor so far forth
as in them lies for the common good and profitte of all men. For he lives most
orderly and most happily, who as little as may be, lives to himself: and
he most disorderly and most cursedlie that lives only to himself, and has
regard of nothing but his own profit.

The subject of Theological Virtues.
THe subject wherein Theological Virtues abide, are the faithful hearts of
Christians only, for no man can be said to have Faith or Hope in that sense
as the holy ghost prescribes, but such as are ingrafted in the promises of
God, through Christ. The Pagan Philosophers had some slight knowledge of
Charity and the use thereof, in that they had a care to preserve human
society; but to say they had either Faith or Charity after that manner as is
required at our hands, were most absurd, considering they never so much as
dreamt of any Messiah or resurection of the body.

How Pagans may have Faith
FAith is diversely taken, first in the Hebru tongue, it is put for verity
and truth. Secondly in the greek, wherein the Apostles and Evangelists
writ, for persuasion: Thirdlye amongst the Latins, it signifies a constancy
which men observe in their words and promises, of which we will speak
hereafter. Fourthly, according as it is effectual to salvation, the holy
scriptures call it the ground of things which are hoped for, and the evidence
of things which are not seen, Hebru. 11, 1. that is, Faith is an assured
confidence of the accomplishment of gods promises made unto us in Christ Jesus.
As it is thus taken, it has no residence in the breasts of Pagans, but as it
is understood the other three manner of ways, it may be as well in them as
in us.

Two sorts of christian Faith.
THere is first a justifying Faith effectual, and accompanied by good works,
not that good works are the merits or any cause of our salvation; but that they
do necessarily follow faith as the fruits and declaration thereof: for if we
should attribute any part of our salvation to our own merits, then were not
our redemption of the free grace of God, but of desert: as is in the epistle to
the Romans 4. chap. to him that works, the wages is not counted by favor but
by debt. Again, Genesis 3, 10. The works of the Law are under the curse, but
he that believes in the son, has life everlasting. John 3 36. Therefore
faith only justifies, though this faith be necessarily accompanied with good
works.

Secondly, there is another kind of Faith, which only consists in word,
without any desire to express the same in action: as there be many that will
say, they believe in God, and they believe his word, and they tremble at his
judgments; but to be merciful unto their brethren, to relieve the poor, or
help the fatherless or widow, that they either care not for, or think to be
no part of their duty: but this a dead faith, an unprofitable faith, and such
a faith as the devil himself has Ia. 2.17.19.

How Faith is in us.
FAith is in us, neither by nature; for by nature we are the sons of wrath and
destruction: nor by reward, for then might Simon the sorcerer have purchased
it with money. Act. 8.20. Nor by our own industry, for though Paul plant and
Apollo water, it is God that gives the increase 1. Cor 3.6. But by the spirit
and free gift of god, and by the means which he ordains for us to receive
the same gift, which is by the hearing of his word, preached and taught unto
us.

The opposite to Faith.
THat which stands against Faith is infidelity and Atheism, which is of four
sorts: The first is of those me^ that think there is no God at all, but that
the world is gouernd by the course of nature, had never beginning, nor shall
ever have end.

The second is of those, that although they can be persuaded that there is a
God, yet they will not believe that he has any respect to the actions and
course of men's lives.

The third is of such, as believe after a sort there is a God, and that by his
providence all things are governed; but will not be persuaded there is any
judgment or resurrection of the body, after this life.

The fourth and last is of those, that believe there is a god, the creator,
guider and governor of all things, that weighes men's actions, and shall sit in
judgment upon the^ at the general day of resurrection, but yet in their manner
of conversation, through their sins and wickedness, they seem to deny all this:
and such kind of Atheistes may the best Christians be: for there is none that
does good, no not one Psalm. 14.4

What hope is.
HOpe is an affection of the soul, so imprinted in our hearts, that we do not
only certainly expect the fruition of those good things promissed unto us in
the scriptures, but we also patiently abide any extremity of this life with
a settled, constancy and peaceable tranquillity of mind, because at length we
know we shall enjoy them.

Two kinds of Hope.
THe first is, that which is grounded upon the promises of God, which is
always certain and infallible, because he that is the end of such a hope, is
truth it self and never changable.

The second is a vain, doubtful, and deceitful Hope resting upon earthly and
transitory things, and because they are alwais fleeting and ever changing; so
is the Hope that dependes upon them: as we see by experience in the affairs
and enterprises of this world, sometime we hope for one thing, and the clean
contrary happens unto us. A learned Athenian was wont to say, that there
are two things very hurtful unto men, Hope and love, the one lead them on to
seek out means to execute their thoughts, and the other persuaded them of
good success. But as the one proved oftentimes a false guide, so the other
deceiud them with their promised reward.

The fruits of Hope.
HOpe is commended in this, that it steals away our labors, causes fear of
perril to cease gives us comfort in adversity, being in il case promises us
better fortune, abides with them that have no others goods, and (like a
soueraign medicin, or precious balm hourelye applied) preserues man's weak
and crasie life. Alexander the great, when he was to make wars against the
Persians, inquired of his friends that were to follow him, how they were
provided: and finding them but bare and needy, gave unto some great offices;
to some lands and possions; to some Jewels and great somes of money; and to
some the presidentship of rich towns and Cities. And when he was asked of
Perdicas one of his cou^celors, what he reserved for him self: he answered,
Hope: so great a power and force did this conqueror attribute thereunto, that
if he had nothing else in the world, yet by hope he had all things.

The Titles of Hope.
HOpe is said to be a guide to direct us, a prop to strengthen and uphold us,
and a spur to prick us forward with boldness in all our actions; provided
that it be always fixed upon right and equity.

The difference between Faith and Hope.
BY faith we beeleue the certainty of things, but by hope we already enjoy
them. By faith we are well persuaded, but by hope we are well rewarded. Faith is
ever permanent, but hope no sooner has got the thing it hoped for, but
straight way it dies and comes unto an end: as for example, we shall still
believe that Christ is our savior, although we be rapt into heaven and there
reign with him, but we no longer hope for that blessedness, because we then
enjoy it.

The opposite to Hope.
THe opposite to hope is Despair, which is a certain pusillanimity of faintnes
of the heart, utterly drooping and distrusting the success of things, and
therefore wishes rather to lie still and languish than to rise up and prosper.

What Charity is.
CHarity is an affection of the heart, which binds us to love God, because he
has loved us, and to do unto men, as we would be done unto our selves. Of
all virtue it is the most excellent. For love is the fulfilling of the law And
as the apostle says; Though I speak with the tongue of men and angels, and
have not love, I am but as a sounding brass, or a tinckling cimbal. 1. Corint.
13, 1.

How we may be Charitable.
WE may be Charitable four manner of ways, first in pardoning our neighbors
their offenses, secondly in distributing to their wants, thirdly in defending
their wrongs; and fourthly in admonishing them of their errors and ignorances.

In whom Charity is.
Charity remains not in such, as are envious, proud, ambitious, or churlish;
but in such as are meek, gentle, patient and long suffering: and these and such
like are the fruits and effects of Charity. We read of a Philosopher,
called Heraclitus, who although he were a heathen and knew not the true God,
yet he had so great an instinct of Christian Charity in him, as it is said of
him, that all his whole life he did no thing but weep and pour forth floods of
tears, in compassion of men's follies and miseries. The life of our savior
Christ (as writ the holy Fathers) consisted of two things, in passion and
compassion; either in suffering for us, or in suffering with us.

The opposite to Charity.
THat which stands against the effect and power of Charity, is obduracy or
hardness of heart, which is a kind of vicious quallitie, that shuts up our
eyes from relenting, our hands from giving, and our minds from pittieng: but
our saviors council is otherewise; give to him that asks, and from him that
would borrow, turn not away thy face.

A second issue of Virtue.
To the aforesaid Virtues there are belonging or depending other virtues also;
as namely Religion, Devotion, Contemplation, Zeal, Indignation, Prayer,
Repentance and such like.

What Religion is.
TO describe Religion, according to the properties thereof: First, we may call
it Religion, of reelection; because where by our sins we had lost Gods
favor, by Religion we were chosen and brought into grace again: Secondly, we
may call it religion, of relection, that is of reading over: because he that
will be religious must often read and study over the Scriptures: Thirdly, we
may call it religion, of reliction; that is, of leaving of our wickedness and
our own ways, and cleaving to God and his ways: lastly, we may call it
religion, of religation, that is, because it binds us again unto god, from
whom we were separated: so that of these perticulers, we may conclude this
geneneral, that religion is the Virtue, wherein consists the service of God
and the salvation of our souls.

What Devotion is.
Devotion is a word derived from the Latin Deuoueo, which signifies to vow
or addict ones self, to some thing which we know to be good, and therefore
the heart of man, after it once has had a taste of religion, and the sweetness
thereof, deuotes it self wholly to the act and exercise of godliness, which is
the fruit of religion; so that devotion may be called a heavenly disposition
of the will, enclining to all such things with great affection and
earnestness, as appertain to the service of almighty God.

The Properties of Douotion.
Devotion according to the excellent effects that proceed from it, may be
compared unto three things: First to a blast of fresh air, because as the
wholesome air refreshes man's body, so the spirit of God by devotion,
refreshes and comfort our souls.

Secondly, it may be compared to a precious ointment: For as a precious balm
or ointment, suppleth and mollefieth the joints of man's body, making the^
nimble for performance of any action, even so devotion viuifieth and quickneth
the powers of the soul, enduing them with that quicknes and agillitie, as that
they may easily tread down and run over the difficulties and drowzinesse of
the flesh, to follow virtue, and the works of the spirit.

Thirdly, it may be compared to an oderiferous perfume; For like as a perfume,
kills the stenches or il savors in a house or lodging, so as they cannot be
perceived; even so devotion so long as it abides in the heart, spreads abroad
such sweet and oderiferous fumigations, as that the noisome and stinking
appetite of our evil desires, can not be so much as perceived or felt.

What Comtemplation is.
AFter that by continual custom, devotion becomes a habit, it bringes forth
another excellent virtue called conte^platio^; which is a rest of the soul and
spirit in the consideration and beholding of all Gods favors and mercies: so
that night and day it meditateth thereon, as a thing wherein consists all
delight and true happiness, and from this proceeds also thanksgiving, zeal,
and indignation.

What Zeal is.
AS upon the consideration of gods favors and our own unworthiness, we are
moved to give him thanks: so from the same head, springs anoother duty, which
is a care joined with a kind of disdain or just displeasure if at any time,
we shall chance to see him dishonored or irreverently used by his creatures;
because we intirelye love him and hold him dear unto us: and this affection or
good motion of the soul is called zeal: provided always, that it proceed not
of ignorance This made the good servants of God (that were otherwise very
meek, gentle, and patient, in any indignities offered to themselves) to become
impatient and full of anger, showing invincible courage and implacable minds,
till they had reue^ged the injuries done unto their God. As appears by the
example of Moses, who descending from the mount, and finding the people of
Israel worshipping a Caulfe, threw the two tables of stone wherein the Law
was written, and brake them all into pieces, and yet being not so satisfied,
ground the image into powder, made them drink it, and then commanded the
Levites to gird them with their swords and to go thorough the host, and slay
every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his
neighbor, insomuch as there fell that day of the people, above three
thousand. Exodus 32.

What Indignation is:
INdignation, is a grief wrought in our minds, when we see some good befall
an unworthy person, and he that is worthy to be deprived thereof: As when we
see the honor that is due unto God, attributed unto men, Idols, or any other
thing: or in humane affairs; when we see men of no desert advanced to
worship and dignity, and the virtuous kept back, left destitute and
despised. This virtue of indignation has some resemblaunce with the former of
zeal, but that zeal takes his beginning from some evil that befalls a worthy
person; and indignation arises from some good which befalls an unworthy person.
Beside, indignation is not altogether so forceable as zeal, nor does so soon
break forth into redress or ease of it own wrongs, but rather smothereth
discontent, and flies to prayer rather than to violent pursuit.

What prayer is.
Prayer, is a talk or conference with God, either in mind submissiuelie, or in
word more openly; whereby we lift up our hearts, our eyes and hands, unto him
for his help and mercy, either for our selves or others, in the time of
calamity, want, or affliction.

Why our prayers many times are not heard.
THere are six reasons why we pray many times and are not heard: first
because we are not in Charity, when we pray.

Secondly, because we pray not with a full hope and assured faith to obtain
that which we pray for, but are wavering or doubtful of Gods mercy and
loving kindness toward us. Ia. 1.

Thirdly, because we do not pray in the name of Jesus Christ, without whose
intercession nothing is acceptable in Gods sight, and through whom the father
will give us whatsoever we ask. Io. 16.

Fourthly, because we pray more to satisfy our own lusts, than to glorify
God: more for temporal things, than spiritual things.

Fiftlie because we use much babbling, as though God did not know what we stand
in need of, except we set forth our defects, with an elaborat and rhetorical
kind of oration: and because we pray not continually, but use our inuocations
by starts.

Sixthly, because we are not so fervent as we should be, nor so attentive to the
matter we have in hand; but suffer our thoughts to wander hither and thither
whilst our tongues speak unto God*

The efficacy of Prayer.
FIrst it is as swift as thought, because it is no sooner conceiud in mind, but
it is as soon receiud of God.

Secondly, it is as pearcing as the sharpest steel, for that it is no sooner
vtterred in the servency of spirit, but it straight way makes passage through
the clouds and firmament, even to the presence of god.

Thirdly; it is the greatest and chiefest point of Charity that may be used,
for that at one instant by prayer we may show our selves helpful to many
thousands, yea to the whole world, whereas by our bounty we can be
beneficial but unto few.

Fourthly, it is more victorious then the mightiest host of men, or the
gretest conqueror of the world; in that (with reverence be it spoken) it does
as it were overcome God himself, who overcomes all things, and at whose beck
heaven and earth shake: as appears by the example of Moses. Ex. 32.10, 14*
Likewise in Eliah, we may read the great force and efficacy of prayer, who
prayed that it might not rain, and it rained not for three years and six
months. And again, when he prayed, the heavens poured forth their shewers,
1. King. 17, 1: and chap. 18, 45.

At the prayer of Joshua the Sun and Moon stood still: and at the prayer of
Hezechias, the shadow of the Dyall went back ten degrees. 2. king. 20, 10:

What Repentance is.
AS by faith we are stirred up to believe Gods word, to depend upon his
promises, acknowledge his graces, and to be zealous in his service: even so,
when by sin or the frailetie of our nature, we fall from any of these duties,
to work our reconciliation, we must lay hold upon true repentance; which is
a conversion or turning again unto God. In which conversion we depart from
eulll, believe the promise of forgiveness of sins, and study to lead a new
life, according to the Laws of God: whereupon there follows these three good
effects. The first is a cleansing or deliverance from sin, by the blood of
Jesus Christ. 1. John 17

The second, is the imputation of the righteousness of Christ, when as his
obedience, truth and innocence, by faith is made ours. Romans 5.

The third, is the acceptance into ever lasting life, for whom the Lord
justifies, them also he glorifieth. Romans 8 But as true repentance is never
without faith; so is it likewise at all times accompanied with good works.

What good works we ought to do.
INsomuch as the lord pronounces he is worshipped in vain with the
commandments of men; therefore we must practice and do such good works, as
are prescribed unto us in the word of God, Ezec. 20. because many things may
seem good in our eyes, that are abominable in the sight of God.

How good works are to be done.
AFter that a godly and religious man has found out what works are to be
don, forthwith he addresseth himself to understand in what sort they are to
be done: for resolution of which question, that one place in the Epistle to the
Heb. 11, 6. may be sufficient, where it is said, That without faith it is
impossible to please god: so that the distribution of our good works, must
always be accompanied with faith in Christ Jesus. For neither love nor
obedience can be acceptable, except mercy and reconciliation for the mediators
sake be first apprehended. By this are excluded the good works of the wicked
and unbelievers, in that howsoever they seem beautiful and beneficial to the
world; yet god has no reguard of their deeds: insomuch as they are not
presented unto him in the obedience and perfection of christ's merits. As in
the example of Scipio, and David: they both fought for their country; Scipio
fought, and David also fought, and yet their warfare was not to be accounted
of alyke: For the warfare of Scipio did not plese God, because he was not
regenerate, but the wars and labor of David did please God, because he was
accepted by faith.

The causes of good Workers.
THe causes that stir up men's minds and prick them forward to work well, may
be said to be three; The first is the necessitye of Gods commandment, keep
my statutes (says he) and walk therein. Le. 18.4. Which necessity of good
works or walking in Gods commandment, stretches it self into four other
branches, that is to say, necessity of debt: we must do good deeds, because
they are a debt which God requires at our hands. To. 8.

The second is necessity of faith: he that provides not for his own, and
namely for them of his household denies the faith, and is worse than an
infidel. 1. Ty. 5.8.

The third is the necessity of avoiding punnishment, for unless we decline
from inequity and perform the duty of good Christians, the Lord will plague
and punnish us: he that knows his masters will and prepares not himself to
do thereafter, shall be beaten with many stripes. Mat. 12.47.

The fourth is the necessity of conversion: because the Lord has said, I
desire not the death of the wicked but that he turn from his way and live,
Ezech. 33.11. Therefore by necessity we are bound to fly from sin and do
good, or else we shall never be converted to the Lord, nor the Lord to us.

The second cause of good works.
THe second cause that may stir us up to good works, is the dignity which
we receive thereby; being regenerate by faith, and faith working in us to
Godliness and all manner of Christian-like exercises, we are made holy, as
our heavenly father is holy, I Pet. 1, 16. Our bodies become the temples of
the holy Ghost, and of god himself to dwell in us: and what honnour, joy and
comfort that is, may be imagined by the honor and joy that a private subject
receives, when his prince and Soueraign does vouchsafe to come and lodge with
him in his house. Therefore they that pollute this temple with the filthiness
of Satan, so that the holy ghost is either not admitted, or being admitted, is
churlish lie cast out of his dwelling again, let them imagine what an act of
cruelty they commit.

The third cause of good works.
THe third cause that may move us to obedience toward god, in the performance
of our duties both toward him and the world, is the reward and recompense which
he has promissed shall succeed and redound unto us by our good works; not for
their own worthynesse but for the promise of his grace, which promise does
assure us not only of all good in this life present, but also in the life to
come. I Tymo. 4. So that if neither the necessity nor dignity of good works
may induce us to embrace them, yet for the profit and commodity that comes by
them, let us not neglect them. The Souldior reguardes not wounds so he may be
conqueror: nor the Merchant the perils of the Sea, so he may grow wealthy,
let it not be said that they have greater Zeal and Fortitude in seeking after
shadows, than the Children of God in purchasing the substance.

The Second branch of Virtues first issue.
THe second branch of Virtues first issue, are these four most beautiful
and gracious ofsprings, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice: Which are
called Cardinal virtues, for that al other Moral virtues (as upon hindges)
do hang and depend upon these. These are the guides of the soul, whereby all
civil duties, either of man toward man, or of man toward himself, and
consequently of both to the glory of God, are directed in the way of truth
and equity.

The subject of Cardinal Virtues.
THe subjects wherein these Cardinal Virtues do remain, are the reformed
and docible minds, not only of Christians, but also of Pagans: nay oftentimes
the efficacy and strength of these virtues, do more clearelie shine and
appear in Pagans than in Christians. What Christian is so absolute that may
not learn precepts of wisdom, out of the books of Aristotle, Plato, and
diverse other heathen Philosophers? And so consequently of all the rest of the
Virtues.

What Prudence is.
PRudence is the light of understanding, whereby we know God and affect his
works, to which knowledge is joined a discretion, to be able to discern good
from bad, profitable from that which is hurtful, to the end we may shun the
one and practice the other: it is to the mind as sight (of all other corporal
sense) is to the body; for as the sight is most peircing, clear and
apprehensiue, so is prudence, by whose determinate and deep judgment, all
other virtues are gouernd in their good and commendable operations.

Why God gave Prudence unto man.
COnsidering that men's thoughts are wavering and their inventions unstable: and
considering that the wild affections of man's nature do rather opresse then
comfort, seduce then conduct the soul to that end for which she is created,
namely to the knowledge of God and his creatures: therefore has the almighty
(of his free grace and mercy) to lighten this darkness, and remove this
danger, let fall a spark of his eternal light (which is wisdom) whereby men
see to govern their actions, to the glory of god, their own good and the
profit of humane societiy.

How this wisdom appears.
TO be known to have wisdom will appear two manner of ways: first inwardly
by the dexterity of the mind, and decent carriage of the body, whereby such as
are so disposd, are said to be men of a good presence, or men of a fair
behauior. Secondly, it will appear outwardly in things belonging to ourselves,
as sobriety of diet, or in things belonging to others, as in comely
entertainment, well gouerninge of our house and family, and such like.

The difference between wit and Wisdom.
AS a tuneable Instrumente, in the hand of a an unskillful musition, so is
wit to many men, in it self very ripe and pregnant; but because they know
not how to use it, therefore it sta^ds them in little stead: so that we may
define wit to be a faculty of the mind, whereby men understand and know much
good, but oftentimes they neglect to follow it: but wisdom we may term to
be that correspondencie of the powers of the soul, when will and
understanding, knowledge and practice go together.

Why wisdom is said to be the light of the mind.
Wisdom is said to be the light of the mind, because as the body has two
instruments to direct it, which are the two eyes; even so Prudence to give both
mind and body better direction, is likewise said to have three eyes: The
first is the eye of memory, with which she beholds time past: The second, is
the eye of understanding, with which she beholds time present: And the third
the eye of providence, by which she takes a view of things to come.

Two sorts of Prudence.
THe first kind of Prudence, may be said to be that ripnesse of knowledge and
experience which men have in worldly matters, and so Machevile may be said to
be a wiseman, but such wisdom is accounted foolishness before God. 1, Cor. 3,
19. And in the end intangles the owners in their own craftiness, as appears
by the desperate end of Achitophell. 2. Sam. 17.23.

The second kind of Prudence, is that knowledge, which is had in divine
matters, touching the understanding of Gods word, and the mystery of our
salvation, which is called true wisdom; and though the drift hereof
especially tend unto that end, yet is it not without a sharp insight also, and
an able discretion in such things as appertains unto this world: but it uses
this, but as a servant, or handmaid to the other. And this is that wisdom
which Solomon so greatly commends, and so largely beautifies and sets forth
in his book of proverbs, accounting all other knowledge, but as vanity in
respect of this. When petition was made to the oracle of Apollo, to know what
people or nation in the wolrd was the wisest and best learned, the answer was
yt the Hebrews were the wisest me^, for that they had the knowledge of the true
God, and so had not the rest.

The daughters of prudence or Virtues third issue.
THough we may well say, that all other virtues take their beginning from
Prudence, as the head and fountain of the rest, without which they are
altogether unprofitable, yet for the better understanding of her gracious
effects which she brings forth in the hearts of men, it shall not be amiss
to consider that from her do spring and proceed these five peculier virtues:
namely consultation, vigilance, dillygence, providence, and constancy: all
which are made manifest unto us, in that one example of the five wise Virgins
recorded in the 25 Chapter of the Gospel after S. Matthew. First, they had
consultation in preparing and providing themselves to meet the bridegroom:
Secondly, they had prouydence in regarding the length of time, and so
furnishing themselves accordingly with oil: Thirdly, they had vigila^cie, in
watching for the hour of the bridgromes coming: Fourthly, they were
dilligent, in triming their lamps: lastly they were constant, in that, though
they waited long, yet they were not weary of their labor. So that by these
necessary and helpful effects which follow wisedo^e, we may gather other
unnecessary and hurtful accedents which it may run into, if not ruled and
tempered as it should be.

The maimes to Prudence.
THere are three special evils which wisdom may endanger it self with all,
if it be not carefully looked unto: The first, is temerity or rashness when it
either gives council, or puts in execution any thing before mature and
serious consultation be had: or when upon a sudden determination, it concludes
upon things unknown, for known; uncertain, for certain.

The second is credulity, when it ouerlightly believes or gives credit to
any thing it hears, and does not first examine the circumstances of every
matter; nor confer and lay them together, that so the truth may by sifted out.

The third is curositie, which appears two manner of ways: First, when we pry
into things forbidden, or covet to know more than God has thought good to
reveal unto us. As Aristotle, that died for grief, because he could not find
the natural cause why the sea did ebb and flow: or of those men that now a
days by their curious questions, strive to know what god did before he made
the world, or why he gave not man such a soul as might not sin, with a number
such like impious and unlawful demaundes. And secondly, when we seek to be
renowned, in showing and expressing what power of wisdom we have in triflles
and things of no moment, as he that spent much time and labor, in making a
lock and a chain of three and forty linckes, that was in weight no more but
one grain or wheat corn: so that it being tied about the neck of a fly, she
was able to draw it after her. Anno Regno Elisa. 21.

The opposites to Prudence.
Every virtue holds the myddle between two extremes, so that on the one
side prudence is beset with ignorance, and on the other with craft or
subtletie. And as the one is vicious in respect of the defect, so the other is
odious in respect of the excess; the one is so far from knowledge, as it
knows nothing, or very little, and the other is so fraught with skill and
experience, as it turns the use thereof to many most vile and ungracious
purposes.

What ignorance is.
WE may call Ignorance, an unskillfulness both in human and divine matters, what
we have to do, or what we have to leave undone: what we have to choose and
make much of, or what we ought to reject and avoid.

The effects of Ignorance.
IT takes away the sight of the mind, as blindness does the sight of the
body: it makes a man prodigal when he should be liberal: covetous when he
thinks to avoid superfluity: if a man be mean, it makes him fearful,
superstitious, unprofitable, needy, slothful, and unfit for any thing. If he
be mighty, it makes him arrogant, rash, cruel, talkatiue, inconstant, and
given to voluptuousness and lust. It is the spring of all errors, bad
opinions, and absurd behauiors: and as by wisdom men are renowned and had in
reputation; so by ignorance, they become base, contemptible, and of no
reckoning. Yet it is better than subtletie, because that which is misdoone
through ignorance, is more excuseable, tha^ that which is misdoon willingly and
against the conscience.

What subtletie is.
SVbtletie is a vicious quality of the mind, whereby we dispose the power of
wisdom to bad purposes; as to deceive, beguile, seduce and entrap others,
thereby to delighte or enrich our selves. The author thereof is the Devil, and
the companions that attend upon it, Hypocrisy and dissimulation; but the reward
it shall receive, is hate and suspicion amongst men, and before God perpetual
reiection. One Nestorius (as we read in histories) was so subtle, and so full
of hypocrisy and dissimulation, as in the end for a just punishment, his
tongue was eaten out of his head with worms. Dyonisius the tyrant, would
cunningly smoth and lay sweet baits, till he had caughte such as he would
have within his power, and then like the Crocodile he would devour them; but
in the end he was thrust from his throne and dyadem. So that we see by these
and the like events, that the issues of virtue are of that consanguinitie, so
linkt and affied together, as they cannot one be without another. For as no
man can be perfectly temperat, unless he have wisdom to direct and govern
his appetite, to know when, how, and wherein to be temperate: so in like manner,
no man can be perfectly wise, without temperance, which serves as an vmpire or
moderator to keep our knowledge within rule, and the bounds and limits which
are appointed for it. Therefore it follows that we speak next of
temperance.

What Temperance is.
TEmperance is that virtue of the soul, whereby the appetite and unruly
affections of man's nature are kept in awe and government; so that the eye lusts
not, the tongue offends not, the hand breaks not forth into unlawful actions,
nor any part of the whole body straies beyond that duty required to the honor
of god, and the good of our neighbor: this virtue is so necessary, that like
as a cunning Pylot in a ship, so she sits in the frail vessel of man's body,
that but for her guidance, would either be dashed in pieces against the rocks
of affliction, or sinck in the sands of a thousand temptations.

The opinions of Philosophers concerning Temperance,
AGapetus a Learned man, writing to Justinian the Emperor (who was a very
temperate and well gouernde Prince) told him he was the inheritor of a double
crown; the one was the crown of regalty, whereby he did command over men,
the other was the crown of temperance, whereby he did reign over his own
affections.

Socrates was of opinion, that nothing did preserve the soul in her perfect
essence, nor lift her up if at any time she chanced to fall through vice and
impiety, so well as temporance.

Plato testifies, that temporance is the mutual consent of the affections,
whereby the soul lives in perpetual harmony.

Cicero, accounted it the pathe that leads unto al decency and comlines, both
in word and deed.

To what Temperance may be compared.
TEmperance, acording to the worthy effects that proceed from her may be
compared to these six things: First, it may be compared to the sun; because
as the sun dries up the foggie and mistie vapors of the earth, even so
temprance drives away the darkness and filthy euaporations of the soul, that
otherwise would choke it, and gives it the comfortable light of reason,
whereby it is refreshed.

Secondly, it is compared to a bridle, that as a bridle restrains the
headstrong wilfulness of an untamed horse: even so temperance in the midst of
pleasures and temptations, holds us back, and compels us to follow
reason.

Thirdly, it is compared to a sharp rasor; because like unto a rasor, it
cutteth and loppeth away the superfluity of corrupt desires.

Fourthly, it is compared to a shield or helmet, because as these twain keep
off and defend the violence of our enemies weapons: even so temperance is a
bulwark or defense, against the sharp darts of luxuriousnes.

Fiftlye, it is compared to a tutor or corrigidor, because with like authority
as they command over their pupils, or charge committed unto them, even so does
she check and bear swaie over immoderate passions. Sixtlie, it is compared to
a bond orchaine; wherewith things are bound up and kept close together, and
thereby made of the greater force and pre-eminence: even so by temperance, all
other virtues are coupled and knit together into an invincible strength and
power, which otherwise lose that vigor and efficacy. As we see in fortitude,
he that is of an high and courageous spirit, and wants temporance to rule and
govern it, runs many times into intolerable mischiefs. Likewise in
Justice: he that would be esteemed as a just man, and is not able (through the
help of temperanee) to keep his soul free from perturbations, will sooner
commit wrong, than patronage or propulse injury.

The objects of Temporance.
THe objects whereabout this virtue is busied, and wherein she shows her
power and authority, are many in number, but especially these: the desire of
honor, riches, promotion, fame, dignity: the passions of the mind, as joy,
grief, fear, compassion, anger, hate, envy, and such like: the bayts of
love, beutie, gorgeous attire, sumtuous buildings, dainty dishes, wine, music,
gaming, and all other delights and pleasures: But here is to be understood
that we do not set down temprance, as binding her to that strict observation,
as that we would have her deprived of pleasures, but our meaning is, that she
should so use them, as that thereby follow no inconvenience or abuse.

The daughters of Temperance, or virtues fourth issue.
THere are six other stems or plants that draw sap and nutriment from this
root of Temperance; that is to say: Continency, Clemency, Modesty, Sobriety,
Frugalitie and order. All which, like true ofsprings of so gracious a stock,
help to beautify the parentage from whence they are derived:

What Continency is.
COntinency is that part of tempra^ce whereby concupiscence and desire are
governed by council and reason: This virtue did shine most clear in Scipio,
who at the winning of Carthage, having taken a very beautiful Lady prisoner,
was so far ftom being amorous, as he sent her away with a great dowry, to
him unto whom she was betrothed.

What Clemency is.
CLemency is that part of temporance, whereby (the minds of men rashly
carried away with hatred of any one, or with desire to hurt) are kept back
and restrained by gentleness. Adrianus before he was made Emperor, enuieng a
Roman for some displeasure which he had conceived against him ye same day he
was elected, meeting his enemy in the street, said to him aloude, Euasisti,
meaning that he being now a prince, might in no wise revenge an injury.

What Modesty is.
Modesty, is that power of the mind whereby honest shame and bashfulnesse,
purchase good and deserved honor. And because shame is the foundation of
modesty, it shall not be amiss to speak somewhat thereof.

What Shame is.
WE may define Shame to be a kind of modest fear, whereby we dread the
danger of dishonor or reproof likely to happen us, by some indecent or
enormous action: or an indignation conceived against our selves, after the
commiting of any dishonest crime, prolocution of any foolish and absurd word,
or the expressing of any uncivil or rude gesture.

Two kinds of Shame.
THe first is a good shame, whereby we are ashamed of evil. The second is a
bad shame, whereby we are (under color of modesty) restrained from
performance of some good and laudable action, because (against right and
equity) we fear to displease a multitude, or dare not withstand the
authority of him that is mighty. As Pylate, that feign would have pronounced
our Savior guiltless, and yet because he feared the people, gave sentence
upon him against his own conscience.

Rules of good shame.
IF at a feast thou be invited, to drink more than reason or thirst requires,
be not ashamed to refuse it.

If a babbler or ignorant fellow, seek to stay thee by discoursing of vain and
tedious matters, be not ashamed to shake him off.

If thy friend or any man else, either in act or purpose offend, be not
ashamed to reprove him.

If any man make a request unto thee that is either unlawful, or not in thy
power to perform, shame not to deny him.

If any man ask thee a question wherein thou art ignorant, shame not to
confess thine ignorance, that thou may be instructed.

If any man withhold thy due, shame not to challenge it.

Effects of bad shame.
THese are the effects of bad shame. Cowardlines, Impudency, liberty to sin,
base Flattery, oppression, neglect of benefit, betraying of ones self, hate
of the world, and prostitution of the senses.

What Sobriety is.
Sobriety is properly called a moderation in diet: a thing so esteemed of
wise men, as Augustus the Emperor, never used to sit down to meat before
others had half dined, and was the first again that rose from the table.
Pythagoras seldom or never drunk wine. Socrates would alwais spil the first
pitcher of water yt he drue for himself, to this end (as he said) that he
might acquaint his sensual appetite to expect a convenient time of reason.

What Frugalitie is.
FRugalitie, may be said to be a moderation in expenses, under which title,
many have been so sparing and near themselves, as they have incurd great
shame and infamye. As Jews the eleventh king of France, who was of such a
niggardly and pinching disposition, as after his death, there was found in his
chamber of accountes, a bill of expenses, wherein was set down twenty souse,
for two new sleeves to his old doublet, and fifteen deniers for grease to
grease his boots.

What Order is.
ORder is a convenient disposition of all things (according to their worth and
dignity) into that place, and at that time as shall seem most requisite. The
world is called Mundus, which signifies a well disposed order of all things:
by beholding of which, we may learn to keep our body (which is a little
world) in upright and eeuen manner, without confusion.

The opposites to Temperance.
Upon the right hand it is accompanied with intemperance, and upon the left,
with Stupiditie: which are as two blind guides, and look unto which soever of
them temperance gives consent to follow, she straightway loses the name and
title of Virtue, and is branded with the stamp of Vice.

What Intemperance is.
INtemperance, is an ouerflowing of voluptuousness against reason, and the
health of the soul, seeking no other contentation than in that thing which
brings delight and pleasure to the senses; as appears by the example of
Vitellius Emperor of Rome, who had served in to his table at one supper, two
thousand several kind of fishes, and seven thousand sorts of feathered
fowls: or of Phyloxenus, who wished that he had a neck as long as a Crane,
that the taste and pleasure of his meats and drinks, might continue long,
before they descended into the stomach.

How we may be intemperate.
WE may be intemperate four manner of ways. First, in apparel, when we
either covet that which is too costly, or to have more store than is
sufficient, so that the moathes rather consume it with eating than we with
wearing.

Secondly, in meat and drink, when we are lavish and superfluous, or over nice
and curious. Thirdly, in veneriall and other corporal pleasures, whether
tasted of by the eye, the ear, the heart, hand, or any other part: and fourthly
in giving way to our passions, as joy, fear, anger, etc. without stop or
controulment.

What Stupiditie is.
STupiditie, is a numnesse or chillness of the senses, so that we neither have
feeling of any pleasure, nor are moved with any desire; but this is a defecte
hardly or never seen amongst men (especially having health of body) and
therefore we will pass it over, and come to Fortitude, the third branch of
Virtues first issue.

Whence Fortitude has her denomination.
THis virtue of Fortitude, takes her denomination neither from strength of
body, hugeness of limbs, toughness of armor, walled towns, multitude of
soldiers, nor any other munification of place or advantage of time; but from
the generositie and greatness of courage, which like a holy and spiritual
fire lives in the heart, and from thence sendes heat and vigor through the
whole body, enabling it for the execution of difficult and mighty deeds.

Why it is annexed to man's nature.
THe seeds of all virtues are originally adjoined and fixed to ma^s nature, but
by reason of the degrees of growth which the body has they cannot show
themselves in any perfection, before they be advanced and set forward by the
help of Time, labor, and instruction; so that Fortitude is annexed to man's
nature for 3. especial causes. First, that as his Creator (after whose image
he is fourmed and made) daily expresses and shows forth wonderful works
for the benefit of his creatures; so is he born to draw near unto him in
similitude of goodness, and might have in his soul a kind of natural
instigation, to prick him forward by all lawdable, high and laborious actions,
to profit those amongst whom he lives.

Secondly, that knowing the excellency of his own nature, and the stock from
whence he is derived, he might not care for mortal goods, nor fear the
contrary; but think himself worthy of eternal happiness, and be provoked
with great courage to desire the same.

Thirdly, that he might fear to degenerate from so high and noble a lignage,
by committing any base or ignoble deed, unbeseeming the excellency thereof.

What Fortitude is.
FOrtitude, is a firm stability and resolution of mind, whereby neither for
fear of death it self, nor any other inconvenience that may befall us, we
turn aside from the way of Virtue and Justice; but after good consideration
had, remain steadfast and immovable (against all the world) in our thoughts
and purposes.

Two sorts of Fortitude.
THe first is employed in the compasing and perfourmaunce of great deeds, for
the love of virtue: and the other, in suffering for the same with an invincible
and undaunted courage, any wrong, affliction, torment or extremity whatsoever.
For the first, we have the example of king David, who shrunk not back from
the encounter either of men or monsters, for the establishing of Gods glory:
and for the second, the examples of the prophets and Apostles, that
(notwithstanding their wrongs and great reproaches) spared not to seal the
profession of gods holy religion, with the effusion of their bloods.

The properties of Fortitude.
BEside many other good properties and inclinations that follow this virtue,
we may reckon these five in special: first, it is free from all fear of
death. Secondly, it is constant in all adversities. Thirdly it so hates and
detestes the doing of evil, as it will study to do good unto it enemies.
Fourthlie, as it strives to have dominion over external things, so it accounts
it most base, not to be able to rule the internal passions of the mind.
Fifthly, it never fights or contends, suffers or indures for any thing, but
that which is just and honest; so that neither they that suffer for
wickedness or unjust matters, nor they that fight for their private
commoditye, or to satisfy their own unbridled fury, are to be accounted
valiant men.

The objects of Fortitude.
THe objects of Fortitude are passions to master them, injuries to suppress
them, prosperity not to be lifted up with pride; adversity, not to be cast
down with despair: enemies, to be made more dilligent to look unto our
behavior: losses, to overcome them with patience: death to contemn it, because
it bringes immortallitie, and a number such like.

The daughters to Fortitude or virtues fifth issue.
AS the rest, so this virtue of Fortitude is not barren of increase, but from
her teeming womb sends forth these goodly ympes of grace and honor:
Magnificence, Confidence, patience, Compassion, and perseverance.

What magnificence is:
MAgnificence is an elevation of the soul, whereby it is not content with
every mean dewtie, but seeks to compass and bring to pass things that are
most rare and excellent. As Alexander, that thought it too mean a point of
fortitude and valor, to over come Darius in battle, unless he also
vanquished him in the virtues of the mind; and therefore he used his wife and
children with all bounty and humanity, after he had taken them prisoners.
Augustus, held it not sufficient valor, to omit the taking of revenge upon a
fellow that sought all means possible to murder him, but advanced him
likewise unto a chief place of dignity under him. Hannibal esteemed his
passing over the Alps, and al his other labors and victories nothing, unless
he conquered Rome, that then held her self queen and mistress of the world.

What Confidence is.
COnfidence is a conceit or hope which the mind has of prosperous success,
how dangerous or desperate soever things appear to be. Richard the first king
of England, going to war with diverse other Christian Princes, against the
Turks and Sarazens, and being in Palestine when a quarrel arose between him
and the king of France, insomuch as not only he, but all the rest forsook
Richard, and departed with their powers homeward: yet king Richard,
notwithstanding he was left alone, his army small and the number of his foes
almost ininnumerable, was of that confident spirit as he proceeded against his
ennemies, and drove them out of Jerusalem and the holy land.

What Patience is,
PAtience, is a voluntary and continual suffering for the love of virtue and
honesty: and therefore whatsoever happens, a wise man by this virtue is
prepared to digest and turn it to the best. Socrates being councelled to
revenge a wrong received; answered, What if a Mastie had bitte me, or an Ass
had struck me, would ye have me go to law with them? Esteeming no more of the
despights offered unto him of men, then if they had bin done of brute beasts.

What Compassion is.
COmpassion is a like sense or feeling of evil or grief, as if we our selves
suffered that which we see others endure by reason of that conjunction which
ought to be of one with another as members of one and the same body: and
therefore it is requisite this virtue should be in a valliant man, that when he
sees injury offered unto any one, he should be moved with the violence
thereof, no otherwise then if it were offered unto himself. Marcellus, after
he had conquered Syracusa, not without great slaughter of many people, mounted
up an high tower of the castle, and with many tears lamented the rufull and
tragical fall of the city, feeling in himself (as it were) a fellow
sufferance of their grievous misery.

What perseverance is.
Perseverance, is that part of Fortitude, when a man does firmly and
steadfastly abide in his resolution and purpose, undertaken with good
consideration and advise. Zeno having resolved to keep silence whatsoever the
king of Ciprus did demand of him, and being persecuted with torments for the
same purpose, least he should be found not to persevere in his intent, bit off
his tongue, and spit it in the torme^ters face.

The opposites to Fortitude.
THe opposits to fortitude, seeking to dim her glory with their dusky presence,
are Cowardlines, and wilful presumption.

What Cowardlines is.
COwardlynes is a base kind of fear, void both of reason and assurance, causing
a man through the want of sense and understanding, that he can neither be
profitable to himself, nor the common wealth, but remains as the shaddowe of
a man cast down and astonnished with dangers, or the report of every idle
dream and vision. As Mydas K. of Phrigia, who being troubled with the terror
of a certain dream, drank poison and killed himself. Or as the Gentleman of
Padua, that Speron talks of in his dialogues, who being cast into prison
upon some accusation, when it was told him ouernight that he should lose his
head the next morning, conceived such an impression of fear in his heart, that
his hair which before was black, that same night altered and became gray.

Two sorts of Fear.
THe one good, when we stand more in awe of blame, reproach, and dishonor,
then of death or grief. The other bad; which is likewise of 2. sorts. The
first, makes the soul dead and void of every good effect, as is before
declared. The second is that, which works in the wicked a horror of pain
and punnishment, whereby they are brideled and restrained from their villainies,
and as the first is a sign of an abject and contemtible nature; so this
argues a corrupt and wicked disposition.

What wilful presumption is.
Wilful presumption, is a kind of audacious boldness, when a man without
necessary constraint, or for every frivolous matter, casts himself into
certain and undoubted danger. As I have read of an Italian lover, who walking
with his lady by a river side, and making great protestations what he would
do for her sake, she to prove him, badde him leap into the River, which no
sooner heard, but he to show his rashness, without any further
consideration, threw himself from the bancke into the stream, and there was
drowned. And thus much touching Fortitude. Now to proceed, the next branch of
virtues first Issue, to be considered of, is Justice.

The four elements, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire, are of all things the most
different and disagreeing: yet by the divine providence of God, they are daily
so tempred, as nothing can be found or imagined to be of greater harmony, more
consonant or agreeing. The like we may say of the four cardinal virtues;
which although they are diverse, being considered in their particular effect, yet
in nature and complete order, they so depend one upon another, as many times
one includs all the rest, as evidently appears in this virtue of Justice: he
that is petfectlie just must be wise, temperate and valiant. Wise, to discern
good from bad: temperate, to govern and rule his affections: and valiant, not
to fear to help the wronged, albeit with hazzarde of his own life. And yet
for all this, Justice includes something in itself, whereby it may be discerned
from the rest, as by the sequel may be seen.

What Justice is.
Justice is a motion of the soul, whereby we are stirred up to give to every one
his right, and that which belongs unto him, even as willingly observing law
and duty toward others, as we would have the same observed and kept toward
ourselves.

Tenn sorts of Justice.
THe first is the preservation and order which God himself observes in the
governing and maintaning of the world, without which we should have a general
confusion and many times wro^gs would pass with that secrecy and power, as
innocence quite would be ouerborne, but that his justice at convenient time
reueales them, and gives them their due punishment, and this is called
providence.

The second is the divine exhibition and accomplishment of that service and
obedience, which Gods creatures owe unto him, and this is called piety

The third, is that distribution of right and equity which we are bound to
show one toward another, and this is called Charity.

The fourth, is that care and respect which we ought to have unto ourselus in
accepting or renouncing, in applyeng or restraining, what may be prejudicial
or profitable unto us: and this (beside that it may also be called charity)
has another name, which is, indulgency or self affection: for there is no man
but is bound by the laws of God and of nature, with moderation and discretion
to have a respect unto himself.

The fifth is that religious administration, which every magestrate ought to
have, which is called to be a supreme governor, or to have any inferior
office or authority in the commonwealth, and this is called equity and peace.

The sixth, is that mutual society and loving conjunction which is expreste
between man and wife, without either usurpation or tyranny, and this is called
unity and concord.

The seventh is that awful respect, which servants in simplicity of heart
without dissimulation or hypocrisy, show to their masters, and this is called
reverence.

The eight, is that careful and provident respect which masters ought to show
toward their servants, especially when they mix their authority with love and
courtesy, and this is calcald humanity or gentleness.

The ninth, is that natural submission and loving fear which children owe to
their parents, and this is called honor.

The tenth, is that moderation and abstinence which the soul is engaged for to
the body, and this is called health or alacrity of the spirit.

So that by these aforesaid circumstances (our special purpose being to
speak of that measure of just and upright dealing which is to be observed
between man and man) we may gather another division of Justice, which is only
humane, and that may be contracted or drawn into two parts.

Two parts of humane Justice.
THe first is called Distributive, which consists in giving to every one
according to his desert, whether it be praise or punishment; honor or
disgrace, money or moneys worth, little or much, etc. And this is confirmed by
the words of Christ, give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. And of
S. Paul. Give unto all men their duty, Tribute to whom tribute; Custom to
whom custom; and fear to whom fear belongs. To. 13.7

The second is called commutatiue: which has relation to the exchange of
duty, and the fidelity and constant truth which ought to bein men's words and
promises, contracts and covenants: and this is that faith which is said to be
the foundation of Justice: contrary to which, are all falshoodes, deceipts,
coosenages, treasons, periuries, breach of promises and lying.

Whether all promises be to be kept.
Some men are of opinion that promises which are made either for fear, or
through deceit are not to be kept. It Is true indeed, that a wicked promise or
an ungodly vow is better broken than kept, but a wise man will be so advised,
that he will never promise or undertake any thing, which shall be contrary to
duty, upon any necessity whatsoever: no not for death it self: and when he
does engage himself, it is upon discretion and sound judgment; and being so
engaged he will show forth his truth and fidelity, and be master of his
word, though it be to his own loss and hindrance. Psalm. 15.5

If a lie be tolerable.
Our Philosophers whose doctrine without any further reference, was only
directed by the rule of reason, say there are three sorts of lies; a pleasant
lie, a profitable lie, and a pernicious lie: and that the two first are in some
sort tolerable* but the last by no me^as to be admitted. We that are
christians and know there is a God, and that God is truth and to deny the
truth (howsoever we cloak or excuse yt with profit or pleasure) is to deny
God, and to prefer the Devil which is the father of lies before God: ought to
think that it is lawful in no manner of sort to tell a lie: but if we shall
answer for every idle word that passes our lips, much more shall we answer
for lying and falsehood.

The necessity of Justice.
HOw necessary Justice is amongst men may appear in this, in that it defends
the oppressed, helps the needy, incourageth the virtuous who else would
desist from well doing, if they saw their good endeavors despised, and represseth
the wicked, whose malice would overthrow the state of human society, but
that they see vengeance and punishment prepared forthe^; nay it is so necessary
(as Cycero says) that very Pirates, thieves and robbers, cannot live together
without observing some part of Justice.

The end of Justice.
THe end of Justice, is the glory of God, and the preservation of the common
secrecy of men.

The perfect use of Justice.
THe perfect use of Justice, is to make no difference of men either in reguard
of wealth, kindred, friendship, poverty or dignity. Iunius Brutus consul of
Rome (as Pliny reports) caused his own sons to be beheaded, for an offense
which they had committed. Papinianus a pagan being commanded by the Emperor
Caracalla to defend an unjust cause, would not do it. Cleon of Lacedemon,
being elected to an office in the common wealth, called all his friends and
kindred together, and told them, during the time of his magistracy and
government, he did renounce and discharge himself of al friendship and
affinity.

Denial of Justice dangerous.
BEside that we may hold it for a maxim, that man is no longer a man, a King
no longer a King, nor a magistrate no longer a magestrare, tha^ he is willing,
forward and ready to execute Justice; so we may conclude, that the denial or
delaying of Justice, is so heinous a thing, that it has been either punished
and revenged by men or where men could not reach, God has stretched forth his
arm and given it check and controlment. For the first, we have the example of
Henry K. of Sweathland, who striking a gentleman with a dagger, that was an
important suter unto him for Justice, so robbed him of the hearts of his
people, as shortly after he was deposed and put in prison: and for the latter,
we have the example of Herod, who being of that power that the world could
not punish his tyranny and injustice, was stricken by the hand of God,
insomuch as his very bowels were eaten out of Lice. Act. 12, 23.

The opposites to Justice.
STill to observe our first purpose, that contraries opposed will alwais shine
more clear and evident, and that every virtue has her extremes, which
consist in too little or too much; therefore it follows that we set down the
opposites to Justice, which are two in number; namely Injustice, which is the
defect, and Severity, which is the excess: for as the one makes the seat of
Justice a shop of disorder, so the other makes it a shambles of Tyranny.

What Injustice is.
Injustice is the denial of right and equity, either toward God, our
neighbor, or our selves: so that we may say we are so many ways unjust, as
we deny unto God, unto our neighbor, or unto our selves, those duties which
we owe unto them.

The effects of Injustice.
THe effects of Injustice are infinite, but these in special. Disorder,
confusion, torment of conscience, even in him that is iniust; Impunitie, free
scope for murder, theft and violence, clamors of Widows, Orphants and
innocents, whereby undoubtedly follows at length the vengeance of God upon
that kingdom or country where it is used, as it is written: The cry of the
children of Israel is come up unto me (says the Lord) and I have also seen
the oppression wherewith the Egyptians oppressed them, and I will stretch out my
hand and smite Egypt. Exo. 3, 9.20 And again, Woe unto him that builds his
house by unrighteousness, and his chambers without equity, that uses his
neighbor unjustly, and gives him not his hire. Ier. 22, 13.

What Severity is.
Severity, is a racking of Justice beyond her limits, carried away with fury
and passion of the mind, rather than led by truth and vprighte judgment: so
that it punnisheth small faults for great, and allotteth overplus where an
indifferent measure might have served the turn. Piso appointed proconsull in
the Romans war, when two soldiers by his permission, went out together about
some business, and the one returned to the camp and the other did not, he
condemned him, thinking he had slain his companion, and therefore commanded
him to be executed. At the very instant of execution, the other came;
whereupon the Captain that had the charge to see him put to death, returned to
the Proconsull with both the soldiers; but Piso being offended therewith, put
them all three to death: the first, because he was condemned; the second,
because he was the cause of the condemnation, and the Captain, because he had
not obeyed. So that by rigor and severity, he made away three for the
innocence of one.

How all virtues are preserved.
AS all virtues are planted in us by nature and the help of art, so are they
preserved and kept in their full strength and vigor by use and exercise: for
better never had, than not exercised and put in practice: nay, howsoever they
are abundantly in us, yet if they be not exercised, they quickly vanish and
are forgot, as it appears by things most natural unto us. For what is more
natural than to speak, and go? yet the familiarity with strangers may make us
forget the one, and a little sickness decay the other. And thus in speking of
Virtues genealogy, and the increase and branches that are derived from her,
although much more might have bin said, yet this I trust may in some sort
show her worth and excellency: and what my pen has ouerslipt, I wish
(together with so much as is in this book) may be more plentifully expressed
in men's deeds.

FINIS.

