New EPISTLES BY Mounseur du Balzack.
Translated out of French, into English by Sr Rich: Baker Knight.

LONDON. Printed by Tho: Cotes, for Fran: Eglisfeild, Ioh: Crook, and Rich:
Serger, and are to be sold, at the Greyhound, in St Paul's, Churchyard. 1638.

Will. Marshall sculpsit.



NEW EPISTLES BY MOVNSIEVR D' BALZAC.

Translated out of French into English, BY Sr. RICHARD BAKER Knight.

Being the second and third Volumes.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes for Fra. Eglesfield, John Crook, and Rich.
Serger, and are to be sold at the Gray-hound in Paul's Chuch-yard, 1638.

Imprimator Tho: Wykes.

Septem. 6. 1637.

TO THE HONORABLE The Lord of Newburge; one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Counsel, and Chancelour of the Duchy of Lancaster.
MY Lord, I may perhaps be thought, besides the boldness, to be guilty of
absurdity; in offering a Translation to him, who so exactly understands the
Original; and one, who if he had a mind to see how it would look in English
(were able to s^t a much fairer gloss upon it, then I have done: yet my Lord,
this absurdity may have a good color; for it may not be unpleasing to you, to
see your own perfection, in the glass of another imperfection, seeing even
the best Diamonds, seem to take a pleasure in having of foiles. Besides, I
have my choice of another color, for being to pass a world of hazard, in the
Censure of the world; I am willing to pass the Pikes at first, and account
this done, having once passed yours. And toward it my Lord, I have two
Comforts; One for the Reader; that the Authors Gold, is so much over weight,
that though much be lost in the melting, yet it holds weight enough still, to
make it be current. The Other for my self; that by this means I may have a
Testimony remaining in the world, how much I honor you; and in how high a
degree, I most affectionately am,

Your Lordships humble Servant. RICHARD BAKER.

THE LETTERS of Mounsieur De BALZAC.
To Mounsieur Moreau, Counselor to the King, and Lieutenant of PARIS. LETTER.
I.
SIR, I come^ to renew my old importunity, and require your Authority, to call
the Printers of Paris to account: They have set forth, in my name, certain
Letters, which I acknowledge to be mine, and deny not to father; but yet I
ought to have been of counsel to them, considering I never meant they should
gadde about the streets. By this means, when I think I am in my Closet, I
find my self upon the Stage; they carry me abroad, when I desire to be
private, and what I intended an enclosure to my Friends, they lay in common for
all the Country. You know Sir, that this kind of writing has always been
privileged; and that many things are entrusted to the bosom of Letters, which
neither curiosity, nor hatred ought to prye into: nor ever will, if that be any
thing discreet; This, any thing generous. An Enemy in war, that neither
spares men's goods nor lives, yet makes a conscience of opening Letters; and the
law of secrets, seems more forcible than the law of Arms: Yet so unfortunate
am I that what an Enemy will not offer in War, I suffer in Peace; and that by
men, that would be thought to have no thought of doing me hurt. I have nothing
so properly mine, which they think not as properly theirs; Nothing kept so
close, which they bring not to light. If hold could be laid on intellectual
things, they would dive (I think) into the very thoughts of my heart: but
since (...) arms are too short for this, they snatch them from me, as soon as
ever I have made them sensible, and given them a body upon paper; in such sort
Sir, that I should not dare to write my very Auricular Confession, for fear
they should put it in Print, and make it be cried upon the Exchange; and I must
be forced at last, either to renounce all commerce in this kind, or at least
to invent some strange unknown Characters to speak in secret, and to preserve
my conceits from their Arresting. They arrogate to themselves a more sovereign
power than Princes do, who always leave to private men, the free use of that
which is theirs, and never offer to make a Highway of my Garden, nor a
thorow-fare of my Courtyard. This is a disorder, whereof the consequence
reflects upon you, and wherein you are more interrested, than my self; for I
do not believe, you would be willing to see those excellent discourses which I
have heard you make to your Auditors, be disfigured by an uncorrected
Impression; and it would grieve you, that profane hands should touch them
without choice or discretion, and thereby mar their luster, and defile their
purity. I therefore humbly entreat you in this point to take care of your
self, and to do your self right: The boldness of these mercenary persons is
not restrained by Respect, it must have a stronger Bridle; and if you give it
not a stop by fear of punishment; neither our Closets, nor our Beds will
have any thing so secret, which will not be cried upon the Market place, and
to speak in the Comoedians phrase: That which Jupiter speaks to Juno in her
ear, shall be made Table talk for all the people. You being as you are, the
censor of manners, and Pylot of the state; it belongs to your place to
restrain this so Tyrannical an usurpation upon the liberty of men's spirits,
and whilst you desend from violence our fortunes and our lives; you must not
expose to the same violence, other of our goods, no less dear to us than
those. And herein, I promise to my self, some consideration of my own
particular, and that for my sake, you will let your courtesy go further than
your justice. And having obliged me to you already upon the like occasion; I
doubt not but you will maintain that first favor, with a second, and make the
Printers know, that you have taken my Name and Writings into your protection,
to defend them against all their practices. This shall be to me a singular
favor, and which shall bind me, all my life, to seek out means to testify,
that I am

Sir, Your most humble, and most affectionate servant, BALZAC.

To Mounsieur Rigault. LETTER. II.
SIR, having adventured to speak Latin, I feared my boldness might have had
but ill success; and I doubted, whether in a foreign Country I might pass
for an Enemy, or for a Friend. But your Letter has given me assurance of my
condition. I account it as the Letters Pattents of my Naturalizing; and where I
was afraid to be held a Barbarian, I see my self suddenly become a Citizen
of Rome. For since there is now, no more Use, that can serve for the Law; nor
People, that can serve for the Judge of a dead language; I have therefore
recourse to you Sir, in whom I seem to see the very face of the most pure
Antiquity; and who, after the dissolution of the body of the Commonwealth, do
yet preserve the Spirit. It is false to say, The Goths and Vandalts could
justly brag they left nothing of any worth behind them: I find still the
full Majesty of the language in your writings; and your style has in it, not
only the Air and Garb of that good time; but the very Courage and the
Virtue. You draw your Opinions from the same Well, and I see no cause that any
man can have to contradict them. It is certain, that to gain belief, one
must keep himself within the bounds of likelihood; and present to posterity
examples which it may follow; and not Prodigies, with which it may be frighted.
Words that are disproportionable to the matter, seem to savor of that
Mountibankes strain; who would have it believed, he could make a statue of a
Mountain, and would persuade us, that a man were a mile long. There are some
men's works, not much less extravagant than this Mountibanks design; and most
men seem to write with as little seriousness; and with as little care to be
believed. And though men make a conscience in dealing with particular persons;
yet when they come to deal with the Public, they seem to think themselves
dispensed with; and that they owe more respect to one neighbor than to whole
Nations, and to all Ages to come. You know notwithstanding, that this is no new
vice; and not to make a troublesome enumeration of the ancient adoters of
Favor: Is not that base delight of Velleim come even to us? and was he not a
Bondslave, that desired one should know he was in love with his Chain? I could
curse the ill fortune of good letters, that has bereft us of the book which
Brutus writ of virtue; wherein we might have seen the infamous profession he
makes of unmanlinesse; to have more care of the orders of a corrupted Court,
than of upholding the maine structure of the Latin Philosophy. If it had
been his fortune to have outlived Sejanus; I doubt not, but he would have
taken from him all the praises he had given him to make a present of them to
his successor Macron: and if the gappes and breaches of his book were filled
up, one should see he had not forgotten so much as a Groom in all Tiberius
house, of whom he had not written Encomiums. We live in a Government much more
just, and therefore much more commendable; the reign of our King is not barren
of great examples. It is impossible the carriage of M. the Cardinal, should be
more dextrous, more sage, more active than it is: yet who knows not that he
has found work enough to do for many Ages, and battles enough to fight for
many Worthies: That he has met with difficulties worthy of the transcendent
forces of himself, far exceeding the forces of any other; it is necessary,
that Time it self should join in labor with excellent Master-workemen to
produce the perfection of excellent works. The recovery of a wasted body, is
not the work of only one potion; or once opening a vein: the reviving a
decayed estate, requires a reiteration of endeavors, and a constancy of
labors. The salving of desperate cases, goes not so swift a pace, as Poets
descriptions, or Figures of Orators. We must therefore keep the extension of
our subject within certain bounds; and not say, that the victory is perfected,
as long as it leaves us the evils of war, and that there remains any
Monster to be vanquished, seeing even poverty is it self one of the greatest
Monsters; and in comparison whereof, those which Hercules subdued, were but
tame and gentle. With time, our Redeemer will finish his work; and he that
has given us security, will give us also no doubt abundance. But seeing the
order of the world, and the necessity of affairs affoords us not yet to taste
this happiness; it shall be a joy unto me, to see at least, the Image of it in
your History: to return and re-enter by your means into these three, so rich
and flourishing years, after which the peace has showed it self but by fits;
and the Sun it self has been more reserved of his beams, and not ripened
our fruits but on one side. You shall bind me infinitely unto you, to grant
me a sight of this rare Piece, and to allow me a key of that Temple, which you
keep shut to all the world besides. I assure my self I shall see nothing
there but that which is Stately and Magnificent; specially I doubt not but the
Palace it self is admirable, and that your words do Parallel the subject,
when you come to speak of the last Designs of our deceased King; and of the
undoubted revolution he had brought upon the state of the world, if he had
lived. And though in this there be more of divination, then of knowledge; and
that to speak of such things be to expound Riddles; yet in such cases it is
not denied to be Speculative; and I do not beleeye that Lyvie recounting the
death of Caesar, did lightly pass over the Voyage he intended against the
Parthians; and that he stayed not a little to consider the new face he would
have put upon the Commonwealth if death had not prevented him. If all my
affairs lay here, yet I would make a journey to Paris, expressly for this;
and to read a discourse, made after the fashion of this Epitaph, which pleased
me exceedingly. He had a Design to win Rhodes and overcome Italy. I should
have much a do to hold in my Passion till then; but now I stand waiting for
your Tertullian, that I may learn of him that patience which he teaches, that
I faint not in waiting till it Printed, and in state to be seen; and till he
come abroad under your Corrections; like to those glorious bodies, which being
cleansed from all impurity of matter, do glister and shine on every side. This
is an Author, with whom your Preface would have made me friends, if I had
otherwise been fallen out; and that the hardness of his phrase, and the vices
of his age had given me any distaste from reading him. But it is long since,
that I have held him in account; and as sad and thorny as he is, has not been
unpleasing to me. Me thinks, I find in his writings that dark light; or
light some darkness, which an ancient Poet speaks off; and I look upon the
obscurity of his writing, as I should look upon a piece of Ivory that were
well wrought and polished. This has been ever my opinion of him. As the
beauties of Africa, do not therefore leave to be Amiable, because they are not
like to ours; and as Sophonis be would have carried the prize from many Italian
faces; so the wits of the same Country, do not leave to please, though their
eloquence be a forreiner: and for my part I prefer this man before many that
take upon them to be imitators of Cicero. Let it be granted to delicate Ears,
that his style is of Iron but then let it be granted also, that of this Iron;
many excellent Armours have been forged, that with it he has defended the
honor and innocence of Christianity, with it he has put the Valentinians to
flight, and has pierced the very heart of Marcyon. You see I want not much of
declayming in his Praise, but to avoid this inconvenience, I think best to
break off abruptly. I am neither good at making Orations, nor at venting of
Complements; I am a bad Advocate, and as bad a Courtier: yet I entreat you to
believe, that I am very truly:

Sir, Your; etc.

To Mounsieur du Moulin. LETTER. III.
SIr, no modesty is able to resist the Praises that come from you. And I vow
unto you, I took a pleasure to suffer my self to be corrupted, with the first
lines of your Letter. But it must be one, that knows himself less then I
do, that dwells long in this error. After a pleasing dream, One is willing to
awake; and I see well enough, that when you take such advantage to speak of my
Travel: you make not use of the whole ability of your Judgment. You do me a
favor, I cannot say you do me justice; you seem to have a will to oblige me
to you, by hazarding to incur the displeasure of Truth. Now that you are your
self at the Goal; you encourage with all your forces those that are in the
race; and to persuade them to follow you; make them believe they shall go
beyond you. An admirable trick of Art, I must confess; and which at first I
did not discover. But whatsoever it be, and from what ground soever this
wonderful commendation of yours proceeds; I esteem it not less then an
ambitious man does a Crown; and without piercing into your purpose. I take a
joy in my good Fortune which is not small Sir, to be loved of you, whom I have
always exceedingly loved; and whom I have a long time looked upon in the
Huguenot Party, as an excellent Pylot that affronts a great Fleet, being
himself but in a Pinnace. The Right and Authority is on our side; the Plots
and Stratagems on yours, and you seem not less confident in your courage,
then we in our cause. It is certain, that this is the way to give a sedition,
the show of a just war: and to a multitude of mutiners, the face of a well
ordered Army. By this you keep many in a good opinion of that which has now
lost the attractive^ grace of Novelty; and though it be now bending to its
declination; yet it cannot be denied, but that it holds still some color, and
some appearance, by the Varnish of your writings; and that never man has more
subtly covered his cause from show of weakness; nor more strongly upheld
his side from ruin then your self:

Si Pergama Dextra
Defendi possent, etiam hac Defensafuissent.
This is my ordinary language, when it comes in my way to speak of you. I am
not of the passionate humor of the vulgar; which blancheth the liberty of
their judgment; and finds never any fault in their own side, nor virtue in
the opposite. For my self, from what cloud soever the day break; I account it
fair; and assure my self that at Rome honest men commended Hanniball; and
none but Porters and base people spoke basely of him. It is indeed a kind of
sacrilege to divest any man, whatsoever he be, of the gifts of God, and if I
should not acknowledge that you have received much; I should be injurious to
him that has given you much; and for difference of the cause, wrong our
Benefactor that is indifferent. It is true, I have not always flattered the
ill disposed French; and was put in some choler against the Authors of our last
broils; but observing in your Books, that our intendments are alike; and that
the subjection due to Princes is a part of the Religion you profess; I have
thought I might well speak of your conformity herein, as much as I say; and in
so doing, be but your Interpreter. Whether the tempest rise from the Northern
wind, or from the Southern; it is to me equally unpleasing; and in that which
concerns my duty; I neither take Council from England, nor yet from Spain.
My humor is not to wrestle with the Time; and to make my self an Antagonist
of the Present; it is pain enough for me only to conceive the Idea of Cato,
and Cassius; and being to live under the command of another, I find no virtue
more fitting then obedience. If I were a Switzer, I would think it honor
enough to be the Kings Gossip; and would not be his subject, nor change my
liberty for the best Master in the world; but since, it has pleased. God (...)
have me borne in chains, I bear them ^illingly; and finding them neither
cumber^me nor heavy, I see no cause I should break ^y teeth, in seeking to
break them. It is a ^reat argument, that Heaven approoves that ^overnement
which has continued its succes^on now a dozen Ages: an evil that should last
(...) long, might in some sort seem to be made ^egitimate, and if the age of
men be venerable, ^ertainely that of estates ought to be holy. These great
Spirits which I speak of in my ^orke, and which are of your Party, should ^ave
come in the beginning of the world, to ^ave given laws to new people; and to
have ^etled an establishment in the politic estate; ^t as it is necessary to
invent good laws, so ^ertainely it is dangerous to change even those ^at are
bad. These are the most cruel thoughts ^at I entertain for the heads of the
party; in ^is sort I handle the adverse side; and take no ^easure to insult
upon your miseries, as you ^eme civilly to charge me, who have written ^at the
King should be applauded of all the ^orld, if after he has beaten down the
pride ^f the Rebels, he would not tread upon the ^alamity of the afflicted. The
persecutors of ^ose who submit themselves are to me in e^uall exe^cration with
the violatours of Sepul^hers; and I have not only pity of their af^iction,
but insome sort reverence. I know ^at places stricken with lightning, have
some^mes been held Sacred. The finger of God has been respected in them,
whom it has touched; and great adversities have sometimes rather given a
Religious respect, then received a reproach. But thus to speak of the good
success of the Kings Arms were to speak improperly. Both sides have gained
by his victory. All the penalty that has been imposed upon you; has been
but this, to make you as happy as our selves, and you are now in quiet
possession of that happiness, for which before your Towns were taken, you
were but suppliants. Our Prince will put no yoke upon the consciences of his
Subjects; he desires not to make that be received by force; which cannot well
be received but by persuasion; nor to use such remedies against the French,
which are not good, but against the Moors. If the King of Sweden use his
prosperity in this manner, and soil not so pure a Grace with proscriptions and
punishments; I make you a faithful promise, to do that which you desire me to
do; to employ all my cunning and all my engines, to erect a statue to the
memory of his Name. You touch the right string of my inclination, when you pray
me to praise and to magnify that Prince. If all the Crowns that are wrought
upon his Scarf should be changed into so many Kingdoms, they could never in
my opinion sufficiently recompense so rare a virtue; nor be able to fill so
vaste a Spirit as his is: As I expect nothing but great from his valor, so
from his honesty I hope for nothing but good; and although in Spain it be
current that he is certainly Antichrist; yet I am neither so devout to believe
such a fable, nor ^o fearful to be afraid of such a deame. I on^y answer
some scrupulous persons, who que^tion me about this Prince; that our King has
^n him a second to stand by him; and such a one ^s a fitter could never be
found, to strike an amasement into the house of Austria; and to ^ivert it from
the care it takes of our affairs. But I will stay my self here for this time;
and ^ot enter upon a subject which I reserve for the ^earest hours of my
leisure, it is better to make (...) stand at the porch of holy places, then to
enter unto them without preparation. Besides, my dis^ourse may seem already
long, if not too long, ^or a beginning of acquaintance, pardon I be^eech you,
the contentment I take to be this way with you, which makes me forget both ^our
employments, and my own custom. It ^s not any desire I have to be troublesome
to any, much less to make Sermons to my friends, ^ut your self gave me the
Text I have hand^ed, and I cannot doubt, but that having open^d unto you the
bottom of my heart, without ^issimulation; you will give my liberty the credit
of your belief, and with this I solemnly ^ssure you that I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur, the Abbot of Baume. LETTER. IV.
SIR, I am true, if not liberal; and I send you that I promised, though I
cannot send you what I would. This is neither a mooveable for the use of your
house, nor an ornament to beautify your closet; it is matter of discourse
only for two or three days at your table; and a Novelty that will quickly
grow stale. But if your self have any better opinion of it, and that you
account it of any value, I am contented that you leave my style to the mercy of
any that will arrest it; so you please to justify my intentions to men that
are reasonable, and not suffer in the Country where you are, that an honest man
should be oppressed with the hatred against his side. If I were a revoulted
Spaniard, and that the words I write did come from the mouth of a Fugitive,
they might with good reason be taken in ill part; and we find that a Grecian
at Athens, was once punished for serving the Persians to be their Interpreter:
but I desire you to consider, that the cause I maintain is the cause of my
Prince and Country, which I could not maintain coldly, without a kind of
treason. We punish Prevaricatours and Traitors, but true and lawful enemies
we praise, and I cannot think that M. the Cardinal of Cueva, will think the
worse of my passion, for the public liberty, who has showed himself the like
passion, for one particular man's Regency. I am not afraid that a good action
should make me lose his favor, or that being himself extremely just, he
should not more esteem of my zeal, which is natural and honest; than the
choler of Doctor Boucher, a mercenary man, and a Pentioner to a stranger. It
will be no Novelty to say that of Spain, which has been always said of
great Empires, and that rapine and cruelty is a reproach even to Eagles and
Lions. To be a Tyrant and an Usurper, is it not in other terms to be a
Grandee, and a Conqueror? And are not violence and severity vices that exceed
the reach of virtue, and which makes our morality ridiculous; I blame sometimes
the counsels of Kings, but I never lay hands upon their royalty, and if I
seek to cut off superfluities and excesses, it cannot therefore be justly said,
I tear that off which I seek to prune. Crowns are to me sacred, even upon
Idolaters heads; and I adore the mark of God in the person of the great Cham,
and of the great Mogoll. Having now made this declaration which yet is more
expressly delivered in my book: I hope there will be no place left for
calumny, and I promise to my self, that for my sake you will whip the
Spaniards in point of generousnesse, and show them, that she has showed her
self principally to do a favor to enemies, and to mingle things which seem
hard to be mingled, courtesy and war together, I demand not these good
offices from you, I expect them from your friendship, and I doubt not but you
will continue it to me in spite of all the spightfulnesse and bitterness of
the opposites, seeing I know you are free from those petty passions of vulgar
spirits, and that you know I am

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur Bouthillier, Counselor of the King in his Counsels, and
Secretary of his commands. LETTER. V.
SIR, I vow I am one of the worst Courtiers of France, and to justify Fortune,
for having little favored me, I will accuse my self for having little courted
her, yet for the love of you I have used an extraordinary endeavor. My
affection has gone beyond my action, and I have put my self to the venture to
go as far as Gascogny to seek you out. If you had gone by Cadillac, as I
was told you would, you had found me at the waters side at your disimbarking,
and I should have put hard with the best of the Country to have had the honor
to offer you my service first of any, but God did not think me worthy of my
desires. It was his pleasure I should make a journey of fifty leagues not to
see you, and I conceive my happiness to be such, that if I should go to Paris
with the like intention, God would presently inspire the Kings heart to send
you away in some Embassage: Be pleased therefore Sir to spare me this travail;
I dare undertake no second voyage, for fear least such a thought only should
remoove you from the station where all the good of life is seated, and out of
which a man can have no contentment, but what he can get by the force of Reason
and Philosophy. It suffices me that I have this one way left me, to present
you my Complements; and that from time to time I can make you read that your
Idaea is the dear company of my solitude, and your reputation the comfortable
trouble of my repose. In the estate I now am in, this in effect, is all the
part I claim in the affairs of the world; these are the news for which I
retain still my whole enquiery; I profess unto you the public prosperities
would be less dear unto me if yours were not bound up in one volume with
them. It does not trouble me I confess that our affairs are prospe^ous, and
that our armies have glorious success, but to think that you are one of the
instruments of so flourishing a kingdom, and that the king makes use of your
pen to communicate himself to his own people, and to strangers, and to
distribute both good and evil to all Europe, this is that which ravisheth me
with extremity of joy. From your words are framed the Oracles that are at this
day given to all Nations, you trouble not your brains any more with the petty
interests of Tytius and Maevius; Italy and Germany are now your clients; and
the Princes that either fear or suffer oppression expect their destinies from
your answers. I had the pleasure Sir to see all these things before they were
visible; I saw the fruit when it was but in the budde, I knew the Gold when it
was yet in the mine, I remember your happy entrance into the world, and that
you have not needed a time of probation for being perfectly an honest man, you
said things to me in your infancy which I make use of now in my old age; and
I keep for a Monument a letter you once writ to me from Villesavin as a seed
of all the dispatches, and of all the instructions you shall ever make. At that
time I was proud of my fortune, and you gave me leave to boast of your
friendship, I dare not now use the privacie of such terms; it is fit my
ambition should be more modest and more moderate. I crave now only an
acknowledging and a protection, and this I hope Sir you will not deny me; but
take me for one of the charges descended upon you, with the inheritance of
Mounsieur d' Air your deceased Uncle; Bear with my passion as a thing of your
own, and which you cannot put away, since in effect I am and can never be
other.

Sir, Then your, etc.

To Monsieur, the Earl of Excester. LETTER VI.
SIR, if I had made a vow of humility, you give me here a fair occasion to be
proud for not breaking it, yet this should not be an effect of the love of
wisdom; it should be a mark of aversion from goodness, if I did not
testify the joy of the News I have received I could never expect from your
honor a more sweet recompense of my travail then this, which is presented to
me by your hands, and when I see the son of the great Cecile let down his
spirits so low as to mine, and make himself less then he is by representing
me in his Country; I cannot forbear to vow unto you that it has touched the
most sensible part of my soul, and that with joy thereof my miseries have
given me a comfortable breathing time. For your self Sir, all the ^aine you
can take herein is but this, that it may be said, you have your sports as well
as your businesses, and that all the hours of your life are not equally
serious, but seeing the gods in times past have changed their shapes, and
disguised themselves in a thousand fashions; I conceive it may be justly
allowed to you to give us the moral sense of those fables, you are able
without any wrong to your self, to show us, that great persons cloyed with
their felicity are glad sometimes to imitate the actions of private men, and
to put on Maskes to save themselves from the imp^rtunity of their greatness,
whatsoever your design were I cannot but turn to my advantage, for by this
means I am certainly an honester man in England then in France: seeing I
speak there by your mouth, I therefore most humbly thank you for the favor
you have done me, in making me better then I was; and I joy in this, that by
your means I am improved in value, which inables me to make you the more
worthy present, in presenting you my affection, and the desire I have to be all
my life,

Sir, Your, etc.

To Mounsieur de Boyssat. LETTER VII.
SIR, what occasion soever it be that brings me your Letters, it cannot be but
very pleasing, I feel a joy at the only sight of your name, and the honor you
do me to remember me, is so dear unto me, that though perhaps it be fortune
that does it, yet I cannot but thank you for it. You are one of those whose
least favors are Obligatorie, and you never cast them from you so carelessely,
but that they deserve to be carefully gathered. When others bear you
affection and hold you dear, it is but to be just, and to pay debts, but when
you do the like to others, it is to be liberal, and to bestow favors. You
may then imagine what glory I account it, that the meandness of my spirit has
the approbation of your judgment, and I am not a little glad that my
inclination has so good success, not to be hated of one whom I should love,
though he hated me. For a train to this first favor I require from you a
second; be pleased Sir that I ask you, if it be in truth my self whom you
exhort to moderation, whether you think in your conscience that I am fallen
into the vice contrary to this virtue? It is now four years that I suffer
outrages, they think it not enough to do me wrongs unless they print them
too; they do me hurt, and would have me think my self beholding to them for
it; an infinite Army of enemies are come into the field against me, under the
Colors of Philarque; it is not two or three private men, it is whole
Companies, whole Troops that set upon me: I am the Martyr of a thousand
Tyrants, and if this unhappy influence pass not over, or abate not, I shall
come at last to be the object of persecution for all the world. They have
painted me out a public sinner amongst honest men; a a man that cannot read
amongst Scholars, a mad man amongst the sober: These good offices they have
done me hitherto without any revenging, I am as yet a debtour of these
charities to them that have lent them to me; I have taken these blows with
hardiness in stead of repelling them with force, and my patience has been
such, that many have called it want of courage: If this be so, you will grant
me Sir that you trouble your self about that which cannot be, that another
man's praises should be insupportable to me, when I have not been sensible of
my own Calumnies: I am not like to be in have to hinder by my violence the
making of friendship, who have by my remissenes as it were consented to my own
hatred. There is no color to think that I should complain of words feigned,
and such as declaymers use in sport, who have not so much as spoken a word of
the most cruel action that ever the most premeditated malice could bring
forth. Let our friend if he please make an Epitaph or a deifying of -- let him
employ all his Mortar and all his Art, to build him either a Sepulcher or a
Temple, and to speak after the manner of --, let him erect him a shrine, and
place him amongst his household saints: I say nothing against all this, nor
condemn his proceeding, whether it be that he honor the memory and merit of
the dead, or that he stand in awe of the credit and faction of his heirs. I
easily bear with these small spots in my friends, and exact no more of them
then they can well spare. I know that Greek and Latin make not men valiant,
nor are things that descend to the bottom of the soul, they scarce reach to
the outermost superficies: they stay commonly in the memory and in the
imagination, and polish the tongue without fortifying the heart: I should
therefore desire too much, if I should desire at all that these goodly
knowledges should get a new virtue for my sake, and should work a greater
effect in the spirit of -- then they wrought in the Poet Lucan, whom feare^
constrained to accuse his mother, and to praise a tyrant. If it stay but upon
me that this dear child should see the light, after so many sower looks and
so many throws, I am ready my self to serve for a Midwife. I am content it
shall be published to day, and to morrow be translated into all Languages,
that the Author may not lose a day in his glory, and that his glory be not
bounded within River or Mountain. Never fear that I will impair his ill
nights, or add the care of one process to his ordinary watchings, if he have
no other u^quietnesse but what he is like to have^ from me, he may be sure to
enjoy a perpetual calm, and a perfect tranquillity, if he be not awaked but by
the noise you think I will make him, he may sleep as long as Epimenides, who
going to bed a young man was fifty years elder when he rose. Besides, I have
too much care of my own quiet, to go about to trouble his; and I love his
contentment too well, not to procure it, being to cost me nothing, but the
dissembling his weakness, And this I entreat you Sir, to assure him from me.
But knowing you to be wise and virtuous in the degree you are, I doubt not, but
of your own head, you will tell him, that it becomes not a man of his gravity,
to countenance such petty things; and in a point of Schollarship to use as much
formality and ceremony, as if it were the Negotiation of an Ambassador, but
much more, that it is a base quality to juggle with his friends; and after
having said a truth, which was not for all men's taste to make a Comment upon
it, of a Sophister. I have read Tacitus, and the Books of -- and therefore
should know the style of Tyberius; and the Art of Equivocation; but I should be
loath to seem ingenious, to the prejudice of mine honor, and to make use of
poison, though I had one so subtle that would kill without leaving any mark
to be seen; I have loved men in affliction; and have made use of men in
misery. Lightning has not driven me from places which it has made frightfull;
I have given testimony of my affection, not only where it could not be
acknowledged, but where it was in danger to be punished. I am not now so dealt
withal my self; and yet if the justice of my cause were not as it is to be
regarded; me thinks the violence of my adversaries ought to procure me some
favor; does not even honor oblige those that have any feeling of it, not to
join with the multitude which casts it self upon a single man? Oppression
has always been a sufficient ground for Protection; and Noble minds never
seek better Title for defending the weaker; but the need there is of them;
and to take part with a stranger, it is cause enough that many assault him, and
few assist him. and such also I doubt not is your mind. I am not less
persuaded of the generousnesse of your mind; then of the greatness of your
Spirit, and assure my self you are not the less on my side, because I have
many persecutors, as because also, I am firmly,

Sir Your etc.

To Mounsieur Huggens, Secretary to the Prince of Orange. LETTER. VIII.
SIR, I complain no more of fortune, she has done me at least some
courtesy amongst her many injuries, and since she suffers that you love me,
it is a sign she has care of me amidst her persecutions, this good news I
have learned by a Letter of yours to M. the Baron of Saint Surin, who will
bear me witness, that after I had read it. I desired nothing more for
perfecting my joy, but that I might be such a one as you make me, and be like
my picture. If this be the coal of Holland with which you make, such draughts,
it surpasses all the color that we use here to paint withal, and yet the
beauty costs you nothing, but you shall handly make me believe it; I know Gold
and Azure, and can easily distinguish it from coal, I see Sir the Ambushes you
lay for me. The Facility of your style covers the force of it, but weakens it
not, and under a show of carelessness, I find true Art and Ornaments. It
secures not your turns to do better in the place where you are than we; and
shutting us out to hold possession of the ancient and solid virtue, but you go
about to take from us all that is any way passable to corrupt estates, I mean
the glory of Language, and not suffer us to have this little toy to comfort our
selves withal, for the loss of all our truer treasures. After fifty years
overcome you will now be talking of a parley, and think to make your selves
masters of men by a more sweet and humane way then the former, as much in
effect as to be, that you have sometimes been termed the brothers of the
people of Rome, and heirs of the old Catoes, who made profession of severity,
and yet not enemies of the graces. This is to perfume Iron and Copper, and to
the liberty and discipline of Sparta, to add the bravery and dainties of
Athens, M. de Saint Surin has thereunto made us excellent relations; and you
have sent him back to us with his heart wounded, and his mind tainted with
that he has seen, and he wants not much of being become a bad Frenchman, at
least he reteines nothing for his country but a dutiful and reverent
affection; his love your Island has gotten possession of, and I am much afraid
you will find more loadstone to draw him to you, then we shall find chains to
hold him with us. He is full of the objects he has left behind him, and when I
talk to him of our Court and of our confusions; he answers with telling me
of your government and good order. And here you shall pardon me if I change my
complement into blame, and require to be righted by you for dehauching a
friend, who with one look of his countenance allayes and sweetens all the
bitterness of my life. The number of my persecutors is in a manner infinite,
but for how many think you I account so brave a champion? Take him from me and
you leave me quite disarmed against ill fortune, I loose my comfort for
adversity, and my example for virtue. And finding you the principal author of
this disgrace, I know not how I should but hate you, and persevere in the
resolution I have taken, to be most affectionately,

Sir, Your, etc.

To the Baron of Saint Surin. LETTER. IX.
SIR, I learn by the Gazette that you have received a wound at Mastricke, so
it be light I forgive it you, but though it be but a scratch I love you too
well not to accuse you of too much forwardness. They that are poor in
reputation ought to press up to the trenches, and such fervor is as well
beseeming fresh soldiers as young Friars; but for you, you have seen too many
wars to be called by the first name, and your valor having been showed in
the presence of the Prince, and approved by the testimony of the very enemy; it
seems to me that your part is not so much to bring it forth as a new matter,
as to keep it up as a known good. I would have you make good actions, yea
ordinary; but I would have you do it now, if it might be had with a body
charmed and with enchanted Arms, that leaving behind you all danger, you
might have before you nothing but glory. If God had given us three or four
lives, we might at any time venture one, and sometimes in a bravery let one
go, being assured we have another in store, but to be prodigal in poverty,
and to be careless of ones head when no art can make him a new, this is a
point has no appearance of reason. We must not set so light by the beauties of
heaven and the Rays of visible things, nor turn our eyes from a spectacle so
magnificently erected for us: I offend perhaps the ears of your courage with
this discourse, and you are like to send my counsel away as it came, yet take
not distastfully an officious injury and think it not strange that I acquaint
you with my fears, seeing a goddess was not ashamed to attire her son in a
woman's habit to preserve him; it would greeve me exceedingly to see you come
halting home, or with but one eye, and to bring such untoward favors from the
wars; I will not be bound to flatter your grief with that word of a
Lacedaemonian mother, Courage my son; you cannot now take a step that puts
you not in mind of your virtue, and less with that example in the histories
of Salust, he made ostentation of a face remarkable only for skarres, and for
having but one eye, wherein he took a pleasure though it made him deformed,
and cared not for losing one part of himself, which made all the rest the
fuller of honor. Spare me I beseech you this kind of consolation which I
should give you, if you suffer the like losses, and be not so hot in seeking
after a fair death which can gain you nothing but a fair Epitaph. Give me
belief only this once, and after this I will leave you to your own belief,
and commend you to your good Angel. You shall have leave to dispose of your
time some otherwise then thus, but remember that Melons are past, and make not
-- stand waiting too long for you: Our Rivers never ran more clear, not our
Meddowes were ever more green. I make use Sir of all things both reasonable
and insensibe to persuade your return. In the name of God come and draw me out
of the unquietness you have put me in, I have something, I know not what, lies
heavy at my heart, and nothing will lighten it but your company: That which a
superstitious man would do for a dream, or for some idle presage, do you I
pray you for a friend: who carries you always in his mind, and who is more
then any in the world,

Sir, Your, etc.

To my Lord the Cardinal De la Valette. LETTER X.
SIR, the Letter you did me the honor to write unto me, the thrirteenth of the
last Month came not to my hands till the beginning of this, otherwise I had
sooner given testimony how dear these last marks of your remembering me are
unto me, and how much I receiv^ of secret glory, seeing all other is denied me,
in that I have done any thing which seems not altogether unpleasing to you. It
is no small matter to entertain eyes that use not to stay upon vulgar objects;
and to minister pleasure to a mind which has nothing in it but lawful
passions, and indeed Sir the height of my ambition is bounded there. If I had
no other payment for all my travail, but only your good opinion of it, I
should not complain for being ill paid, and your goodness has made me full
recompense for all the wrongs I have received. The number of my enemies is
great, I see it well, the time does not favor me, I confess it, but having
your favor Sir what can I fear under so powerful a protection? Seeing those
to whom God has given clearer eyes then to other men, and a more sovereign
reason, as well as a more sovereigne dignity, have no ill opinion of my
opinions, what need I care for the censure of the base world? and how can I
but hope that the truth assisted by a few sages, will be always able to
withstand a multitude of Sophisters? I now send you Sir my answer to such of
their objections, that seem worth the refuting, and which have but any spark
of appearance to dazzle the eyes of simple people; the rest are so ridiculous
that I dare not oppugn them, for fear you should think I had devised them my
self to make matter for discourse; or that I coaped with them about points
where I were sure they could do me no hurt. And yet why should I dissemble my
ill hap? Those ridiculous objections find abettours and uphoulders, although
I have justice on my side, yet am I sued still, and persecuted by men I never
offended; and that when I give over the field and entreat for my life, see the
dealings of cruel minds toward those that are good. They have no fear, but
because I make no resistance; they magnify themselves in the wrong of their
advantage; they have not taken it; it is my self have given it them. Their
first success which my sufferance has encouraged have been new bonds for the
continuance; and because I have used no words against their blows, they think
I judge my self worthy to endure them; yet all this shall not make me change
my resolution, and I am bent to stay within the bounds into which I have
voluntarily put my self. Although I am neighbor to a Marshalls Court, yet I
choose ^ather a disgraceful quietness then to entertain the best quarrel in
the world. I have got as it were a habit of carelessness, I dare not say of
patience, least I might be accused to praise my self for a virtue. It may
happen that their persecution shall not continue so long as my innocence, and
that I may see an end of that which would be my end. It may be a calmer season
will follow after this, and perhaps the tempest that threatens my head will
fall but at my feet. However the world go, I will always comfort my self
with the Letter you did me the honor to write unto me. I will put your good
will in balance against all men's malice, and against all the injuries of
Fortune, I will account my self not altogether unhappy as long as I shall have
place in your remembering me, and that you will believe I am,

Sir, Your, etc.

Another to the same Cardinal. LETTER XI.
SIR, I never durst adventure to be suter to you in behalf of others, and
finding my self unworthy of your favor, I have never offered to counterfaite
a Favorite But though I did stand so far in your grace as to do good offices
for any, and that you allowed me the liberty which I dare not take of my self;
yet I should do very untowardly to begin with a suite in behalf of Mounsieur
Conrades, and to step before you in your own inclinations. I know your love
to him, is one of the most ancient you ever had, and he therefore one of the
first servants you ever entertainde: The choice of so judicious an infancy as
yours, has not I dare say been rashly made; and I discover daily by the
opening of his heart and thoughts unto me, the reasons you had to love him at
first; I come not therefore as his Solicitour but as his bare witness; and
assure you most undoubtedly, that I know not a man living more religious
toward the memory of his masters, more firm in performance of his duty, more
fervent in his passions, nor more passionately affected to your service then
himself. Now that he has lost M. the Marshall Scomberg, by whose commandment
I came expressly from Bordeaux, to offer him on his part all the contentment
he could wish; he thinks he has right after him to place his hope in you,
and that you will do him the honor to uphold with your protection the
affairs he has at Court. I concur with him in this opinion; and knowing
that in this so general a corruption of the world, this age of ours owes unto
you the last examples we see of goodness, and that without you neither the
dead should any more find pity, nor the miserable consolation; I have
conceived you will not take it ill that I confirm him in this belief, and
that I take this occasion to say that unto you which in the suddenness of my
departure, I had not time to say that I am perfectly and ever,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Angoulesme 23. November. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER XII.
SIR, you are a better man than you would have me believe you are. Your words
of Fire and Blood agree ill with the sweetness of your spirit, and having
received from you a Letter of challenge, I expect from you another of
friendship. You may make your profit of the good examples you have seen on
that side the Mountains, but follow not the Italian examples of being captious
and retaining of spleen, as if it were a jewel. It is not fit the holy week
should pass upon your choler without abating it. It would not be an act of
courage, but a hardness of heart, and the best extremities partake so much of
vice, that even supreme right is no better than supreme wrong. Play not
therefore the tyrant toward your friend, but stay your self within the bounds
of ordinary justice. The limits that part justice from wrong are not so well
marked out, but that one passes them often before he is aware; and it is
neither a lawful greatness to make ones self terrible to those he loves, nor
an honest resistance to stand obdurate to the prayers of men in misery. But
perhaps I offer remedies to one in better state than my self; perhaps I am
affrayd of in artificial choler, and am frighted with that which is but a
Vizard. It may be you have a desire to know in what degree I love you, and that
your hard dealing with me is but to try me; such experiments would prove
dangerous to any other man besides your self, but you may make them safely,
for I make you promise that my patience shall be more insensible then your
sense is tender. But yet muse a little upon the honor of our friendship, and
upon the opinion of the world. I make confession to you of my faults, and I am
told you publish briefes of your dislike; I have told you confidently that I
suffer in it, and because I tell it not with a good grace, you are offended
with the incivility of privacie. Me thinks you should not exact from a plain
country man so punctual a discretion, by living amongst clownes I have
forgotten all the good manners I learned with you: the wild man you had
civilized is returned back to his natural condition. I do not any longer
walk in the woods, I wander there, and had it not been to see my Lord Mayors
show, I had not been seen in the City, although to say the truth, so
obstinate a retyring might justly enough have been censured as a kind of
rebellion; and as the study of wisdom takes from me all admiration of vain
pomp, so yet it leaves me the reverence of lawful authority. And to this
purpose (that I may change the tenor of my discourse) I must tell you that I
am very well pleased with my voyage, and do not repent me to have performed a
small Complement which has discovered unto me an eminent virtue. I have
studied M. de Brassac now eight days together, I have observed him in public
and in private. I have seen him handle different subjects, with so equal
force, that I am even ashamed, that having so perfect knowledge of his own
Art, yet he knows mine much more better then my self. He is none of these
limited wits that count themselves full, if they have but three words of
Latin, and have but read one of Plutarkes lives: Take them out of certain
common places within which they entrench themselves and draw all discourse
thither, every where else they are utterly disarmed and without defense; but
his knowledge is so universal, and comprehends such an infinite number of
things that one cannot touch upon any point where he is not ready for you,
and to draw him dry I do not think there are questions enough in the world to
put unto him. In one day I have heard him discourse with Gentlemen about
hunting and husbandry; with Jesuits about Divinity, and the Mathematics, with
Doctors of less austere profession about Rhetoric and Poetry, without ever
borrowing a foreign term, where the natural were the fitter, and without
ever flying to authority where the case in question were to be decided by
reason. To answer a premeditated oration from point to point upon the sudden,
and to send back our orators more persuaded by his eloquence then satisfied
with their own, this I have seen him oftentimes do, and no man ever came to
visit him, whose heart he did not win with his words, or at least left in it
such an impression as is wont to be the first elementing and foundation of
love. No liberty can be so sweet as so reasonable a subjection; such a yoke
is more to be valued then the Mayor of Rochels Halberds, and when one is once
assured of the sufficiency of his guide, it is afterward but a pleasure to
be led. In less then one week he has new made all spirits here; has
fortified the weak, has cleared the scrupulous, and has given to all the
world a good opinion of the present, and a better hope of the time to come. I
vow unto you I never saw a man that had a more pleasing way of commanding, nor
better knew how to temper force and persuasion together. I have indeed known
some not unfit to command, but it has been in a Gally not in a City; such
might serve for excellent followers, but are never good to make Governors;
they understand not the Art of governing Freemen; there are even some beasts of
so generous a disposition, that it would be rudeness to carry a hard hand over
them; much more whom one might lead in his garter to curb them, besides a
bridle with a Cavasson. They think that power cannot subsist but by severity,
and that it grows weak and scorned, vds it be not frightfull and injurious.
This method and manner of governing is not like to come from the school and
discipline of M. the Cardinal, from whom nothing is ever seen to come that
relisheth not of the mildness of his countenance, and receives not some
impression from the clearenesse of his eyes. All that have the honor to come
near about him are known by this Character, and wear all the same livery,
though they be of different deserving. There is not so sullen an humorist that
is not mollified by his presence, nor so dull an understanding that he makes
not pregnant with a word of his mouth; this you know, and I am not ignorant of;
he makes powerful use of weak instruments, and his inspirations lift up
spirits to such a highth as their own nature could never carry them. He
needs in a man but a small seed of reason to draw from him exceeding effects
of prudence, and he instructs so effectually the grossest spirits; that what
they want in themselves they get by his instructions. These are works which
none can do but he, materials which none but he can put in frame; yet I
think I may say without offense, that this is more of his choice then of his
nature. To spirits that languished for want of room to stir themselves in,
he has given scope and employment, and where he has found a virtue
neglected, to make it as bright as it was solid; he has not forborne to crown
it with his friendship. There is not a mouth in all his Province that blesses
not his Election; and every man believes to have received from him that power
which he has procured to him, who will not use it but for our good. Amongst
the showtes of exultation which wait upon him in all places where he goes; the
joy of the people is not so fixed upon present objects, but that it mounts to a
higher cause, and gives thanks to the first moover of the good influences
which the lower heavens power down upon us. And in effect if Caesar thought
he took a sufficient revenge of the Africans, for their taking part with the
enemy, by placing Salust to be their Governor; who did them more hurt by his
private Family, then a Conqueror would have done with all his Army; by the
contrary reason we may gather that the true Father of his Country has had a
special care of us in advancing M. de Brassac to the government of this
Province, and meant herein to honor the memory of his abode there, and to make
happy that Land, where perhaps he first conceived those great designs which
he has since effected. I should not have spoken so much in this point if I
did not know that you mislike not in me these kinds of excess; and if it were
not the vice of Lovers now adays to speak of the object of their love without
all limits. Besides, I have been willing to make you forget the beginning of
my Letter by the length of the middle, and by a more pleasing second discourse,
to take from you the ill taste I had given you by the first. And so adue
Mounsieur Choler, never fear that I will provoke you again; it was my evil
Angel that cast this temptation upon me to make me unhappy; I might have been
wise by the example of -- whom you handled so hardly in presence of -- I shall
be better advisde hereafter: and will never be

Sir, But your, etc.
From Balzack 16. of April 1633.
To Mounsieur de Soubran. LETTER. XIII.
SIr, if you take me for a man hungry of News, you do not know me; and if I
have asked you for any, it is because I had none to tell you; and because I
must have something to say, I have done it against the stream of my resolution
quite, which is, to quit the world both in body and mind: but custom is a
thing we often fall into by flying it; and we swear sometimes that we will not
swear; I desire so little to learn that I know not, that I would be glad to
forget that I know, and to be like those good Hermites who enquired how cities
were made, and what kind of thing a King or a Commonwealth was; I am well
assured that Paris will not be removed out of its place that Rochell will not
be surprised again by Guiton; that petty Princes will not divest great Kings;
that favor will never want Panegyricks and Sonnets; that the Court will never
be without Sharkes and Cheaters: that Virtue will ever be the most beautiful,
and the most unprofitable thing in the world. And what can you write in the
general of affairs, that has not relation to one of these points? And for my
own particular, what can I hear, but that either some Book is written
against me, or that my Pension is like to be ill paid, or that I shall not be
made an Abbot, unless I be my self the Founder of the Abbey: such news would
be terrible to a man more interressed than my self, but to me, they are in a
manner indifferent, and trouble me no more, than if you should tell me it will
be foul weather all this Moon, or that the water is grown shallow in our
river, or that a tree in my Wood has been overturned by tempest. I have had
heretofore some pretentions to Church preferments, but now they are all reduced
to this one preferment of being a good Ch^stian; and so long as they cast not
upon Balzac the term of an Apostata, for the rest, I am well content with my
present condition and certainly desires so moderate, cannot ^use but be
successful, and I will never believe that ill fortune any more than good will
seek after me so far as this; or that it is possible for him to fall that
stands so low, yet if any devil, enemy of my advancement should envy my
retiring; and if any promoter should lay to my charge, that to get out off --.
I would corrupt --, I make my self this promise Sir, that you will stand
strongly in defense of your innocent friend, and that in so just a protection
you will embarque also that excellent personage, of whom you speak in your
letter. I am, as you know, unhappy enough not to know her, but seeing the
honest men of Greece have used to adore upon adventure, and built Altars to
unknown Deities, it may as well be lawful for me to use devotion to this
Saint upon the credit of the people of Rome, who have now these three years
looked upon her, as upon one of the true Originalls, whereof they revere the
Statues; they all agree in this, that since the Porciaes and the Corneliaes
there never was any thing scene comparable to this; and that those divine
women, which were the domestical Senate of their husbands, and the rivalls of
their virtue, have no other advantage over this French Lady, but that they died
in an age of funeral Orations. You send me word that you find her in the
same estate you left her, and that she is now as fresh and amiable as ever she
was, and I easily believe it; this long continued state of youth is no doubt
the recompense, of her extraordinary virtue: the calm within sweetens and
cleares the air without, and from the obedient passions of her mind, there
rises neither wind nor cloud to taint the pureness of her complexion, as
there are certain temperate Climates which bring forth Roses all the year
long; and where it is counted for a wonder, that such a day it was cold or
snowed: so are there likewise certain faces privileged, preserved to the end
of old age, in the happy estate of their infancy, and never lose the first
blossomming of their beauty. But it is not for a man buried in the darkness
of a Desert, to talk of the most illustrious matter that si in the world: it
befits me rather to read that over again which you have written, than to add
any thing to it, and for fear least any word should escape from me that is not
Courtly, and which may mar all I have said already, without further
discourse, I assure you that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 8. of August 1633.
To Mounsieur de la Nauue, Counselor to the King in his great Chamber. LETTER.
XIV.
SIr, I take great joy to hear you harken after me, and that you need no
remembrancer to put you in mind to be mindful of me. This thought of yours is
so much the more dear unto me, because it comes from a heart that ha^ none
vain or casual, but makes choice of the Objects it beholds, and of the Images
it receives: to be thought of by you, is to be worthy of ^eing thought of. This
ought to be the ambition of men that are worth ought, and a virtue that is not
approved of you, shows there is something in it that is defective. If then I
have this mark, I have the seal and confirmation of the true good, I have
both ^he good fortunes, that of Virtue, and that of your Favor, and herein at
least I have some resemblance of an honest man. There are some whom blind
chance has lifted up above you, of whom I cannot speak in this manner, one
may set their blame and their praise in equal degree of indifferency, and
there is no Obligation to follow them in their Opinions, but when they get it
by constraint, or else by purchase, all their greatness is in their Titles,
there scarce appears upon them one little beam of it in days of Ceremony;
and if they will have us to respect them, they must be feign to send a Herald
to put us in mind. For you Sir, it is not only upon the Bench that the world
reveres you, but your authority follows you wheresoever you are; she
accompanies you even in your ordinary conversation: you cannot so disguise your
self; but that I shall always take you for a Judge; and this gravity of your
countenance, which changes every word you speak into a Decree, and gives a
dignity to your very silence, may serve to verify that Paradoxe of the
Stoikes, That a wise man can never be a private person; and that Nature her
self makes him a Magistrate Monsieur Coeffeteat and my self, have often had
long discourses about this point, and it i^ not as we would have it, and as we
wish, the a man should be left at the bottom of the stairs, whose merit we
see ascended to the top; but this is the destiny of the be^ things; either
they are wholly neglected, o^ at most but half known: and I have seen i^ the
same place a Munkey set upon the top o^ a Piramis, and a masterpeece of
Phydias suffered to stand upon a very mean Base; but the satisfaction of your
conscience, and the testimony of your good report ought to be your comfort for
all such events. There are illustrious live^ of diverse fashions, but those like
yours, which cast a sweet and pleasing light, please me much better than those
that thunder and lighten. It is not the noise and the flashes that make the
fair days, it is a calm and clear Air; and a life led in tranquillity and
judgment, which is the work of Reason, is preferrable before one half of the
great success the world admires, which are but the extravagancies of Fortune.
See here the Decree of a Country Philosopher, and matter of meditation for one
of your walks at Yssy. To tell you true, I have a great longing to come upon
you one day on the sudden, and to surprise you in some of your conferences, but
it shall be then with a purpose to return as soon as I have seen you,
without so much as seeing Paris; to make you thereby see, I can with more ease,
go a hundred miles for a man I love, than four paces for the miracle of the
world. Such a bravery would be an affront, and subject to interpretation not I
suppose; yet I am assured thatthose who are diseased with opinion, and infected
with custom, would make no ill censure of it, and it little concerns me, that
the common people condemn me; if you, and those other good men do justify
me, and believe that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Ianu. 1622.
To Mounsieur Chaplain. LETTER. XV.
SIR, Expect not from me a Regular Answer to your letters; for besides that I
yield an absolute assent to all they contain, and that in treating with you, I
desire rather to believe than to dispute, and to be found faithful rather than
reasonable, I should do wrong to the acknowledgement I owe unto you, to make
you see it, in the pensiveness I am now in, and to dislustre so pure a matter
with the impression of so black a vapor. I therefore reserve it for fairer
days: when my mind shall enjoy its former serenity; and that I shall possess
it without distraction at that time if I continue my ill occupation, and after
I have played a Prince, it comes in my fancy to play a friend: you, I assure
you, must be the man I shall set before my eyes; and shall not seek a more
illustrious Original, nor a more remote: yet it grives me Sir, that you should
love with so little success: it is not reasonable you should weary your self
in a soil that will bear nothing, and that you should take pleasure to employ
your husbandry in tilling of stones and thorns; you can never dive to the
bottom of my ill fortune; you are, I deny not a powerful agent, but it must
be upon an apt subject; your industry is great, but Art corrects not destiny,
and I am ashamed to see, that all humane wisdom should be unprofitablely
employed in governing of me, when whole common wealths are governed sometimes
with less ado, a whole fleet would not put you to so much labor as one
poor bark; and to succor one particular person, you must enter combat
against heaven and earth. It is better Sir, that this perpetual Object of
scandal be removed by my absence; and that I leave peace to my friends by
leaving the field to my adversaries. This resolution is not so unmanly as some
would point it out unto me, change only the terms; and that which they call
cowardice and running away, is but to be better advised and to yield to the
time. I have read a word in a letter which Cicero writ to Brutus that confirms
me much in this opinion; You withdrew your self, says he, out of a corrupted
city, you gave place to Varlets; for you Stoickes say, That a wise man never
runs away. Cato himself, who would rather die, than live to see a Tyranny;
was he not resolved to go voluntarily into banishment for avoiding a more
supportable evil? And think you, that he had more reason to love his
liberty, than I to love my quiet? Or that his grief was more just than mine?
As all resistences are not honest, so neither are all flights shameful, and as
there are some naughty joys, so there are some reasonable griefs; and you
shall see in the Paraphrase of your friend, that for a disgrace which Saint
Paul received at Ephesus, his heart failed him, and he grew weary of his life.
The authority of so great an example, binds you to pardon in me, the
weaknesses you charge me with; for my self, me thinks I hear continually
sounding in my ears, the voice that cried to Arsenius, Fuge, sede, tace; which
seems to council me, to give my self satisfaction by my quiet, and to give
others contentment by absenting my self, and by my silence. Some further
reasons I will acquaint you with, when I shall have the honor to see you;
having no meaning to do any thing without your liking, and without your leave;
whose I am

Sir Most humble etc.
At Balzac 8. of April 1632.
To Mounsieur de Nesmond Counselor to the King, and Controller of the Princes
House. LETTER. XVI.
SIR, my dear Cousin, we were put in hope we should have the happiness to
see you in this country, and that here you would make one of the reposes of
your voyage, but you have not been pleased to make us so happy; It seems you
thought not our walks pleasant enough for you, you scorn now the fountains
of Maillou, and the river of Balzac; these sweet Objects, which heretofore
gained your inclinations, and enchanted the innocence of your tender years,
are not now able to excite in you the least desire, nor so much as to tempt
your graver age. I find in this something to be offended at, and whereof to
complain. If you had to do with a Poet, he would make a mighty quarrel
between you and the Deities of the Woods and Waters; and would send you most
reproachful Elegies in behalf of the Nymphs whom you have scorned. But it
makes well for you that I understand not the language of the Gods, and that I
can speak no otherwise than the common people do: this will defend you from a
number of naughty Verses; and I will say nothing to you more spightfull than
this, that you seem to reserve your self all for Paris, and fear to be
profaned with the baseness of a Village. Princes and their affairs leave not
in you so much as one poor thought for us; and the pleasures of the country
are too gross and meager, for a taste that is used to more delicate and solid
pleasures. You see Sir, my dear cousin, that my complaints are sweet, and
that I justify you in accusing you. It is certain, there is a part of the
active life, which one may call delightful; and though Virtue have her joy
with less tumult than Vice, yet the very secrecy of her joy augmenteth also
the sweetness, and vapors not out the purity thereof; and so it happens,
that while you sought but after honesty, you have found withal delight also:
you dreamed but of being virtuous and profitable to your Country, and into the
bargain, you have contentment also and pleasure for your self. For in effect
considering your humor, I doubt not but the pains you take, is your
sufficient recompense for the pains you take, and that your very action keeps
you in breath; or rather refreshes you; and as one in Aristotle said, That it
was a death to him, when he was not in some office; so I verily believe, that
to take away employments from you, were as much as to take away your life, and
that you would refuse even felicity it self if it were offered you without
having some thing to do. You do well to love a burden that graceth you more
than it weighes, and not to think it a trouble to be in a race which you have
entered with as much applause as they can desire that are going out. You have
been men's joy, from the instant you were first seen, and your many
employments that have since so happily succeeded, have but ratified the good
opinion that was had of you being yet unknown. There are some men that get
more reputation by playing upon advantage; but yours is a lawful acquest, and
this integrity which has nothing in it, either fierce or fearful, this
learning which is neither clownish nor quarrelsome this course which can avoid
Precipices without turning out of the right way, are none of the qualities with
which men use to abuse the world, none of the enchantments which you make use
of to dazzle our eyes. And though our eyes were capable of illusion, yet having
merited the grace and favor of a Prince, the clearest fighted the hea^ens ever
made, and whose gift I value less than his judgment; It is not for us any
longer to examine your sufficiency seeing he has chosen you for an instrument
of managing his affairs. You would not believe the pleasures that Madam
Co^pagnole and my self take in the consideration of this matter; and what
reflection we receive of all those good successes that accrue unto you; I can
assure you, she forgets you not in her devotions, and if God but hear her
prayers, you, need not make any wishes for your self; We promised our selves
we should see you in our Deserts, but since your honor calls you otherwhere;
it is reason we rest satisfied with so sweet a necessity, and to bear with
patience that the public has need of your service. It is far from me to
prefer a short satisfaction of my eyes before the long and durable joys I
expect from the progress of your reputation; and if I should desire that for
your coming hither you should put your self the farther off from your ends,
my desires should be indiscreet, and I should not be the man I ought to be.

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 1. October. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Pontac Monplesir. LETTER XVII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, if the counsel I have given you did not give me an
interest in the resolution you have taken, yet I could not choose but
acknowledge it to be good, considering the good success it has produced. It
is true that till now I never liked of long deliberations, nor of stayed lovers;
but seeing your wisdom has concluded in favor of your love, and that it is
no longer an idle contemplation of the person you love; I seem to conceive the
design you had in drawing out the lines of your love to such a length; in
which it cannot be said there has been time lost, but that you would taste
all the sweetness of hope before you would come to that of possession; this is
not to be irresolute but subtle, and not to make a stop of contentments but
to husband them. This is not to have an apprehension of being happy, but to
have a desire to be happy twice, so that in this point you are fully justified.
This circumspection which I accused wrongfully, and which is equally remooved
from Fury and Effeminatenesse, puts the passions into a just and durable
temper, and makes the mind capable of its felicity by a serious preparation;
and I vow unto you that the life you have begun was well worthy you should take
some time to study it; It is not fit to enter the state of marriage rashly, and
by the conduct of Fortune; all the eyes that prudence has are not too many to
serve for a guide in this business; many men fall into a snare whilst they
think to find a treasure, and errors are there mortal where repentance is
unprofitable; but God be thanked you are out of danger, and your happiness is
in sanctuary. There is no Nectar nor Roses now but for you; (accept from me I
pray this one word of a wedding Complement) and in the estate you are in, what
are you not? Since a Conqueror that is crowned is but the figure of a lover
that injoyes; the lover receiving that really which the Conqueror but dreams.
You offend not the peoples eyes with proud inscriptions, nor astonish them with
the clamor of your conquest; you celebrate your triumphs covertly, and draw no
man's envy upon you; you reign by your self alone, and all the pomp which
greatness draws after it, is not comparable to that which you enjoy in
secret. I am not acquainted with lawful pleasures, and ought not to be with
forbidden; but I have heard it said, that in the first there is a certain
peace of spirit, and a confident contentment which is not found in the other:
And as the Honey is less gathered from the flowers then from the deaw which
falls from the stars; so these chaste pleasures are seasoned from heaven and
receive their perfection from the heavenly grace and not from their own
nature. I have learned from the ancient Sages, that there is not a more ancient
nor a more excellent friendship then this; that in this sweet society greefes
are divided, and joys doubled, and that a good wife is a catholieon or
universal remedy for all the evils that happen in life. I doubt not but she
whom you have chosen is worthy of this name; and though I should hold your
testimony in suspicion; yet I have heard it deposed with so great advantage on
her part; and by so tender and judicious spirits, that I am not only glad in
your behalf for the good company you have gotten you, but give you thanks
also in my own behalf for the good alliance you have brought me. I am
exceeding impatient till I see her, that I may between her hands abjure my
wrong opinions; and if need be, make honorable amends before her for all the
blasphemies I have heretofore written against marriage. I solemnly by this
Letter engage my self to do it, and entreat you to dispose her, that she
may accept my retractations, which proceed from a heart truly penitent and
full of passion, to testify to you both, that I am

Sir my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 23. Septem. 1633.
To Mounsieur Huggens, Counselor and Secretary to my Lord the Prince of
Orange. LETTER. XVIII.
SIR, your Letter has run great hazards before it arrived here; It wandered
about seven months together, and that now at last it is come to my hands; I
ascribe it to the remorse of a man unknown, who being but half wicked,
contented himself only with opening it, but would not by any means that I
should lose it. Happy were I if I could as well recover other things I greeve
for, and that I could say, he were but strayed whom I loved with my heart; but
I have lost him for ever, and you are never able to restore me that I lent
you; yet I lay it not to your charge, nor to the charge of your innocent
Country. I am not of that man's humor, who spoke a thousand villainies against
poor Troy, and taxed all her Histories and Fables, because (forsooth) his
brother dyed there, and perhaps of a malady that he had gotten somewhere else.
My grief is wiser then his, I should take my loss unkindly at your hands, if
you were your self the richer for it, but now the loss is common to us both;
we both lament a common friend, and your self have rather the greater share in
this sad society, in as much as herein you have advantage over me, for having
performed to him the last duties. He saw your tears fall amongst his blood,
you filled your eyes and your spirit with all circumstances of his death, and I
doubt not but it hindered you from being perfectly sensible of the victory at
Mastrich, and to show a joyful countenance in the most joyful day of all your
Princes life. For my self, I am not as yet capable of consolation, yet have
laid upon my wound all the plasters Philosophy could minister. Me thinks my
grief is to me in place of my friend; I possess it with a kind of
sweetness, and am so tender of it, that I should think it a second loss, if
I had it not to pass my time withal; yet I must entreat it a little
forbearance, that I may have time to make you an account of your liberality,
and that you may know what is become of the presents you sent me; I received
them Sir after your Letter, and that by another kind of adventure. I have
imparted them to the worthiest persons of our Province, I am at this time
adorning my Closet with them, and make more reckoning of them then of all the
riches your Havens can show, or then all the precious rarities the Sea brings
to you from the farthest parts of the earth. There is as much difference
between your friends style, and that of other Panegyrists, as between the
stoutnesse of a Soldier and the coyness of a Courtesan. This manly eloquence
full of metal and courage, seems rather to fight then to discourse; and
rather to aid the King of Sweden then to praise him. The ordering of his
Tragedy is according to the rules and intention of Aristotle; precise decency
most religiously observed, The verses lofty and worthy of a Theater of Ivory.
Every part pleased me, but that of the Chorus'es even ravished me, and because
I sigh always after Italy, that Chorus of the Roman Soldiers put me in
passion; I find my self touched with it at the very quick, and in all
company where I come I cannot forbear crying out, as if I were in rapture with
divine fury: O laeta otia Formiae; Lucrini O tepids lacus, Baiarum O medii
dies; O sola Elysiis aemula vallibus: Lassi temperies Maris: Campani via
littoris, lia Baccho ac Cereri vetus, etc, I have only one little seruple to
propose unto you; I know not well why Tysiphone is brought in with Mariamne,
speaking of Styx, Cocytus and Acheron; and I cannot conceive how it is possi^le
a natural body should be formed of two as differing pieces as are in my
opinion, the Jewish religion and the Heathenish. My doubt grows from my
ignorance, and not from presumption: I ask, as desirous to learn, and not to
pick a quarrel, specially with a man, who in such Criticismes is a King, and
whom I acknowledge for the true and lawful successor of the great Scaliger; I
have read his two Tracts upon the Satyr of Horace, which are indeed two
Master-peeces; and I do not think, I ever saw together so much antiquity
renewed, so much reason displaied, so much subtlety fortified with so much
force. He stands not dreaming upon a word of no difficulty, erecting as it
were Trophies of like passages, after the fashion of our Note-makers now
adays, who heap up places upon places, and bring nothing in their writings,
but the cruditie and indigestion of their reading. He handles Grammar like a
Philosopher, and makes Books to be subject to Reason; and the authority which
time has given them to the Principles, which truth has established; he has
discovered that Idea of art, which the best workmen never yet came near, and
has added that last perfection, which shows spots and impuritie in the most
elaborate writings. I have a great design Sir, to go make my self an Artist
under his discipline, and to be at once both your Courtier and his Scholar. I
have thought upon this Voyage a year since; but I would feign your wars
would make passage for me the way I would go, and that there were nothing
Spanish between Paris and the Hage. The sanctity of Orators and Poets is not
reverenced over all the world, they bear no awe amonst Barbarians; these
public enemies would not spare Apollo himself, nor the Muses, and my person
would find as little respect at their hands as my Book did, which in full
council they caused to be burnt by the hands of the Marquess of Aytona, yet I
think you may say, you never heard speak of a more illustrious Executioner,
nor of one that does more honor to his trade; and that the Counts of Egmont
and Horn were not handled in their punishment with such pomp and state. I
dare not laugh Sir, at this extravagant cruelty. The Truce I had taken is
expired, and I cannot possibly stretch the leave which my grief gave me any
further. I therefore leave you to return to her, and end with swearing, Per
illos manes numina doloris nostri, that there is nothing in the world more
dear unto me than your friendship, and that I am with all my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 2. of February 1633.
To Mounsieur de la Nauue, Counselor of the King, in his first Court of
Enquests. LETTER. XIX.
SIR, my dear Cousin, I never doubted of your affection toward me, but I
thought it proceeded of pity rather then of merit; and that having nothing
considerable in me, but my ill fortune; your good nature was thereby only
excited to do me this charity, but now I see, you propose to your self a
more noble Object, and think to find a better reason for your loving me; yet
I know not whether it be so just as the former, and whether you may as lawfully
respect a vulgar person as you may protect an unfortunate? If I had had any
such seeds of goodness in me as you speak of, my ill fortune would have
stifled all their virtue. Nothing can bud forth in an air perpetually
tempestuous. It is not enough for the laboring man that he take pains in his
husbandry, and that his soil be good, but there must be a sweetness of the
season also to favor his travel: which I have hitherto proved so contrary,
that I wounder how I have the heart to be always planting for tempests to
spoil. I find more good for me in idleness than in labor, and more gain by
doing nothing than by doing well. When I am idle, I am at least at quiet; and
envy rests as well as I, but as soon as once I offer but to stir, there is
presently an alarm raised in the Latin Province: and opposition is made
before I have conceived any thing to be opposed. Other men's good deeds are
rewarded, mine only, if any of mine be worthy the name, must look for nothing
but defacing: a very hard suiteit would be, but to get their pardon: and I
follow not virtue, only without reward, but I follow her with danger. You
think not withstanding that I take a pleasure in this ungrateful occupation;
and that I have a greater forwardness to it, than I find resistance. You
think my spirit should never shrink for ill successes, and that of its own
fertiltie without either one beam of the Sun, or one drop of dew, and at
the mercy of all winds, it is able to budde and bring forth some thing. You
judge too favorably of a vigor that is half extinguished, and consider not
that melancholy indeed, is ingenious and pregnant when it comes from the
temper which Aristotle commends, but that it is dry and stupid when it
proceeds from the continual outrages of adverse fortune. And therefore Sir,
my dear Cousin, expect nothing from me to answer your expectation, and to
merit the veneration you speak of in your letter. I cannot endure such a great
word in your mouth; are you not afraid to come under my office of a Grammarian?
One such improper term is unexcusable, unless it be you had relation to that
old Verse, Res est sacra miser; or to that brave fellow in the controversies of
Seneca, who in the life time of the Orator Cestius, but upon the wane of his
spirit, affirmed that he reverenced his very Cynders, and would use to swear
by his shadow, and by his memory. It shall suffice me that you handle me in
this manner, that Mounsieur your President and your self would sometimes say
in lamenting me, he had been further off than now he is, if he had met with
fewer ambushes in his way. I require your recommendation of my service to that
rare personage, whom I dare not call the last of the French; I remember what
was laid to Cremutius Cordus his charge; but how ever, I account him worthy of
the ancient France, and of the Senate which we have not seen, that had the
honor to be Arbitrator between the Emperor and the Pope; a mediator between
the King and his People. I require from you but only the like favor, and I
acquit you of your veneration, provided that you keep for me your good will,
which I cannot lose if you be just, since I am.

Sir, My dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 16. Februa. 1634.
To Mounsieur Conrade. LETTER XX.
SIR, the account I make of you is far from being a scorn. One should do
you wrong to take you for any other than your self; and it would be a hard
matter to find a man for whom you could be changed without loss. I see
therefore your drift, you would not think the number of your Virtues
complete, if you added not humility, and you would make me see that there are
Capuchine Huguenots. Indeed a fine noveltie, but it belongs not to you, to be
so modest; nor to take upon you Perfection who have not yet attained
Conversion. To speak uprightly, your respects and your submissions are not
sufferable, men used to speak otherwise in the golden age; and to say nothing
more hardly of you, you are too unjust a valuer of your self. Do what you
can, you are never any more able to weaken the Testimony which Madam de Loges,
and Mounsieur Chapelain have given of you, then you can deny me your friendship
which I crave of you in their name. You see how contagious an ill example is;
and how I imitate you in condemning you. I can play the Reserved as well as
you, and seek for mediators and favor to obtain that favor you have granted
me already. These are the subtilties of my passion, to the end I may taste a
second joy; I will make you tell me twice one thing; I will have you once again
lay forth your letter to our former view, thereby to husband the better for so
long time, the pleasure I take to hear you assure me that you love me. Such
assurances should persuade me but little in the mouth of many men; but for you,
I know with what Religion you make your promises, and of what holiness your
word is. I know you approve of no lies, but those of the Muses, and that
fictions in Poetry you can bear withal, but banish them from your
conversation; I am glad therefore I have found one face among so many vyzards,
and that I can lay hold of something, I can feel, and that has truth in it.
It is nothing but the freedom of my mind that gives me the boldness to
approach other virtues, with all which I am at defiance, if I find not this
freedom in their company. By this Sir, you have wo^e me, and I must vow unto
you, that this syncerity whereof you make profession has been a wonderful
allurement to a man, that is no longer taken with the bravery or galantnes of
spirit. These flashes have so often abused me, that I am now grown to be
afraid of any thing looks r^d de, least it should be fire and burn me. I
suspect these Barks that are so painted and gilded over, I have often made
shipwreck in such: I desire those that are sound and safe, and enter them as
Vessels to sail in, and not as Galleries to walk in. When I speak of a
friend, I mean not a companion in trade or in disorder, nor one that can
return visites the next day aftet he has received them, and is not failing
in the least duties of a civil life, but I mean, a witness of the
conscience: a Physician of secret griefs, a moderatour in prospe ritie; and a
guide in adversity. I have some few left me of this sort, but have had many
losses, and very lately one, which but for you would be irreparable; you whom
God has sent to comfort me, and whom I substitute in the place of one of the
honestest men that was in France. Our contract if you please shall be short and
plain. I will propose no matter of luster to engage you in it; only I assure
you my heart, and a sincerity answerable to yours. It is now of proof from
the most dangerous Air of Christendom, I have brought it from Rome, I have
preserved it at Paris; It is not therefore likely that to deceive you, I am
come to lose it in a Village; and that I have any design to falsify my faith;
seeing I assure you, I will ever be

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 5. of February 1633.
To -- -- -- LETTER. XXI.
SIR, since you will have me to write that in a letter, which I spoke unto you
by word of mouth, this Letter shall be a second testimony of the account I make
of --, and of the feeling I have of the courtesies received from him. During
the time we had his company, I considered him with much attention; but in my
conscience observed nothing in the motions of his spirit, but great
inclinations to great designs, and to see him do wonders in the world, you
need wish him no more but matter of employment. He has all the Intendments
of an honest man, all the Characters of a great Lord: by these he gains men's
eyes in present, and their hearts in expectation, and afterward brings more
goodness forth than ever he promised, and exceedes expectation with
performance. And in truth, if this Heroic countenance had no wares to vent but
vulgar qualities, this had been a trick put upon us by Nature, to deceive us
by hanging out a false sign. The charge he exercises in the Church, is no
burden to him, he has in such sort acco^modated his humor to it, that in the
most painful functions of so high a duty, there lies nothing upon his
shoulders, but ease and delight. He embraces generally all that he believes
to be of the decency of his profession, and is neither tainted with the heat
which accompanies the age wherein he is, nor with the variety which such a
birth as his does commonly bring with it. In a word the way he takes goes
directly to Rome. He is in good grace with both the Courts, and the Pope would
be as willing to receive the Kings commendation of him, as the King would be to
give it. He has brought from thence a singular approbation, and has left
behind him in all the holy College a most sweet odor, and that without
making faces; or making way to reputation by singularity. For in effect, what
heat soever there be in his zeal, he never suffers it to blaze beyond
custom: his piety has nothing either weak or simple, it is serious all and
manly, and he protests, it is much better to imitate S. Charles, than to
counterfeit him. Concerning his passion of horses, which he calls his malady;
since he is not extreme in it, never counsel him to cure it, it is not so bad
as either the Sciatica or the ^out; and if he have no other disease but that,
he has not much to do for a Physician. One may love Horses innocently, as
well as Flowers and Pictures: and it is not the love of such things, but the
intemperate love that is the vice. Of all beasts that have any commerce with
men, there are none more noble nor better conditioned; and of them a great Lord
may honestly and without disparagement be curious. He indeed might well be
said to be sick of them, who can sed mangers of Ivory to be made for them, and
gave them, full measures of pieces of gold; this was to be sick of them, to
bestow the greatest part of his estate upon beautifying his Stable, and to make
a mock what men said or thought of choosing a Consul by his horses neighing.
You shall give me leave to tell you another story to this purpose, not
unpleasant. It is of Theophylact, Patriarch of Constantinople, who kept
ordinarily two thousand horses, and fed them so daintily, that in stead of
Barley and Oats, which to our horses are a feast, he gave them Almonds,
Dates, and Pistache nuts; and more than this, as Cedrenus reports, he watered
them long time before in excellent wine, and prepared them with all sorts of
precious odours. One day as he was solemnizing his Office in the Church of
Saint Sophia; one came and told him in his ear, that his Mare Phorbante had
foaled a Colt; with which he was so ravished, that instantly without having
the patience to finish his Service, or to put off his Pontifical Robes, he
left the mysteries in the midst, and ran to his Stable to see the good news
he had heard, and after much joy expressed for so happy a birth, he at last
returned to the Altar, and remembered himself of his duty which the heat of
his passion had made him to forget. See Sir, what it is to dote upon horses;
but to take a pleasure in them, and to take a care of them, this no doubt may
make a man be said to love them: and nevertheless not the less the wiser
man. Even Saints themselves have their pleasures and their pastimes, all their
whole life is not one continued miracle; they were not every day four and
twenty hours in ecstasy amidst their Gifts, their Illuminations, their
Raptures, their Visions; they had always some breathing time of humane
delight, during all which time they were but like us: and the Ecclesiastical
Story tells us, that the great Saint John, who has delivered Divinity in so
high a strain, yet took a pleasure, and made it his pastime to play with a
Partridge which he had made tame and familiar to him. I did not think to have
gone so far; it is the subject that has carried me away, and this happens
very often to me when I fall into discourse with you. My complements are very
short, and with men that are indifferent to me, I am in a manner dumb; but
with those that are dear unto me, I neither observe Rule nor Measure; and I
hope you doubt not, but that I am in the highest degree,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5. of January 1633.
To Mounsieur Godeau. LETTER. XXII.
SIR, there is no more any merit in being devout; Devotion is a thing, so
pleasing in your Book, that even profane persons find a relish in it, and
you have found out a way how to save men's souls with pleasure. I never found
it so much as within this week, that you have fed me with the dainties of
the ancient Church, and feasted me with the Agapes of your Saint Paul. This man
was not altogether unknown to me before, but I vow unto you, I knew him not
before, but only by sight; though I had sometimes been near unto him, yet I
could never mark any more of him than his countenance and his outside: your
Paraphrase has made me of his counsel, and given me a part in his secrets;
and where I was before but one of the Hall, I am now one of the Closet, and see
clearly and distinctly what I saw before but in clouds, and under shadows.
You are to say true, an admirable Decipherer of Letters, in some passages to
interpret your subtilty is a kind of Devotion, and thoroughout the manner of
your expressing is a very charm. I am too proud to flatter you, but I am just
enough to be a witness of the truth; and I vow unto you, it never persuades me
more that when it borrowes your style. There reflects from it a certain flash
which pleases instantly as beauty does, and makes things to be lovely before
one knows they are to be loved. Your words are no way unworthy of your
Author, they neither weaken his conceits by stretching them out at length, nor
scatter the sense by spreading it out in breadth. But contrariwise the
powerful spirit which was streightened within the bounds of a concise style,
seems to breath at ease in this new liberty, and to increase it self as much
as it spreads it self: he seems to pass from his fetters into triumph, and
to go forth of the prisons of Rome where Nero shut him up, to enter into a
large kingdom, into which you bring him with royal magnificence. There are
some so curious palats, they cannot relish the language of the Son of God,
and are so impudent as to accuse the holy Scriptures of clownishnesse and
Barbarism, which made Monsieur --, who died Archbishop of Benevent, that he
durst not say his Breviary, he was afraid to mar his good Latin by contagion
of the badde, and to take some tincture of impuritie that might corrupt his
eloquence. I will not speak at this time what I conceive of his scruple; only
I say that if in the vulgar Translation there be Barbarism, yet you have made
it civil, and if our good Malherbe should come again into the world, he would
find nothing in your paraphrase that were not according to the strictness of
his Rules, and the usage of the Court whereof he spoke so often. Some other
time we will confer about the Preface, and the letters I received, which I
have in a manner all by heart, but specially I have culled out these dear
words to print in my memory, and to comfort my spirits. A little patience will
crown you, all their throws seem like those of sick men, a l^tle before
they di^, in which I think there is neithers malice nor f^ce, if you can but
despise them, Prefer the better side before the greater, and the Closet
before the Theater. Honest persons are for you, and I make account you care not
much for pleasing others. The people have often times left Terence for dancers
upon the Rope, and banished Philosophers, to gratify Iesters. I have nothing
to add to this; and will take heed how I sow Purple with packethread. I
content my self Sir, at this time to assure you that I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzack 1c. May 1632.
To Mounsieur Thibaudiere. LETTER XXIII.
SIR, I will not raise to you the price of my tears, though I have shed them
for you 8. days together: I content my self to tell you that I am now
comforted since, the news of your death, is changed into tidings of your hurt;
and that I am made assured, you may be quitted of it, for a little pain and a
little patience. I know well that Virtue is more happily employed in well using
honest pleasures, than in patient bearing troublesome crosses, and that without
an absolute distemper in the taste, one can never find any sweetness in
pain: yet you shall confess unto me, that there is a kind of contentment in
being lamented; and though the joys of the mind be not so sensible as those
of the body, yet they are more delicate and more subtle, at least, you have
come to know of what worth you are by the fear, which all honest men were in
to lose you, and that in a time when half the world weighs the other way; and
every one reserves his lamentation for his own miseries; yet all in general
have mourned for you, in such sort Sir, that you have had the pleasure to hear
your own Funeral Oration, and to enjoy the continuance of a happy life, after
receiving the honors done to worthy men after death. If the war of Italy
continue till Winter, I will come and learn from your own mouth, all the
particulars of your adventures, and I shall then know if your Philosophy have
not been moved, and waxed pale, at the sight of the Probe, and of the Rasour.
In the mean time do me the honor to be mindful of him who exceedingly
honors you, and to keep for me that part in your affection which you have
promised me, since I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 29. July 1630.
To Mounsicur Gyrard, Secretary to my Lord the Duke de Espernon. LETTER. XXIV.
SIr I had heard that before, which you sent me word off by your footeman; and
had rejoiced already, for the new Dignity of Mounsieur the President Segnier.
It seems you think he is made Keeper of the Seals, for none but for you, and
that no Feast for the joy of it should be kept any where, but at Cadillac.
Within these foure^ days, you shall see it kept all the Country over; it is a
favor the King has done the whole Realm. It is not so much for the purity of
the Air, and for the fruitefulnesse of the earth, that we ought to call it a
happy year, as for the election of worthy Magistrates. I therefore take a joy
in this News, (...) Lam a Subject of the Kings; and this is my first part of
joy I have in it: but beyond this, I have a second Right of rejoicing, in that
I am interessed in the advancement of a modesty, which I know; and make account
to be made happy, by the prosperity of him, of whose honesty I am assured. I
put not forth this last word, at adventure: I am ready to make it good, against
whosoever shall think it rash, and I know he has preservatives against all
the Poisons of the Court; and a judgment that cannot be corrupted with all the
bribes of Fortune. There is nothing of so high a price, for which he would be
willing to leave his virtue: if he had lived in Neroes time; he had been a
constant Martyr, but living now under a just Prince he will prove a profitable
Officer. To preserve a life, which is to continue but a few days: he would not
obscure that life, which ought to ^ast in the memory of many ages: and the
least ^ot upon his honor, would be more insupportable to him, then the
effusion of all his blood. He knows that in the administration of Justice,
being the Interpretor of God; he cannot work of himself; that this Divine Act
ought to be a General Suspension from all humane affections, and that in the
exercise thereof, he is no longer at his liberty, to show love or hatred;
revenge or gentleness. He considers that he makes not law, but only declares
it, that he is a Minister, and not a Master of his Authority, and that the
Sovereignty is in the Law, and not in himself. This is the reason why in every
cause he censures, he bethinkes himself of his own proper cause, which shall
one day be censured; he so judges, as if Posterity were to take a review of
his Judging; and as though the present time, were but subalternate to the
future. Thus I have heard him to make his account; and from his Principles I
have drawn my conclusions, and in a conference I had sometimes with him; he
seemed to me a better man then I have set him forth. In such sort Sir, that I
am not of a mind to contradict you, in your writing of him to me, you say
nothing which is not of my knowledge, and in my writing of him to you, I do
nothing but follow your conceits. Never fear that the common errors will
deprave his Spirit, he has laid too sure a foundation in the knowledge of
Truth, he is too strongly confirmed in the good Sect. Having often and
seriously meditated on the condition of humane affairs, he values them just as
much as they are worth, but he adds nothing by opinion, he hates neither
riches nor authority; this were the peevish humor of the Cynicks, to hate a
thing that in it self is lovely, he makes use of them after the manner of the
Academy, and of the Lycaeum, which never thought them impediments to
happiness, but rather aides and furtherances to Virtue. Or may we not say more
probably that he has drawn his doctrines from a Spring nearer hand; and that
he has not gone out of himself to find out the truest wisdom? He has
examples at home, which may serve him for Idaeas of perfection, and Sages in
his own race, which are Artists of virtuous life. Whilst he governes himself
by their Rules, he may well pass by all foreign doctrines; and having his
diseased Uncle before his eyes; he need not care to have Socrates for a
myrrour: Quippe malim unum Catonem quam trecentos Socratas. The memory of this
illustrious personage is in such veneration thorough all France, and his name
has preserved so excellent an Odor in the prime Tribunal of Christendom;
that it is not now so much the name of a Family; as it is the name even of
integrity and constancy it self. Remember the Greek Epigramme I showed you
in a Manuscript; which says, that in a place at Athens when one named
Plutarch, there was an Echo answered Philosophy, as taking the one for the
other, and making no difference between the two. By the like reason the Muses
might use the same Figure, and act the like miracle, in favor of this new
Pillar of justice. They never need to use reservations; nor fear too deep
engaging themselves, whatsoever they lay forth before hand for his glory, shall
all be allowed them again in the reckoning. Having been bredde up in their
bosom; and being entered into their Sanctuary, he will never suffer them to
stand waiting and catch cold at his gate, no that a Swytzer shall keep them
out from entering his base Court. They shall never have I assure my self that
unhappy advantage to have given him all; and receive back nothing from him
again, to have enriched his mind with a thousand rare Knowledges, and then
hardly get him to seal them an acquittance. Let us now come to the other part
of your Letter; and assay to satisfy your Doctor concerning his Objection.
He finds fault with me, because I praise the Pope for his beauty, and says
that such praise is for women and youth, and belongs not to old men and
Priests. First Sir I answer, he wrongs me in changing my terms; for I make a
great difference between beauty and a good Visage: of this I spoke in the
person of the Pope, and should never have thought I had committed a sin,
though I had spoken of the other also. As concerning age, you know there are
beautiful old men, though there be not beautiful old women, and you remember
that ancient personage, who by report of History was of equal pleasing to all
companies thorough all the ages of his life. As concerning the quality, besides
that God rejected in sacrifice all lean and unsound Oblation, ^e required also
to have hansome Priests, and you may show your friend in the Books of Moses,
that not only the lame and pore-blinde, but even the flat nosed, were exclused
from being Ministers in sacrificing. But if being as he is a profane Doctor,
the holy Scriptures do not please him; yet he might have remembered that old
word of the Tragic Poet, (...), upon which I had an eye when I said, This
Visage worthy of an Empire. And yet more being a Gascogne Doctor, I wounder
he never read the Panegyricke, which a country man of his pronounced at Rome
before the Emperor Theodosius; where he should have found these words;
Augustissima quaeque species, plurimum creditur trahere de Coelo; sive enim
Divinus ille animus venturus in corpus, dignum prius metatur hospitium, sive
cum venerit fingit habitaculum pro habitu suo; sive aliud ex alio crescit; and
cum se paria junxerunt utraque major a sunt, parcam Arcanum Coeleste rimari;
Tibi istud soli pateat imperator cum Deo consorte secretum. Illud dicam quod
intellexisse hominem and dixisse fas est; talem esse debere qui a gentibus
adoratur cui toto orb terrarum privata vel publica vota redduntur; a quo petit
Navigaturus serenum, Peregrinaturus reditum, Pugnaturus auspicium. Virtus tua
meruit imperium, sed virtuti addidit forma suffragium. Jlla praestitit ut
oporteret te principem sieri; haec ut deceret. In this discourse, there are
some terms which yet may seem fitter for a Pope than for an Emperor: and
here is to be noted, that Theodosius was no young man, when Latinus Pacatus
praised him thus for his beauty, for it was after his defeat of the tyrant
Maximus; and when after many victories obtained against the Barbarians, he was
in full and peaceable possession of his glory. Sometime before this Gregory
Nazianzon had upbraided the Emperor Julian for his ill favored Visage, for
the ill feature of his face, and for other deformities of his body, of which
nevertheless he was not guilty. Though one might here question the holy
Orator, whether in doing this he did well or no? Yet from hence we may at
least gather, that the qualities contrary to these he blames, ought justly and
may be lawfully made account of, and that such praises which reflect upon the
Creatours glory, are much more Christian than those accusations which trench
upon the scorning of his knowledge. Your friend therefore is certainly more
severe than he need to be. He is much to blame to reject in this sort the
blessings of heaven, and the advantages of birth; and to imagine that holiness
cannot be Exemplar and Apostolic, unless it be pale and lean, and look
like one were starved. These are the dreams of Tertullian, who will have it,
that our Savior was in no sort beautiful, and therein gives the lie to all
Antiquity, and to the tradition of the whole Church. He draws a Picture for
him, which is not only injurious to his Divine, but dishonorable also to his
humane Nature. This in my opinion is one of his greatest errors, and which
most of all startles me in reading his Books. If he would have it, that his
watchings and abstinence had dried up his blood, and made him look ghastly; it
may perhaps be granted him: but to say, that to the burnt color of Afric,
he added also that of burnt Melancholy, and of overflowing choler; I like not
such accusing, either the Sun of that country, or the temperature of that
body, but leave every one in his natural estate; and so should he have done.
But to go about to disfigure the most beautiful amongst the children of men,
and to eclipse all the beams and luster of a divine countenance, this is an
abuse which no patience can bear, no charity can ever pardon. You wondered at
this strange opinion when I last showed it unto you; and I perceived you
suspected I did him wrong; now therefore to justify my credit with you, and to
let you ree I did it not to abuse you: I send you here the passages I promised
you to look at. The first is in his Book of Patience; where Christ is called
Contumeliosus sibi ipsi. The second in his Book against the Jews, where he
is said to be, Ne aspectu quidem honestus, but hear the third, which will
fright you to hear, in his Tract of the flesh of Christ; Adeo ut nec humanae
honestatis corpus fuit; tacentibus apud nos quoque Prophetis de ignobili
aspectu ejus, ipsae passiones, ipsaeque contumeliae loquuntur; passiones quidem
humanam carnem; contumeliae vero inhonestam. An ausus esset aliquis ungue summo
perstringere corpus novum? Sput aminibus contaminare faciem nisi meruentem,
etc. Let us see what Mounsieur Rigaut thinks of this; and whether he be of
these sharp and sour ones that would take from heaven its stars, and from
the earth its flowers. Certainly my censure is of this number; for I perceive
beauty offends him, and he would easily subscribe to Tertullians opinion. Yet
say no more to him of all this, but that which he must needs know, and spare
sending out a second Process against a man that has too much of the first,
and deserves you should take some care of his quiet; since he is from the
bottom of his heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 10. of March. 1633.
To my Lord the Bishop of Nantes. LETTER. XXV.
SIR, It is told me from all parts that you speak of me, as of one that is
dear unto you, and of my ill fortune, as of a thing that concerns you. If
this tenderness proceeded from a soft effeminate spirit, yet it would not be
without merit; and oblige me infinitely unto you; but now that it comes from a
feeling of the purest spirit in the world, and the least capable of weakness;
how much ought I to esteem it, and of how great price to value it? It wants
not much of making m^e love that grief which procures me so glorious a
consolation; and I vow unto you, that to be pitied of you, is a more pleasing
thing than to be favored of the Court. In that country men go upon snares and
ruins, the best places there are so slippery that few can stand upright; and
if the miserable pretenders avoid a sudden falling, it is by enduring a tedious
hanging, receiving perpetual affronts, and returning perpetual submissions. I
therefore like much better to hide my self here with your good favor, and my
own good quiet, than to bear a show there with their frights and sour
looks; and I bless the winds, and count my Shipwreck happy which has cast
me back upon my old home. Some that were more sensible than my self, would
in this case complain of the world; but I content my self to forget it: I
will neither have war, nor commerce with the world: I have sounded a retreat
to all my passions; as well those that be troublesome as those that be
pleasing; and I protest unto you Sir, I should read with more delight, a
relation of one of your walks at Cadillac, then the most delightsome passage
of all the German History; when I think upon you in company with --, me thinks
I see Laelius come to visit Scipio, and confirming him in the resolution he
has taken to stand a loofe from the tumults and turbulencies of worldly
affairs, and by a quiet retreat to place his virtue, and his glory in a sure
hold. I am extremely glad of the honor he will do my father to pass this
way, and bring you along with him; and you may well think that after this I
shall not reckon our Village inferior to Tempe or to Tyvoly. If it were not
for the fit of an Ague which is now leaving me, but very quickly to return, I
would go as far as Rochel to get before this good fortune, that I might be
at the first opening of those Largesses of the Church, which a mouth so holy
and eloquent as yours must needs distribute. But I am not happy enough to see
you, and gain a Iubilee both at once; It must be your pleasure to be so
gracious as to accept of such a compliment as I am capable of; and to rest
assured with my assuring you by this messenger that I am, and always will be
with all the forces of my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 13. May, 1633.
Another to the same. LETTER. XXVI.
SIR, there are some of your bounties I have cause to complain of; they are
such as cannot be acknowledged, and in the least of your actions you are so
great, that if I take measure of my self by you. I cannot appear but very
little. Your liberty makes me rich, but withal it discovers my necessity,
there being no proportion between you and me, how extreme soever my passion
be, it can be no competent price for yours, and in the Commerce that is
between us, I return you but Flints for Diamonds, yet I present them to you
but in forma pauperis, not as a Mountibanke, and know I give you nothing though
I keep nothing for my self. I am well assured Sir that I honor you
infinitely, but am infinitely unsatisfied to offer you so mean a thing; there
is no reasonable man that does not as much, and since so much is due to you for
only your virtue, how much am I to pay you more for your affection? Of this
last moyitie I am altogether Non solvent; my services; my blood are not all
worth it; and I confess unto you, I shall never be able to deserve but these
four words of your Letter, Non discedo abs te Mi Fili, sed avellor; nor those
Delicias in Christo meas; nor this, Dulce decus meum, with which you graced me
at another time. Mounsieur Gyrard who knows all my secrets, and offers to be
an agent for me with you, will tell you with a better grace how sensible I am
of your so great favors, and how proud of so illustrious an adoption as you
are pleased to honor me with, of which I make far greater reckoning then to
be adopted into the family of the Fabians or the Marcelli; you shall also hear
by him, that since your departure from hence, you have been (I may say)
solemnly invocated, and most honorable commemoration has been made of you in
all our innocent disorderly Wakes. Our Curate believes verily that your
presence has brought a blessing to the fruits of our Parish, and we look for
better Harvests then our neighbors, who had not the happiness thereof as we
had. There is therefore just cause that every week we make a feast upon the
day of your coming to Balzac, Et ut tibi tanquam futuro in posterum loci Genio
non uno poculo libetur. If this kind of acknowledgement will content you, I
shall perfectly acquit my self of performing my duty, having learned in
Lorraine, and the Low Countries the means of testifying that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 6. of June 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XXVII.
SIR, though I know the good deserts of -- are not unknown unto you, and that
you need no foreign commendation to increase your respects toward him, yet
I cannot hold from doing a thing superfluous; and assure you by these few lines
that it will be no blemish to your judgment to let him have your testimony of
his piety. Ever since the time he renounced his error, he has continued
firm and steadfast in the doctrine you taught him: of an erroneous Christian
you made him an Orthodox, and your hand is too happy to plant any thing that
does not prosper. He is therefore your workmanship in Christ Jesus, and
otherwise so perfect a friend of mine that I know not, if in the order of my
affections, I ought not to set him in equal rank with my own brother. This
at least I know, that the least of his businesses is the greatest of mine, and
I will not only part your favor between him and me, but will become your
debtour for the whole my self alone. I am now polishing those writings which I
had condemned, but that you asked their pardon; and since it is your will they
should not perish, I revoke my sentence, and I am resolved your self shall be
the other person of my Dialogue; after the example of that Roman you love so
well, whose books of Philosophy are commonly his conferences with Brutus, or
other Sages, the true and natural judges of such matters; yet Sir it is
impossible for me to dissemble any longer a grief I have at my heart, and to
end my Letter without letting you see a little cut you have given me there; you
made me a promise to come back by Balzac, and now you have taken another way:
Thus the wise men of the East dealt with Herod; yet I am neither tyrant nor
enemy to the Son of God. This kind of proceeding is far unlike the Belgicke
sincerity, and it is not fit for Saints to mock poor sinners. But how
unkindly soever you deal with me, I can never turn Apostata, and should you
prove more cruel, I should yet never be,

Sir, But your, etc.
From Balzac. 15. October. 1633.
To -- -- -- LETTER. XXVIII.
SIR, since you have taken pleasure in obliging me, I will not have you have
the grief to loose your obligation, nor that my incompetent acknowledgment
should make you have the less stomach for doing good. I know your goodness
is clear and free from all foreign respects, and has no motive but it
self; it is not at any man's prayers that the Sun, rises neither does he
shine the more for any man's thanks; your courtesies are of like condition:
Your favors have not been procured by my making suite; and as of my part
nothing has gone before the kindnesses I have received, so on your part I
assure my self you expect not that any thing should follow them; yet something
must be done for examples sake, and not to give this color for showing little
courtesy to such as complain that men are ungrateful. The place where you
are is full of such people; all commerces are but Amusements, and to make men
believe the whole world is given to deceive; and it is a great merit in you
that you can follow so forlorn and solitary a thing as truth is; in a Country
where Divines maintain her but weakly, and where she dares scarce be seen
in a Pulpit, does it not show an extraordinary courage to take upon him to
distribute her amongst the pretenders, and that in open Theater? It is no mean
hardiness to be good at the Court, to condemn false Maxims where they have
made a Sect, and where they have gotten the force of Laws. I have been
assured you make profession of this difficult virtue, and that in the greatest
heat of calumny; and the coldest assistance that ever a poor innocent had,
you have been passionately affected in my behalf, being altogether unknown
unto you, but by the only reputation of my ill fortune, and even at this
present you are taking care of some affairs of mine which I in a manner had
abandoned, and upon the report you heard of my negligence you make me offer of
your pains and industry. The only using your name were enough for all this,
I might well spare my own unprofitable endeavors, where my negligence being
favored by you shall without all doubt be crowned. You have heard speak of
that Grecian whom the love of Philosoph^e made to forget the tilling of his
ground; and of whom Aristotle said that he was wise, but not prudent. He
found a friend that supplied the defect of his own ill husbandry, and repaired
the ruins of his house. If my estate was like his, I should expect from you
the like favor; but I ask not so much at this time. All that I desire now, --
has promised me a dozen times over; and I see no reason to distrust an Oracle.
He is neither inspired by any false Deity, nor has made me any doubtful
answer; so that resting my self upon this foundation, there seems to have
been a kind of Religion in my negligence: and I am not altogether in so much
blame, as -- would make you think me. He is, I deny not, an Author worthy
to be credited; and his testimony ought to be received; but yet he has not
the gift of not erring, and never believe him more, then when he assures you
that I am.

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 9. of Feb. 1630.
To Mounsieur du Pleix, the Kings Historiographer. LETTER. XXIX.
SIR, since the time that persecution has broken out into flames against me,
I never received more comfortable assistance then from your self, and I
account your strength so great, that I cannot doubt of the goodness of a cause
which you approve. You were bound by no Obligation to declare your self in my
behalf, and you might have continued Neutrall with decency enough, but the
nobleness of your mind has passed over these petty rules of vulgar Prudence;
and you could not endure to see an honest man oppressed, without taking him
into your protection. This is to show me too much favor in a Kingdom where
Justice is no better than Mercenary, and where payment comes not, but after
long soliciting. I know well that the soundest part is of my side; and that my
state is not ill amongst the wise; but on the other side, there are so many
opposites on the By, make war upon me; that I am ready to leave my self to
the mercy of the multitude, and to be persuaded by the number of my enemies,
that I am in the wrong. It is therefore no small Obligation I am bound to you
in, that you have preserved the liberty of your judgment amidst the
altercations and factions of passionate men, and have taken the pains to
clear a truth, which is to me of great advantage, and was to you of small
importance. I do not desire that men should count me learned; this quality
has often troubled the peace of the Church; and they are not the ignorant that
make Schisms and Heresies. And less I pretend to the art of well speaking;
many bad Citizens have used this as an instrument to ruin their country, and a
dumb Wisdom is much more worth than an ill minded eloquence. That which I
desire, and which would trouble me much to have taken from me is honesty; of
which only I make profession, and without which we are never able to attain
salvation, where with all the Greek and Latin of our Books we may incur
perdition. Mounsieur Gyrard, a man you dare trust, and one that has never
borne false witness, will answer for me concerning this last point. He has
seen my soul to the very bottom, and can assure you without deceiving you,
that I am no lover of vice; and if you desire assurance that I am an extreme
lover of virtue, he will enter into bond for me that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 12. Aug. 1630.
To Mounsieur Maynard. LETTER. XXX.
SIR, that sorrow is happy which has you for a comforter. I find more
contentment in your compassionating me, then I find affliction in others
persecuting me: and I am far from wishing ill to an age, to which I am
beholding for so excellent a friend. In this respect I easily pardon it, the
wrong you say, it has done me; and should be more unjust than it self is; if
being beholding to it for a treasure; I should think much to partake of its
iron and rust. It is not now only that opinion governes the world; there has
been disputing against Reason in all ages. Contentions and Heresies have ever
been, and the truth it self was not believed, when it came into the world in
person and would have spoken. I seek not the favor of the multitude, it is
seldom gotten by honest and lawful means; and in that Enchanters have
advantage over Prophets. I seek the testimony of few; I number not voices but
weigh them: and to show what I am, one honest man is Theater enough. Therefore
never trouble your self that things have befallen me as I made account they
would, and never ask for reason of the vulgar who have it not. Ignorance can
never be just, nor go right in the dark: Alarums are given, and surprises are
made by the favor of night: this is the time of murders and robberies, she
the mother of dreams and phantasmes. Your self have had your part in this
experience as well as others. And at this very time I am talking with you, it
may be you are accused by some for being a miscreant, for not believing that
Saint Gregory made prayers to God for Trajans soul; or that Saint Paul was
ever a bosom friend of Seneca. It may be you are called Haguenot for doubting
the infallibility of Philarchus, and denying some of his miracles. It may be
you are charged with seeking in vain to persuade a Master of Art, that
Aristotle had as much learning as Ramus; and that Ciceroes style is as good as
that of Lipsius. What shall I say more? It may be your dear and well beloved
Martial puts you to more pains to defend him than to imitate him: some
Scholar of Muret maintain boldly against you, that he is a beastly Buffon;
and perhaps the contrary will not be believed upon your bare word.

Forsitan and stupidas bona carmi^na perdis ad aures.
It is fit to laugh at such disorder, and not to grow in choler; and if you
will make a Satyr of it, that it be of the Charocter of Horace, and not of
Iuvenal. I cannot abide victories that are cruel; I ask mercy for my enemies,
and love that my revenges should be imperfit, and that your Pen should not be
bloody, as indeed it could not be, but of a base obscure blood, and to put you
into a quarrel unworthy of you, I make too great a reckoning of your valor,
and am too much,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 20. March 1632.
To Mounsieur Descourades. LETTER XXXI.
SIR, my dear cousin, if I could with any honesty leave the business I have
in Angoumois: -- should not go into Languedoc without me; and I would make
this journey of purpose only to have the happiness to embrace you; you would
know me presently by the old yellowness of my face; and thereupon the force
of blood would draw along with it a little tenderness, and I do not believe
but you would make a difference between your own and strangers. The effects
of Grace destroy not the affections of Nature; they only take away that which
is impure and earthly; and I assure my self you do not love me less than you
did, but that you love me in a better fashion. I am told that the kind of life
you have chosen is not austere, but only to your self, and that your thorns
prick no body else; in truth, a devotion that pleases me exceedingly, and I
could never away with this studied sadness, which disguiseth the hatred it
bears to men, under pretense of the love of God. I am right glad you have
taken the other way, because we may now come safely to you, and never be
afraid your virtue should scratch us. Christian Philosophy has nothing in
common with the Cynicke. This disguiseth, and that reformeth; one composeth the
countenance, the other regulates the spirit; and indeed without an exact
managing the superior part: all the pain that is taken about the inferior is
to no purpose without that, Mortification is not so good as Carnalitie; and if
you do nothing but change your cloth of gold for a russet coat; and your
cutworke band for a demi collar, you shall no doubt be a loser by the change.
But the case is not so; you have left cares and trouble, for calmness and
quiet; and you possess a happiness which Kings can neither keep with
themselves, nor suffer amongst their neighbors; I speak of Peace, which in
vain is expected from their Alliances and from their Leagues, being not to be
obtained but only of God, and who gives it not but to his friends. You are a
happy man to be of that number, and you may believe me that I am not troubled
about it, seeing there is good hope I may have a benefit by it my self, and
that your prayers may draw me after you, I doubt not but they are of great
power and efficacy, and doubt as little that I am my self of the number of
those you hold dear unto you, but as one that has more need than any other,
I conjure you to double them unto me, who am in heart and soul,

Sir my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzack 4. May 1633.
To Mounsieur D' Andilly, Counselor of the King in his Counsels. LETTER XXXII.
SIR, I perceive that Mounsieur the great Master is a great extender of
Expositions, and has tied you to explain your self in a matter whereof I
never doubted. Herein he has exceeded his Commission, and done more than he
had in charge to do. I seek no new assurance of your friendship; this were to
show a distrust in the old, whereas the foundation already laidis such that
makes me forbear even ordinary duties, for fear I should make show to need
them, and as if I would hold by any other strength then your own inclination.
Care and diligence, and assiduitie are not always the true marks of sincere
affections, which I speak in your behalf as my own: Truth walks now a days
with a less train, men use not to make open profession of it, but rather to
confess it as a sin: her enemies are strong and open, her adherents weak
and secret: yet Sir, if she were in more disgrace, and were driven out of
France by Proclamation: I should believe you would be her receiver, and to
find her out, I should go directly to Pompone. I therefore never doubted of
your love; God keep me from so evil a thought, only I marvelled that -- knew
nothing of it, and that you let him take possession of his government, without
recommending unto him, your friends there. To satisfy my self in this point;
I said in my mind, that certainly this proceeded from the great opinion you
had of his justice; and that conceiving there would not be with him any place
for Grace or Favor; you would not do me a superfluous office. This is the
interpretation I made of an omission, which in appearance seemed to accuse you;
and this is the conjecture I made of your silence, before I came to know the
cause. Now I see I was in the wrong, to imagine you had such subtle
considerations; or that you were restrained by such a cowardly wisdom which
dares not assure the good to be good, least such assuring should corrupt it.
For my part I renounce a prudence that is so dastardly and scrupulous, that
fears to venture a word for a virtuous friend, because this friend is a man,
and may perhaps lose his virtue. You do much better than so, and Pam glad to
find you not so jealous of the glory of your judgment, but that you can be
contented to be slighted and scorned, when it is for the benefit of a friend
you love: let us leave fleame and coldness to old Senators; and never make
question whether we ought to call them infirmities of age, or fruits of
reason: These are good qualities for enabling men to judge of criminal causes,
but are nothing worth for making men fit to live in society: and he, of whom
it was said, that all he desired, he desired extremely, seems to me a much
honester man than those that desire so coldly; and are so indifferent in their
desires. If you were not one of these violent reasonable men, and had not some
of this good fire in your temper, I should not have your approbation so good
cheap. That which now galls you would not at all touch you; and things which
now descend to the bottom of your soul, would pass away lightly before your
eyes. There came yesterday a man to see me, who is not so sensible of the
pleasures of the mind, and took great pity of me and my Papers: he told me
freely that of all knowledges which require study, he made reckoning of none
but such only as are necessary for life; and that he more valued the style of
the Chanc^ry than that of Cicero; he more esteemed the penning of a Chancery
Bill, than the best penned Oration that ever Cicero writ. I thought this at
first a strange compliment, but thinking well of it, I thought it better to
seem to be of his opinion, then undertake to cure a man uncureable. I
therefore answered him, that the Patriarch Calarigstone so famous for the peace
of Uervins, was in a manner of his mind, who being returned from his
Embassage, and asked what rate and admirable things he had seen at Paris;
made mention of none but their Cooks shoppes; saying to every body, as it were
with exclamation Ueramente quelle rostisseries sono Cosa stupenda; as much as
to say that there are Barbarians elsewhere, then at Fez and Morocco. One half
of the world does not so much as excuse that which you praise: our merchandise
is cried down long since, and to bring it into credit again and put it off,
there had need return into the world, some new Augustus and Antoninus. --
says, that whilst he waits for the resurrection of these good Princes; he is
resolved to rest himself; and not to publish his Verses, till they shall be
worth a Pistole a piece. I fear it will be long ere we shall see this Edition
come forth; for my self who make no such reckoning of my Prose; I have no
purpose to make merchandise of it; yet desire I not nither to tire my hands
with writing continually to no profit. I mean to make hereafter no other use
of my Pen, then to require my friends to let me hear of their healths; and
to assure you Sir, that I am no man's more,

Than yours, etc.
At Balzac 12. June 1633.
To Mounsieur Conrart. LETTER. XXXIII.
SIR, I had a great lon ging to see -- and you have done me a special
kindness to send it me over. Yet I must tell you, that your sending it gets
him a greater respect with me then his own deserving, and if you appoint me
not to make some reckoning of him, all that I shall do for his own sake, will
be but to bear with him. A man had need be of a sanguine complexion, and in
a merry vein before that should be moved to laugh at his poor jests.
Melancholicke men are too hard to be stird, that which goes to the Center of
other men's hearts stays without doors in theirs, at least it touches but
very weakly the outside; and oftentimes I am so sadly disposde and in so
sullen an humor, that if a Ieaster be not excellent I cannot think him
tolerable nor endure to hear him. It is certain the Italians are excellent
in the art of jeasting, and I could mark you out a passage in Boccace that
would have made -- and all his predecessors the Stoic Philosophers to forfeit
their gravitie. But there are not two Boccaces, nor two Ariostoes, there are
many that think themselves pleasant when they are indeed ridiculous; I would
our good -- would leave his wrangling about controversies, and fall to this
kind of writing, in which in my opinion he would prove excellent. This would
draw his Genius out of Petters, and give it the extent of all humane things to
play in; only he should spare the Church for her eldest sons sake, and
forbear the Pope for M. the Cardinals sake, one of the Princes of his Court.
These are respects you ought to have, until your conversion furnish you with
other more religious, and change this your honest civilitie into a true
devotion. If we be not bound to speak of mens-honour reverently, yet we are
bound to speak seriously, and even at this day we call Lucian an Atheist, for
scoffing at those Gods who we know were false. For the rest Sir, I pray take
heed you show not my Letter to --, he would give me a terrible check in
behalf of --, he would not endure I should speak so insolently of an Author
approved by the Academie, De gli insensati de Perouse, and indeed I had not
spoken as I did, but that I dare trust your silence, and know, that to discover
a secret to you is to hide it. Make much of this rare virtue and never leave,
and be pleased to believe me that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 13. June. 1633.
To the same another. LETTER. XXXIIII.
SIR, I am going to a place where in speaking good of you I shall find no
contradiction, and where your virtue is so well known, that if I say nothing
of it but what I know, I am sure I shall tell no news. I bring along with me
the last Letter you writ unto me, and mean to be earnestly entreated by
Mounsieur -- before I yield to grant him a Copy. As for Madam -- she should
entertain an enemy upon this passeport, and though she were resolved to give
me no audience, yet she would never deny it to the reader of your writings. I
know of what account you are in her heart, and how much I ought to fear least
all the room there be taken up before hand with your favor. Yet such opinion
I have of her justice, that I willingly make her Arbitratour of our difference,
and require her to tell whether she think I have done wrong to -- in desiring
him to give over his going to Law, and to pass the rest of his days in more
quiet and sweet employments. The art of jeasting, whereof I speak is no enemy
to the art of morality whereof you speak, rather it is the most subtle and
most ancient way of retailing it; And that which would fright men, being used
in the natural form, delights and winnes them sometimes, being used under a
more pleasing mask. A wisdom that is dry, and altogether raw, is it for the
heart? it must have a little seasoning, such a kind of sauce as Socrates was
wont to make it; that Socrates I say whom all the Families of Philosophers
account their Founder, and acknowledge for their Patriarch. The story says he
never used to speak in earnest, and the age he lived in called him the
feoffer. In Platoes Book you shall find little else of him but jeasting; with
disorderly persons you shall see him counterfeit a Lover, and a Drunkard,
thereby to claw them whom he would take. He shunnes the style of the
Dogmatists, or to speak definitively of things, as thinking it an instrument
of Tyranny, and a yoke that oppresses our liberty. In short he handles
serious matters so little seriously that he seems to think the shortest way
to persuade was to please; and that virtue had need of delight, to make way
for her into the soul. Since his time there have come men who contented not
themselves with laughing, but make profession of nothing else, and have made it
their recreation to play upon all the actions of humane life. Others have
disguised themselves into Courtiers and Poets, and left their Dilemmaes and
their Syllogismes to turn jcasters, and to get audience in privy Chambers.
We see then the world had not always been sad before Ariosto and Bernia came
into it, they were not the men that brought it first to be merry; Ieasting is
no new invention, it was the first trade that wise men used; who thereby made
themselves sociable amongst the people. Theophrastus who succeeded Aristotle
thought it no disparagemen^ to Philosophy, nor that there was in it any
uncomlinesse unfit for his school Lycaeum, he is excellent at descriptions,
and counterfeitings, and his Characters are as so many Commedies, but that they
be not divided into Acts and Senes, and that they represent but only one
person. Seneca, as solemn and of as sullen humor as he was otherwise, yet
once in his life would needs be merry, and has left us that admirable
Apotheosis of Claudius, which if it were lost, I would with all my heart give
one of his books de Beneficiis to recover again; and a much greater ransom
if it were possible to get it entire. No doubt but you have heard speak of the
Caesar's, of the Emperor Julian; that is to say, of the sports of a severe man,
and of the mirth of a melancholicke man, and from whence think you had the
Menippaean Satyrs their names? Things so much esteemed of by antiquity, and
under which title the learned Varro comprised all wisdom divine and humane;
even from Menippus the Philosopher, who was of a Sect so austere, and so great
an enemy to vice, that Iustus lipsius doubts not to set it in comparison with
the most strict and reformed order of the Church. I am much deceived but Madam
-- will not be found so scrupulous as you, and not give her voice in favor of
an opinion authorized by so great examples. And indeed Sir, why should you not
like that our friend should reserve some mirth and some pleasure for his old
age? and having declaimed and disputed abroad all day, should come at night to
have some merry talk in his own lodging; why should you think it amiss,
that after so many wars and cumbats I should counsel him to refresh
himself with a more easy and less violent kind of writing; and to afford us
such wares as may be received as well at Rome as at Geneva? These thirty
years he has bin a Fencer upon Paper, and has furnished all Europe with such
spectacles; why should he not now give over a quarrel that he is never able
to compose? He may in my opinion honestly say, it is enough, and content
himself to have outlived his old adversaries, without staying to look for
new. Having had to do with Mounsieur Coeffeteau, and with Cardinal Perron; it
would be a shame for him to meddle now with a dizzy headed father, or with the
Anticke of Roan; and a poor ambition it would be in my judgment to erect
Trophies of two such broken Bables; it were better he left individualls and
fell to judge of species in general, and that he would consider other men's
follies without partaking of them. It were better to discredit vice by scorn,
then to give it reputation by invectives, and to laugh with success, then to
put himself in Choler without profit. Though there be many sorts of
disciplining men, and correcting their manners; yet I for my part am for this
sort, and find nothing so excellent as a medicine that pleases. Many men fear
more the bitterness of the potion that is given them, then the annoyance of
the infirmity that offends them; we would feign go to health by a way of
pleasure, and he should be a much abler man that could purge with Raspices,
then he that should do it with Rhubarbe. Our Gentleman by -- his leave is none
of these; for commonly he neither instructs nor delights, he neither heales
nor flatters their passions that read him; he has neither inward treasure
nor outward pomp; and yet I can tell you, as beggarly and wretched as he is,
he has been robbed and ransacked in France. He could not save himself from
our Thieves; and you may see some of his spoils which I present you here.

My fidling Doctor in his visage various,
Had twice as many hands as had Briareus;
There was not any morsel in the dish
Which he with eyes and fingers did not fish;
And so forth.
You see we live in a Country where even Beggars and Rogues cannot pass in
safety; though they have nothing to lose, yet they lose for all that, and men
pull the hayres ^en from them that are bald. There is no condition so ill but
is envied of some, no poverty so great which leaves not place for injuries.
Cottages are pillaged as well as Palaces; and though coverousnesse look more
after great gains, yet it scorns not small. But all this while you must
remember that my discourse is allegorical, and that I speak of Poets and not
of Treasures. I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 25. September. 1633.
To my Lord the Mareschall Deffiat. LETTER. XXXV.
SIR, though I know your life is full of business, and that it has neither
festival, nor day of rest; yet I am so vain as to fancy to my self that I
shall be able to suspend this your continual action, and that the recreation I
send you shall find some place amidst your affairs: you are not one to be
wrought upon, you know the true value of things, and so in Arts those secrets
which none but Artists themselves see. There is no thinking therefore to
deceive you by a show of good, and by false flashes of reputation; no way to
gain estimation with you, but by lawful ways, and rather by seeking
commendation from ones self, then testimony from others. This is the cause
that I come always directly to your self, and never seek to get a favor by
canvasing and suite, which is not to be gotten but by merit. If my Book be
good that will be a sollicitour with you in my behalf; and if it make you
pass some hours with any contentment, you will let me understand it when you
have read it. Howsoever I hope you will grant, that the Pension which the King
gives me is no excess that needs reformation; and fear not to be accused of
ill husbandry, if you please to pay me that which is my due. There have been
heretofore in the place that you are now in certain wild unlettered persons,
who yet made show of valuing humane learnings, and to respect those graces in
others which were wanting in themselves; forcing their humor and sweetning
their countenances to win the love of learned men; and either out of opinion
or out of vanity have revered that which you ought to love out of knowledge,
and for the interrest you have in it, I say for the interest, because besides
the virtues of peace, having in you the virtues of war; it concerns you not
to leave your good achievements to adventure, but to cast your eyes upon such
as are able to give your merits a testimony that may be lasting; I dare not say
that I my self am one of that number, but thus much I can assure you most
truly that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 20. October. 1633.
To Mounsieur Granier. LETTER XXXVI.
SIR, I have received your Letter of the 27. of the last month; but it makes
mention of a former which never came to my hands: and it must needs be that
Fortune has robbed me of it, for fear I should be too happy, and should have
two pleasures in Sequence. This is an accident which I reckon amongst my
misfortunes; and I cannot sufficiently complain of this Violatour of the law
of Nations, who has been so cruel as to break our Commerce, the very first
day of our entering into it; and to make me poor without making himself rich.
I am more troubled for this loss, than for all that shall be said or written
against me: Slander has a goodly catch of it to be at war with me, it
shall never make me yield; it is an evil: is it not a glory for a private man
to be handled in such manner, as Princes and their Officers are? And is it not
a mark of greatness to be hated of those one does not know? I never sought
after the applause of --, which cannot choose but have corrupt affections in
such sort, that when they praise me, I should ask what fault I had done?
Though their number were greater than you make it, this would be no great
novelty to me, who know that truth goes seldom in the throng; and has in all
times been the Possession but of a few. Even at this day, for one Christian
there are six Mahometans; and there was a time, when Ingemuit orbis, and se
Arrianum esse miratus est. If God suffer men to be mistaken in matters of so
great importance, where their salvation is at stake; why should I expect he
should take care to illuminate them in my cause which no way concerns them;
and to preserve them from an error which can do them no hurt? Whether I be
learned or ignorant; whether my eloquence be true or false, whether my Pearls
be Oriental, or but of Venice: what is all this to the Commonwealth? There is
no cause the public should trouble it self about so light a matter; and the
fortunes of France depend not upon it. Let the Kings subjects believe what they
list; let them enjoy the liberty of conscience which the Kings Edicts allow
them. A man must be very tender that can be wounded with words; and he must be
in a very apt disposition to d^e, that lets himself be killed by Philarchus;
or Scioppius his Pen. For my self I take not matters so to heart; nor am
sensible in so high a degree. The good opinion of honest minds, is to me a
sovereign remedy against all the evils of this nature. I oppose a little
choice number, against a tumultuary multitude, and count my self strong
enough, having you on my side; and knowing you to be as vigorous a friend of
mine, as I am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 15. Februa. 1633.
To Mounsieur Gaillard. LETTER. XXXVII.
SIR, I am unfortunate, but I am not faulty. I was assured you had written to
me, but I received not your letters. You have been my defendour; and I have
been a long time without knowing to whom I was bound for defending me: whether
it were a man or an Angel that was come to my succor. These are honest
injuries, and generous supererogations. This is to deceive in charity, and to
his advantage that is deceived. This is to bring again that good time, wherein
Knights unknown to become freemen, that were oppressed without telling their
names; or so much as lifting up the Beavers of their Helmets. You have done in
a manner the like; you have hidden your self under a borrowed shape; thereby
to take away from a good action, all appearance of vaineglory; and to let them
that are interessed, see, that you are virtuous without looking for reward. For
my self, I do not think I am bound to follow the intention of this
scrupulous virtue. If you have a will to shun noise, and the voice of the
people; yet you cannot refuse the acknowledgement of an honest man: nor let me
from paying what I owe you. Because you are modest, I must not therefore be
ungrateful, as I am not by my good will, I assure you. You possess my heart,
as absolutely, as you have justly purchased it; I am yours by all the sorts of
right, not forgetting that of the wars. I will even believe that my enemy
has gotten a full victory, to the end I may more justly call you my Redeemer;
and that you may have the crown that was due to him had saved a citizen.
Mounsieur Borstill, whose wisdom and integrity you know, will answer for the
truth of my words: and for my self, I shall need none to answer, being ready
to testify by my actions; that there is not in the world, a man more than my
self,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 22. April 1633.
To Mounsieur the Master Advocate in the Parliament. LETTER. XXXVIII.
SIR, I have too great a care of your reputation, to seek to have you be found
a liar. It shall not lie upon me, that you be not a man of your word; and that
your friend is not contented; and seeing it is expected to see this present day
what I have written of his company; It is not fit to put off till to morrow
the effect of your promise: or that he should languish in the expectation of
so small a thing. It is true my Book is not here, and my memory is not now so
faithful, that I dare trust it to deliver that I gave it to keep: yet I
conceive after I have stined it up in your name, which is so dear unto me, I
shall find enough to satisfy your desire, and receive from it this good
office. I seem therefore to remember I said, that after so many years, that
the Christian Muses have been in France: he is the only man has entertained
them with honor; and has built a Palace for this sovereign science to which
all other are subject and inferior. He has drawn her out of an obscure and
close mansion, where like the poor Socrates she discoursed in prison of the
supreme felicity, to place her in a seat worthy of her, and to set up a
stately and sumptuous race for the exercise of her children. From hence we may
apprehend the dignity and merit of our Sorbone: for which a man the fullest of
business in all the world, has yet had so particular a care amidst the most
violent agitation of his thoughts, that the design of the house he crects for
her, has found place in his breast, amidst the Forts and Rampires of Rochell.
If our predecessors the Gauls next to their gods, gave the second place of
honor to their Druides, who showed them but a dim and confused light of the
state of our souls after this life; what respect then, what reverence can be
too great for those venerable Fathers, who teach us by a knowledge most
infallible; what the chief and supreme good is; who discover to us in
certainty, the things that are above the heavens, who make us true relation of
that admirable commonwealth of happy citizens that live without bodies, and
are immateriall; and who deliver to us the wounders of the intellectual world,
more pertinently and more directly, than we relate to blind men the ornaments
of this visible world. With them are had the springs of pure Doctrine; where
with others, but only Brooks and Streams; with them are had resolutions of
all doubts, remedies for all poisons: with them Time wrongs not antiquity; nor
does old age either need painting, or fear tainting: with them this sixteenth
age of the world, behold Christianity preserved and kept in its first luster.
Seeing the memory of the most part of the Roman Lords is perished together with
their Baths, their Aqueducts, their Races, their Amphitheaters; whereof the
very ruins are themselves ruined and lost; I find that M. the Cardinal
understands more than ever they did, and goes a straighter way to eternity,
traveling in a place where his travel can never perish and leaving the care
of his name to a company that of necessity shall be immortal, and shall
speak of his magnificence as long as there shall be speaking of Sin and
Grace, of good and evil Angels, of the pains and rewards of the life to
come. I assure my self I have not spoken too much; and I think I could not
have spoken less: it is lawful for us to set a price upon our own; and if an
ancient writer said, that more worthy men came forth of Isocrates School; then
out of the Trojan Horse: why may not we say as much of Albertus Magnus, and of
Saint Thomas? Me thinks I know not how to speak to our countrymen, but of the
Lycaeum and of the Academy: and it is now five and twenty years that I have
beaten my brains about the Gymnosophists the Brachmanes and the Rabbis: but
when all is done, we should remember that we are Christians; and that we have
Philosophers that are nearer to us, and ought to be dearer to us then all they.
I am glad occasion has been offered me to put my opinion hereof in writing;
and thereupon to let you know I make no mystery of my writings; and specially
with you, to whom I have opened my very heart; and whose I am wholly without
reservation,

Sir, Most humbly, etc.
At Paris. 4. July. 1633.
LETTERS OF Mounsieur de BALZAC. LIB. II.
To my Lord the Earl of Exeter. LETTER. I.
SIR, if you had wholly misliked my Book, I had wholly defaced it: but seeing
some parts of it, seemed to you not unsound, I have thought it sufficient to
cut off the corrupt part, that you might be drawn to endure the rest. I now
therefore send you an Edition of it reformed, done expressly for you, and which
I have taken care to cleanse from the stains, that in the two former were
distastefull to you. It is not my purpose to stand disputing in an Argument,
where I am willing to be confuted: nor to defend that which is condemned by
you, where the question is to give you satisfaction by my rigor; I presently
grow insensible of the tenderness of a Father: and shall he uncompassionate to
my dearest issues, as often as your pleasure shall be that they should perish.
My Writings are to me no better than Monsters when they offend your eyes, and
to seem vile to you, is to be vile indeed; and therefore in stead of asking
there pardon, I have been my self the hastner of their punishment. There
cannot a greater test^ony be given of a man's integrity, then when the
Delinquent concurres in opinion with the judge; and is the Executioner, where
he is the condemner. All this have I already done; and although in that unhappy
passage which gave you distaste: I had not so much a meaning to bite as to
laugh; yet I confess I took my mark amiss for laughing justly. Oftentimes
one countenance for another changes the face of the most innocent action of
the world: and though I failed only in ill explaning my self; yet it was
fault enough, seeing thereby I gave you cause to doubt of my intention. Truly,
my Lord, it was never my meaning so much as to touch the resplendent glory of
your divine Princess. I know well enough, it was fitter to consider her by the
magnanimity of her spirit; whereof your whole posterity shall taste the
fruits, then by the light flower of bodily beauty; which not only falls away
by death; but runs away at the very first approaches of age. I should come out
of another world, if I were ignorant of the Encomiums she has in this kind
received by all peoples voices. She has I know been styled the Star of the
North: the goddess of the sea; the true Thetis. I have read in a Letter, which
Henry the great writ unto her in the hight of all his troubles; and in the
violence of the league: these words, I will Madam be your Captain Genorall.
Even he that excommunicated her, spoke of her with honor: and he was, as you
know, an understanding Prince, and admirable in the Art of Ruling. He took a
pleasure to be discoursing of her with Ambassadors resident at his Court; and
would sometimes say merrily, that if he had been her husband, certainly
Greatness and Authority would have been the issues of so renowned a marriage.
But though she had not ascended to this high degree of reputation, and though
she should be divested of all these glorious marks of honor; yet there are
two considerations; less specious indeed in the eyes of the world: but more
sensible to my spirit, that would bind me strongly to reverence her memory:
One Sir, that she has not scorned our Muses; the other, that she has loved
your house. I was taught by Cambden, the knowledge she had in all kinds of
learning; so far, as that she had happily Translated out of Greek into
Latin some of Sophocles Tragedies; and some of Isecrates Orations. Of the same
Author also, I have learned the great part your Ancestors bare in her
confidence and secrets; and your name is so often used in the history of her
life, that where soever Elizabeth is mentioned, there Cicile for the most part
is never left out. So that she being by good right your domestical Deity, and
the reverence you bear her, your most ancient inclination; it is far from me
to violate that which you adore, or to hate that which you so dearly love;
seeing I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. June, 1634.
To my Lord the Archbishop of Thoulouse. LETTER. II.
SIR, I have never been sociable since your departure from hence; no man can
make me speak; and I do not yet break my sullen silence, but only to tell
you, I am the saddest Hermit that ever was. Those whom Saint Hierome reports
to have been companions of Serpents and Scorpions, were never of so untoward
an humor as I, for I have their vexation, and I have not their consolation.
Nothing pleases me in the place where I am; you have carried away with you
all its worth and goodness, and it is not the hardness of the season, it is
your absence that obscures the beauties of my solitude. It was not well done
Sir to accustom me to a pleasure which you meant so suddenly to take away
from me, or to say better, to show me only my good fortune thereby to procure
me envy, and then go presently and make others happy with enjoying it; and
yet I know well, that such petty considerations owe obedience to a greater, and
that particular interests ought always to give place to public. Mine
therefore is not so dear unto me, but that I willingly forget it upon such
occasions, and easily forgo my own conceits, to enter upon the purpose of
divine providence. The peace we hope for shall perhaps by your voyage be
advanced, and you are now perhaps sent from heaven to go whither you thought
to have gone without commanding; If peradventure there be found some particular
men that are too much heated, your Eusebius and your Theodoret will help to
allay their heat, and if they be too stiffly bent upon severitie, you will make
them abate their rigor by the examples you bring them, of the moderation of
their fathers; I have too good an opinion of so many worthy Prelates as are in
your assemblies, to imagine they would ever agree to arm Princes, either
against a penitent, or against an honest man, mistaken; and would not in the
interests of their order content themselves with employing the Thunderbolts of
the Vatican, but would do their uttermost to call forth also those of the
Arsenall; Whatsoever may be said in defense of such proceeding, it can never in
my opinion have so general approbation, but that some honest spirits will be
scandalized by it. This would be to bring excommunication into a poor
account, to make it serve only for an Essay, and for a preparative of
punishment, and to make it the first plaster of a light wound, which ought to be
the last remedy of the extremest evils. Such practice would be far from the
custom of the ancient Christianity, and of the age of Martyrs; and I cannot
conceive, neither can it be, that Christian Pastors should become Butchers of
their Flock; and that the Church which hither to has been in persecution,
should now it self begin to persecure. This Church Sir, as your self and my
masters your brethren teach us, is not a cruel Stepdame, proud and maligning
her spouses children; but it is a natural mother, compassioning her own, and
desirous to adopt even Proselytes and strangers: You tell us that she runs
after the greatest sinners, and goes as a guide before all the world, which is
far from saying that it stands not with her dignity to be an instrument of
their conversion, nor so much as once to take care what becomes of them; It is
you who assure us that she is content to lose her richest vessels, so as
thereby she may recover the sacrilege of her robbers; it is from you we
learn that she is far from animating justice to ruin innocents, who gives
sanctuary of pardon to Delinquents. I have heard speak of the sweet nature and
signing of the Dove; but never of her cruelty nor of her roaring; and to give
her claws and teach her to love blood, would be no less then to make her a
Monster; this would be Sir to make love it self turn wild, and metamorphise
it into hate. This would be to imitate the ancient Pagans, who attributed to
their gods all the passions and infirmities of men; no man I hope shall be able
to lay such profanation to our charge, we will be no corrupters of the most
excellent purity, no handlers of holy things with polluted hands, no
stretchers of our defects to the highest point of perfection: They which do
so, in what part of the world soever they be, are Anathemaes in your Books,
accursed in your Sermons, condemned by the rules of your doctrine, and by the
examples of your life. These false Saints do not serve Christ, but serve
themselves of Christ; they solicit their own affairs in his name, and
recommend it as his cause when it is their own suite. Periwasion that they do
well makes them more hardy in doing ill; they call their choler zeal, and
when they kill, they think they sacrifice. Thanks be to God no part in the
whole body of our Clergy is so unsound; it is returned to its oil, and to its
balm, in whose place the civil wars had substituted deadly Aconite and
bitter Wormwood. The League is dead, and Spain heartsicke, our Oracles are no
longer inspired by foreign Deities, the spirit of love and charity animates
all our Congregations; and no doubt he that ought to be the mouth of the
assembly, will consider that Bishops are Ministers of mercy, and not of
justice; and that to them our Lord said, I leave peace with you, but said not I
leave vengeance with you; the wisdom of M. the Cardinal will strip off all
the thorny prickles of passions, and sweeten all the bitterness of figures,
before they arrive to come near the King. This divine spirit is far
surmounting all orations, all deliberations, and all humane affairs, and in
this he will easily find a temper both to preserve the honor of the Church,
and yet not oppress the humility of him that submits, both to give full
satisfaction to the first order, and yet not withdraw regard from the merit of
the second; both to make us see heads bowed and knees bended before the Altars;
and yet no houses demolished, nor governments destroyed, whereof the Altars
should receive no benefit. I am in hope you will do me the favor to inform
me of the occurrents of the whole history, whereof I doubt not, but you are
your self one of the principal parties, and I expect by your letters a true
relation of all the news that runs about. In the mean time Sir, I trust you
will not take it ill that I speak unto you of this great affair, as a man
that sees it a far off; and whom you appoint sometimes to deliver his advise
upon matters, of which he has but small understanding. At your return we will
renew the Commerce we have discontinued, and since you will have it so, I will
once again play the Orator, and the Politician before you; yet I fear me
much, you will scarce be suffered to keep your promise with me; I see you are
more borne to action then to rest, and that our rural pleasures are not worthy
so much as to amuse so great a spirit as yours is, I therefore wish you such as
are worthy of you; that is, the solidest and the perfectest, and such as
glorious Achievements and glorious actions leave behind them; and I love not
my self so much that I am not much more,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. January 1630.
To Mounsieur Arnaut, Abbot of St. Nicholas. LETTER III.
SIR, the small service you desired of me is not worth considering, but only
for the great thanks I have received for it; I had altogether forgot it when I
received your Letter, which makes me yet forget it more in making m^ ^o
remember it. You have words that change things, and in your Language a^
impuissant willingness i^ ^n immortal obligation. If you make so great
account of good desires, I merveile what price you set upon good deeds; and if
you thus bestow your compliments without necessity, I fear you, will want
them when you have need; you should go more reserveldy to work, and retain
more providence for the future. A man may be a good husband, and yet not be
covetous; and seeing limits and bounds are fit in all cases, they cannot be
unfit in the case of courtesy: Think not therefore Sir, that herein you have
done an act of acknowledgement, you have gone far beyond the bounds of this
virtue. If there be a vice opposite to ungratefulnes, your too great
officiousness has made you fall into it, and by the excess you have avoided
the defect. The interests of M. the Cardinal Bentivoglio have no need of
recommending, but amongst people that are not yet Civilized; that which
concerns his honor, is no matter of indifferency to them that know his
virtue, and they that know it not are no better then Barbarians. If to do him
service I had not run whither you prayed me to go, and if I had not required
an absolute suppression of that discourse, whereof you required only but a
sweetning; I had performed my duty but very weakly, and had deserved blame in
that for which you praise me. Though his name were not resplendent in history,
nor his dignity in the Church, yet he should have I^stre enough in his very
style and writings, and though he were not a grandchild of Kings, and a
Senator of the whole earth; yet I find something in him more worth then all
that: I consider him without his Purple, and divested of all external
ornaments; regarding only those that are natural to him; and which would make
him most illustrious, though he had but a black cap on his head, and most
eminent, though he were but a private man. These are advantages he has over
other men, and which he communicates to this age of the world, goods that he
possesses and I enjoy. For I vow unto you that in this sad place whither my
own humor has miss-led me; and where there is no talk but of Suits and
quarrels; I should not know in the world how to pass my time; if I had not
brought his book along with me. This has been the companion of my voyage,
and is now the comforter of my Exile, and after I am dulled with a deal of
troublesome discourse, and have my ears filled with idle chat, I go and
purify my self in his delicate relations; and gather my spirits together,
which the noise and clatter had before dispersed. I never saw in so sober and
chaste a style, so much fullness and delight; if nature herself would speak,
she could never make choice of more proper terms then those he uses; and
where proper terms fail, she could never more discreetly borrow foreign
then he does. The Character of his phrase is so noble, that by this only,
without any other signs I should easily know he is come of a good house; and
I see that fortune which has been so great an enemy of his blood, and has
done so much hurt to his ancestors, has not yet been able to take from him
the mark of their greatness, nor the manners and language of a Prince. At
your departure from thence you gave me thanks for loving qualities that are so
lovely, and that making profession of Letters, I am put in passion for him who
preserves their honor, and who in his country is the Crown and glory of our
Muses; as often as there is question for his service I shall need no second
consideration to put me in heat about it; I tell you plainly, I shall do it
no whit the more for any love of you, I entreat you to provide some occasion
apart from all interests of his, where you may see the extraordinary account I
make of your merits, and the desire I have to manifest unto you that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 3. of October 1631.
To Mounsieur Ogier. LETTER IIII.
SIR, you could never have falle^n again to your pen upon better terms then
you have done; and I have a conceit your silence has not been so much a
neglect as a meditation. The Letter you pleased to write unto me is so full of
infinite excellent things, that it seems you have been making provision three
years together to make one feast, and that your sparing for so long a time had
no other meaning but to be magnificent for one day. The dispatch of the
Constantinopolitan slave you sent me, and the news of Koppenhagen you writ
unto me are so enriched with ornaments of your making, that I see plainly
whatsoever passes thorough your hands receives an impression of excellency,
and that glorious achievements have need of you to be their historian. It is
not strange unto me that M. your brother has pleaded my cause, I am an
eternal clyent of your family, and as it is my part to honor my benefactor,
so it is yours to preserve your benefits: But verily I could never have thought
this last action should have had the Court of Denmark for a Theater, and the
King and his daughters the Princesses for Judges. You sent me word I had a
famous decree passed on my side, and that the assailant was as much hissed at,
as the defendant was applauded. God be praised that grants us justice amongst
the Goths, for injuries done us by the French; and that raises up in an end
of the world a sovereign defender of persecuted innocence, such succor
sometimes he has extraordinarily afforded when men abandon her; the Lions
have become humane, rather then leave her without protection; and in the most
frightfull deserts there have been found Nurses for children, whom the
cruelty of their mothers had exposed. Let us therefore never believe that
sweetness and humanity are qualities of the earth or of the Air; they are
neither proper goods of the easterlings, nor captive virtues of the Grecians.
They are wandering and passant, all climates receive them in their turn, and it
is not the Cimbricke Chersonesus any longer, it is Athens and Achaia that at
this day are Barbarians. This divine princess of whom your brother writes such
wonders, has no doubt contributed much to this change, and though there should
shine no other Sun upon the banks of the Balticke Sea, this one were enough
to make virtue bud forth in all hearts, and to make Arts and discipline to
flourish in all parts. This is a second Pallas that shall have her Temples, and
her suppliants shall be president of Letters and studies, as well as the
former. Even that which you say of the defect of her birth, and of the
obscurity of her mother, might be ground enough for a Poet to make an entire
work and to assure us that she was borne and came out of her fathers head at
least Sir if your relations be true, she is the lively Image of his spirit,
the interpretour of his thoughts, the greatest strength of his estate, and who
by her eyes and tongue reigns and rules over all objects that either see or
hear. Why should I dissemble or hide my contentment? I must confess I am
proud in the highest degree for the praises she has given me. Never Prince
passed the Rhine more happily then mine has done, seeing so good fortune has
attended him there, and that there he should be crowned by a hand which was
able to give wounds to all others. What shall I say more? I scorn all the
ancient triumphs when I think upon this: I hope for no luster, but for her
splendor, I seek for no glory, but in her recommendation; her only voice is
instead of the suffrages of a whole Diet of all the north; and what reason they
should not forever be banished the Empire who blame that which she praises, or
that would oppose the sovereignty of her excellent judgment? As for our common
enemy, condemned by her; to keep company with the Hobgoblins of Norway; since
he is no longer in the world. he is no longer in state to do her obeisance. If
it be not that God will have that to be the place of his purgatory which she
would have to be the place of banishment, and that this proud spirit is confind
to live amongst the tempests and other frenticke issues of the North, as Varro
speaks of Satyrs. You have read I suppose the Dialogues of Saint Gregory;
and therefore must needs know that all souls are not purged after one manner,
but some pass thorough the fire, and others endure the Ice; and the extremity
of cold is no less an instrument of the divine justice, then extremity of
heat. But I purpose not to set a broach a question of divinity, for I should
then begin a new Letter; and it is now time I should finish this; but telling
you first, that he which shall deliver it to you, has in charge to present you
a larger discourse; and to let you see, that there is both Greek and Latin in
our Village. If it were not for my study, my solitude would neither have
excuse, nor comfort, and yet shall not have it perfect neither, unless you
bring it to me; and be so honest a man as to come and see m^e: as I most
heartily entreat you to do; and to believe that I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 7. Feb. 1635.
To Mounsieur Sirmond. LETTER V.
SIR, be not scandalized, nor take exception at my silence. The greatest part
of the Letters I writ; are but the payment of my old debts: and before I answer
one, I cast up my reckoning three or four times. I seldom stay upon matter of
compliment, all I can do, is but to defend my self untowardly; I think my
self sufficiently honest, if I be but indifferently uncivil; and because I am
apt to do courtesies voluntarily; I expect also voluntarily to receive them;
of you Sir especially, who judge not friendship by the look, and knows that
superstition is more ceremonious, then true piety. The new favors I have
received from your Muses are to me as they ought to be, exceeding sensible:
yet think not, that this makes me forget your former benefits: and that I
carry not in mind, that it is you that gave me the first taste of good, and
the principles of virtue; you do but build upon the foundation you laid your
self; and give estimation to your own pains. Having been my guide in a
country which I know not; it is for your honor it should be believed, I have
made some progress there, that so it may apppeare your directions are good.
Thus your Poem has in it a hidden art, which few understand; and I am but the
color of your design. You enjoy your self all the glory you have done me;
all the glory you have imparted to me stays still with your self; and you
have found out a way how to praise your self, without speaking of your self:
and how to be liberal without parting from any thing. If you come this Summer
to Paris, I will give you account of an infinite number of things that will not
dislike you; and in revenge thereof, I require to hear from you some news of
our male content;

Cui mos in trivijs humili tentare Veneno
Ardua and impositos semper Cervice rebelli
Far duces; Coeloque lovem violare Tonante.
I know not whether you will be able to bring the state into his favor; but
this I know, it is no small work for persuasion to effect, seeing he is no
less obstinate in his errors, then you strong in your Reasons. Whatsoever he
say of the time; and of the carriage of things; the impunitie with which he
triumphs, is a visible mark of the moderate government of this Kingdom; and in
any country but this; his Head long before this time had paid for his tongue.
But I hear he is of so vile an humor, that he is angry for his very liberty;
and thinks it is done in scorn, that he has not all this while been put in
the Bastyle. He valewes himself to be worthy of an informer; and of
Commissioners, and thinks he has merit enough to be punished in state. Let us
bear a little with his malady; he is otherwise not evil, nor of evil
qualities: It is only the temperature of his body that is faulty: and if
Mounsieur Cytois can purge away his choler, he shall procure to M. the
Cardinal a faithful servant. I expect hereupon an Epigramme of your making,
and am with all my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 4. March. 1631.
To Mounsieur Colombiers. LETTER. VI.
SIR, I find by the Letter which Mounsieur de Mantin writ unto you, that you
have done me good offices with him; and that upon your word, he takes me for
more than I am worthy. It is your part now to make that sure unto him which you
have warranted, and to disguise me with so much Art, that may make good your
first deceit by a second. For to think that I shall be able to answer his
expectation, and satisfy your promise: I know he expects too much; and know
you have promised too much, that which he speaks of me and of my writings,
seems rather to come from the passion of a lover, than from the integrity of
a Judge; and I ought to take it, rather as a Present, then as a Recompense. I
know besides, that the place^ from whence he writes has always beene^ the
habitation of courtesy; and that the spark of the Court of Rome which has
rested there, since it parted from thence; has left a light which gives an
influence to the manners and spirits of the Country. Yet distinction must be
made between the civilities of Avignon, which extend to all sorts of
strangers, and the resentments of an able man, which respect nothing but
reason, and a difference must be put between the honesty of a compliment, and
the Religion of a testimony. Mounsieur Malherbe deceased, who never gave any
man's merit, more than its due: and but coldly praised the most praiseworthy
things; yet has heretofore to me, in so high a degree extolled this man, of
whom we speak; that I could not but think, it must needs be a very
extraordinary Virtue that transported him so unwontedly, and a very pressing
verity, that forced him to open himself so freely, I have since been
confirmed in my judgment of him by diverse persons of good quality, and
generally by the voice of all our country: But yet there is in this more cause
for me to fear, than hope: Wise men do but only taste an error; with which
common people drink themselves drunk: They do not plunge themselves in false
opinions, they pass them lightly over; and I am afraid you will ere long
receive another letter in retractation of this, he has now written so much in
my favor, if the worst come to the worst; and that there be no means for me,
to keep all the good you have gotten me; I yet may lawfully require to have a
part left me; which Mounsieur your brother in Law cannot honestly deny me. I am
unfit for the terms he gives me; I willingly return them back to himself.
Let him keep his Admiring for Miracles; or at least for the great stupendous
works of Nature; I aspire not, nor have any pretense to so high a degree of
his account; but I think I have right to his friendship; and that both of
you are my debtors of some good will; seeing I honor you both exceedingly, and
passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 20. October. 1632.
To -- -- -- LETTER VII.
SIR, I am not altogether profane, yet am but a simple Catechumene neither: I
adore your mysteries, though I comprehend them not; and dare not give my spirit
that liberty which you give it. Is it fit to be a judge of a Science, of which
it is yet but learning the Alphabet? It scarce knows visible Objects, and
runs a hazard, when it considers but the exterior face of Nature; as for
that which is above, it climbes not to it, nor soars so high. My curiosity is
not so ventrous: and concerning the condition of superior things; I wholly
refer my self to the Sorbone. Never think therefore that I will give my
Censure of your Book: I have not yet discovered the bottom; only the bark,
I must tell you seems very precious; and I am ravished with the sound and
harmony of things, I understand not, this kind of Writing would have
astonished Philosophers whom it could not have persuaded: and if Saint Gregory
Nazianzen had but showed such a piece as this to Themistius, he could not choose
but have been moved with it, and must needs have admired the probability of
Christianity; though he had not known the secret. These are not words that one
reads, and are painted upon paper: they are felt, and received within the
heart. They live and moove, and I see in them the sinews of the first
Christians; and the style of that Heroicke age, where one and the same virtue,
gave life both to discourse and actions; gave influence both to the soul and
to the courage, made both Doctors and also Martyrs. Tell me true, Did you not
purpose to your self a Pattern to follow? Have you not been at the Oracle of
--: have you not received some inspiration from our excellent friend? Me
thinks I meet with his very Character. In certain passages I observe some
marks and traces of his spirit; and when I read them, cannot sometimes
forbear crying out: Sic oculus, sic ille manus, etc. You need not take
offense at my suspicion: so noble a resemblance is an inferiority lifted up
extremely high. You are not therein his Apc, but his Son: There is nothing
base nor mean in the imitation of so high and perfect an Idea: and you know
the example of Plato, made Philo go check by jowle with him. All I ask of
you at Paris, where you so liberally offer me all the good offices you can do,
is but this; that you will do me the favor, to assure that great personage of
the great reverence I bear to his merits: and what glory I count it to be
counted his friend: but I require withal the continuation of your own love,
with which you can honor none, that is more truly then I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
25. July 1630.
To Mounsieur Coeffeteau, Bishop of Dardanie. LETTER VIII.
SIR, since your departure from Mets; there has nothing hapne^ worthy of the
History I promised you, but only that the Emperor as I hear, has presented
to the view of brave spirits, certain new and very strange recreations by
which he has gained a great opinion of his knowledge. As to make the Images
in a piece of Tapistry, to walk, and move: to make all the faces in a room,
to seem to be double; to make a river rise in a Hall; and after streaming away
without wetting of any, make a company of Fayries appear and dance a round;
these are his ordinary sports, and to use the phrase of our friend; but the
outside of his secret Philosophy. Signior Mercurio Cardano, swears he has
seen all this, and more; enough to find you discourse for many meetings: and
if you appoint him to set hand to his Pen, he will be a Philostratus to this
Appolonius. He has told me, as he has heard it from him, that for certain,
the heavens meuace France, with a notable revolution; and that the fall of --,
has not been so much the end, as the change of our mysteries. For my self
who know, that God never makes Mountibanks of his Counsel; and that the
virtue of the King, is able to correct the malignity of the stars: I laugh at
the vanity of such Presages; and look for nothing but happiness from the
ascendant and fortune of so great a Prince. But to change this Discourse, and
this Mountibanke for another: I have seen the man Sir, that is all armed with
thorns: that pursues a Proposition to the uttermost bounds of Logic; that in
most peaceable conversations, will put forth nothing, nor admit of nothing that
is not a Dialemma, or a Syllogism. To tell you true, what I think of him; he
would please me more if he had less reason: this quarrelsome Eloquence
affrights me more than it persuades me. They which commonly converse with him;
run in my opinion the same fortune, which they do, that live near the falls
of Nilus; there is no overflowing, like that of his words, a man cannot safely
give him audience; a Headache for three days after, is the least hurt he can
take, that but hears him after dinner. The Gentleman that brings you this
Letter, has charge given him from all in general to entreat you Sir, not to
forsake us in so important a matter: but to come and free our companies from
one of the greatest crosses, that has a long time afflicted civil society.
You are the only man in whom this Sophister has some belief: and therefore
none but you, likely to reduce him to common right; and to bring his spirit to
submit it self to Custom and Usage. You can if you please make it appear
unto him; that an honest man proposes always his opinions, no otherwise than
as doubts; and never raises the sound of his voice, to get advantage of them,
that speak not so loud, that nothing is so hateful, as a chamber Preacher who
delivers but his own word; and determines withou warrant, that it is fit to
avoid gestures, which are like to Threatenings, and terms which carry the
style of Edicts; I mean, that it is not fit to accompany his Discourse, with
too much action; nor to affirm any thing too peremptorily. Lastly, that
conversation reflects more upon a popular estate, then upon a Monarchy; and
that every man has there a right of suffrage: and the benefit of liberty. You
know Sir, that for want of due observing these petty rules, many have fallen
into great inconveniences; and you remember one who maintained an argument at
the Table, with too great violence, disturbed and drove Queen Margaret from
her dinner. Such men commonly spoil the best causes; whilst they seek to get
the better, not because their cause is good; but because themselves are the
Advocates; Reason it self seems to be wrong, when it is not of their side, at
least not in its right place, nor in its ordinary form. They disguise it in so
strange a fashion that it cannot be known to any; and they take away her
authority and force, by painting her in the colors and marks of folly.
Against these Ringleaders, it is that we desire you to come, and to take the
pains of applying your Exorcismes, particularly upon -- you will have a
thousand Benedictions, if you can drive out of his body, this devil of dispute
and wrangling; which has begun already to torment us. We expect you at the
end of the week; and I remain,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Mets, 15. Augu. 1618.
To my Lord the Earl of Brassac. LETTER IX.
SIR, that which I have written of you; is but a simple relation of that I have
seen of you: and if there be any ornament in it: It must needs be, that either
your self have put it there; or else that Fortune has lent it to me. I had
done it very innocently, I assure you, if I had spoken any thing well; who was
so ill prepared for it. I should have hit a mark which I aimed not at; and
have drawn a Picture, by the casual falling down of my Pensill. My drift was
to entertain my friend, who was accustomed to the negligence of my style: and
with whom; if I committed any fault, I was sure of Pardon. He cries not out
murder, upon seeing one Vowell encounter another, nor stands amazed at meeting
with an untoward word as if it were a Monster: This favor I receive from him;
and he, the like from me: we allow all liberty to our thoughts: and if in
treating together, we should not sometimes violate the laws of our Art, we
should never show confidence enough in our friendship. Rhetoric therefore
has no place in Writings where Truth takes up all: There is great difference
between an Orator, and a Register; and my private testimony ought not to
pass for your Encomium. Yet you will have it to be so; you had rather accuse
me of being eloquent, then confess your self to be virtuous; and you avoid
presumption, by a contrary extremity. It seems this occasion is dangerous to
you; and as in a shipwreck, where all run to save the dearest things: so you
abandon your other virtues, to preserve your modesty. She does her self wrong
Sir, to stand in opposition to the public voice; and to reject the testimony
of noble fame. She ought not to contradict the two chief Courts of Europe;
whereof the one honors your memory, the other makes use of your counsels.
Aristotle would never approove of this; who speaks of a vice, with which if a
man be tainted, he resembles him to one, who will not confess he has won
in the Olympicke games, though men come and adjudge him the Garland; and calls
himself still culpable: though three degrees of the Areopage, pronounce him
innocent. Be not you, of solittle equity to your self; and suffer me to tell
you what I think; seeing I think nothing, but that which is the common
opinion; and I deliver not so much my own particular conceit, as the general
belief of the whole world: They who prefer a Captain of Carabins before
Alexander the Great; and know not how to praise the integrity of a Statesman,
without affronting that of Aristides; fall into that excess which reason
requires should be avoided. Yet we ought not for all this, generally to slight
all merit of the present age; and fancy to our selves, that we are not bound
to revere virtue, unless it be consecrated by Antiquity. For my self, I
judge more favorably of things present, and do not think I run any hazard in
subscribing to the Popes judgment of you, that in serving the King, you have
been his governor. This would be to be too scrupulous, to fear mistaking,
after him that they say cannot err; and you are too courteous, to count it a
courtesy that I do my duty; and to give me thanks that I am not a
Schismaticke. Concerning the last Article of your Letter; I say it gives me not
so much, as a temptation: neither am I indeed capable to receive it. It
suffices me Sir, that you protect my repose here; for to enter into defense of
my interests in the place where you are, as you do me the honor to promise
me; I would advise you not to undertake it. You could never look for better
success, then the prime man of this age had, who could not obtain of --; the
favor he required of him, in my behalf. It is much easier to break down the
Alps; and to bridle the Ocean, then to procure the payment of my Pension: and
there is nothing that can make a worker of miracles see, there is some thing
impossible for him to do; but only my ill fortune. There are the bounds of
this power, which is so much envied: The good will he bears me, cannot draw
from Spain the eight thousand pounds which are due unto me: and it is Gods
will he should be disobeyed in this, that I may be a witness against them who
say that he is absolute. I only entreat you, seeing you desire to oblige me
to you, to show him the constancy of my passions, which is obdurate against
ill successes, and preserves it self entire amidst the ruins of my hopes, It
shall be satisfaction enough for me that he do me the honor to believe I can
adore freely and without hope of reward; and that I should do him as great
reverence if he were not in so great a height of happiness. I expect this
favor from your ordinary goodness, and promise my self that you will always
have a little love for me, seeing I have a will to be all my life most
perfectly,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 30. May 1633.
To Mounsieur de la Nauve, Counselor of the King in his Great Chamber. LETTER
X.
SIR, say what you can, I am not so indulgent to my passion as you are
injurious to your own merits. Amongst all your good qualities, you have one
that seems an enemy to all the rest, detraction does you more justice then you
do your self, and envy it self gives you that which your own modesty takes
away from you. This is not to handle the truth civilly, to respect her then
when she embraces you? This is to render her evil for good, to call her
fabulous, when she calls you virtuous. I find in this Sir more scruple then
Religion: The first and most ancient charity is thereby broken, and you are
faulty in the first principle of your duty; if before doing justice to all
the world, you deny to do it to your self alone. It must be a great
preciseness of conscience that shall find in you the evils you accuse your
self of, and a sight more clear then mine that shall see defaults in the
course of your life. If you have any that are surely immateriall, and such as
fall not under sense. They come not within the knowledge of any; It must be a
secret between your confessor and you. None is known Sir, at least not
known to be revealed, and if any were so known, it would rather be found a
proof of humility then a mark of imperfection. I am none therefore, as you
say I am, of these charitable liars, who attribute to them they love all that
they want, nor of these forgers of commonwealths, who carry their imagination
beyond all possibility of things; I present not unto you an Idea to make you
better then you are, but taking you into consideration I propose you as my
example to stir me up to goodness; I draw your picture for my own use and
not for your glory; I intend more the instructing my self then the prattling
with you. The object of so elevated a virtue fills my mind with great desires,
and if it astonish me sometimes with its height, it makes me at least see by
experience, that an inferior virtue is possible to be acquired; so that to say
true, I study you more then I praise you, and am in this more swayed with
interest then with passion: I mean this passion without eyes, that rises
only from the animal part, for as for that which is reasonable and works with
knowledge I have that for you in the highest degree, and by all kinds of
obligations and of duties am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 6. Febru. 1634.
To Mounsieur Heinfius, Professor of the Politics at Leyden. LETTER XI.
SIR, I acquit my self of a charge that was laid upon me, and send you from
Mounsieur Favereau the verses he lately made for the King; they have had the
approbation of all France, but they have not yet had his own, and if this
public judgment be not confirmed by your particular, he takes it but as the
passion of a mother; and that France does but flatter her children. He thinks
no glory is legitimate whereof you are not the distributour, and that things
are not so good by their own goodness, as by the account you make of them;
you see by this Sir what rank you hold in the Commonwealth of Letters, and
that I am not the only man that look upon you with veneration, being seated
in the Throane of the great Scaliger, and giving laws to all the civil parts
of Europe. The highest degree that a man can aspire unto, who is Prince amongst
his own, is to become a judge amongst strangers; and there to get reverence
where he cannot pretend subjection. To this uppermost Region of merit are you
ascended; the light of your doctrine shines upon more then one people, and more
then one country; it spreads and communicates it self in diverse places and
kinds; it has as well adorers a far off, as admirers at home: He of whom I
speak Sir is worth a whole multitude, and makes not only a part of a choice
company, but is himself alone a company and a number. Do you ask for
qualities intellectual and moral? for virtues civil and military? would you
have a Philosopher a Mathematitian, a Poet, for Latin, Italian, French? you
shall find them all in his one person. He has the key of the most sublime
sciences, and the superintendance of the noblest Arts. Heretofore he has been
the dispenser of the conceits of Marino, the reformer and pruning knife of the
superfluities of his style, at this time he is overseer of all curious works;
the Oracle that Carvers consult, and the spirit that guides the hand before
Painters. He meddles in an infinite number of things with equal capacity,
and has as many trades as Sage Stoics had; but makes better works of them
then he did. It is not possible either to fill his spirit, or to set it about
work enough; so greedy and unsatiable it is of knowledge, so impatient of
rest, and growing fresh with action. And to impart to you the expression of a
gallant friend of ours; he is in as great a heat for the pleasures of the
mind, as the Princes of Asia are for the pleasures of the body; and as they
have many Concubines besides the Sultana which they marry, so has he one
profession as his principal study, but leaves not for all that to follow
other exercises, though follow them but with inferior affection; so that it
cannot be said of him, that he knows all, but that he ought to know; and
that he is nothing less then that he ought to be. He acquits himself most
worthily of his charge, and never stands in contemplation, when it is time to
be in action. If he be a great Poet, he is no less a great Lawyer; he makes
as well the draught of a Process as the description of a Tempest; and having
sung Phillis and Amarillis with an admirable grace, he treats of Seia and
Sempronia with no less soliditie. I give this testimony as religiously of him,
as if I gave it before a Judge, and as if my writing were upon oath. Is it not
fit you should be ignorant of his merit, whom without any merit you ought to
respect, though but only for his respect to you. It is fit you know that he is
an elevated person, humbling himself before you, and a Saint offering you
sacrifice. It is fit also I should satisfy his desire, which you shall see in
the word he has written to you, as he was going out of his Inn and taking
Coach, but that done Sir, it is not fit I should forget my self; I entreat
you therefore you will be pleased that in presenting to you the vows of
another, I may offer you also my own, and make you this true protestation,
that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 5. December. 1634.
To Mounsieur de la Pigeonniere, Lieutenant General of Bloyes. LETTER XII.
SIR, the Letter you took the pains to write unto me has calmed my spirit,
and given it ease; I could have no comfort of the news of your death, but
only by that of your resurrection; and to make an end of weeping for you, it
was necessary you should come your self and stay my tears. I am none of these
broachers of Paradoxes, whom too much reason makes unreasonable, and have no
feeling either of joy or grief. My spirit is more tender, and my Philosophy
more humane; and let them as long as they please call these passions
infirmities, yet for my part I had rather have my malady then their health; If
I had lost you, I had lost part of my self, and should never think my self
an entire man again, and if I had not hope to enjoy again your learned
conversation, I should find nothing but bitterness in my life; nothing in my
studies but thorns, at this time especially when I am promised a retreat
three miles from Bloys, and that I shall come under the jurisdiction of M. the
Lieutenant General. I do not much rejoice at this your new Dignity, because
I do not rejoice at the servitude of my friends; and because I do not count
it any great happiness to be always handling the Sores and Ulcers of the
people. I make more reckoning of your idleness then of your employment, and of
the Elegy you will make then of all the judgments you will give. If you
please to send it, or please to bring it your self to Paris, you shall make
choice your self in what place of my book you will have it set; and I shall
not be a little proud to have so fair a mark remaining of your friendship. I
had more to say, but I was pulled away from my Letter, and your own best
friends debauch me; I must therefore perforce leave you, yet assuring you once
again that I am infinitely glad I shed my tears for you without cause, and
that no man is more truly then my self,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 7. Sept. 1631.
To Mounsieur Chapelain. LETTER XIII.
SIR, if your ticket had overtaken me at Orleans, I had certainly returned to
Paris to receive that honor it promised me; and not have lost so pleasing a
visit, which would have comforted me for a troublesome one that afflicted me
not a little the day before. But the mischief is, that I was come hither
before your ticket, and all I can do now, is to let you know the grief I
take, that my inclination and my affairs lie not always in the same place.
They have drawn me from the suburb Saint German, to make me ride Post in the
greatest violence of the late heat; and have exposed my head to all the
beams, or to speak like a Poet, to all the Arrows of the Sun. I vow unto
you that being in this case, I even repented my self of all the good I had
ever said of it, and would feign call back my praises, seeing it made no
difference at all between me and my Post boy who had never praised it.
Thanks be to God I am now in place of safety, where you may well think I
seek rather to quench my thirst, then to make my self fat, and look more
after refreshing then tricking my self up. To this purpose I forget nothing of
that I have learned in Italy: My ordinary Diet is upon the fruits of Autumn;
being of opinion that no intemperance of these pure Viands can be dishonest,
and that it is not fit to be sober as long as the Trees offer us their store,
and tempt our appetite. Be pleased Sir, that my business may not be to do
until the Trees shall have nothing upon them but leaves; and that I may not
go to the City but when the Winter drives me from the Country. In the mean
time, I leave mine honor to your care, in the place where you are, and
recommend unto you a little reputation that is left me, having so many wars
upon me, and so many combinations made against me. I would be glad my name had
less luster, and my life more quiet, but I know not where to find obscurity;
I am so well known, it not by my good qualities, at least by my ill fortune,
that though I should banish my self into a strange country, I do not think I
could be hidden. Ubique Notus perdidi exili^ locum, I have no remedy therefore
but to continue in this famous misery, and to be laboring continually to
provoke the envious, and to make work for the idle; wherein notwithstanding,
if I shall do any thing that pleases you; I shall not think my labor ill
bestowed --: I am in truth in great impatience to make known to all the world,
the account I make of your virtue: and to leave a public testimony, and if I
durst say it, an eternal; by which posterity may see, that we have loved one
another; and I passionately have been and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 10. September. 1631.
To Mounsieur Mainard. LETTER XIV.
SIR, I have heard this day by a Letter from Mounsieur Chapelain, that you are
at Paris, and that in some business of his; you have obliged him exceedingly:
wherein you have done more than ever you meant; and your action has in it a
double merit. I owe you thanks for it in my own behalf: and besides, being
joined as I am with him in communion of all goods and evils; you cannot fasten
upon him, and leave me free. He sends me no word of the nature of his
business, in which you have done him such good offices: but I doubt me, it is
some employment beyond the Alps, and dependence upon some Ambassador to Rome.
Whereof I think I may truly say, without giving reins to my Passion at all;
that he has both the substance and the supplenesse, which are necessary in
dealing with the brains of that country; and that he, under whom he serves,
may lie and sleep all the time of his employment, without any prejudice at all
to the Kings service. They who see but his outside only, take him for a neat
man, and one of excellent and pleasing qualities: but I, to whom he has
discovered that, which he hides from all the world besides: I know him to be a
man capable of great designs, and that besides speculative knowledge, he
possesses those also which serve for use, and are reduceable to action. I
would say more, if the Post would suffer me. I will only add this in point
of his honesty, which I said to you once, of an ancient Roman, that I see no
example of virtue, in all the first Decade of Titus Livius, that is of too high
a strain, or too hard for him. Never therefore withdraw your affection, from
so worthy a place; and so long as you thus oblige my friends, It is I that will
be,

Sir, Your, most humble and most obliged servant, etc.
At Balzac 20. December. 1631.
To -- -- -- LETTER XV.
SIR, in the Letter which -- received from you, I saw a line or two for me,
that would even tickle a heart that were harder then mine, and which I could
not read without some touch of vaineglory. There is a pleasure in yielding to
such sweet temptations, and though I know my merit has no right to so
gracious a remembrance, yet by what title soever I come to be happy, I am not a
little proud of my fortune. These are Sir the mere effects of your goodness,
and your experiments in that art, with which you know how to gain hearts, and
to purchase men without buying them. The fairest part of the earth in which you
have left a dear remembrance of your name, gives this testimony of you by the
mouth of its Princes, and of their subjects, but seeing in the place where you
are, you meet with spirits of love and tenderness; it cannot be that any
should escape you, upon whom you have any design to take hold. All things are
biting beyond the Garonne; the Sheep of that Country are worse then the
Woolves of this; and I have heard a great person of our age say, That if France
had a soul, certainly Gascognie should be the Irascible part. Yet I hear Sir,
you have already sweetened all you found four there; and that your only look
has melted all the stcele of the courages of that Province. Mounsieur de --
and my self make account to go see the progress of so admirable a beginning,
and this next Summer to come and behold you in all your glory. But if we go
thirty miles for -- -- we would more willingly go three hundred for -- -- --
and I begin to think already of a vow to Loretta, that I may thereby have a
color to go to Rome, to be there at the time when you shall do honor to
France, and maintain the Kings rights. This cannot be too soon for his
service, nor soon enough for my desire, who am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. August. 1631.
To Mounsieur Arnaut, Abbot of Saint Nicholas. LETTER XVI.
SIR, I am very slow in answering your Letter, but I could not do it sooner;
after three months of continual agitation, this is my first hour of leisure,
and the first place I find of commerce, to tender you the Compliment I owe
you. I see well that your word is not subject to the accidents of the world,
and that I have chosen a plot which is out of the reach of Fortune. Your
affection to me is not of this brittle matter that friendships at Court be
made of; it is of a more excellent stuff, and such as neither time can wear
out, not my negligence weaken. I need not doubt of preserving a good that you
keep for me; your faithfulness is more then my negligence, and I am more
assured of your honesty then of my own; notwithstanding what certainty soever
I have of your love, it is no trouble to me to have new assurances: Men that
are well enough persuaded, yet will go to a Sermon, and take a pleasure to
hear that they know already. For my self I can never be weary of reading a
thing that gives me satisfaction, and though it were as feigned as it is true,
yet you write it with so good a grace that it would be a pleasure to be so
deceived; yet it is fit to stay my self there, and not to fall from joy into
presumption; how can you look my spirit should contain it self within its
bounds, knowing that I am talked of at Rome, and that my name is sometimes
pronounced by the most eloquent mouth of Italy? you should have concealed the
express charge you had from M. the Cardinal of Bentivoglio, to send me his
History; or at least for a temper to my vanity, you should have told me at
the same time, that I must not impute a favor to my own sufficiency, for
which I am beholding to your good offices; I may believe Sir that he had never
had this thought of me, if you had not stirred it up in him by some favorable
mention you made of my person; and I know he puts so great a trust in you, that
after you have once made a commendation, he would make a conscience to use his
own judgment in examining my worth. From what ground soever my happiness
comes, I am bound to acknowledge the visible cause, and to that I destinate my
first good days journey that God shall send me. I will not fail to give
thanks to M. the Cardinal, and to give him an account of my reading, that he
may see I know as well how to receive as he to give. In the mean time I offer
him a present far unworthy of the magnificence of his, and which will show
him, how with his hook of Gold he has fished but grass, such as it is you
shall do me a favor to present it to him, and to let me hold the possession
I have in your love, whose I am all my life,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. May, 1634.
To Mounsieur de Nesmond, Controller of the Princes house. LETTER XVII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, your Letter has told me no news, it has only
confirmed me in my opinion; and testified that you are always good, and
always do me the honor to love me. You have qualities of greater luster
then this, but you have none of greater use; and they that could live without
your wisdom, yet cannot bear the miss of your goodness. My sister and I
continue to implore it in a business which is already set on foot by your
commendation, and which attends a full accomplishment by your second endeavor.
It is neither without example nor without reason; it needs but such an
undertaker as your self, and you may easily save it from rigorous justice, if
you will but lend a little aid to its equity. Of your will I make no doubt, it
is the continual agitation of the court that makes me fear, which drives men
one way and their affairs another. But if the heavens help us not, we are
not like in have to see it in any state of consistence; it will be always
floting like the Island of Greece, until a great birth shall make it stay; and
that God make sure the Kings victories by the Queens fruitfulness. In the
mean time it is not fit you should stay at home, but that you should make one
in all voyages; but you must not be of these voyages that get many hoasts, and
few friends. You are in a state of obliging and making men beholding to you by
doing always good; and now for fear you should want matter to work upon, I
offer you matter here to set you aworke. Be pleased Sir; my dear Cousin, that I
entreat you to deliver to -- the Letter I writ unto him; and when you deliver
it, to testify withal unto him, that having the honor to be to you as I am,
the things that touch me must needs concern you; Heretofore I have held good
place in his confidence, and to use the terms of a man you hate not: Vetus
mihi cum eo consuetudo, and cum privatus eraet Amici vocabamur. Even lately at
Paris he offered me courtesies that might have contented a prouder man's
vanity then mine; and I received from him more good words then was possible
for me to return him. But these illustrious friendships require continual
cares, and an assiduitie without cessation. I know they are subject to a
thousand inconveniences, and that they grow cold if they be not stirred up and
kindled continually. Three words of your mouth spoken with a due accent, may
save me the soliciting of three months, and my requests ought not to seem
uncivil; seeing I desire nothing but this, that -- should not do me the
honor to make a promise, and then leave there, and think that enough. To this
purpose I send you a short instruction for --: and you may be pleased to be a
means, that he cast his eyes upon it; at such time as the business he has
about your person shall permit him. I would not solicit you so boldly: nor
press upon you so burdensome a familiarity, if you had not your self made the
overture first. It is a persecution you have drawn upon your self by the
liberal offers you made me in your Letter; and I conceive you speak as you
mean, as I do, in protesting that I honor you with my soul; and am,

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
From Balzac 20. October. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Borstell. LETTER XVIII.
SIR, I do not know my self in your Letters: you are like those Painters,
that care not for making a face like, so they make it fair. Certainly you
thought upon some honester man than my self; when you took the pains to
write unto me; and your Idaea went beyond your subject: or else you meant to
excite me to virtue by a new subtilty; and the praises you give me are but
disguised exhortations. They could not be Sir, either more fine, or more
delicate: and I do not think, that your pretended Barbarism, comes any thing
behind the Grecian eloquence. But tell me true; Is it not as artificial as
Brutus his folly? And are not you in plain terms a Cosener, to make us
believe you come from that climate, from whence the cold and foul weather
comes? Whereas it cannot be you should be borne any where but in the heart of
Paris: or if any place be more French then Paris: that certainly must needs
have been your Cradle. You speak too well, not to speak naturally; this
garb, and this purity, in which you express your self, is not a thing that
can be learned by Books: you owe it to a nearer cause; and study goes not so
far as it. There have strangers been Marshalls of France, but their accent
has always discovered, they were not natural: and they have found it more
easy, to merit the leading of our Armies, and to gain the favor of our King;
then to learn our language, and attain a true pronouncing. But Sir, seeing in
your person, there is seen an Ambassador of eighteen years old: and a
wisdom without experience: there is not so great a wonder in the world as
your self: nor any thing incredible after this. It is fit only, that you make
more account than you do, of this so rare and admirable a quality: and that
you should use it, according to its merits; and not employ it upon base
subjects, that are not worthy of it. Otherwise how good an Artist so ever you
be; you will be blamed for making no better choice of your Materials; and my
self, who draw so much glory from, our fault; had yet much rather see you
employ your excellent language, in treating of Princes interests, and the
present estate of Europe; then in advancing the value of a poor sick man: who
prays you to keep your valuing, for --; and asks you nothing but pity; or
at most but affection: if this be to merit it, that I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 6. Novem. 1629.
To him another. LETTER XIX.
SIR, I remember my promise, upon condition you forget not yours: and that in
case you come within six miles of Balzac: you will allow me the half days
journey, I require. It is not any hope I have to send you away well satisfied,
either with your Host, or with your lodging: that makes me to make this
request: but it is Sir, for my own benefit: for you know very well, we never
have commerce together, but all the gain remains of my side. I find that in
your conversation, which I seek for in vain, in my neighbors Libraries: and
if there fall out any errors in the work I am about, the faults must be
attributed to your absence. Leave me not therefore, I entreat you, to my own
senee, and suffer me to be so proud, as to expect one of your Visits, if you
go to Santoigne, or otherwise to prevent it, if you stay at Lymousin. There
are some friendships that serve only to pass away the time, and to remedy the
tediousness of solitariness: but yours Sir, besides being pleasant, is
withal I vow, no less profitable. I never part from you, that I bring not
away pleasuros that last, and profit that does you no hurt. I make my self
rich, of that you have too much; and therefore as you ought not to envy me my
good fortune, which costs you little: so you ought to believe also, that as
long as I shall love my self, I shall be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 20. December. 1629.
Another to him. LETTER XX.
SIR, at that time when Mistress -- parted from hence; I was too much out of
order to present my self before a wise man; and I chose rather to be failing
in the rules of civilitie, then to be importunate upon you with my Compliments.
Now that I am a little at qulet; and can fall to work indifferent well; I must
needs tell you, that the confidence I have of your love, sweetens all the
bitterness of my spirit, and that in my most sensible distasts; I find a
comfort in thinking of this. It is certain Sir, the world is strangely
altered, and good men now a days, cannot make a troop. This is the cause,
that seeing you are one of this little flock which is preserved from
infection; and one of those that keep virtue from quite leaving us; I
therefore bless incessantly Madam Desloges, for the excellent purchase I have
made by her, means: and proclaim in all places, that she discovered me a
treasure when she brought me first to be acquainted with you. If I husband it
not, and dress it with all the care and industry, it deserves; it is not, I
assure you, for want of desire: but so sweet and pleasing duties, have no
place amidst the traverses of a life in perpetual agitation, and your ordinary
conversation is reserved for men more happy than I. I wait therefore for this
favor from a better fortune than the present, as also occasions by which I may
testify, that I possionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. Febru. 1630.
To him another. LETTER XXI.
SIR, although I am ravished with your eloquence, yet I am not satisfied: but
you remain still unjust, and I not well pleased. I see what the matter is; you
are so weary of your Penance at Lymousin: that you have no mind to come and
continue it in Angoumois. You like better to go in a straight line to the
good, then to go to it by the crooked change of evil; and prefer a safe
harbor before an incommodious creek. Wherein Sir, I cannot blame your choice;
only I complain of your proceeding; and find it strange, you should disguise
your joy, for escaping a badde passage, and that you are content to be unhappy
at Rochell; because you will not venture to be unhappy here. These high and
Theological comparisons which you draw from the austeritie of Anchorets,
concerning works of supererogation; concerning Purgatory and Hell, make me
know you are a mocker, and can make use of Ironies, with the skill and
dexterity of Socrates. Take heed I be not revenged upon this Figure of yours
by another, and return your Hyperboles. For this once, I am resolved to suffer
all; hereafter perhaps, I shall help my self with my old Arms. But howsoever
the world go: and in what style soever I write unto you, you may be sure I
speak seriously, when I say, that I very firmly am;

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 9. Septem. 1630.
To him another. LETTER XXII.
SIR, I am exceedingly beholding to you, for remembering me; and for the good
news you have so liberally acquainted me withal. If the -- loved Sugar, as
well as they love salt; they should have enough of it, never to drink any
thing but Hyppocras; nor to eat any thing but Comfits. Without jeasting I vow,
these are excellent Rebels; and their simplicity is more subtle than all the
Art and Maxims of Florence. These Mariners read Lessons now to the
inhabitants of Terra firma; and are become the Paedagouges of Princes. There is
nothing of theirs that troubles me, but the proposition of their Truce. They
should reject it, as a temptation of the devil: and I dare swear, it was
never set a foot, but to gain time and opportunity: The good will, the
Spaniard makes show to bear them; is the bait they show upon the hook they
hide, he seeks not after them, but to catch them; and he makes show of
kindness; because he could do no good with force. Though I have not read the
Book you spoke to me of; yet I doubt not of its worth and goodness; I know
the Author is a man of great learning and experience, and one that has been
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; I mean of --: who no doubt has
acquainted him with all the Mysteries of our state. For my self, it must
needs be that I speak but at hap hazard of this matter: for it would be a
miracle, if by living in the woods, I should learn the skill to govern
cities; and that I should be a Politician and a Lawyer, being scarce either a
man or a citizen: for to speak truly, if the first be a sociable creature,
and the other a manager of some part of the common wealth: I see not in the
estate I am in, how I can justly pretend to either of these two qualities. In
favor therefore of Mounsieur -- I yield up my right in all the good I receive
from you; and in all the praises you give me, as things that much more belong
to him than me. Admire as much as you will, his subtlety; but yet make some
reckoning of my freeness; and give him that which I leave him; but yet keep
for me, that which you cannot take from me, without doing me wrong: I mean
your good will; which ought to be the prize of my passion, and of the fidelity,
with which I shall be all my life,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. June 1630.
To him another. LETTER XXIII.
SIR, I should be extremely culpable, if you were not extremely good; but I
know, you are no rigorous exactour of that which is your due, and that you have
much indulgence, for the faults of those you love. My idleness is even become
stupidity; and has taken from me all use both of speaking and writing; yet all
things considered, this is no ill quality at this time: no man is bound to
give account of his silence; and many become Delinquents for their speaking. I
do not think therefore you would ask me news, in a time, when reporting it
is dangerous: and when one may be called in question to make explication of it
before Magistrates; though the litterall sense of our words be innocent, they
may search the allegorical, and stand punctual upon an equivocall term to
make us culpable of another man's subtlety. But I defy the most pregnant
Grammarian, and the most severe inquisitour to find any fault in the
protestation I make of most perfectly honoring your virtue, and of being with
all my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 4. May, 1631.
To him another. LETTER XXIV.
SIR, if my Letters had been lost, you should have known long ere this the
joy I have had in being cleared of the most important debts that troubled me,
and in learning from your self that you do me always the honor to love me;
not that I ever doubted of your goodness, but I have so much knowledge of my
own unfortunatenesse, that I cannot hear any ill news so incredible which I
do not believe to be very probable. Yet I perceive Sir by your holding out so
firmly in behalf of a party ruined, that you are not easily altered either
in your opinions, or from your errors. That which you have once spoken, and
indeed that you have but once conceived, is never changed nor revoked; and
therefore as I have nothing more dear nor more precious then your friendship,
so have I nothing also more assured or of more soliditie. This ancient German
Probitie is not a whit altered by contagion of our ill examples, and the
strength of your constitution has been able to resist the ill air of our
Court. It is not out of ignorance that you follow not the false maxims of
this; but follow your own and those that be lawful; and if it be true, that
the king of the Flies has a sting indeed, but never stings, it is much more
true of you, that having the power and ability to do evil, yet for all that
you are no evil doer. But this would be too little to praise you but thus;
they that understand you well will say with me, there is nothing in virtue so
high or difficult, to which your spirit is not aspired; and as nature has
given you all the good qualities that cannot be acquired by study, so your own
study has procured you all the good qualities that are not in the gift of
nature. Though your courtesies had left me my first liberty, and that there
were neither Obligation on your part nor Resentment on mine, yet I should say
as much as I do, and give this testimony of you before all the world, and I am
not less true of my word then I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 7. October. 1631.
Another to him. LETTER XXV.
SIR, this bearer will toll you how often in a day I am speaking of you, and in
what esteem your virtue is in all places where I am heard speak; yet I speak
but of the kind of life you have chosen, and this I propose as the peace of
passions, which with others are so mutinous, and as the kingdom of wisdom,
which is not free in the great world. Never repent you of so hardy a flight,
nor of so noble a banishment; the leisure that you take is far better then
the employment that others desire, and you are that close happy man that
enjoyes true happiness without either pomp or envy.

Aemulus ille Iovis, celsa qui mentis ab arce,
Sub pedibus vel summa videt fastigia Regum.
Quem non ambigui fasces, non mobile vulgus
Non leges, non castra tenent, qui pectore magno
Spemque metumque domat vitio sublimior omni:
Exemptus fatis, indignantemque repellit
Fortunam, dubis quem non in turbine rerum
Dependet suprema dies, sed abire paratum
Ac plenum vita, etc.
This me thinks is your very description, and might be mine also, if I had
cut off a little thread by which I hang still about Paris; out of a fancy of
my friends, without any hope at all in my self, for thanks be to God I have
purged my spirit from all smoakes and fumes of the Court, and my ambition goes
no further then the border of my village. I have no longer any thoughts but
rustique and provincial; and demand not of -- but only abatement -- and
return of Quart d' Escus; if these be two things, and as it is said, both
within his power. One conference with you will fully accomplish the settling me
in a good state, and you cannot deny your council to a man that has a longing
to put it in practice; and who is with his whole heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. May, 1633.
Another to him: LETTER XXVI.
SIR, this day being the six and twentieth of April, I solemnly renounce all
Complements, yet after I have told you first that I never used any with you,
but such as were most true, and that whatsoever I have written unto you
heretofore until now, is of as great force and vigor as if it had passed
before a public Notarie. I have with a great deal of pleasure read the Latin
which you did me the favor to send me; the force of the reasoning, and the
Oeconomie of the discourse content me exceedingly; only one little word
distasts me, and your friend might well have forborne to couple us with
Mahometans and Infidells. The liberty which the King gives his Subjects, not
to be of his opinion, ought not to reach to the scandalizing of that opinion,
and seeing he holds it a glory to be the eldest son of the Church, to call
this Church a whore, is in good French to call -- He deserves Sir more respect,
and your Doctors should have more descretion: For in truth, if their Religion
were the prime Religion of the kingdom, and that they were at liberty to
preach it in the Lovure; they could never speak in higher terms, nor handle
Catholics in a ruder manner then they do. I assure my self you will be in
this of my opinion: One must always remember the condition of the time, and
the state of affairs; wise men will never provoke them that are easily able to
undo them; and in the ancient triumphs it was lawful for the Soldiers to
scoff at their General; but it was not lawful for the vanquished to speak
reproachfully of the Conqueror; you may please to make some reflection
hereupon, and I know you will conceive that innocence it self becomes
culpable if it draw on persecution. I bid you goodnight, and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 26. April, 1634.
Another to him. LETTER. XXVII.
SIR, without accepting the challenge you sent me, I thank you for the care
you had to make me win honor; If it came of it self I would perhaps not
stick to receive it, but if it cannot be had without contesting, I will none
of it; I love my ease too well, I say not to lose it, but even to hazard it in
the best quarrel of the world. I am as patient and as utterly disarmed as an
Anabaptist; I am afraid of a Potgunne or a Squibbe; far from running upon
Muskets and Swords points, as they say in our Vicinage. It would be a hard
matter to draw a man of this humor to a combat; but a much harder matter to
make me stand in argumentation, being resolved to let the world hold what
opinion it pleases, and ever to forsake my own, if any man will wrangle with
me for it. I desire neither to establish my own Maxims, nor to destroy other
men's; and if a Master of Arts should come and try me with Omnis Homo Currit, I
would answer him Lascialo andar; and if he should go on and say, sed Petrus
Currit, I would reply, Lascialo star; and if he would conclude, Ergo Petrus non
est Homo, I would take my leave of him and say, Che m' Importa? I have very
seriously considered of the Letter of -- -- and absolutely lost all remembrance
of my own; I thought I had reason, and perhaps I was wrong, his intentions
might be good, but my interpretation of them was naught. The Conclusion is;
He is a man I make infinite account of, and his friendship shall always be
dearer to me then my own opinion. I conjure you to give him assurance hereof,
and to get his leave that I may live; seeing I am already beholding to you for
so many other courtesies, and am also with all my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzde, 15. August, 2634.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER XXVIII.
SIR, if it had not been for a troublesome rheum which has followed me now
these fifteen days, I should have sooner thanked you for the new courtesies
you have done me, and for the late pains you have taken for the most
unprofitable servant you have. God will reward a nature so free and noble, for
my self I can but praise it, and give it the testimony that is due unto it.
But to make it perfect, I entreat you it may be as sweet as it is gracious,
and heal me if it may be without thrusting your nails into my sores. I desire
not to be left in my ill estate by flattery, but I desire to be drawn out of
it without roughness; works alone seasoned with sweetness content me more
then good deeds that are dry, and come from a proud hand. Be not therefore like
the friends of Job, who reproached him in conforting him; but be compassinate a
little to humane infirmities, and remember you cannot alter me unless you new
make me. I dare not say, that I prefer the liberty of Deserts before the
magnificence of Courts; and that chains though never so well made and gilded
over, do yet not tempt me, I only say, I know my self too well to meddle in
a trade whereof I am not capable, and to begin a life which ought to be ended
in beginning it. Thus Sir I do that out of consideration which you think I
do out of laziness, and the faintness of my spirit comes from that of my
body. But I know it is impossible to persuade you to this, and no means is
left me to justify my sickness but by my death, and when you have lost me,
then you will find and say I had reason to complain. In the mean time I
understand that the devils of Paris, of Bruxells, etc. are all let loose, and
commit outrages upon me in four or five Languages. The contrary faction
fortifies it self daily, and there seems to be merit and piety in tearing
asunder my reputation. Leave me not therefore to adversaries so incensed, and
add not your rigor to their cruelty. I conjure you to take some care of an
afflicted soul; if I have defects, supply them by your virtue; if I be
negligent in my affairs, be you my tutour, but exact no more of me then
nature has given me. You are too generous to put back a man that casts
himself between your arms; and one that is more than any other in the world,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 5. Ianua. 1632.
To Mounsieur Descartes. LETTER XXIX.
SIR, your Letter found me in the blackest humor I was ever in in all my
life. To tell you, that in that estate it brought me joy; were to speak too
boldly for a man in misery: but it is true, it did a little mitigate my
sadness, and made me capable of consolation. I did not then live but in the
hope I had to go see you at Amsterdam; and to embrace that dear Head, which is
so full of reason and understanding. This is that which hinders me from
inviting you to come hither; or --: He is ever in the slavery of Ceremonies and
Compliments; and plays the coward with such a valor of spirit, that one could
not imagine. He has the soul of a Rebel; and the submission of a slave: if
you may believe him, he has no ambition; yet he consents to that of another;
and dies of a sickness that is not his own. See what it is to be a sycophant;
and to be undutifull by obedience. But you Sir, have raised your mind above
these vulgar considerations: and when I think upon the Stoics Wiseman, who
only was free, was rich, was a King; me thinks, I see you foretold long ago;
and that Zeno was but the Figure of Mounsieur Descartes:

Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,
Atque metus omnes, and inexorabile fatum,
Subjecit pedibus.
Either you are this happy man, or hee^ is not to be found in the world; and
the conquest of truth, for which you labor with so great force and industry
seems to me a more noble business, then all that is done with so great
brute and tumult in Germany and Italy, I am not so vain to pretend, I should
be a companion of your travel herein; but I shall at least be a spectator; and
shall enrich my self with the rellicks of the prey; and with the superfluity
of your abundance. Think not that I make this proposition by chance; I speak
it in great earnest; and if you stay never so little in the place where you
are; you shall find me a Hollander as well as your self; and my Masters, the
States, shall not have a better citizen: nor one more passionate for liberty
than I am. Although I love extremely the air of Italy; and the soil that
bears Orenges; yet your virtue is able to draw me to the banks of the frozen
sea; and even to the uttermost border of the North. It is now three years,
that my imagination goes in quest after you; and that I even die with longing
to be united to you, and never to part from you again: and to testify unto
you, by a continual subjection, that I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At ^arisc, 25. April. 1631.
To Mounsieur de la Motte-Aigron. LETTER XXX.
SIR, I have heard of the happy accomplishment of your marriage; and that it
has been one of the great solemnities of Rochell. I have celebrated it here
in my particular; with less pomp indeed and tumult; but with as much joy,
and satisfaction of mind, as they that sung the Hymenaeus. Though perhaps you
would not have it so; yet your contentments are mine; you have not any passion
so proper to your self, which is not common with me, and play the cruel, as
long as you will; I will have a share in that which is yours; even then, when
you will not afford to give it me. At the worst, I will love you still, as I
have ever done, as a creature supremely excellent; though not supremely just:
As there are some virtues that are fierce and scornful; so there are some
sciences which have attractives amidst their difficulties, and which draw us on
in thrusting us back, You are like these abstract knowledges: Your merit
sweetens all your rigours: and how hard soever the persecution has been,
which I have suffered: yet I vow unto you, I could never find in my heart to
hate the Tyrant. I have still so great a care of his reputation, that I would
not be thought innocent; for fear he should be blamed to have done me wrong;
and I had rather be a Prevaricatour, and treacherous to my self, then to seem
I had cause of complaint against him. We ought to condemn the memory of this
disorder; and to suppress this unfortunate Olympiade. We ought to persuade
our imagination, that the matter is not so indeed; but that it is only
dreamt. When you shall please to remember your word; I shall see your Verses;
and your friends Sermons. In the mean time Sir, if you will not have it be a
mere liberality: I send you something, to exercise commutative justice, and
begin a traffic whereof the Toll is not agreed upon to be taken of right.
Never was man so miserably busied as my self; I am intricated with an infinite
number of petty affairs: which, as you know, are no less cumbersome than the
great: One thrust of a sword hurts not so much as a hundred pricks of a Pin:
and the Arabians have a saying; It is a better bargain to be devoured of a
Lion, than to be eaten up of Flies. If I had you, I should have a Redeemer; but
your State-businesse, is preferreable before my interests; and it is better I
should want you, than come to have you with the curses of the people. I am, and
shall never be,

Sir, But your, etc.
At Balzack 29. July. 1634.
To Mounsieur de Granier. LETTER XXXI.
SIR, the^ day I parted from Paris; I dreamt not of taking any journey; but a
news which I received, made me take horse within an hour after I received it.
This is that which hindered me from taking my leave; and to use such compliments
with you, as in such cases are accustomed. If I did not know you to be an enemy
of the tyranny of Ceremonies; and that you, as well as my self, cut off from
friendship all vain pomp and superfluities, I should study for long excuses
to justify my journey: but in so doing, I should offer wrong to a wise man; to
think he had opinions like the vulgar: and that he would either give or take
so good a thing as liberty. I enjoy it as I would wish within these three or
four days; and I have received it at the bank of the river where I left it
the last year. I banish from my mind all thoughts of the street Saint
Jacques; and dream not either of my Prince or Commonwealth, either of enemies
Books, or of my own: I dream, to say true, continually of you; and find no
Image in my memory so pleasing, as that which presents me the time of our
being together. I would willingly employ Atlante, or Melisse, to procure me a
more solid contentment; and to convey you and your library hither in a night. I
cannot forget this dear retreat of your repose; for, I know, that without
this, you would find even in Tyvolie, a want in your felicity; and that
without your Books, our fruits would be but sour; and our good cheer but of
ill taste unto you. These are imaginations Sir, with which I flatter my self;
whilst I stand waiting to return to Paris; that I may there go find out a
happiness which cannot come hither to find out me. If in the mean time you
please to fend me some news, whereof, you know provincicall spirits are
extremely greedy; you shall give me means, to make a whole country beholding
to me; and you need deliver them, but only to --: who will ease you of the
pains of writing them. In these, I require not the strains of your
understanding, nor the politic Animadversiana which come from this accurate,
and Collineant judgment; (to use the barbarous eloquence of our friend) it
shall be enough for me that I may know in general some part of that which
passes, and may have some Epitome of the History which you send weekly to
Mounsieur D'Andylly. I humbly entreat you, to assure him that I honor him,
continually with passion; and assure your self also, that I am,

Sin, Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. Septem. 1631.
To Mounsieur de la Nauve, Commander of a Company in Pyedmont. LETTER. XXXII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, I cannot endure you should be cmoe back into France,
for nothing but --: and that he should solely and without me, possess a
happiness, which more belongs to me than him. His Letters speak nothing but
of your conversations, and of your feastings: news which he sends me, rather
to brave me, and to set me in a longing, then to give me any part in his good
fortune, and to justify my stay at Paris. I shall one day have means to be
revenged of him, for this malice: I doubt not to have liberty to walk abroad,
when he shall be tied to stay at home; and to have my turn in feasting and
making merry, when he shall stand waiting upon enterrements, and go exhorting
men that are to be hanged. Yet he is all this while your Favorite in my
absence, though he ncede not think me absent, unless he will; for if he
love me enough, to be troubled for losing me, he may easily recover me, by
looking upon your face. This resemblance between you and me, is not the least
of my vanities; and I vow unto you, I am proud of it in the highest degree:
every day I thank my mother for it in my heart; and do a secret homage for it
to Nature. It were enough for me, to be taken for your Copy; but my gray
hairs tell me to my shame, that I am rather your Original, and put me in
mind of this untoward advantage. I should not do much good, to paint them,
unless withal, I could discharge the pensiveness that has changed them: for
the tincture of this blots out all other. It is fit therefore to be merry, and
to banish sorrow, seeing this is the only means to new make us, and to make
us able to resist old age. I resolve my self to do so, though it be but to do
Fortune a spite; and to take from her by my not grieving, the pleasure she
thinks to take in her cruelty. But this goodly resolution stands in need of
you; my joy would be perfect, if you would sometimes be a man of the Province;
and that there were any appearance of hope, to see you at Condeville. I know no
reason you should scorme an Island, in which our Ariosto would have charmed his
dearest Heroes; and whereof he would have made a thousand other strange
devises, if he had been able to discover it. Venture to come thither this
next Summer, I conjure you to it by the memory of --: and I will promise you,
though not the good fellowshippes of Paris; yet at least the fair days of
Pigneroll. But I fear me much you are not settled enough to undertake so high
a design; nor good enough to come to civilize a clown; who yet is beyond all
I can say,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 3. Ianua. 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XXXIII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, the beginning of your Letter had frighted me, and I was
taking Alarm at these words of death and Physicians, but I recovered my
spirits when I saw the first had failed of his blow, and that you use not the
other but to strengthen you in an estate they have already put you; such days
as this will prove more healthful to you then all their Drugges, and the
sweetness which begins to spring from the purity of the Elements is the only
medicine that heales without corrupting, and cleanses without fretting. For my
self I think not of dying when I have once gotten March over my head, and me
thinks I find my self renewed at the only smelling of the Violets. I make
use of them to more then one service, they serve me for Broaths as well as for
Nosegayes. I cannot be persuaded that cold purges the Air, or drives away
sickness; and I am glad at heart to hear the Duke of Feria is dead of the
Purples in the month of January, and that in Germany. At least this will
justify the Summer and the hot Countries, and will serve us for a proof
against -- when according to his custom he will plead our adversaries cause.
I am more happy then I thought I was; seeing you assure me that I am sometimes
the subject of your conferences; and though in this you run the hazard of being
in the number of those Orators who were blamed for making ill choice of their
subjects; yet pardon me if I account the testimony of your remembering me, more
dear unto me then the glory of your well speaking; and if I like rather you
should talk of my idleness and of my walks, then to discourse of public
affairs or voyages of Princes. I regard not the estimation of the people, I
would give a great deal to buy out that with which I have gotten it; but there
are certain friendships upon which only I rely, and to be razed out of all
accounts in the state would be less grievous to me then to be blotted out of
your memory. Continue therefore these conferences which are so pleasing to me,
and of which I am in spirit a partaker, or rather deny me not these
consolations which are so sweet unto me, and whose effect I feel a hundred
miles off. I cannot dissemble the need I have of you, I could not live if you
did not love me, but withal you could not love a man who is more passionately
then I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 22. Febru. 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XXXIIII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, I am exceeding glad to hear of your news; as for news
of the world I set so little by them, and interest my self so little in
general affairs, that I may boldly say, I never yet read a whole Gazetta
through; you may think this a strange distaste of the present time, and a
remarkable impatience, specially in a man who complains that Livies History
is too short, and wishes Herodotus would never make an end. Things that wounded
me heretofore at the very heart, do not now so much as superficially touch
me; that which I accounted as my own is now become a stranger to me, and my
heart is hardened against all accidents that happen, if they concern not either
my self or my friends. It is true the death of -- wrought in me some
compassion; I can never hate men that are extraordinary, and it grieves me that
cowardice should triumph over virtue; and the lazy cause the valiant to be
murdered. For this man it would not serve to take him at table, it was
necessary to come behind him; for else the most resolute of the conspiratours
would never have had the courage to do the act, would never have a^idden the
splendour of that terrible countenance, and would have thought he had always
heard this voice.

Fallit te mensas inter quod credis Inermem
Tot bellis quaesita viro, tot caedibus armat
Majestas aeternam Duce^. Si admoveris or as sta
Cannas et trebia^ ante oculos, Thrasymenaque bu-
Et Pauli stare in gentem mir aberis umbram.
Change but the Latin names for Duch, and we^ may conclude thus;

Gustavi stare ingentem mir aberis umbram.
If I should say more, I should seem to make his Funeral Oration; I am
neither fit nor officious enough to go so far, my design was only to write
a word or two, and to pay you all your Compliments with this one little word, I
am but most truly,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 7. April, 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XXXV.
SIR, my dear Cousin, I mean not to show your Letter to the Doctor that
brought it to me, it would make him lose that little humility that is left
him, and he would think himself already In statu perfectionis acquisitae; you
do not well to use him as he were some rare personage, it is the way to
spoil him altogether, and to harden a vanity which durst not otherwise show
it self. I shall have something to do to make him come to himself, and to
take down the swelling of his spirit, which your testimony has put him into.
It is an casier matter to corrupt then to reform, the good works more slowly
then the evil; and I much fear my remedies will not be so forcible as your
poison; Under this name austere Philosophers would comprise the Present you
have sent me. They conceive that perfumes are made of sweet and pleasing
poisons, and that if they make no impression upon the body, they yet effiminate
the vigor of the mind: For my self I speak no such harsh Language, but
content my self to say with an honester man then they; Cursod be these
Effaminate persons that have cried down so innocent and so good a thing. The
use of it is lawful, the excess is forbidden; I know the first, and you would
cast me upon the other. For to speak truly what good can come of so exorbitant
a liberality? and what means this abundance of Orange flower water with which
you have loaded our messenger? If he had done any thing that pleased in the
place where you are, you should not have imputed the greatest part of it to me,
and it might have been spoken without Hyperbole, and without putting me upon
so high a strain. Your good deeds have no spice of the present poverty, one
may see in them the abundance of the golden age, and an image of that happy
time of which a Poet writes; They powered out by Floods what they received by
Drop; yet you have done well to get before hand, hereafter the sumptuary laws
will not suffer you to be so liberal; and you are threatened with the coming
forth of a Proclamation that will bring things back to the ancient frugality
of our ancestors. Perfumes shall not be used but in Temples, and about the
sacrifices at great festivalls, nor

but about the palace or at the Kings Coronation, so that you shall learn the
virtue of moderation by a lesson from the Prince, and you shall be made a good
husband if you will but be a good subject. I my self who profit by disorder
must tell you thus much, that if you reduce not your great bottles to little
violls, I shall inform against you, and yet will always be,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac, 10. June 1634.
To Mounsieur Bardyn. LETTER XXXVI.
SIR, never was Host better paid then I, for making you poor Cheer; if you
should make any long journey at this price, you would make your self a poor
man before you come home, and your first courtesies are such, that they scarce
leave any place for second. You are so good that you are unjust; to compare our
fruits to those of Italy is not so much to advance our Village, as to vilify
Naples and Florence. This is to affront her whom Virgill adored, and to whom he
said upon his knees and holding up his hands;

Salve magna Parens fragum Saturnia tellus
Magna virum, etc.
There is no reason to pardon this excess to a man that makes profession of
the truth, and who ought to speak that plainly which it is lawful for Poets
to disguise. These fellows make waste of their ornaments and their figures;
they call the worst wine they drink Nectar; and though the house of Cacus were
no better then an Ox stall, yet in their Verses it is made a Kings Palace;
such liberty is not allowed to Philosophers, and without derogation to this
quality, which you have so good title to possess, you could never have
bestowaed your praises upon such base Viands as I was feign to set before you.
And for my entertainment with which you seem much better satisfied, even that
was yet much poorer, and more meager then my cheer. You know Sir that in our
commerce I contribute nothing but my Dociblenes, and my ears; I am the people
and you the Theater; I mean a Theater reasonable and intelligent, inspired
with sentences and instructions, to whose spectacles I would run from one end
of the world to another, and never complain of my pains nor of my journey. I
would not only return you your visit in Touraine; but to hear you; would do
much more, and go much further, willingly untertake as long a voyage as
Appollonius did, who traveiled many kingdoms, and passed many Seas, only to
see Iarchas in his Throane of gold, and hear him discoursing of the nature of
things. Your Indian visage and your yellow color make show of a Gimnosophist;
but Gimnosophists had not the virtue that lies hidden under this yellowness;
for though they made Trees to speak, and sent tempests on their errands, where
they pleased, yet these were effects of their divellish arts, and no arguments
of their wisdom. Yours is not only more humane and more lawful; but is used
also with less pride and less violence. Instead of filling the eyes with
unprofitable wonders, it makes to flow and stream in the soul necessary
verities; it does not astonish me with prodiges, nor affright me with Thunder,
but it persuades me to doae that I ought to do, and instructs me to know that
I ought to know. It is the same I think that appeared under the Empire of
Trajan; and communicated it self to men by the mediation of Plutarch. How have
you decked her without disarming her? how sweetened her countenance without
weakening her force? how covered her Bones and Muskes with a fair flesh, and
made her a body of a Carcass? The Syllogism, which by the saying of a Grecian
is the Trident and Mace of Philosophy, is in your writings all painted and
perfumed: After you have purged it from the rust of Barbarians, and from the
poison of Sophisters, you make with it a wholesome and delightful lancing, and
no man seeks to ward your blows, because they heal and tickle. With these
rare knowledges you should entertain your friends, and not with the fruits of
our Orchard, nor with those of my studies, which are as vulgar the one as the
other; But yet seeing they please your taste, and that you demand of me
particularly the last piece you saw of my making, I have entreated -- who
carries it to Paris to deliver it unto you in the place where you are; By your
example I call it my dissertation, because we live in a country of liberty,
and where faults of this nature are not under the jurisdiction of the Kings
commission. But I durst not be so bold at the Court, where there is no longer
any favor for naughty words, nor safety for innovatours of our Language.
Remember therefore that I speak under Benedicite, and in our most strait
confidence; and imitate herein that Queen, who in public called her son by
the name of her husband, but in private by the name of her favorite; much after
this sort do I; having conceived my work from the acquaintance I have with
the Latin; I let it in truth carry a French title, but in secret and speaking
in the ear I give it the name of his father. It is now three months that M.
de Nants has been in Britanie, and M. de Tholouze in Languedoc. Upon the
first opportunity I will not fail to send them your rare Presents, and let
them know in what height of account you hold them both. Do me the like office
to Mounsieur Bourdelot, and assure him that I have great pretensions upon his
learning, and that I ground my self much upon his honesty. Hereafter one of
them shall be my treasure in the necessities of my spirit, the other my
Sanctuary against the malice of the world. For you Sir, it is impossible for
me to express the high opinion I conceive of you; when the question is to
speak of your virtue, I cannot find words that give me satisfaction, and
therefore at this time you shall have from me but the common conclusion of all
my Letters, that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 15. December. 1633.
To Mounsieur de Aigue bear Commander of a Company in Holland. LETTER XXXVII.
SIR, your Letter has stayed here a long time for me; if I had been here at
its first arrival, I had sooner testified to you the joy with which I received
it: and the especial account I make of the meanest of your favors. I seek not
after new acquaintance; I had rather I could forgo one half of those I have
already but for yours; I vow unto you I have much desired it, and you had
attractives for me, even in the malancholy of my Quartaine Ague. I discovered a
great worth under the veil of your disvaluing your self; and saw well, that
you sought rather to go safely and solidly, than to go in pomp and state,
and had more care to nourish your mind, than to set it out in colors. I do
not therefore take you for a simple Captain of Holland, who talks nothing but
Stoccadoes; and Circumvallation; and studies such other words in that country,
to come afterward and fright us with them here in France, I know you possess
no less the virtues of peace, than those that make a noise and handle iron:
and that you are a man of the Library, as well as of the Arsenall. Mounsieur
Huggens, I assure my self, is of the same mind; and I doubt not, but having
observed you in both these kinds, he rellisheth as well your spirit, as he
values your courage. I am very glad of the correspondence that is between you;
of which, if you please, I shall make use hereafter, for the safety of our
Commerce. But Sir, I have another, more important request to make unto you; and
I earnestly entreat you to do for me, with my Lord --: the good offices,
which I have right to hope your goodness will afford me. It has been
written to me from Paris, that he had some sinister conceit of me; and indeed
the coldness of his countenance, the last time I had the honor to do him
reverence, seemed to show as much. This misfortune comes not to me by any fault
of mine: for I swear unto you Sir, that I have always carried toward him a
most religious respect, and have never spoken of him, but as of a man of very
extraordinary parts. It must needs be, that this is some rellicke of those
impressions, which -- has left in him: and that he judges of me by the report
of my enemies. I will not revenge my self upon the memory of a dead man; nor
lay aspersion upon the passion of so great a Worthy; though there have been
some moved with motives less reasonable, that have wept for their Dogs; and
built Tombs for beasts they loved. In that, I acknowledge the good fortune of
--: but you know better than any other what his honesty was: and you ought upon
this occasion to give your uttermost testimony in behalf of calumniated
innocence. I conjure you to do it effectually: and from what coast soever the
evil come, take into your protection an honest man, who passionately is,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 3. Febru. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XXXVIII.
SIR, I have received in one Packet, a Letter from you, of the four and
twentieth of March; and another from Mounsieur Huggens of the fifteenth of
December. I give you a thousand thanks for each of them; and complain not,
that I staid a while for the latter, seeing if it had come a readier way, it
had perhaps not come so safe away: neither contains it any news, whereof the
knowledge might not be forborne without any danger: no matter in it, that
either concerns the life of the Prince, or the good of the state. It might
have come time enough, tonne years hence; for it speaks of nothing but of
Kings and Commonwealths, that have been long ago. Our commerce has no
object, but our Books; and I have no reason to complain of a slownesse, that
does a favor to my negligence. But my good neighbor, -- suffers me to be idle
no longer; she will have me hereafter make use of her messengers; and by
consequent, ease you of your conveying them. Yet for my part, I exempt you not
altogether, but if you return into Holland, at the time you have appointed;
you shall do me a favor to remember the note I send you. I entreat you also
to demand of our friends in that country, what reason they have to bring into
our language a new fashion of speaking; and which by the communication you have
with them, is gotten into the letter you sent me. If you say, my Masters the
States; you may as well say, Mounsieur the Counsel; and Madam the Assembly:
and more than this; if many Senators that make the body of a republike, may be
called, my Masters the States, then every Senator, which makes a part of that
body, may be called Mounsieur the State: and if this be suffered, the most
strange opinions of -- shall be authorized by public use: of the same words
will be made another language, and after this it cannot be thought strange,
that -- should speak of the Seigneury of Venice; as of the Infanta of
Portugal; and that she should marry with Mounsieur the Kings brother. It is
true the League committed the like incongruitie when ita ve the Duke de Maine,
the title of Lieutenant of the State, and crown of France, but this was not
without a check: you know what sport the Catholicon makes at it; and with what
force he defends at once, both the rights of the Kingdom, and the laws of
Grammar. And where the same Author in another place, calls the Assembly, which
was held at Paris; My Lords the States; he did that but to make it rediculous;
and not with meaning to speak regularly: Our dear friends may make of a
little city, a great; but of a bad word they cannot make a good: and though
their liberty extend very far, yet it reaches not to license Barbarism.
Mounsieur Huggens will consider of this point; and if in propounding to the
Counsel so important a matter, he shall speed well; he shall have the honor
to purge his country of a vicious phrase, as much in the judgment of
Grammarians, as to free it from a Hidra, or Chymaera, and therein shall show
himself a Hercules, or a Bellerophon. This is a way I take with my friends, to
make my self laugh; because I am given to pensiveness, when I am alone; and I
cannot stir up any joy in me, but by the presence, at least the
representation of some person, which is both dear unto me, and chosen for the
nonce: of this number Sir, you are, and know well, that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Paris 3. April 1634.
To Mounsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER XXXIX.
SIR, in the mean time, till I see you; be pleased to receive from me a
compliment, which shall not be tedious: Only to let me congratulate with you
the recovery of your health. God has now a kind of interest in preserving it;
seeing you have consecrated it to him; and your life is vowed to a perpetual
meditation of his Mysteries. I doubt not of his blessing this your holy desire;
and look at my return to find a great Preacher under your Cassocke. You will
show me as many Homilies, as heretofore you have showed me Sonnets: and instead
of Parnassus and Permessa; you will speak of Sion, and of Siloe. Yet moderate
your self a little at first: and be reserved in a strange Country. I would not
have you dive too deep into the Abysses of Predestination; famous for the
shipwrackes of so many Pilots; or to speak more plainly, for the heresies of
so many Doctors. If you will take my counsel, you shall let the Jesuits and
the Iacobins fight it out between themselves about the Question De Auxilijs;
and never meddle amongst them, nor go about to part them. The often using of
Syllogismes is very dangerous for health; there is nothing that heates the
blood, or enflame's choler more than Disputation. Besides, though you make your
self hoarse with speaking for the Truth, and make it never so plain: yet you
shall never make your adversary to confess it; or ever be able to take hold of
him, so long as he can slip from you by a distinction. Above all Sir, let not
the love of Divinity make you forget your temporal affairs, and the care of
your fortune: for otherwise, It were better, I should study with you to halfes;
and that you should make the Court both for your self and me. As I am like to
acquit my self extreme badly; so you are likely to grow soon to perfection;
and I despair not, one of these days to salute you by the Title, Of Most
Reverend Father in God. I know you do not dislike that we should write to one
another in this kind of style, which Cicero and Trebatius made use of, before
such time as untoward compliments had corrupted friendship; and that this base
jangling was brought into fashion. This Trebatius was a famous Lawyer: of whom
Cicero made great account; and yet is always wrangling with him about his
Science, and his formal writs: the like liberty I am bold to take with you;
whom I honor infinitely; and should not in this sort contribute to our common
joy, if I were not with a perfect freeness of heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 11. Novem. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XL.
SIR, I pity your good fortune, the court that follows you at your Chamber
would be to me an unsupportable honor, who would not give my mornings for all
the Compliments of Paris. It is the flower and prime of the day that is taken
from you; it is the time of meditation and Prayer which flattery intruds upon.
There is no Creditour nor Sergeant that you might not deal withal better
cheap then with these troublesome friends. You are unfortunate to be so
beloved, and a man of whom so many other have use, can be of little or no use
to himself. It is better yet to pass for a clown, then thus to prostitute
ones self by civilitie, and better never to sacrifice to the graces, then to
make ones self the beast for the Sacrifice. You would perhaps intermit this
course, but the time is past for that; a breach would draw upon you a war;
and you would run the fortune of that poor Saint, who was murdered with
pricks of Penknives, and cut in pieces by his Scholars. You would be the
object of a Rhetorical, an Historical and a Poetical persecution; and the
muses which now court you would grow furies, and fall a tearing you, so that
you have no remedy now but to hold it out, if you look for safety in the place
you are in, you must ever be the mediator between Apollo and Poets; you must
always have a thousand businesses both in Prose and Verse, your chamber must
be the passage always from the University to the Court. This back door
whereof you have sent me a Platform, is in truth an excellent invention, but
this will presently be discovered, and you will gain nothing by it, but to be
beseiged in more places at once. Do better Sir, quit the place that is not
tenable, and come save your self at -- -- -- I am not so poor, but I can make
you a reasemblance at least of the good cheer of Paris, and furnish you with
innocent pleasures, such as Philososophie and Priesthood will allow of; It
shall be for as short a time as you please; and only to make an ill custom
take another course. All the family desires this voyage, particularly -- -- who
is in good hope his son cannot prove ill, seeing you have no ill opinion of
him, and for his daughter of whom you write me so much good: I cannot stay my
self from vowing to you, that she is not altogether unworthy of it; and
perhaps would have deserved an Air with three couplets of your making, if she
had appeared in the time when you were the great Chaunter of France. But now
that you have changed your course of life, there is no looking for any thing
from you but spiritual discourse and Christian meditations, which yet will
serve as fitly for a Sex to which devotion belongs no less then beauty. Bring
therefore to us the Original of your Piety and of your Divinity, at least
show some sorrow that you cannot do it, that I may see my affection is not
scorned, and that I am not without revenge,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 1. December. 1634.
Another to him. LETTER XLI.
SIR, if you hold your old wont, you will tax me with ignorance, and write me
a man of another world; one delivered me but yesternight observations upon the
process of the Marshall of -- -- and I set my self to reading all the time my
groom set himself to sleeping. In very truth they gave me a^ excellent
relish; and I vow unto you I never read a style more subtle, nor that hid its
Art more cunningly; I entreat you to send me word who the Author is, and to
whom I am beholding for so pleasing a night. It must needs be some man who
understands two things equally well, affairs and how to write, one that
partakes of the life of a scholar, and of a Courtier; like to that God of whom
the Poets say, he is of the one and other world, Utroque facit commercia mundo.
From the knowledge of Books, he draws the vigor and force of his phrase, and
from the practice of the Court; the colors and sweetning of his matter. He
speaks the language of the Closet, and brings proofs of the Palace; but in
such sort, that neatenesse does not weaken his Reasons; and his force is so
tempered; that even Ladies may be judges of the process. Once again, I
entreat you to send me the name of this sage Observer, and besides, to give me
account what grace I stand in with Mounsieur de --: I was told in no very good
grace; neither I, nor my writings neither. If I made but little reckoning of
him; I should easily comfort my self, for this disgrace: but in truth, it
would grieve me much to be condemned by a judgment, to which I should make a
conscience not to subscribe; and I rather believe, there are many defects in my
Writings; then that in his taste there is any defect of Reason. Assure him Sir,
if you please, that I am at least capable of discipline: and am ^pt enough to
follow any method he shall prescribe me, for attaining a proportion of
knowledge to content him. Let him but tell me my faults, and see how quickly I
will mend them; let him but say, what it is in my style that offends him; and
see, how ready I shall be to give him satisfaction. If my Hyperboles displease
him; I will blot them out of my Letters the next time they are Printed; I will
truly confess, all I have ever used, and make a sollemne vow never to use
more. Yet it cannot be truly said; that to use this Figure; is a matter that
deserves blame; for, not to speak of humane Authors, we should then blame
the Son of God; for saying, It is easier for a Cammeil to go through a
needles eye, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven. But I
will not seek to save my self by so supreme an authority: In this, I will
respect our Savior, but not follow him; I will believe that such examples are
far above all humane imitation; and will not attempt it no more then to walk
upon the water, and to go forty days without eating. In good earnest, I would
do any thing to give contentment to a man; that gives contentment to M. the
Cardinal; and has persuaded the King of Sweden, If he will play the tyrant
with those that seek his favor, let him; I refuse not hence forward the
hardest conditions he can lay upon me; and to gains his protection; I renounce
with all my heart my very liberty: It is now four and twenty hours, since I
laid my eyes together; It is time therefore that I bid you good morrow, or
good night; take which of them you please; and believe me always,

Sir, Your, etc.
From Balzac 4. December. 1634.
To Mounsieur the Master Advocate in the Parliament. LETTER XLII.
SIR, you know I have fed upon the fruits of Pomponne, even beyond the rules of
temperance; and I have signified to you in each place where they grew, that
they are generally excellent; yet I now specially declare my self, in favor
of the last you sent me, and find them, far surpassing the Amber Pear, or
all other kinds, which I cannot name. It is true, I affect specially the Tree
it self that bears them: and I account the meanest of the leaves, no meaner
than jewels: yet their own goodness is such, that though they grew in the
garden of --: or grew upon a stock that Father --: had planted; yet I should
not for all that, but highly esteem them, and take a pleasure in their taste.
In a word, to leave speaking in Allegory, and not to flounder my self in a
Figure, into which you have most maliciously cast me: I say Sir, that in all
your Presents, I see nothing but excellent; and least you should think, I
meant to exempt my self from giving a particular account of my judgment, by
speaking in general terms: I let you know, that in the first place, the two
lives spoken of at the end of the discourse, please me infinitely; and next to
this that place which is written upon occasion of --: that France is too good a
Mother to rejoice in the loss of her children; and that the victories gotten
upon our selves, are fit to wear mourning, and be covered with black vailes.
All that cuold have been said upon this Argument, would never have been
comparable to this ingenious silence. And as he has dexterously shunned a
passage so tender, so he enters as bravely, and as proudly upon a matter that
will bear it; when speaking of --: he says, that having overcome the waves
and the winds, that opposed his passage, and traversed the fires of so many
canons of the enemies; with a few poor Barks, he made his way thorough a
Forest of great ships. And a little after; where he says: that God, who
bestows his favors upon Nations, by measure; seeing, that the admirable
valor of ours, would easily conquer the whole world; if it had Prudence equal
to its courage, seems therefore to have given us, as a counterpoise to the
greatness of our spirits; a kind of impetuositie and impatience, which to our
Armies have oftentimes been fatal, and cause of ruin. But that now the case
is altered in this point: for now the French are no longer French, then they
are valiant: now these Lions are grown reasonable; and now, to the strength
and courage of the North; they join the prudence and staidness of the South,
etc. Also where he says, that the carriage at Cazal, is a thing
incomprehensible; and for which we must be feign to look out some new name;
for it cannot be called a Seige, seeing the place was surrendered before ever it
was battered: nor it cannot be called a Battle, seeing no man struck a
stroke: nor it cannot be called a treaty seeing treaties are not made with
weapons in hand, etc. But that which pleases me most of all, because it
touches indeed the string of my own inclination; is that which he speaks of
the Marquess of Rambovillet: that there had been Statues erected in honor of
her virtue; if she had fortuned to be borne in the beginning of her race. For,
as you know Sir, this illustrious woman, is of Roman stock; Et de Gente
Sabella; of which Virgil speaks. These are the passages I can call to mind,
having not the Originalls by me: being taken from me, by a neighboring Lady;
who affects the King of Sweden with the like passion, as Madame Rambovillet: so
elevated a spirit may chastely enough be loved of both sexes; and let the
slanderous History speak its pleasure; I for my part think no otherwise of
it, then as the Queen of Sheba loved Solomon: and as Nicomedes loved Caesar. I
had begun something for the triumph of this great Prince, but his death made
my Pen fall out of my hand; and therefore you are like to have nothing from
me at this time; in revenge of your Sonnet. For your French Prose, I send you
another, which I will never believe to be Latin, until -- shall assure you, it
is; to whom I entreat you to show it from me: Vir plane cum Antiquitate
conferendus, and qui mihi est in hoc genere, vnus curia, Censor and Quirites. I
have read many things of his with infinite satisfaction: but I know, he has
certain mysteries in his Writing, which he lets not common people know; and --
has told me of a continuation he has written, of the History of M. de Thou;
which is not imparted but to his special friends; and which, I am infinitely
desirous to see: but I am not a man that will enter by force upon any man's
secrets: and my discretion in such cases, shall be always graeter, then my
curiosity, Opture licebit, si potiri non licet, If I should not presently:
make an end of my Letter, I should kill you with Latin; for I find my self in
an humor that way; and in this desert where I live: I have no commerce, but
with such as speak all Latin, I would persuade you to revive them in our
language; by an imitation which you are able to do, not much unlike those
great examples; I mean of Cicero, of Salust, and of Livie; not of Cassiodore,
or Ennodius Ticinensis, or Sidonius Apollinuris. They that love this impuritie
of style, are in a ficker state, then they that love to eat coals and ashes.
Far be it from us, to have such disordered appetites, and let us never be so
foolish, to prefer the corruption and decay of things, before their prime,
and their maturitie, I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 4. Febru. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XLIII.
SIR, He that delivers you this Letter, knows as much of my news as I my
self, and will make you ample relation of all that has passed at --: He has
a business in the Parliament, which is of no great difficulty; and which may
be spedde without any great Eloquence: yet I address it to you, but upon
condition, that you shall not employ your whole force about it; but that your
laboring for him may be a refreshing to you, from some other labor. I hear
with a great deal of pleasure, of the progress of your reputation, and of the
effects of my prefages. The acclamations you cause in the Palace, are sounding
in all places; and we are not so out of the world, but that the Echo of them
comes to us. But Sir, I content not my self with clapping of hands, and
praising your well-speaking, as others do; I desire to have some particular
ground, for which to give you thanks, and am willing to be in your debt, for
compliment and reverence; this shall be, when you have spedde my friends suite:
and which shall be a cause, if you please, that I will now at the end of my
Letter, add a superlative; and say I am;

Sir, Your most humble, most faithful, etc.
At Balzac. 2. Novem. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XLIV.
SIR, I make no secret of our friendship, it is too honest to be hidden; and I
am so proud of it, that I think my self of no worth but by it. Mounsieur
Iamyn, acknowledges my good fortune herein, and is himself in passion to get
your acquaintance, to which he persuades himself; I should not be his worst
introductor; and that by my means he might be admitted to your studies. I will
make my self believe, that he mistakes me not; and that for my sake, you will
add to your accustomed courtesies a little extraordinary. They who saw
Pericles, how he thundered and lightened in the public Assemblies, were
desirous to hear him in a quieter estate; to know whether his Calm were as
sweet and pleasing as his Tempest. This man has the like desire; and though
my recommendation, were as indifferent to you, as it is dear; yet so honest a
curiosity would deserve to be respected. He is the son of one of my best
friends, and though perhaps you know it not, you are the example that Fathers
propose for imitation to their children; and by whose name they excite to
virtue all their youth. I need not say more to you of this; only be mindful
of our resolute and undaunted Maxims; and in this age of malice; do not
scorn the praise I give you for your goodness. I kiss the hands of all your
reloquent family, and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris. 16. Febru. 2634.
To Mounsieur de Caupeau ville Abbot of Uictory. LETTER XLV.
SIR, the time which my malady permits me, I bestow upon you, and make use of
the respite of my sits, to tell you, I have received your last Letters, and the
new assurances of your friendship; which is so much the dearer unto me,
because I know you use them with discretion; and that there be not many things
you greatly affect. This makes for my glory, that I can please so dainty a
taste; and that I can get good from one that is so covetous. It is no small
matter to draw a wise man out of himself; and to make Philosophy
compassionate of others evils. Although the place, to which she has raised
you cannot be more eminent, nor more sure; yet my disgraces may because that
her prospect is not so fair or pleasant: and how settled soever the peace of
your mind be, yet the Object of a persecuted friend, may perhaps offend your
eyes. Our Mounsieur Berville, I assure my self, dislikes not this kind of
wisdom: he likes to have that husbanded and dressed, which Zeno would have to
be rooted out; he knows that magnanimity has its residence between
effeminatenesse and cruelty; and that the sweet and humane virtues, have
place between the Fierce and the Heroioke. Poets sometimes make the Demi Gods
to weep; and if an old woman's death were cause enough to make Aeneas shed
tears; the oppression of one innocent, cannot be unworthy of your sighs. Yet
I require from you, none of these sad offices: your only countenance is
enough to give me comfort. I do not live, but in the hope I have to see it,
and to get you to swear once again, in presence of the fair Agnes, and the
rest of your chamber Divinities, that you love me still. After that, if you
will have us make a voyage in your Abbey, I shall easily co^discend: Provided
Sir, that you promise me safety amongst your Monks: and that they be none of
those, that are angry at good language, and have no talk, but of Analysis and
Cacozoale. If you have any that be of this humor, you are an unfortunate
Abbot; and you may make account to be never without suites. First, they will
ask you a double allowance: next they will question your Revenew; and if you
chance by ill hap to make a Book, you are sure to be presently cited before
the Inquisition; or at least before the Sorbonne. God keep you Sir from such
Friars, and send you such as I am, who eat but once a day; and who will not
open my mouth; unless it be to praise your good words, and to tell you
sometimes, out of the abundance of my heart, that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 26. December. 1631.
To -- -- -- -- LETTER XLVI.
SIR, I am able to live no longer, if you be resolved to love me no longer; and
think not that the good you promise me, can countervaile the loss of that
you take from me. Keep your estimation and your bounty, for those that have
nothing in them but Vanity and Avarice: I am endowed from heaven with better
and more noble passions; I like better to continue in my poverty, then in your
disgrace; and will none of this cold speculative estimation, which is but a
mere device of Reason; and a part of the Law of Nations, if you give it me
single, and nothing else with it. I must tell you, I think my self worthy of
something more; and that the Letter I write to you, was worthy of a sweeter
answer then you sent me. If therein I said any thing that gave you distaste, I
call that God to witness, by whom you swear; I then wandered far from my
intention. I meant to contain my complaints within so just bounds; that you
should not find the least cause to take offense. But I see I have been an ill
interpreter of my self, and my rudeness has done wrong to my innocence: yet
any man but your self, would I doubt not have borne with a friend in passion,
and not so unkindly have returned choler for sorrow. As for my pettish humor,
it is quickly over, and there is not a shorter violence, than that of my
spirit: whereas you have taken six whole weeks to digest your indignation,
and in the end come and tell me, you would do me any good you can, upon
condition to love me no longer. I vow unto you, it is a glorious act to do
good to all the world, and to make even ungrateful men beholding. But Sir, if
you think me one, to whom you may give that name; you do me exceedingly much
more wrong, then it is in your power to do me right: Neque decorum sapienti,
unde amico infamiam parat, inde sibi gloriam quaerere. I am wounded at the very
heart, with this you have written; but since you will not suffer me to
complain; I must be feign to suffer and say nothing; only I will content my
self, to make a declaration contrary to yours; and tell you, I will never make
you beholding to me, because I am not happy enough to be able to do it; but
yet I will love you always, and will always perfectly be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. March, 1633.
To Mounsieur Trovillier, Physician of the Popes house. LETTER XLVII.
SIR, having always made special reckoning of your friendship; it is a great
satisfaction to me, that I receive assurance of it, by your Letter. I doubt not
of your compassionating my disgraces; and that the persecution raised against
me, has touched you at least with some sense of grief; for even mere
strangers to me, did me these good offices; and though the justice of my cause,
had not in it self been worthy of respect: yet the violence of my
adversaries, was enough to procure me favor and protectours. There is no man
of any generous spirit, that found not fault with the bravadoes of your
Philarchus: nor a man of any wisdom, that thought him not a Sophister. Yet I
cannot blame you for loving him: seeing I know well, you do it not to
prejudice me, that your affection corrupts not your judgment. You are too
intelligent, to be deceived with petty subtilties; and too strong, to be broken
with engines of Glass; but in truth, being as you are, a necessary friend, to a
number of persons of different qualities; it cannot be, but you must needs
have friends of all prices, and of all merit, and that the unjust as well as
the innocent are beholding to you. You shall hear by Mounsieur --, when he
comes to Rome, the little credit I have with the man you spoke to me of, to
whom I present my service, but only once a year; and that I do too, least I
should forget my name, and mistake my person. If in any other matter which is
absolutely in my own power; you will do me the honor to employ me; you shall
see my course is not to use excuses and colors; but that I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 4. April 1631.
To Mounsieur Gerard, Secretary to my Lord the Duke D'Espernon. LETTER XLIX.
SIR, you cannot complain, nor be in misery by your self alone: I partake of
all your good and evil, and feel so lively a reflection of them, that there
needs but one blow to make two wounds. And thus I am wounded by the news you
write, and though your grief be not altogether just, yet it is sufficient to
make me partake with you, that it is yours. We weep for one not only whom we
knew not, but whom we know to be happy: one that in six weeks staying in the
world has gained that, which St. Anthony was afraid to lose after threescore
years penance in the Wilderness. I wish, I could have had the like favor;
and have died at the time, when I was innocent: being my self, neither valiant
nor ambitious: I account those wars the best that are the shortest; and that,
though in Paradise there be diverse degrees; and diverse mansions; yet there is
not any that is not excellent good. Observe only your goodly making of Saints,
and you shall find of all sorts; I mean of the one, and the other sex:
Religious and Seculars, Gascoignes, and French. You know well. I have appointed
you here a chamber; and that you are my debtor of a visit, now a whole year,
if you be a man of your word; but I fear me you are not, and that as your
custom is, you will content your self with praising my quiet course of life;
yet I would have you to flatter at least my spirit, though it be, but with some
light hope of so perfect a contentment: promise me you will come, and make me
happy; though you break your promise, I shall enjoy at least, so much of good;
and in doing so, you shall amuse me, though you do not satisfy me. I send you
all I have of that admirable Incognito; of whom there is so much talk, and who
has made himself famous now these three years, under the name of Petrus
Aurelius: I cannot for my life find who he is. Mounsieur de Filsac, told me
lately at Paris, that of him that brought the leaves to Printing, he could not
possibly learn any more than this, that he was a man, who desires to serve God
invisibly. And in truth, if you knew, in what sort he carries his secrecy; and
with what care and cunning he hides himself; you would confess he takes more
pains to shun reputation, then ambitious men take in running after it. Far
from being a Plagiary, to rob others of their glory, who refuses that which
is his own, and suffers a Phantasme, to receive those acclamations and praises
which belong to himself. This is no man of the common mould; even in the
judgment of his adversaries; and his writings savor not the compositions of
his age. They are animated with the spirit and vigor of the former times; and
represent us a Church we never saw. Yet it seems in some passages, he has
less of Saint Austins sweetness than of St. Hieroms choler; and that he is
willinger to do that, which justice only permits him, then that which
charity counsels him. I could wish he had showed a little more respect to the
gray hairs, and rare merit of Father Sirmond; or rather that he would have
laid aside his Arms, and dealt with him in a gentler war. But there is no
means to bridle a provoked valor, nor to guide a great force, though with a
great moderation. All Saints are not of one temper; it is enough for Religion
to cut off vices; and to purify the passions. Our moral Divinity
acknowledges some innocent cholers: and it is the beauty of Christ's flock,
that there be Lions amongst the Sheep, and that as well the sublimest and
strongest spirits as the basest and sweetest submit and prostrate themselves to
the greatness of Christianity. If I had learned nothing in his book but
only to know what respect men owe to a Character reverenced of the Angels, I
had not lost my time in reading him. If Bishops be of such eminent authority:
shall we make any difficulty, to call a Prelate, My Lord; and esteem him
less than a Grande of Spain, or then an Earl of England? You will tell me
more of this, at your next meeting; and I doubt not, setting aside the interest
of -- --: send it me back when you have read it; and forget not the Chapters
of honest Bernia. I am more than I am able to express,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 15. Octo. 1634.
To my Lord the Bishop of Nants. LETTER LI.
SIR, I am now grown shameless, and make no longer any conscience to be
trouble some to you. Yet hold on your course of goodness: which has from the
very first been so ready to me, and freely makes me offer of that, for which
it ought to make me be a suitor. I send you now four leaves for Ruell, and if
you please to let three of your own lines bear them company, I doubt not but
they will have a happy arrival, and that the skiffe will procure passage for
the great vessel. But because Fortune her self, has done one half of my
discourse, and that I have little commerce with any but Latins borne, I humbly
entreat you my Lord, to be so good, when I am fallen to help me to rise, and
not suffer me to go astray, in a Country, where you are Prince. I know you
love your own elections, with more then natural tenderness, and that you
respect me, as none of the least of your Creatures. This is a cause, why to
keep me in your favor, and to engage you in my interests, I will not tell you
to your face, that you are the Chrysostom of our Church, that you are privy to
the most secret intentions of Saint Paul, That there is neither Jew nor
Gentile, that hearing you speak of the greatness and Dignity of Christianity,
does not willingly submit himself to follow Christ, I will only say, it has
been your will to be my Father, and that I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac 8. Ianua. 1630.
Another to him. LETTER LII.
SIR, you have a right to all occasions of doing good. I see not therefore, how
I can forbear to offer you one, and to the end, you may always be meriting of
thanks, why I should not always be craving new courtesies. The bearer of this
Letter is my near Kinsman, yet our friendship is nearer, then our alliance,
and the knot which Nature made, Virtue has tied. I humbly entreat your
Lordship, to let him see you slight not things, whereof I make such reckoning,
and to do that for my sake, which you would much willinger do for his own
sake, if he were known unto you. He is a man of metal and spirit; and has
served the King in this Province, having also had the honor, to be in person
before him in very famous actions. At this time, he is troubled against all
right and reason, and they that have drawn him, from the exercise of his
charge, to make a walk to Paris, have nothing to say, but that they do it of
purpose to vex him. And therefore their manner of fight with him, is by flights
and retreates, and they cast so many bones of difficulty, between his Judges
and him, that it is impossible they should ever come to any issue. They are not
able to hinder his justification at last; but they are able to delay, and keep
him off a long time. You Sir, may save him this long journey, and may break
this Project of Calumny, if you please but to facilitate the overture, he will
propose unto you, obtaining for him of -- only one quarter of an hours
audience. I assure my self, he will not be loath to hear him, being able to
inform him of the state of things in these parts; and which he will do
faithfully. You shall therefore my Lord, infinitely oblige him, to take him
into your protection, and you may be pleased to remember, that it is your dear
son, that makes this request unto you, one whom in the ecstasy of your
Fatherly affection, you have sometimes called your glory; and the ornament of
this Age, who yet accounts no quality he has so glorious as that which he will
never part with, whilst he lives; to be

My Lord, Your etc.
From Balzac 3. April 1630.
FINIS.
A SVPPLY TO THE SECOND PART; OR THE THIRD PART of the Letters of Monsieur DE
BALZAC.

Written by him in French, and translated into English by Sr R. B.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for John Crook, Francis Eglesfield, and Richard
Serger, and are to be sold at the Gray-hound in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

To my Lord, the Cardinal De la Valet. LETTER I.
SIR, being not able to bring you this untoward Present my self, I humbly
entreat you to excuse me that I send it. Wherein I bind you not to a second
perusal, and to read that again, which perhaps you have read already with
distaste. It is true Sir, that something is altered in the Copy, and well near
one half added to the original; but the spite is, that base wares get no
value by store, and the water that comes from the same Spring, can never be
much differing: but if in any of the passages, I have not altogether come off
ill, and that I have had some tolerable conceits, I acknowledge Sir, that I
have had it all from the good education I had with you; and that it is the
fruit of those Instructions, which you have done me the honor to impart unto
me. For, no man ever had conceits more pure, more pregnant, than your self; no
man ever saw things more clearly than you do; you can tell precisely in what
degree of good and evil any thing stands; and to find out the truth, there
needs no more, but to follow your opinion. But to speak truly, I fear this
quality in you, no less than I esteem it; you have too much knowledge in you
for a Discourse that requires simplicity in the Reader. Neither am I so
unadvised, to expose it to the severitie of your judgment, I submit it rather
to the protection of your goodness, and hope you will not lay open those
faults, which none but your self can see: Humbly entreating you to protect a
spirit of your own making; and not so much to consider my manner of
expressing, as the affection with which I am

Sir, Your, etc.

To the same as before. LETTER II.
SIR, I am negligent, for fear of being troublesome, and least I should be
importunately complementall; I forbear to show my self officiously dutiful.
But my fault growing from discretion, I hope you will not take it ill, that I
have a care not to trouble you, and that you will pardon the intermission of my
Letters, which has no other end, but the solacing your eyes. I seek no
colors of Art, to paint out the affection I owe to your service; This were to
corrupt the natural purity. Truth is simple and shamefast, and when she
cannot show her self by real effects, she will scorn to do it by verbal
expressions. It is not in my tongue to express her otherwise, than in such
terms as are the engagements of a lie; and when I shall have made you most
sincere protestations of inviolable fidelity, there will come a coozening
companion that will outvie me, and endeare himself beyond all my oaths. I
could wish there were some mark to distinguish protestations that are true,
from those that are feigned; for if there were, I should have great advantage
over many Courtiers, more officious and more hot in offering their service,
than I am, and you should acknowledge that the eminency of your virtue, not to
speak of the eminency of your dignity, is of no man more religiously
reverenced, than of my self, who am, and ever will be

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur Godeau. LETTER III.
SIR, Disguising will not serve your turn, you are a remarkable man, and
whether it be that you call the dissembling of Art, Negligence, or that you
cannot put off those ornaments which are natural in you; I let you know that
the excellency of your style, extends even to your familiar speech, and that
you are able to sweeten it without sawcing it. A man may see that come
springing and flowing from you, which in others is brought ^farre off, and that
with engines; you gather that which others pull off, and though you write
nothing loosly, yet you write nothing with streyning: yet I must tell you, they
are not the periods of your sentences, nor the pawses that win me so much
unto you; I am too gross for such slender and fine threads; if you had nothing
but rich conceits and choice words, this were but the virtue of a Sophister,
and I should place you in the number of things that may please but not of
things that one ought to love; I make more reckoning of the honesty of a dumb
man, than of the eloquence of a varlet; I look after the good of society, and
the comfort of life, and not after the delight of Theaters, and the amusement
of company: Let us make then a serious profession of our duties, and let us
give good examples to an evil age; let us make the world see, that the
knowledge we have of virtue, is not merely speculative; and let us justify
our Books and our Studies, that now are charged with the vices and
imperfections of their Teachers. Philosophy is not made to be played withal,
but to be made use of, and we must count it an Armor, and not a painted Coat.
They are men of the worst making, that now adays make the worst doing; sots
take upon them to be subtle, and we have no more any tame Beasts amongst us,
they are all savage and wild. For my self, who have seen wickedness in its
Triumph, and who have sometime lived in the Country of subtlety and craft; I
assure you, I have brought nothing from thence, but loathing, and before ever I
tasted it, was cloyed. I am exceeding glad to find you of the same diet, and
doubt not of the Doctrine I Preach, seeing I read the same in your own Letter;
Believe it Sir, there is none more wholesome, none more worthy of our Creation.
Which I am resolved to maintain, even to Death, and will no more leave it,
than the resolution I have made, to be without ceasing;

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur Godeau again. LETTER IIII.
SIR, I have known a good while, that you are no longer a Druyde, and that you
lately made your entry into Paris: I doubt not but with magnificence enough,
and not without bestowing some public largess. I never knew you go a
forraging, that you returned not home laden with booty; and your Voyages have
always enriched your followers. I pretend my self to have a feeling of this,
and though far remooved from the place where you act them, yet I cannot
learn, that my absence makes me loose my part in the distribution of your good
deeds. Cease not Sir, I entreat you, to bind me unto you, and to deserve well
of my tongue. Fill our Closets with the fruits of your brain, and since you
can do it, make us to gather more sheaves of Corn, than the best workmen
hitherto have left us ears. My devotion stands waiting continually for your
Christian works, and I entreat you, they may be done in such a volume, that we
may carry them handsomely with us to Church. That which I have seen of them,
does so exceedingly please me, that I would be a Poet for nothing else but
withsome indifferent grace to praise them, and to say,

Verses bless him that makes such blessed Verses.
If I did not love you well, I should envy you the conversation of Monsieur
Chaplain, from whom in fifteen days I have received but one small spark of
a Letter by the ordinary Post. Thus I do but taste of that whereof you make
full meals; yet remember, I have as good right in him as your self, and
though I trust you with the keeping him, yet I do not quit my part in him; To
him and you both, I am most affectionately

Your, etc.

To Monsieur Conrat. LETTER V.
SIR, I had undertaken to have answered to every point of your eloquent Letter,
but when I had spent a whole month about it, I could not satisfy my self
with my undertaking. That which I had written, was not worthy, me thought, that
I should Father it; and I began to think I should do you a great courtesy,
to save you the reading of an ill Oration. But seeing of evils, the least are
the best, you shall have cause to thank your self for this complement, which
will cost you no more but one look to look over, and never put you to the
labor of turning over the leaf. I have this only to say at this time, that
the report which was spread of my death, has not killed me, and that in
despite of rumor and mortal Presages, I intend to be happy by your means,
and not to forgo the good fortune presented to me in your person: so I call
your excellent friendship, with which no burden is heavy, no calamity
dolorous. For I know I shall find in you that ancient generousnesse, whereof
Monsieur de la Nove, and Monsieur de Ferries, made profession. I account when I
discover secrets to you, I hide them; and shall have no jealousy of my honor
when I have put it into your hands. In such sort Sir, that my soul should be
of a very hard temper, if it did not feel a kind of tickling in so present and
great advantages, and if I should not most perfectly be, as you oblige me to be,

Your, etc.

To my Lord the Bishop of Nantes. LETTER VI.
SIR, I was upon the point of sending my footman to you, when I saw your
footman enter my lodging, who brought me news exceeding joyful; and now I
depend no longer upon Fortune, since another besides her self can make me
happy; and am so indeed as much as I would wish, and should never know the
value of your friendship, if I made it not the bounds of my ambition. To
complain of fortune, and to be your favorite, are things that imply a moral
contradiction: it is an easie-matter to comfort a pension ill paid, when a man
is in possession of store of treasure, and having neither the gift of
impudency, nor of hypocrisy, it is not for me to prosper in an age which
esteems them most that are owners of these qualities. It is enough for me,
that M. the Cardinal does me the honor to wish me well, and condemns not
your judgment of me; all other disgraces, from whence soever they come, I am
prepared to bear, and take for a favor the contempt that is linked to the
profession of virtue. But it is too much to say of me, that which Seneca said
of Cato: Catonem saeculum suum parum intellexit. These are transcendencies of
M. de Nantes, and impostures of his love. He stretches all objects to
infinity, and all his comparisons are beyond proportion. The Sun and the
Stars are common things with him, and he can find nothing in Nature goodly
enough to serve for a similitude of that he loves. It is this deceitful
passion has made you believe, that I am of some great worth, and that my
barren soil is fruitful in high conceits. But Sir, I count all this nothing,
if this love of yours persuade you not to come and stay a while in it, and to
be mindful of your word. I have put Monsieur -- in hope hereof, and make my
self sure since you have made me a solemn promise; knowing that Truth is
residentupon the mouth of Bishops.

Dixisti, venies, Grave and immutabile sanctis
Pondus adest verbis, and voce^ fata sequuntur.
The Author of these Verses shall be your fourth suppliant: it is one that
has been of your old acquaintance, and was accounted the Virgill of his time.
I make use of him upon this occasion, because perhaps you will make more
reckoning of him than of me, who yet am more than any man in the world.

Sir, Your, etc.

Another to my Lord Bishop of Nantes. LETTER VII.
SIR, I speak Latin but once a year, and yet as seldom as it is, it comes
more upon hazard than out of knowledge, and holds less of learning than of
rapture: vouchsafe therefore to take it in good part, that in my settled
brains, I answer you in the vulgar tongue, and tell you, that never ears were
more attentive, nor more prepared to hearing, than those of our family when I
read your Letter before them: they were not satisfied to have only a literal
interpretation, and to make me their Gramma^ian, but I must declaime upon it,
and make a Paraphrase as large as a Commentary. If you will know the success,
I can truly say, that all the company was well satisfied; but to tell you all,
was even ravished with admiration of your bounty, specially my Niece, who in
the greatest vanity, that sex is capable of, never durst imagine she should
ever have the honor to be praised in Latin, and should serve for an Argument
of commendation to the greatest Doctor of our age. She says, this is a second
obligation you bind her in, to make her a Roman after you have made her your
daughter; and to give her so noble a Country, after giving her so worthy a
Father. And yet to these two favors, I can add a third, which she forgot:
methinkes Sir, she fattens and grows graceful with these praises you give
her; she is fayrer by one half than she was before. And if from virtue there
issue certain beams which enlighten the objects that are near it; and that
beauty flows from goodness, as from the Spring, I need not then go far to
seek from whence this varnish of her look, this amiablenesse of her
countenance, is grown upon her: It is certainly your late benediction that
has painted her; and to speak it in the words of the Poet,

Formosam Pater esse dedit, Lumenque Juventae
Purpureum, and laetos oculis afflarat honores.
I have considered of the Letters whereof you pleased to send me a Copy, and
in my judgment, you have all the reason in the world to rest satisfied with
it. They could never have been more in favor of you, if you had endited them
your self, and our friend himself had writ them: if you had been the King,
and he the Secretary, if I be not deceived, this style will bring a cooling
upon the joy of -- and make them see, they have at least mistaken one word for
another, and that the absence of -- has not been a discharge of his
authority, but only a breathing from the labors of his charge. I am
wrestling still with -- and preparing you an after-dinners Recreation, which I
will bring my self to Bordeaux, if you stay there till the next month. In the
mean time, since you desire new assurances of my fidelity, I swear unto you,
with all the Religion of Oaths, and with all the liberty and sincerity of
the golden age, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.

To Monsieur de la Nauue, Counselor of the King, in his first Chamber of
Enquests. LETTER VIII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, your nobleness is not of these times, but you are
generous after the old fashion. To call the pains I put you to, a favor, and
to thank a man for persecuting you, this is a virtue which Orestes and Pylades
perhaps knew, but is now no where to be found, but either in old fables, or in
your Letter. The offers you make me, do not so much give me a possession, as
confirm me in it, and assure me the durablenes of a happiness which wants
nothing of being perfect, but being durable. Monsieur de -- has stretched his
belief yet further; he has told me of your coming into this Province, and
has promised me at lest some hours of those Grand days that bring you
hither: if they were as long as those of Platoes year, they should not be too
long for me, if I might be so happy to spend them in your company. I make
account to husband the least minutes of it I can take hold of, and am about in
such sort to deck up my Hermitage, that it may not be offensive to your eyes. I
can present you but with gross pleasures and Country recreations; yet you that
are perfectly just, will not refuse to take a little contentment where you are
perfectly loved, and prefer a lively passion, and a heart sincere, before
false semblances and a dead magnificence. My complements are short, and I am by
profession a very bad Courtier, but my words carry truth in them, and I am with
all my soul,

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
At Balzac; 1. June. 1634.
To Monsieur de la Motte le Voyer. LETTER IX.
SIR, I am going from Paris in have, and carry with me the grief that I cannot
stay to tell you in how great account I hold the offer you make me of your
friendship. If this be the price of so poor a merchandise, as that I sent you,
never was man a greater gainer by traffiking than I: and you seem in this, not
unlike those Indians, who thought to overreach the Spaniards, by giving them
Gold for Glass. I have long since known your great worth, though you would
not be known to have such worth in you; all the care you can take to hide the
beauty of your life, cannot keep the luster of it from dazeling mine eyes,
and though you make your virtue a secret, yet I have pierced into it, and
discovered it. And yet I must confess unto you my infirmity, I find it too
sublime for me, and with my uttermost ability am not able to reach it; all I
can do, is to respect it with reverence, and to follow you with my eyes and
thoughts. The world cannot all raise it self above the pitch of the
presentage, and be wise in equal rank with Aristides and Socrates; I am
contented to be in a lower form of virtue, for I am a man, and they demi Gods;
I neither aspire to be their equal, nor their rival, much less Sir, to be
their judge or accuser. Anitus and Melitus would be much mistaken in me, if
they should think I would join with them in their accusation, as though I
thought all opinions to be bad which are not like mine own; I had rather
think, that it is I that loose the sight of Orasius Tubero sometimes, than
think that he is strayed, or out of the way; and rather charge my self with
weakness, than accuse him of rashness. Let him leave the middle Region of the
air below him, and mount up above the highest; let him take upon him to judge
of humane things, from Shepherds to Kings, from shrubbes to stars, provided,
that he be pleased to hold there, and bow his wings, and submit his reason to
things divine. I have not time to tell you, how much I value him. Monsieur de
-- will at more leisure entertain you with discourse about it, I only will
assure you, that what mask soever you put upon your face, I find you always
exceeding amiable, and that I will ever be

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris, 6. September. 1631.
To Madam de Villesavin. LETTER X.
MAdam, seeing it is my ill fortune, that I cannot find you when I come to see
you, I entreat you to let me speak to you by an Interpreter, and that I may
make this benefit of my being so far from Paris, to have a right of writing
to you when I could not have the power of speaking with you. Indeed as long as
you were taken up with entertaining your dear son, whom long absence had
made as it were new unto you, and as long as you were tasting the first joys
which his return had brought with it; It had been a great indiscretion in a
stranger, to intrude himself into your private feast, and not give you the
liberty to make choice of your Guests; but now, that your ecstasies of joy are
over-passed, and that a more calm estate makes you sociable to others abroad:
Now Madam, you may vouchsafe to accept my complement, and to hear me say, with
my Country freedom, that you want much of that I wish you, if you want any
thing of absolute felicity. I make no doubt but Monsieur Bouthillier your
son, as he parted from hence a right honest man, so he is returned hither an
understanding man; and that to the lights which are given by Nature, he has
added those that are gotten by practice, and by conference. The air of Italy
which is so powerful in ripening of fruits, has not been less favorable to
the seeds of his spirit, and having been at the springhead of humane prudence,
I assure my self, he has drawn deep of it, and has filled his mind with so
many new and sublime knowledges; that even his Father (if it were not for the
great love he (...) him) might not unjustly grow jealous at it. This Madam, is
that happiness I speak to you off, and which I have always wished to you,
and to which, there can nothing be added, but to see shortly so excellent an
instrument set aworke, and so able a man employed in great affairs. When this
shall be, I shall then see the success of my ancient predictions, and of that
I have long read in his very face; so that, you may well think, I shall take
no distaste at your contentment, as well for the reputation of my skill in
Physnomie and Prognosticating, as for that I perfectly am

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac 2. October. 1631.
To Monsieur de Gomberville, LETTER XI.
SIR, the mischance at the Tuilliries, has disquieted me all night, and my
unquietness would have continued still, if you had not taken the pains to
calm it. The news you send me, gives me life; A man cannot be innocent, whom
Madam de Maiso^fort judges culpable, she is not one that will complain where
there is no fault; and truly, if she had taken the mischance of her page in
another fashion than she did, I would rather have abandoned reason than
maintain it against her, and would not have trusted my own testimony, if she
rejected it. You remember, that but hearing her Name, I fell down in a trance,
and that the very sight of her livery, struck into me a religious horror, and
a trembling respect, which is not borne, but to things divine. And in this
rank, I place so rare a beauty as hers is; and though I be no man of the
world, yet I am not so very a stranger to the occurrents of the world, but that
I very well know, she is universally adored; I must not always pass for an
Hermit; this I am sure, she carries with her the desires and vows of all the
Court, and she leads in triumph those Gallants, who have themselves triumphed
over our enemies: yet I know withal, they depend more upon her by their own
passion, than by her endeavors, and follow without being drawn. These are
Captives, whom she trusts upon their word, for their true imprisonment, and
whom she suffers to be their own Keepers. In the course she holds of
honesty, her favors are so moral, or so light, that either they content none
but the wise, because they desire no more than what is given them; or none but
the unwise, because they take that to be given them, which was never meant
them; so there are some perhaps well satisfied, but it is by the force of their
imagination, and no body has cause to be proud of a Fortune, which no body
possesses. As her virtue is as clear as the fire that sparkles in her eyes,
so her reputation is as much without blemish as her beauty; and of this,
honest people give testimony by their words, and Detractors by their silence.
She makes thorns that they cannot prick, and makes slander it self to
learn good manners. And therefore Sir, I should be very unfortunate, if I had
been cause of displeasing her, whom all the world endeavors to please; and it
would be a shame to our Nation, that a Frenchman should bear himself
unreverently toward her, to whom very Barbarians bear a reverence. If this
misfortune had besallen me, it is not the saving my Pages life, should make me
stand in the defense; and I would never desire to augment my train, but to the
end I might have the more sacrifices to offer upon the Altar of her choler. But
she is too merciful, to punish mean Delinquents, and too generous, to give
petty Examples: she reserves her justice for the Great ones, and the Proud;
for those who having more tender senses, are better able to feel the weight of
her anger; or else in truth her purpose is to show me a particular favor, by a
public declaration, and to let the world see, she makes a reckoning of that
of which the world makes none. And knowing what the gratefulness of good
Letters is, she is desirous to have them in her debt; she pays our studies
beforehand, for the fruit she expects from them, and obliges the Art which
can praise the Obligation: she is made believe, that I have some skill in this
Art, and I perceive I am not in so little respect with her as I thought; and of
this I am assured, by the pains it cost you, to make her take her Page again
that was hurt; and by the civil language she desired you to deliver from her.
It exceeded indeed all bounds of moderation, and it seems she would not only
for my sake protect an innocent, but would be ready, if need were, to reward a
delinquent. For acknowledgment of which generous goodness, all my own spirit,
and all my friends put together, can never be too much. It is particularly your
self to whom I must have recourse in this occasion: you Sir, who set the Crown
upon Beauties head, who have the power to make Queens at your pleasure; and to
whom Olympia and Yzatide, are beholding for their Empire: having bestowed so
great glory upon persons that never were; and set all France a running after
Phantosmes, you may well take upon you to defend the reputation of a sensible
and living virtue, and choose a subject that may be thankful to you for your
choice; and this is a matter you cannot deny, of which we will talk more, and
conclude it after dinner in presence of the Lady that is interessed in it, into
whose presence, I must entreat you, to be my usher to bring me, that so I may
ever more and more be,

Sir, Your most humble and most obliged servant, etc.
At Paris, 1. June: 1631.
To Monsieur de Villiers Hottoman. LETTER XII.
SIR, being equally tender of the good will you bear me, and of the account
you make of me, I cannot choose but rest well satisfied with your remembering
me, and with the judgment you deliver of my writings; you are not a man that
will bear false witness, and you have too much honesty to deceive the world,
but withal, you have too much understanding to be deceived your self, and one
may well rely upon a wisdom that is confirmed by time and practice. This is
that which makes me to make such reckoning of your approbation, and such
account of your counsel, that I should be loath to be defective in the least
tittle of contenting you. It is far from me, to maintain a point, that you
oppose; I give it over at the first blow, and yield at the first summons: yet I
could never have thought, that of a jest, there should have been made a fault;
or that a poor word, spoken without design or aiming at any, should have been
the cause of so great complaints. You know, that in a certain modern School,
there is a difference made, Fra la virtu faeminile, and la Donnesca; and it is
held, that to make love, is more the vice of a woman, than of a Princess; and
less to be blamed in the person of Semirdmis or Cleopatra, than in the person
of Lucretia or Virginia: I carry not my opinions so far, and I mean to be no
Author of so extravagant a Morality. It may suffice, that without descending
from the thesis to the hypothesis, I protest unto you, I should be very sorry,
I had trenched upon the reputation of that great Queen, or intended to corrupt
the memory of so excellent an odor, as she hathleft behind her; of whose
great worthiness, I have in other places said so much, that I should but shame
my self to say any otherwise; and indeed, the terms I used were free, and not
injurious, and such, as if they wound a little, they tickle and delight much
more: I neither spoke disgracefully of the dignity of her royal birth, nor
gave her any odious or uncivil names, as some others have done, whom I
condemn extremely for it; yet Sir, I will yield to confess, that I have said
too much, and though my saying too much should have attractives to charm me,
and were as dear to me as any part of my self, yet seeing it is distasteful
to you, I will for your sake cut it clean off, and never look for further
reasons to induce me to it. I can deny nothing to my friends, and therefore
make no doubt of the power you have over me, and of my testifying, upon this
occasion, without further opening my eyes, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. Jan. 1632.
To Monsieur de Borstell. LETTER XIII.
SIR, I am so far from seeking to justify my negligence, that I will not go
about so much as to excuse it: nothing but my being dead, can be a valuable
reason why I waited not upon you, to offer you my service; all other
impediments would prove too light, to have kept me here: but such is your
graciousnesse, that it is impossible to fall foul with you; such your
indulgence, that you remit a fault before I can confess it: you give me no
leisure to ask you, at the very first, you oblige me to thank you, and I have
received my pardon here at home, which I never looked to obtain, but at
Oradour, and that with long soliciting. I have not yet seen the Ambassatrix,
who has done me the favor to bring it to me, and I cannot imagine, she
should be surprised with that despair, as your Letter represents herein.
Alclones affliction, in respect of hers, would be but mean, and those women
whose tears Antiquity has hallowed, did but hate their husbands, in
comparison of her: I know not whether you do her a pleasure, to raise her
sorrow to so high a pitch; for after this you speak of, she shall never be
allowed to lift up her eyes, and you give her a reputation whereof she is not
worthy, if she leave but one hair upon her head. I much distaste your
exaggerations, and cannot think she will bear you out in the report you make
of her miserable estate: if it were such, as you make it, it would be capable
of no remedy: Epictetus and Seneca, would be too mean Physicians, to take her
in hand; yet I mean not to contradict you:

I think when death her husband sea'de,
Angelica with her Fates displeasde,
Looked pale in the face as Alablaster:
Charging the guiltless stars with blame
In the th'hard language, Rage could frame
When it is grown the Reasons Master.
Yet the glory of her spirit makes me believe withal, that this sad humor was
but a Fit, and continued not long, and that the same day upon the tempest there
followed a calm. A man shall meet with some women of such spirits, that
neither time nor Philosophy can work upon them; and some others again, that
prevent the work of time and Philosophy, by their own natural constitution.
As there are some fleshes so hard to heal, that no Balm can cure the prick
but of a pin; so again, there are some bodies so well composed, that their
wounds are healed with plain Spring water, and they close and grow together of
themselves. I assure my self, our fair Lady is of this perfect temper, and
that she wouldbe no example, to make widows condemned for curling their locks,
or for wearing their mourning gowns edged with green. You should allege unto
her the Princess Leonina, so highly esteemed of the Court of Spain, and the
prime ornament of this last age. Knowing that her husbands quirry was come, to
relate unto her the particulars of his death, and hearing that his Secretary
was to come the morrow after, she sent the quirry word, to forbear coming to
see her, till the Secretary were come, that so she might not be obliged to
shed tears twice. There is no virtue now adays so common as constancy, nor
any thing so superfluous, as the custom of comforting. All the Steel of
Biscay, and all the poison of Thessalie, might well enough be trusted in the
hands of the mourners of our time, without doing any hurt. I scarce know a man
that would not be glad to outlive, not only his friends and parents, but even
the age he lives in, and his very Country, and rather than die, would willingly
stay in the world himself alone. Speak therefore no more of keeping Angelica
here by force, who in my opinion is not of herself unwilling; and not having
lost the King of Sweden, may therefore the more easily repair her loss. I
would to God Sir, I could be no sadder than she is, and that I could forget a
person, who is at this present the torment of my spirit; as he has heretofore
been the delight of my eyes: but melancholic men do not so easily let go the
hold of their passions, and the good remedies you have sent to comfort me for
his death; I approve them all, but apply none of them: yet I give you a
thousands marks, though six months after they were due; and though I say not
often, yet I say it most truly, that you shall never take care of any man, that
is more than my self,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 30. April. 1633.
To Madam -- LETTER XIIII.
MAdam, seeing I could not come to see you at your departure, as I was bound to
do, I do not think I shall do you any wrong to send you a better companion
than that I promised you; I mean the Book I now send you, whereof you have
heard so much talk, and which you meant to have carried with you into
Perigord, to be your comforter for the loss of Paris. It is in truth worthy of
the good opinion you have of it, and of the impatience with which I am a
witness, you have expected it. And if wagers have been laid upon Queens great
bellies, and assurance given they should be brought abed of a son, why should
I wonder that you have given before hand, your approbation of a thing that
deserves the approbation of all the world? It will certainly bring you out of
taste with the Present I gave you, when you desired me to look you out some of
my Compositions. In it you shall find that, that will shorten he longest days
of this season; That, that will keep you from tediousness when you are alone;
That, that will make you thank me for my absence. For to say true, all visits
will be unseasonable to you, when you set your self to the Recreation of so
sweet a reading; and whosoever shall come to trouble you at such a time, must
needs have from you some secret maledictions, what civilities soever you make
show of, as your custom is. I would be loath to fall into this inconvenience,
it is better I give my opinion a far off, and in a Letter, which you may
entertain without any solemnity: since then you will have me believe, that my
judgment is not altogether bad, nor my opinions wholly unsound; I profess
unto you Madam, that setting aside the affection I bear to the Author of this
work, I have observed in the work it self, a number of excellent things,
which I could not choose but praise, even in an enemy. He is not so choleric I
hope, but that he will pardon me if I say that he is one of the most pleasing
liars that ever I saw. I complain not of his impostures, but when he cease
to deceive me, because I would gladly have them last always. His History has
quite removed my spirit out of its place, and has touched to the quick all
that I have sensible in me. I will not hide my weakness: I knew at first, that
the painting I looked on, was all false, yet I could not hold from having as
violent passions, as if it had been true, and as if I had seen it with mine
eyes: sometimes sorrowful, sometimes glad; as it pleases Monsieur de Bois
Robert to tell me tales of good or bad fortune. I find my self interessed in
good earnest in all the affairs of his imaginary Kings; I am put in fear for
the poor Anaxandra, more than I can express, and as much I am humbled for the
misfortunes of Lysimantus, and I have seen them both in such extremities,
that I made solemn vows for their safety, when at the very height they were
miraculously delivered. In conclusion Madam, though I have a heart hard enough,
and eyes not very moist, yet I could not forbear to shed tears, in spite of
my self; and I have been even ashamed to see, that they were but the dreams
and fancies of another man, and not my own proper evils which put into me such
true passions. This is a tyrannical power, which the sense usurpeth over the
reason, and which makes us see, that the neighborhood of the imagination, is
extremely contagious to the intellectual part, and that there is much more
body than soul in this proud creature, which thinks it self borne to command
all others. The Aethiopick History has oftentimes given me these Alarums, and
I cannot yet read it without suffering my self to be deceived. As for other
writings of this kind, it is true, I make some choice, and run not after all
Spanish Romanos, with equal passion. They are indeed for the most part, but
Heliodorus in other clothes, or as -- said, but children borne of Theagenes and
Chariclea, and seem to resemble their Father and Mother so near, that there
is not a hairs breadth of difference between them. But in this work Madam, I
make you promise you shall see novelties, and shall find in it this sweet air
of the wide world, and these dainties of the spirit, which are not common in
our Provinces. I confesso unto you, there is in some passages some thing that
may seem too much painted, and perhaps too garish, and which will not bear
examining by the rigor of Precepts; but then you must confess as well that
Fables look chiefly after beauty, and care not though it be a little
immodest, seeing this kind of writing is rather a loose Poesy, than a regular
Prose. As soon as I shall be able to ride, I will come and hear your Oracles
hereupon, and tell you, as I use to do, that as your self is one of the
perfectest things I ever saw, so I am more than of any other,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. August, 1629.
To Monsieur Hobier, President of the Treasures in the Generality of Bourges.
LETTER XV.
SIR, though you should say, I present you always with flowers that prick you,
and offer you services that may seem unseasonable, yet I cannot forbear the
solicitations of my Letters, nor the trading with you by this way of
Complements. The Book which I have desired Monsieur de -- to deliver to you,
shall pass if you please, but for an Essay; and I am contented that my
discourses Moral and Politic, shall contribute nothing to the mending of my
own fortune, so they may contribute something to the recommending of my Sisters
business: if it become me to speak of a person that is so near unto me, and
if you think me worthy to be credited in the testimony I shall give of her, I
am able Sir, to say thus much, that she is a woman, either lifted up by her
own strength above the passions of her sex, or that Nature has exempted her
from them, by a peculiar privilege: so far, as that amongst us, she stands
for an example, and leads a life that is the edification of all our Province.
But though she make profession of severe virtues, yet she aspires to no glory
by sullen humors; she has nothing muddy, nor clownish in her, but tempers
her austerity with so much exterior sweetness, that without endeavoring to
please any, she seems to be pleasing to all the world, I therefore solicit
you for her, in behalf of all the world, and crave your favor with violence;
for to crave it with discretion, would make but a weak show, of the desire I
have to obtain it. In matters that concern my self only, I am held back by
a certain natural ^mourousnesse, which makes me oftentimes to be wanting to
my self; but in that which concerns her, I observe not so much as honest
respects; but am bold, even to temeritie; and if therein I should not do too
much, I should never think I did enough: and yet this is a fault, which leaves
no remorse behind it; the merit of the subject, justifies the impor^unitie of
the suppliant; and when you shall know her better, you will find no great
excess in that I write, and will bless my persecution. You have already
obliged us exceedingly, and have put the business in an infallible way of
prospering; it only remains Sir, that you crown your courtesy, and draw a
concluding word from the parties, whom I shall call Publicans, and couple them
with Heathens, if they be not converted and led with that you shall say unto
them: but I cannot doubt of the effect of your persuasions, who know, that both
by your tongue, and by your pen, you practice our Art, with assured success.
Let us now see the proof of it, in this occasion, and I p^omise you, that
never favor was more commended, nor shall be more recommended, than yours
shall be. The consideration of a good deed, being joined to that of virtue, you
shall possess me by a double title, and I shall not be less of due, than I am
by choice,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. December. 1631.
To Monsieur de Coupeauville, Abbot of the Victory. LETTER XVI.
SIR, seeing the Relations that come from Paris, tell us no News at all of
you, I entreat you to be your own Historian, and not suffer me to be
punctually informed of a thousand things, that are indifferent to me, and
remain altogether ignorant of the state of your health, which is so infinitely
dear unto me. It is very likely, you have all the care that may be of it, as
of a thing necessary for exercising the functions of a virtuous life; and I
doubt not but you contain your self always in that excellent mean, which is
between disorder and mortification. You are no longer hungry after the glory of
(...), and if the Artillery of the Valstin carry not so far as the Realle, I
assure my self, it can do you no hurt: my mind therefore is at quiet in that
point, and I am not afraid to loose you, as I have lost some other valiant
friends; and you do well to leave the war to others, and stay your self
upon the Victory. I ask you pardon for this untoward Aequivocall word, I have
rather written it than thought it, and it is a misfortune which surprizeth me
but very seldom: I only say Sir, that it is better to be Abbot a dozen miles
from Paris, than to be General of an Army in Tharingia or Westphalia; and
that a Cross of so many pounds a year, is much more worth than either
Hercules clubbe, or Rowlands sword; and that he that gave you so honest and so
rich an idleness, has not ill deserved of your Philosophy, to which I
recommend me with all my heart, and wish unto it the continuance of this happy
repose; but upon condition, that it make you not distaste our friendship, and
suffer you to place one of the most noble virtues of the mind in the number of
her maladies and infirmities. Be not a Doctor so far as that, and remember,
you are my debtor of some affection, if you forget not, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. December. 1632.
To Monsieur de Forgues, Commander of a Company in Holland. LETTER XVII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, I think my self a rich man with the goods you have
given me another that should have received the same present, should not owe you
for it the same obligation, but the opinion of things, is the measure of their
value; and because I have neither mind nor eyes that be covetous, I account
the Emeraudes of your Glasse-windowes, of as great a price as those of
Lapidaries: at least, whereas they are without life and motion, these live and
moove in my base Court. I know my riches, and am known by them, and after I
have read my self stark blind, I go and refresh my wearied sight in that
admirable verdure, which is to me both a recreation and a remedy. Base
objects, not only offend my imagination, but even provoke my choler; and I
should never receive a Monkey from the best of my friends, but only to kill
it: but I vow unto you, that beauty pleases me wheresoever I meet it; yet
because it is a dangerous thing in women's faces, I like better to behold it in
the feathers of birds, and in the enameling of flowers. Pleasures so chaste, are
compatible with Lent, and offend not God: and therefore upon these one hour in
a day, I take pleasure to stand gazing and amuse my self: I thank you for it
with all my heart, and passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. March. 1634.
To Madam d'Anguitur. LETTER XVIII.
MAdam, It shall never be laid to my charge, that you speak of me with honor,
and that I understand it without feeling. A good opinion is obligatory, from
whence so ere it come, but infinitely more, when it comes from an exquisit
judgment, as yours is; and I doubt not, but Socrates was more touched and
tickled with that one word the Oracle spoke of him, than with all the praises
the world had given him. The favorable discourses you have held of me, ought
not to be held of me in less acou^t than words indeed inspired, and if I
should place them in the number of humane testimonies, I should show my self
ignorant, that it is Heaven which has been your Instructour; and that from
thence, you have received those clear lights, whereof the Stars are but
shadows. I do not amplify any thing at adventure, nor suffer my self to be
swayed with flattery; but in this point of Illumination, Madam, I always
except matters of Faith, least your Ministers should take advantage of my
words. We must needs, I say, hold for certain, that either you have been
instructed by an extraordinary way, or confess that you owe it all to your
self, and that coming to know the truth, without study and discipline, your
virtue is a mere work of your own making. It is no small matter for one that
lives in parts remote from the Court, to be but tolerably reasonable, and able
to maintain his common sense against so many opposites and oppositions, as he
shall meet with; but in those remote parts, where you have no choice of
Examples, there to discover the Idaea, from whence Examples are taken, to
breath in an infected Air, and full of Errors; and yet retain still sound
opinions; to be continually opposed with extravagant questions, and yet always
return discreet answers; To take pity of silly Buffons, when others admire
them; to make a difference between jeasts picked up here and there, and those
that come from the Spring it self; between wise discourses, and harmonious
fooleries; between a sufficiency that is solid, and that which is only
painted; to do these things Madam, ought to be called even half a miracle:
and no less a raritie in these days than in former times, it was to see a
white Ethiopian, or a Scythian Philosopher. Our Country may justly be proud of
so admirable a birth; It is the great work of her famous faecunditie, and we
may boldly say, there is that found in Saintoigne, which is wanting in the
Circle; that which hinders the Court from being complete, and that which is
necessary for the perfecting of Paris it self. But as well here as there
Madam, if ever you will hear the vows of those who wish your happiness, I
would think it fit, you should not make your self a spectacle for the vulgar,
nor suffer your entertainment to be a recreation for idle persons. It deserves
not to be approached unto without preparation; and that they should examine
themselves well, who present themselves before it. All spirits at all times,
are not capable of so worthy a communication, and therefore, let men say what
they will, I account the reservations you make of your self, to be very just,
and it cannot be thought strange, that being as you are of infinite value, you
take some time to possess your self alone, and not to loose your right of
reigning; which admits, as no division, so no Company. To use it otherwise
Madam, would not be a civilitie, or a courtesy, but indeed an ill husbanding
of your spirit, and a wastfull profusion of those singular graces, of which,
though it be not fit you should deprive them that honor you, yet it is fit you
should give them out by tale, and distribute them by measure. It is much
better, to have less general designs, and to propose to ones self, a more
limited reputation, than to abandon ones spirit to every on^ that will be
talking, and to expose it to the curiosity of the people, who leave always a
certain taynt of impuritie upon all things they look upon: by such vicious
sufferance, we find dirt and mire carried into Ladies Closets: if there come a
busy fellow into the Country, presently honest women are besieged, there is
thronging to tell them tales in their ears; and all the world thinks, they
have right to torment them: and thus, saving the reverence of their good
report, though they be chaste, yet they be public; and though they can spy the
feast sullying upon their ruffes, yet they willingly suffer a manifest soyling
of their noblest part. You have done Madam, a great act, to have kept your
selse free from the tyrannnie of custom, and to have so strongly fortified
your self against uncivil assay lants; that, whilst the Louver is surprised,
your house remains impregnable. I cannot but magnify the excellent order,
with which you dispose the hours of your life; and I take a pleasure to think
upon this Sanctuary of yours, by the only reverence of virtue made inviolable:
in which, you use to retire your self, either to enjoy more quietly your
repose, or otherwise, to exercise your self in the most pleasing action of the
world, which is the consideration of your self. If after this your happy
solitnde, you come sometimes and cast your eyes upon the Book I send you, you
shall therein Madam, do me no great favor: the things you shall have thought,
will wrong those you shall read; and so it shall not be a grace, but an
affront I shall receive. I therefore humbly entreat you, there may be some
reasonable intermission, between two actions, so much differing: Go not
straight from your self to me, but let the relish of your own meditation be
a little passed over, before you go to take recreation in my work. To value
it to you, as a piece of great price; or otherwise, to vilify it, as a thing
of no value, might justly be thought in me an equal vanity. They who praise
themselves, desire consent, and seek after others approbation; they who blame
themselves, seek after opposition, and desire they may be contradicted. This
latter humility, is no better than the others pride. But to the end, I may not
seem to go to the same place, by a third way, and desire to be praised, at
least with that indifferency I ascribe to you; I entreat you Madam, that you
will not speak the least word, either of the merit of my labor, or in default
of merit, of the fashion of language I have used in speaking to you: I mean
not to put this Letter upon the score; to speak plainly, I entreat you to make
me no answer to it; so far I am off, from expecting thanks for it. It is
not, Madam, a Present I make you, it is an homage I owe you; and I pretend not
to oblige you at all, but only to acquit my self of the first act of
veneration, which I conceive I owe you, as I am a reasonable creature, and
desiring all my life to be

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. May, 1634.
To Monsieur Balthazar, Counselor of the King, and Treasurer General of
Navarre. LETTER XIX.
SIR, I never deliberate upon your opinion, nor ever examine any man's merit,
when you have once told me what to believe. But yet, if I should allow my self
the liberty to do otherwise, I could but still say, that I find Monsieur de --
well worthy the account you hold him in, and my self well satisfied of him,
upon his first acquaintanee. By further conversation, I doubt not, but I should
yet discover in him more excellent things, but it is no easy matter, ever to
bring us together again: For, he is a Carthusian in his Garrison, and I an
Hermit in the Desert; so as that which in our two lives makes us most like, is
that which makes us most unlikely ever to meet: yet I sometimes hear News of
him; and I can assure you, he is but too vigilant in looking to his Charge; he
has stood so many Rounds and Sentinells, that it is impossible, he should be
without rhumes, at least, till Midsomer. These are, to speak truly, works of
supererogation; for I see no enemy this Province need to fear, unless
perhaps, the Persian or Tartarian: the very Name of the King, is generally
fortification enough, over all his Kingdom; and as things now stand, Vaugirad
is a place impregnable; that if Demetrius came again into the world, he would
loose his reputation before the meanest village of Beausse: but this is one of
your politician subtleties, to make Angoulesme pass for a Frontier Town, and
to give it estimation, that it may be envied. Doubt not, but I shall give you
little thanks for this, seeing by this means you are clean gone from us, and
I must be feign to make a journey of purpose into Lauguedoc, if I ever mean to
enjoy the contentment of embracing you, and of assuring you, that I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. March. 1633.
To Monsieur de Serizay. LETTER XX.
SIR, if you were but resident at Paris, I should hope sometimes to hear of
your News, but now that you are bewitched there, it will be an ungrateful
work for you to read ^ine. They are always such as must be pitied. In my
way there are as many stones to dash against, as in yours there are flowers:
and life it self is an evil that I suffer, as it is a good that you enjoy:
you left me blind, and may now find me lame; my causes of complaining never
cease, they do but change place; and the favors I receive, are so husbanded,
that I cannot recover an eye, but by the loss of a leg. I was yesterday in a
great musing upon this, when suddenly a great light shined in my Chamber, and
dazeled mine eyes, even as I lay in my bed. And not to hold you long in
suspense, the Name of the Angel I mean, was Madam d' Estissac, who thus
appeared unto me, and willing to make the world see, how much she has
profited in Religion, runs after all occasions, to put her Christian virtues
in practice. This somewhat abates the vanity I should otherwise have taken in
her visit; for, I see it is rather charity than courtesy, and I am so much
beholding to my infirmity for it, that she made a doubt whether I were sick
enough to merit it; as much as to say, a Paralitick should have had this
courtesy from her sooner than I. They must be great miseries that attract her
great favors; pity which teaches the fairest hands of the world to bury the
dead, may well get of the fairest eyes that ever were, some gracious looks to
comfort the afflicted. What ere it be, I have found by experience, that no
sadness is so obstinate and clowdie, but pleasing objects may dissolve and
pierce, not any Philosopher so stony and insensible, but may be softened and
awaked by their lightest impression. I verily think, another of her visits,
would have set me on my legs, and made me able to go: but she thought me
not worthy of a whole miracle, and therefore I must content my self with this
beginning of my cure. I inform you of these things, as being one that
reverenceth their cause, and as one that loves me too well, to make slight of
the goods or evils I impart unto him. This last word of my Letter, shall
serve, if you please, for a corrective to the former, I revoke it as a
blasphemy, and will never believe, that all the Magic in: Paris, is able to
make you forget a man, whom you have promised to love, and who passionately is

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 3. July. 1633.
Another to him: LETTER XXI.
SIR, this is the first opportunity I could get to write unto you, and to
comfort my self for your absence by this imperfect way, which is the only
means left me to enjoy you. These are but shadows and figures of that ture
contentment, I received by your presence; b^ since I cannot be wholly happy, I
must take it in good part that I am not wholly miserable. I will hasten all I
can to finish the business I have begun, thereby to put my self in state to
see you; and if my mind could go as fast as my will, I should my self be
with you as soon as my Letter. It is true, there cannot be a more delicate and
dainty place, than this where I live banished; and a friend of ours said, that
they who are in exile here, are far happier than Kings in Muscovia: but being
separated from a man so infinitely dear unto me, I do not think, I could
live contented in the Fortunate Islands; and I should be loath to accept of
felicity it self, if it were offered me, without your company. Wherefore
assure your self, that as soon as I can rid my self of some importunate
visits, which I must necessarily both receive and give, I will not loose one
moment of the time, that I have destinated to the accomplishment of -- and will
travail much more assiduously than otherwise I should do, seeing it is the
end of my travail, that only can give me the happiness of your presence. In
the mean time, I am bound, first to tell you, that I have seen here -- and
then to give you thanks for the good cheer he has made me. He believes upon
your word, that I am one of much worth, and gives me Encomiums, which I could
not expect from his judgment, but that you have corrupted it, by favoring me
too much. I earnestly entreat you, to let me hear from you, upon all
occasions; and to send me by the Post the two books, which I send for to
Monsieur -- if you have not received them of him already; but above all, I
desire you, that we may lay aside all meditation and art in writing our
Letters; and that the negligence of our style, may be one of the marks of the
friendship between us: and so Sir, I take my leave, and am with all my soul,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 2. December. 1628.
Another to him. LETTER XXII.
SIR, either you mean to mock me, or I understand not the terms of your
Letter; I come to you in my night gown, and my night cap upon my head, and you
accuse me for being too fine. You take me for a cunning merchant, who am the
simplest creature in the world: if another should use me thus, I should not
take it so patiently; but what ere your design be, I count my self happy, to
be the subject of your joy, and that I can make you merry, though it be to my
cost: when I write to you, I leave my self to the conduct of my pen, and
neither think of the dainties of our Court, nor of the severitie of our
Grammar; that if there be any thing in my Letters of any worth, it must needs
be, that you have falsified them, (...) so it is you that are the Mountebanke,
and will utter your counterfeits for true Diamonds. You know well, that
Eloquence is not gotten so good cheap, and that to term my untoward language,
by the name of this quality, is a superlative to the highest of my Hyperboles.
Yet it seems, you stand in no awe of Father -- as though you had a privilege,
to speak without control, things altogether unlikely; for this first time, I
am content to pardon you, but if you offend so again, I will inform against
you, and promise you an honorable place in the third part of Philarchus. The
man you wrote of, has no passions now; but wise and stayed; he has given over
play, and women, and all his delight now, is in his Books and virtue. Rejoice,
I pray you, at this happy conversion, and if you be his friend so much, and so
much a Poet, as to show your self in public, you may do well to make a
Hymn in praise of Sickness; as one has heretofore done in praise of Health:
for to speak truly, it is his sickness that has healed him, and has put
into him the first meditations of his health: I expect great News from you by
the next Post, and passionately am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Bolzac, 25. December. 1628.
To Monsieur Ogier. LETTER XXIII.
SIR, I cannot but confess that men in misery, never found a more powerful
Protector than your self; and that you seem borne to be a defender of
oppressed innocence. The Fathers of the Minimme Order, are as much beholding to
you as my self; whose right, you have so strongly maintained, that if I did
not know you well, I should verily think, the Saint you speak of, had inspired
you. And as by his prayers he gains a jurisdiction over the fruitfulness of
Princesses, so by the same prayers he has contributed assistance to this
excellent work you send me. After this, it is not to be sufferd you should
make show of distaste, and tell me of your sloathfulnesse. When fire shall cease
to be active, I will then believe, you can be sloathfull; but will never think
you hate Books, until -- shall give over his suits in Law; or if I must needs
give credit to your words, I then assure my self, this distaste could never
come unto you, but by your too great fare, nor this weariness, but by your too
great labor. I am my self a witness of your assiduitie in study; and you
know, how early soever I rise in the morning, I always find you in the chamber
next to the Meteors; which high region, I conceive you have chosen, that you
may be the nearer to take in the inspirations of Heaven. I think it long till
I come and visit you there, to take counsel of your Muses, in a number of
difficulties I have to propound unto you. In the meanetime, I have this to say,
that the News you send me, has even astonished me, and it seems to me, a
kind of Enchantment Monsieur -- will show you certain Letters, which I
entreat you to consider of, and by which you shall see, that if I be deceived,
yet it is not grossly, nor without much cunning used. Make me beholding to
you, by opening your mind more particularly in this matter, and by believing
that I am with all my heart

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 4. Feb. 1629.
Another to him. LETTER XXIIII.
SIR, there is no friendship in the world of more use than yours: it is my
Buckler in all my battles, it is my Consolation in all my calamities; but
specially, it is my Oracle in all my doubts. That which before. I have your
advice, I propose to my self with trembling, I soon as once I have your
approbation: I make it a Maxim, and an Aphorism: and when have once consulted
with you, never did an Ignoramus take upon him to be some great Doctor better
than I do: You have knowledge enough to serve your own turn, and your
friends; you are the God that inspires the Sibylle: for my self, I am no
longer an Author, but an Interpretor, and speak nothing of my self, but
preach only your doctrine. I give you a thousand thanks for your great
magnificence, in giving me so great a treasure; and for the learned
Observations you have been pleased to communicate unto me: Assure your self, I
will cry them up in good place, and make your Name alleged solemnly for an
Authority. Gratefulness is the poor man's best virtue, and seeing I cannot be
liberal, I will endeavor, at least, not to be unmindfull: And so Sir, I am
most perfectly, and more than any other in the world,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. Mar. 1629.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER XXV.
MAdam, being in a fit of a Fever, I hear you are at Oradour, where I should
have the honor to see you, if the joy of so good News had the power to carry
me thither, and were able to give me the health, which it is forward to promise
me. Being therefore not in case to assure you in person, how sensible I am of
your many courtesies; give me leave to testify unto you, that I am not
unmindfull of the very last you showed me, and that I give you thanks for the
beginning of my amendment, whereof you are the cause. It is certain, that when
I was burning in a most extreme fire, I received a notable cooling and
comfort, to hear you but only Named; and this, Madam, is the first miracle
you have done in this Country, if you stay but a while here, I hope we shall
see many more and greater, and that you will leave some excellent marks, that
you have been here. Our Deserts shall be no longer rude, or savage, having
once been honored by your presence, the sweet air, that breaths on the banks
of the Loyre, shall spread it self hither; and I doubt not, but you will
change all the choler of Lymousin into Reason, and make our Lions become men. I
do not think, there is any will oppose this truth, unles perhaps -- who had
the heart to part from you with dry eyes, and could not find tears to
accompany yours. I have told him of it to his shame, before Monsieur de -- and
both of us agree, that in this occasion, he might honestly enough, have broken
the laws of his Philosophy, and might have lost his gravitie, without any
lightness. Whilst we were together, they desired to see a part of my Prince,
which as yet I dare not call by so illustrious a Name; for in truth, Madam, he
can be but a private person, until such time as you proclaim him, and that he
receive investiture from his Sovereign: so I call your approbation, which is
with me in such respect and reverence, that I should prefer it before Reason
it self, if they were two things that could be separated, and that I were
allowed to choose which I would have. I would say more hereof, but that
methinks, I have done a great work to say so much; for my head is in such
violent agitation, with the heat of my last fit, that all I can do at this
time, is but to set my hand to this Protestation, that I honor you
exceedingly, and am as much as any in the world,

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. August. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXVI.
MAdam, I am jealous of my Lacquies fortune, who makes now a second journey to
you, and consequently, shall be twice together twice as happy as I: he should
never have this advantage of me, if to a journey to see you, there went nothing
but courage, and if the rellicks of my disease, which prey upon weakness, did
not tire me more than the extreme violence did, when I had some strength to
resist it. By staying in my chamber, I loose all the fair days that shine in
the garden; all the riches of the fields are gathered without me; I have no
part in the fruits of Autumn, whereof the Spring gave me such sweet hopes; and
I am promised health at winter, when I shall see nothing but a pale Sun, a
threadbare Earth, and dead sticks, that have brought forth grapes, but not for
me to eat. In this miserable estate, I have no comfort, but only the Letter
you did me the honor to write unto me, which is so precious to me Madam, that
I even honor it, with a kind of superstition, and am ready to make a chain
or bracelet of it, to try whether the wearing it about me, may not prove a
better Remedy against my Fever, than all the other I have used. There is but
one word in it that I cannot endure, being not able to conceive why you should
call your self Unfortunate: are you not afraid, least God should call you to
account for this word? and charge you with ungratefulness, for making so
slight reckoning of his great benefits and Graces? He has lifted you up above
your own sex, and ours too, and has spared nothing to make you complete; the
better part of Europe admires you; and in this point, both Religions are
agreed, and no contesting between Catholic and Protestant; The Popes Nuntio,
has presented our Belief even to your person, all perfumed with the
complements and civilities of Italy; Princes are your Courtiers, and Doctors
your Scholars: and is this Madam, that you call to be unfortunate? and that
which you take for a just cause to complain? I humbly entreat you, to speak
hereafter in more proper terms, and to acknowledge Gods favors in a more
grateful manner. I know well, that your loyalty has suffered by your
brothers Rebellion; and that in the public miseries you have had some private
losses, but so long as you have your noble heart, and your excellent spirit
left you, it is not possible, you should be unfortunate; for indeed, in these
two parts, the true Madam Desloges is all entire and whole. It is I Madam, that
have just cause to say, I am unfortunate, who am never without pain, never
without grief, never without enemies; and even at this very time I write from
a house of grief, where my mother and my sister being sick on one hand, and
my self on the other, I seem to be sick of three sicknesses at once; yet be
not afraid, least this I send you should be infectious, as though I had a
design to poison you with my Presents: for I have not yet meddled with any of
the Musque fruits, which I hope you shall eat; I have not durst so much as to
come near them, least I should chance to leave some light impression of my
Fever upon them: They are originally Natives of Languedoc; and have not so
degenerated from the goodness of their ancestors, but that you will find
them, I hope, of no unpleasing taste, and besides Madam, rhey grow in a soil
that is not hated of Heaven, and where I can assure you, your Name is so often
rehearsed, and your virtue so highly esteemed, that there is not an Echo in
all our woods, but knows you for one of the perfectest things in the world,
and that I am

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. September. 1629.
To -- LETTER XXVII.
MAdam, see here the first thanks I give you, for you know, that having never
done me but displeasures, I have never yet returned you but complaints: but now
at last you have been pleased to begin to oblige me, and after so many
sentences of death, which you have pronounced against me, and after so many
cruelties, which I have suffered, you have bethought your self, ten years
after, to send me one good News, which truly is so pleasing to me, that I must
confess, you had no other way to reconcile your self unto me; and I cannot
forbear to bless the hands that brought me a Letter from Madam Desloges,
though they were dyed in my blood, and had given me a thousand wounds. The
sense of former injuries, has no competition with so perfect a joy, and of two
passions equally just, the more violent is easily overcome of the more sweet.
You have hastened the approach of my old age, and made gray one half of my
hair; you have banished me this Kingdom, and forced me to fly your tyranny,
by flying into another Country: finally, it is no thank to you, that I have
not broken my own neck, and made matter for a Tragedy: and yet four lines
of Madam Desloges, have the force to blot out all this long story of my
misfortunes, and willingly with all my heart, I forget all the displeasures I
have received, for this good office you now afford me. I make you this
discourse in our first language, that I may not disobey Monsieur de -- who will
have me write, but will not have me write in any other style; for in truth, and
to speak seriously, now that he leaves me at liberty, I must confess unto
you Madam, that I am exceedingly bound unto you, for the continency I have
learned by being with you, and for the good examples you have given me: your
medicines are bitter, but they heal; you have banished me, but it is from
prison: and if my passions be cooled by the snow of my head, I have then never
a white hair, which I may not count for one of your favors. I therefore
recant my former complaints, and confess my self your Debtour of all my
virtue. The time I have employed in your service, has not been so much the
season of my disorderd life, as it has been an initiating me into a regular
life which I mean to lead. Your conversation has been a school of
austeritie unto me, and you have taught me, never to be either yours, or any
others, but only in our Lord,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. October. 1629.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER XXVIII.
MAdam, my evil Fortune, gives one common beginning to all my Letters: I am
impatient even to death, to have the honor to come and see you: but now that I
am well, the air is sick, and all the Country drowned: There is no Land to
be seen between this and Lymousin; and the mischief is, that there is no
navigation yet found out, for so dangerous a voyage. This binds me to wait,
till the waters be fallen, and that God be pleased to remember his Covenant
with Noah. As soon as this shall be, I will not fail to perform my vow, and
to come and spend with you the happiest day of all my life. In the mean time
Madam, give me leave, to tell you, that I am not yet well recovered of the
ecstasy you put me in, by writing unto me such excellent things, that I could
not read them with a quiet mind, nor indeed without a kind of jealousy. All
Frontignon would be sufficiently paid with that you write of a dozen paltry
Muske-fruits I sent you; and you praise my writings with words, which have no
words worthy of them, but your own. This, of one side makes me envious, and of
the other side interessed: and if the honor I receive by your flattering
Eloquence, did not sweeten the grief of being overcome, it would trouble me
much that I had no better defended the advantages of our sex, but should
suffer it to loose an honor, which the Greeks and Latins had gotten for it.
Yet take heed, you hazard not your judgment too freely, upon the uncertaintie
of humane things: you reckon him a Prince, who is not yet borne, you should
have seen his Horoscope from the point of his conception, before you should
speak of him in so lofty terms. But besides that nothing is less assured,
than the future; and nothing apter to deceive, than hope: Consider, Madam, I
beseech you, that you favor an unfortunate man, and that Faction oftentimes
carries it away from truth. It will be hard for you, your self alone, to
withstand an infinite multitude of passionate men: and it may be said to you,
as was said to those of Sparta, upon occasion of the great Armic of the
Persians, that you can never vanquish as long as they can die. Herein there is
nothing to be feared, but for your self; for as for me, I find in your
favor, all I seek for; and having you of my side, I care not what fame can
do, having once your testimony, I can easily flight hers; and all her tongues
put together, can never say any thing for me, that is worth the least line of
your delicate Letter. It is at this time, the delight and joy of my spirit; I
am more in love with it, than ever I was with -- and if she show you that
which I write to her, you shall find, I make not so much reckoning of my
ancient Mistress, as I do of your new messenger; and that I desire all the world
should know, that I perfectly am,

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 13. October. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXIX.
MAdam, I will not take upon me to give you thanks, for the good cheer you
made me; for, besides that I have none but Country Civilities, and when I have
once said, Your humble servant, and your servant most humble; I am then at the
end of my co^plemnts, and can go no further. It were better yet to let you
hold your advantage entire, and owe you that still, which I can never pay. I
forbear to speak of the dainties and abundance of your Table, enough to make
one fat, that were in a Consumption; nor I speak not of the delicacy of your
perfumes, in which you laid me to sleep all night; to the end, that sending
up sweet vapors into my brain, I might have in my imagination, none but
pleasing visions. But Madam, what but Heaven can be comparable to the dainties
of your Closet, and what can I name to represent sufficiently, those pure and
spiritual pleasures, which I tasted in your Conversation? It is not my
design, to talk idly, nor to set my style upon the high strain; you know, I
am bound to avoyde Hyperboles, as Mariners to avoyde Sands and Rocks; but this
is most true, that with all my heart, I renounce the world, and all its pompes,
as long as you please to inhabit the Desert, and if you once determine to stay
there still, (though I have sent to Paris to hyre me a lodging) yet I resolve
to break off the bargain, and mean to build me an Hermitage, a hundred paces
from your abode: from whence Madam, I shall easily be able to make two journeys
a day to the place where you are, and shall yield you a subjection, and an
assiduitie of service, as if I were in a manner of your household. There shall
I let nothing fall from your mouth, which I shall not carefully gather up, and
preserve it in my memory. There you shall do me the favor, to resolve me when
I shall have doubts; set me in the right way, when I go astray; and when I
cannot express my self in fit terms, you shall clear my clouds, and give
order to my confusednesse. It shall be your ears, upon which I will measure
the cadences of my sentences; and upon the different motions of your eyes, I
will take notice of the strength or weakness of my writings. In the heat of
the travail, and amidst the joys of a mother, that looks to be happily
delivered, I will expose the Infant to the light of your judgment to be tried,
and not hold him for legitimate, till you approve him. Sometimes Madam, we will
read your News, and the Relations that are sent you from all parts of
Christendom: Public miseries shall pass before our eyes, without troubling
our spirits; and the most serious actions of men, shall be our most ridiculous
Comaedies. Out of your Closet, we shall see below us the tumults and agitation
of the world, as from the top of the Alps, we stand and safely see the rain
and hayle of Savay. After this, Monsieur de Borstell shall come and read us
Lectures in the Politiques, and Comment upon Messer Nicholo unto us: He shall
inform us of the affairs of Europe, with as great certainty, as a good
husband would do of his Family. He shall tell us the Causes, the Proceedings,
and the Events of the war in Germany; and therein shall give the lie, a
thousand times, to our Gazets, our Mercuries, and such other fabulous
Histories. We will agree with him, that the Prince he is so much in love
withal, is most worthy of his passion; and that Sweden is no longer able to
contain so great a virtue: After the fashion of Plutarch, he shall compare
together the prime Captains of our age; always excepting -- who admits of no
comparison. He shall tell us, which is the better man, the Italian, or the
Germane; what means may be used to take off the Duke of Saxony from the house
of Austria; and what game the Duke of Bavaria plays, when he promises to
enter into the League; and is always harkening to that which he never means
to conclude. From these high and sublime News, we will descend to other
meaner, and more popular subjects. It shall be written to you, whether the
kingdom of Amucant be still in being, and whether there appear not a rising
Sun, to which all eyes of the Court are turned: Monsier de -- shall send you
word, whether he persist in his pernicious design, to bring Polygamie into
France, and to commit nine Incests at once; I mean, whether he have a good
word from those nine Sisters, to all whom he has solemnly made offer of his
service. We shall know whether the Baron of -- put Divines still to trouble:
whether Monsieur da -- have his heart still hardened against the
ungratefulness of the time, and whether Monsieur de -- continue still in his
wilfulness to punish mankind by the suppression of his Books. By the way of
Lymoges, we shall get the devises of Boissiere; the Epigrammes of Mayn^d, and
other toys of this nature. The Stationer des Espies Meurs will furnish you
plentifully with Romances, and with that they call Belles Chooses: and if it
come to the worst from the very Cindera of Philarchus, there will spring up
every month a new Phaenix of backbiting Eloquence, that will find (...)
recreation for one hour at least. And these Madam, are a part of those
employments, in which I fancy in my mind, we may spend our time all the time
of the heat; for when the return of April shall bring again the flowers and
fair days, and invite you abroad awalking: we must then look us out some new
pleasures, and change our recreations: we will have swannes and other strange
Birds, to cover this water at once both quick and still, which washes the
feet of your Muses: we will fall a planting of trees, and dressing the allies
of your Garden: we will dig for Springs, and discover treasures, which loose
themselves under ground, which yet I value no less than veins of silver,
because I judge of them without covetousness. And finally, Madam, we will fall
abuilding that famous Bridge, by which to enter your enchanted Palace, and
whereof the only design, puts all the neighboring Nobility already into a
jealousy. If you like of this course, and of these Propositions, and that my
company may not be troublesome to you, there remains nothing to do, but that
you command me to come, and I am instantly ready to quit all other affairs in
the world, and to come and testify to you, that I am

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. November. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXX.
MAdam, we receive the Answers of Oracles without making reply; perfect
devotion is dumb, and if you had left me the use of my tongue, I should then
have had one part at least, of my spirit free from this universal astonishment
that has surprised it. You are always lifted up above the ordinary condition
of humanity, and the divinenesse of your spirit is no longer an Article in
question amongst people that are reasonable; yet I must confess, you never
showed it more visibly, than in the last Letter you writ unto me, and if at
other times I have been dazeled with some beam, you have now made me stark
blind with the fullness of your light. Spare Madam, I entreat you, the
weakness of my sight, and if you will have me be able to endure your presence,
take some more humane form, and appear not all at once in the fullness of
that you are, I were never able to abide such another flash of brightness. My
eyes are weary with looking upward, and with considering you, as you are a
creature, adorable and divine. Hereafter I will not look upon you, but on that
side you are good and gracious, and will not venture to reason with you any
more, for fear I should to my own confusion illustrate the advantage of your
spirit over mine. You shall have nothing from me hereafter, but prayers and
thanks; and I will make you confess, that I solicit better than I praise. I
therefore send you now Madam, diverse crosses at one time, and persecute you
with no less than three afflictions at once, I mean, three Letters of
recommendation, which I request from you, in behalf of -- I humbly entreat you
to deliver them to this messenger, and to write them in such a persuasive
style, as might be able to corrupt all the Catoes of Paris; although indeed,
the cleernesse of our right, has more need of their integrity, than of their
favor. I expect Madam, this new courtesy from your goodness, and am always
more than any in the world,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. December. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXXI.
MAdam, in the state I am now in, there is none but your self could make me
speak: and I never did a greater work in my life than to dictate these four
untoward lines: my spirit is so wholly taken up with the consideration of my
misery, and flies all commerce and company, in so violent a manner, that if it
concerned me not exceedingly, you should know that -- finds himself infinitely
obliged to your courtesies, and my self no less than he; I think verily, I
should have let -- depart, without so much as bidding him Farewell. Pardon
Madam, the weakness of a vulgar spirit, which feels no crosses light, and
falls flat down at tho very first blow of adverse Fortune. Perhaps in
prosperity, I should carry my self better, and I do not think, that joy
could make me insolent; but to say the truth, in affliction I am no body, and
that which would not so much as leave a scratch upon the skin of a Stoic,
pierces me to the very heart, and makes in it most deep wounds. Grief
dejects me in such sort, and makes me so lazy in doing my duty, and so unfit
for all functions of a civil life, that I wonder no longer at those that were
turned into trees and rocks, and lost all sense with only the sense of
grief. Yet Madam, as often as I call to mind, that I hold some part in your
account and love; I am forced to confess, that my melancholy is unjust, and
that I have no good foundation for my sadness. This honor ought to be unto me
a general remedy against all sorts of affliction, and the misery that you
complain of, is not so much to be pitied as to be envied. From thence it is,
that I draw all the comfort I am capable of, humbly entreating you to believe
you shall never pity a man in misery, that will be more grateful than my
self, nor that is more passionately, than I am

Madam Your, etc.
31. December. 1629.
Another to her. LETTER XXXII.
MAdam, I receive but just now your Letters of the five and twentieth of the
last month, and though I know not, by whom to send an answer, yet I can no
longer hold from expressing my joy, nor keep my words from leaving my heart to
fall upon this paper. The last time I writ unto you, I had heard of the
unfaithfulnes of a friend of mine, which struck me to the very heart; since
which time, a better report has somewhat quieted me; but it is you, Madam,
that have restored to me the full use of my reason; and are a cause that I am
contented to live. Although corruption be in a manner universal, and that
there is no more any goodness to be found amongst men, yet as long as you are
in the world, it is not fit to leave it quite, but your virtue may well supply
all its defects. Besides Madam, if it be true, as you do me the honor to
write unto me, that you account my interests as your own; this very
consideration is enough to make them dearer to me than they were before; and I
am therefore bound to preserve my self, seeing it seems, you would be loath
to loose me. One gracious word, which I observed in your Letter, has won me
to you, in such sort, that I have no longer any power of my self, but what you
leave me; and in all your Empire, which is neither mean, nor consists of (...)
subjects; I can assure you, that you possess nothing with more soveraigntie,
than my will. If your occasions draw you to Aunix this next Spring, I hope to
have the honor to see you at Balzac, where I am trimming up -- with all the
care I can, that it may be a little more worthy of your presence, and that the
amusement I shall thereby give you, may keep you from working the ill cheer
you are like to find in a Country village: My sister is infinitely bound to
you, for the honor you do her, in remembering her; and I am my self, with all
my soul

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. Febr. 1630.
Another to her. LETTER XXXIII.
MAdam, my indisposition hathbin the cause of my silence, and I thought it
better to say nothing, than to entertain you with a troublesome discourse:
Besides, I was in a continual expectation of the performance of your promise;
and looked to have the honor, to see you here in May. But seeing you have made
my hopes recoyle, and that you make your abode in Limousin for some longer
time, be pleased Madam, that I send -- to bring me a true relation of the state
of your health; and to tell me, if you use, as you ought, the shade of your
woods, and the freshness of your fountains: For my self, who make my harvest
at the gathering of Roses and Violets; and who reckon the goodness of the
year, by the abundance of these delicate Flowers; Now is the season for my
humor, and in one only subject I find cause enough, to scorn and slight
both the perfumes of the sheet St. Honor, and the pictures of the fair St.
Germain. Thus I make my self happy, at a very easy rate, and have not so
much as a thought of any want. And indeed, to what purpose should I grieve for
pleasures that are absent, and curiously hunt after all the defects of my
Estate. If my commerce be only with dumb Creatures, at least I am not
troubled with the importunity of Courtiers, nor with the verses of a paltry
Poet, nor with the Prose of Messieurs --: These are the inconveniences of
Paris, which I count more troublesome, than either the dirt, or the justling of
Coaches, and at the worst, if by living in the Desert, I should become a mere
savage, yet I am sure to recover the garb of the world, as soon as I shall
but see Madam Destoges, and make my self neat and civil, with but one half
hours conversing with her. This is my wish Madam, and passionately I am

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. June 1630.
To Monsieur de la Nouve, Counselor of the King in his first Chamber of
Enquests. LETTER XXXIIII.
SIR, My dear Cousin,
one cannot say you nay, in any thing: to do you a second pleasure, I am about
to commit a second treason, and to send you the Verses, of which I told you who
was the Poet. I was bound by a thousand Oaths to keep them secret, but I must
confess you are a strange corrupter, and your persuasions would shake a firmer
fidelity than mine: yet to the end, we may at least save the appearance, and
give some color to my fault; you may be pleased to say, that it is the
translation of an Ode, made by Cornelia, mother of the Gracchi, and that you
found it, in an ancient Manuscript: you may say, she made it for one of her
sons, being in love with a woman, whom afterward he married; and that seeing
him one day look extremely pale, she asked him, what it was had made him
sick? There is nothing more true than this Story, and there needs nothing, but
to change the Names. It is not indeed, the same person, but it is the same
merit, and I am sure, you doubt not, but a French Lady is capable of as much,
as Quintilian spoke of a Romans: Graccorum eloquentiae multum contu^isse
Corneliam, matrem, cujus doctis^mus sermo, in posteros quoque est Epistolis
traditus. -- I never heard speak of such an impatience, or such an
irresolution, for I cannot believe, that it is either fear, or
effeminatenesse, or that the spirit of so great a Prince could be subject to
such enormous maladies. Whatsoever it be, if he had but read Virgill, a woman
would have said unto him with great indignation; and is it then such a
miserable thing to die? And if he had been in the Levant, he might have learned
of a Turkish Proverb, That it is better to be a Cock for one day, than a Hen
all ones life. Et con questo vi bacio le mani, and am

Sir, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
(...). August, 1630.
L'Amant qui meurt.
OLympa, made me sick thou have,
Thou cause of my Consumption art:
There needs but one frown more, to wast
The whole remainder of my heart.
Alas undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
You look to have an age of tryuth
Are you a Lover will repay;
And my state brooks no (...) de (...),
I hardly can one minute stay.
Alas, undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
I see already Charons boat
That comes to ferry me to Hell:
I hear the Fatal Sisters note,
That cries and calls to ring my knell,
Alas, undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
Look in my wound, and see how cold,
How pale, and gasping my soul lies
Which Nature strives in vain to hold.
Whilst winged with fighes, away it flies.
Alas undone, to Fate I bow my head,
Ready to die, now die, and now am dead.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER XXXV.
MAdam, I have not dared now a good while to send you any Letters, for fear
you should conceive, they carried an ill air about them; nor yet to send you
any more Melons, which yet prove excellent good this year; for doubt you
should suspect them, as coming from a Country extremely disparaged: but
since I understand by your Letter, that you are not so much frighted as I was
told, and since also, I can protest unto you most religiously, that I write
from a place most clear from any taint of the neighboring misery, and that
has kept sound in the midst of infection: I am most glad Madam, that I have
the liberty to tell you, that I value you more, than all the ancient Romans,
and that I have no comfort to think of, in the deepest hours of all my
solitude, but only you, and your incomparable merit. What business soever I
am about, I take pleasure to let this thought make me a trewant at my travail;
it is a recreation, for which I abandon all affairs; and there is neither
Moral, nor Politic, Plato nor Aristotle, but I presently give him over as
soon as you are once presented to my imagination. I hope I shall need to use
no Oaths, to make you believe this verity: you are well enough acquainted with
my pride, and know that this Country swayne would not, turn flatteret for an
Empress. There are but three persons, I am resolved to praise; you Madam, are
one; and if you have the leisure to read that I send you, you will easily
guess, who the other two are; and so I b^d you Good ^orrow, and perfectly am

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 9. September. 1630.
Another to her: LETTER XXXVI.
MAdam, you shall receive from me no premeditated excuses, I had rather
confess my fault ingenuously, than take the pains to justify it untowardly.
Indeed a fatal sluggishnesse, cousin german to a Lethargy, has seized in
such sort upon me since my coming hither, that I have not so much as written
to my own mother; so as having failed in this first point, I thought not fit
to fail by halfes; and therefore never troubled my self much in the rest of
my duty. I speak Madam, of this exterior duty, and this affection in
picture, which is oftentimes but a false representation of the soul, for as
for the true respect, and the passion, which has residence in the heart: I
assure you, I have that in me for you, as pure and entyre as ever, and that he
that calls you his Sovereign, yet honors you not more perfectly, than I do.
Monsieur de -- will I doubt not, be my witness herein; and will tell you, that
what part soever I be forced to play amongst jeasters and merry companions, yet
under my players clothes, there will always be found an honest man. I have
been sensible, Madam, of the loss, which -- has had, and have not bin
sparing to speak of his unfortunate virtue; yet I never thought, he needed any
comforting for it; for, seeing he sees that God spares not his own Images and
that his nearest friends have their disgraces and troubles, he ought not to
think any thing strange that happens in this inferior world, and upon
inferior I persons; what consideration soever may otherwise make them dea^
unto him. If you have vouchsafed to keep the Letters. I have written to you; I
humbly (...) you to send them to me, that I may see what volume II can make for
the impression that is required of me: (...) Madam, it shall be if you please
upon this condition, that parting with the Letters, you shall never let your
memory part with the truths they contain, but hold undoubtedly that I very
firmly am, though I do not very often say I am

Madam, Your, etc.
25. December. 1630.
Another to her. LETTER XXXVII.
MAdam, my labor is happy, since it is never from before you, and since I am
told, you make it your ordinary entertainment. The end of all fair Pictures,
and good Books, is but only to please your eyes, and to delight your spirit,
and the good you have not yet set a price upon, is not yet come to its
uttermost perfection. I have therefore all that an ambitious man could wish
for, I may perhaps have fortune from others, but glory I can have from none but
you; and another perhaps may pay me, but none but you can recompense me. The
pains I have hitherto taken, have been but ill required. I have tilled a
ground that brings me forth but thorns; yet Madam, since they grow for your
service, I am contented to be pricked by them; and I love the cause of my
disgraces, if they prove a cause of your recreations. The first News, you
shall hear, will tell you what I mean; and that my patience never makes my
persecutours weary. You shall see Madam, that there is no conscience made to
contradict you, and that, that which you call excellent and admirable, has yet
at Paris found enemies, and at Bruxells hangmen. I will say no more at this
time, but that I am

Madam. Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. Jan. 1631.
Another to her. LETTER XXXVIII.
MAdam, I writ unto you about six weeks since, but my packet not being
delivered where I appointed it, I perceive some curious body has seized on it,
and sought for secrets, which he could not find. The loss is not great, to
loose nothing, but a few untoward words; and small comforting would serve me,
for so small a cross; yet because they were full of the passion I owe to your
service, and carried in them the marks of my duty, I cannot but be troubled,
they came not to your hands, and that my misfortune, gives you cause to
complain of my negligence. I dare not undertake to clear my self altogether;
for though in this I committed no fault, yet I cannot forget some other faults
committed before. The truth is Madam, I have been for some time so continually
taken up with business, that I have been wanting in the principal
obligations of a civil life, and I have drunk besides so many bitter potions,
and tasted so many bitter Pills, that I should but have offended you with my
complements; which could not choose but carry with them, at least some
tincture of my untoward humor. What pleasure could you have taken, to see a
medley of choler and melancholy, powered out upon paper? and instead of pleasing
News, to read nothing but pitiful Stories, and mortal Predictions? But
enough of this unpleasing matter. I expect here within three or four days, my
Lord the Bishop of Nantes; and I would to God Madam, you could be here at that
time, and that you were at leisure to come and taste the doctrine of this rare
personage. I have heard you say heretofore, you never saw a more holy
countenance than his, and that his very look, was a Prologue of persuasion.
This conceit, makes me hope, that he is the man, whom God has ordained to be
your Converter, and to bring you into the bosom of our Church. Believe me
Madam, and you shall not be deceived; trust that enemy, who wounds not, but
only to draw out the blood that causes a Fever, and never make difficulty to
commit your self to one, that intends your freedom. The triumph which the
world makes you fear, is no way injurious to those that be the captives; nor
like unto that of which Cleopatra took so sad an apprehension: but in this
case, the vanquished are they that are crowned, and all the glory and advantage
of the victory rests on their side: I am not out of hope to see so good a days
work; and seeing you are rather laid asleep in the opinion of your mother,
than obstinate in a wrong cause: I entreat you, that you will not be frighted
with phrases. We will not use this hard term to say, you have abjured your
heresy; we will only say, you are awaked out of your ^umber, and if our
dear friend, Monsieur du Moulin would do so too, than would be the time of a
great festivall^ Heaven; and the Angels would rejoice at the prosperity of the
Church. My zeal Madam, is not out of ostentation: for it is most true, that
such a change, is one of my most violent wishes; and to see you say your
prayers upon your Beads, I would with all my heart give you a pair made of
Diamonds; though I am not rich, yet I hope you doubt not of the truth of these
last words, and that I am with all my foul,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. May. 1632.
Another to her. LETTER XXXIX.
MAdam, it has been, as much my shame, as my glory, to read your Letter,
having so ill deserved it, and the remorse of the fault, I committed, makes
me; that I dare not yet rejoice in the honor, I received. You are good and
gracious, even to the not hating o^evill actions; Your delinquents, not only
obtain impunitie, but you allow them recompense, and idleness has more
respect with you, than diligent service with ordinary Masters. This is the
faelicitie of the Golden age, where Plenty had no need of tilling; and where
there was reaping without sowing. Yet Madam, I must not so abandon my cause,
that I forbe are to allege the good it has in it; it is long since I writ
unto you, it is true, but the cause has been for that these six months, I
have every day been upon coming to see you: and according to the saying of the
Orator your acquaintance, I have dispensed with my ordinary diet, in hope of a
great Feast, and to perform my devotion with the more solemnity. If Monsieur
de -- have kept his word with me, he has told you, how often he has found me
upon the very point of coming; but as many journeys, as I intended to make, so
many cross accidents always happened to hinder them, and the misfortune that
accompanies me, makes every duty, though never so casie to another, impossible
to me. Yet Madam, I have never ceased from doing continual acts, of the
reverence I bear you, and I never swear, but by your merit. My brain is dry
in any other Argument, and words are drawn from me one by one; but when there
is occasion to speak of you, then I overflow in words; upon this only Text, I
take a pleasure to be Preaching; and Monsieur de -- to whom I am always before
a harkener; as soon as I begin discourse of you, becomes my auditour. I can
assure you Madam, he honors you exceedingly; and neither his embassage to
Rome, from whence Gentlemen return not commonly without a certain conceit of
soveraigntie; nor the employments of the State, which make particular men,
think themselves the Public, have been able to make him take upon him, this
ungrateful gravitie, which makes Greatness ridiculous, and even virtue it
self odious. He has protested here, before good company, that he will never
be found other, and that Fortune should have an ill match in hand, to think to
corrupt him. I used my ordinary rudeness, and entreated him, to be mindful of
his word, and to be one of our first examples of so rare a moderation: You
shall see Madam, in a Letter I send you; that which hereupon I am bound to say
of him: and I entreat you, to maintain for me, that I am no common prayser:
and that, if I were not persuaded of what I say, it is not all the Canons of
the Town should make me to say it. It is only the worth of things, or at
least, the opinion I have of their worth, that draws from me the praises I
give them. If Monsieur de -- should return to be a private person, I should
not respect him a jot less, than now I do: and if you should be made
Governesse of the Kings house, I should not be a whit more than I am,

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 30. April. 1633.
Another to her. LETTER XL.
MAdam, never trust me any more, I promise that I cannot perform, but though I
be a deceiver, I am an honest one; my promises are always true in my
intention, though oftentimes false in the Event. I know not what to say of this
unfortunatenesse, nor to what known cause, to attribute this long train of
mischiefs. It must needs be, there is some Devil employed, to hinder voyages
to Lymousin: and that will not suffer me to go thither to see you: sometimes
he rayseth up suites in Law against me, sometimes puts me into a quarrel; and
when these be composed, and that I am ready to take horse, either he sends me
company to divert me, or pricks my horse in shooing, or puts a leg out of
joint; for, all these crosses have befallen me, as he that delivers you this
Letter can be my witness. But withal Madam, he shall assure you, that though
I fly away by night, and be carried in a chair, it shall not be long ere I
will have the honor to come and see you. In the mean time, vouchsafe to
accept from me, the amusement of half an hour, and be pleased to read an
Inscription, which was lately found, and taken forth of the ruins of an old
Building. It is engraven in Letters of Gold, upon a Table of black Marble, and
seems Prophetically to speak of you and me. If I were a man could make
Verses, you might doubt it were some trick put upon you, but my ignorance
justifies me, and seeing, as you know, Poets are not made, it were a strange
thing I should be borne at the age of seven and thirty years. I expect from
you a Comment upon the whole Mystery; and remain

Madam. Your, etc.
At Balzac, 6. Jan. 1631.
In Effigiem D. D. praestantissimae and laudatissimae faeminae.
Hac est sequanico, veniens a littore Nympha:
Hospite qua Lemovix, jure superbit ager.
Quis de fiderium Dominae mihi durius urbis
Mitigat; and per quam non fera turba sumus?
Vindicat ha^c sibi Thusca charis, sibi musa latina,
Nec minus esse suam, Graius Apollo velit.
Hanc sophiae Gens sancta colit, dat jura disertis,
Princeps Gra^maticas temperat una Tribus.
Scilicet ut distent specioso sana tumore
Vnascit, and fractis verba sonora modis.
Judicat urbano quid sit sale tingere ludos,
Et quid inhumano figere dente notas.
Novit ab agresti secernere plectra cicuta,
Vosque sacri vates non sociare malis.
Ergo quid infidi petitis suffragia vulgi?
Qui dve Palatinus quaeritur art favor?
Quae canitis vivent, si docta probaverit auris,
Et dabitur vestris versibus esse bonos.
At si quando canat, taceas vel mascula Sappho,
Te melius salvo nostra pudore canit.
Another to her. LETTER XLI.
MAdam, my eyes are yet dazeled, with the brightness of your Cabinet, and I
vow unto you, the Night was never so fair, nor so delicately trimmed up, as
lately at your House.

Not when the Moon accomplishing her way
Upon her silver wayne, beset with stars
Within the gloomy world, presents the day.
I have showed our Ladies the Description of this proud and stately Night, and
of the rest of your magnificence, which if it were in a severer Commonwealth
than ours, would be called a Profusive Wast; they admire you in your house, as
well as in your Verses, and agree with me in this, that Wisdom has a hand
in every thing, and that, after she has discoursed of Princes, and matters of
State; she descends to take care of her Hosts, and looks what is done in the
Kitchen. But from a virtue of their own, they always come to that of yours,
asking me continually for News of your entertainment, and for Copies of your
Letters: and by this means, the happiness which I have from you, is instantly
made common to all the neighborhood, and yet stays not there neither, but
spreads it self both far and near, that when you think, you write but to
one particular man, you write indeed to a whole Province. This is not to write
Letters, but rather to set forth Declarations and Edicts; I know Madam, you
were able to acquit your self perfectly, in so noble an Employment;
complements are below the dignity of your style; and if King Elisabett, should
come again into the world (you know of whom this is spoken) no question but he
would make you his chief Secretary of State. Monsieuer de -- extolls you yet
in a higher strain, and is infinitely desirous to see you in this Country.
Yesterday, of his own accord he made himself your Tributary, and has bound
himself to send you, every year, a reasonable number of his Loaves; if you
shall like them, they will grow into more request than the Gloves of the
Frangipani: but because your people of Lymousin, may take occasion to
Equivocate here: I entreat you to advertize them, that this Perfumer has
thirty thousand pound rent a year; and holds the supremest dignity of our
Province, and that this Glover is a Roman Lord, Marshall of the Camp of the
Kings Armies, cousin to St. Gregory the Great, and that which I value more than
all this, one of the honestest men that lives. I am bold to use my accustomed
liberty, seeing you allow me to do it Madam, having given me your Letters
Patents for it, and will bear me out to laugh in graver subjects than this is.
It may therefore suffice me to say, but most seriously, that I am

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 2. May. 1634.
Another to her: LETTER XLII.
MAdam, your place is before all other things whatsoever, and therefore no
lawful impediment can be alleged, for sailing in the duty, that is due unto
you. I have these two months had great affairs; which in the rigor of your
Justice, is as much as to say, I have these two months neglected my duty.
Having not written to you, in all this time, I am contented to call it, a
Disorder, which otherwise I should call a Business, and I do not think, I
could with all the reasons of the world have made you patient, to stay so long,
for the thanks I am to give you. Your present has equally wherewith to
content both the covetous and the vain; it has soliditie no less than
luster; the only sight of it, refutes the modesty you use in speaking of it:
you are injurious Madam, to so excellent a thing; it deserves the most stately
inscription, you could devise to give it, and if I were worth the having of a
Cabinet, this should be the prime piece, I would make choice of to adorn it.
Because vulgar people have nothing but eyes, therefore they value nothing but
Candlestickes of Crystal, and gilded vermillian dishes, but men of
understanding, who see less with their eyes them with their spirits, they
reflect upon objects, that are more simple and immateriall, and prefer not
the peoples error, and Artificers fingers, before the truth of things, and
before the Masterpieces of the works of reason. He, to whom you did me the
honor to send me, is far above all the Encomiums I can give him: I have
only this to say Madam, that I have with me here, a famous Author, who as
soon as he has once read him, is resolved instantly to shut up shop, and give
over his Trade. He protests he will never more set hand to Pen, unless it be
to sign his last Will; and therefore means to make you a sacrifice of all his
Papers. I showed him the incomparable Sonnet, De L'Amant qui meurt, at every
verse, he called you Divine, and made such loud Exclamations, that he might
have been heard to the great high way: which you know, how very far it is
from my Chamber. He says, he will maintain it, even to the sheet Saint
Jaques, that Parnassus is fallen upon the Distaffe, and that Racan has given
over the right he pretended in the succession of Mal^erbe. He speaks in this
familiar manner, of these two great Personages; and I never hear him use any
meaner style: if I can keep him with me a while; I will tell you more of him,
and promise you a collection of all his Apophthegms. I saw yesterday Monsieur
de -- who is a most just valuer of virtue, and by consequent, most perfectly
reveres yours. He infinitely desires you would come amongst us, and that you
would make choice of one of his houses for your abode: if you were pleased to
do this, I should have no more journeys to make: I should be the happiest
unhappie man that ever was, if I had you here to be my comforter, and that I
might be always telling you, that I always am,

Madam. Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. Aug. 1634.
Another to her. LETTER XLIII.
MAdam, you never heard speak of such a diligence, in two months your Letter
has gone twelve miles; so as a business that required have, had been this way
in a good case: and if therein you had given me advise for saving my life: I
might have had good leisure to dio, before your advise came. I have made
grievous complaints hereof, to my good kinswoman -- who lays the fault of her
fault upon a thousand that are innocent; upon her Gentlewoman, her Nurce, three
maids, four men, etc. so as Madam, there have been great arraignments upon
this matter; and never was any crime so long and so rigourously in examining;
for my self, the joy I take to hear of your health, makes me forget my most
just complaints, and sweetens all my choler. I think no more of the late
receiving it; I content my self, that I have received it at last; and I find
enough in your Letter, to make me amends, for the slownesse of your messenger.
Besides Madam, I give you to understand, that I have had some few days, with
me here, Monsieur Bardyn, as much as to say, The Living Philosophy: or
Socrates risen from the dead. You make doubt perhaps, what the subject of our
conference has been? Indeed Madam, it has been your self, and we have
concluded to erect your statue in the most eminent place of his Lycaeum: and if
any Stoic come to new build the Particus, and any other to restore the
Academie, no doubt but they will honor you with the like respect, and you
shall always be reverenced of wise men, next to wisdom it self. If you
write shortly to -- I entreat you Madam, to do me the favor, to put in your
packet the dispatch I send you. It imports me much, to have it believed, that
-- and I doubt not, but you will be content, to use this little fraud for my
sake, who am without reservation,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. December. 1634.
Another to her. LETTER XLIIII.
MAdam, I am of your opinion, and can by no means approve the ambition of your
fair neighbor: her head is full of state and soveraigntie, and aims
certainly at a Crown. God loves her too well to second her bad desires, and to
give her that she asks: so rare a beauty ought to be the recompense of
virtue, and not the prey of Greatness: It is fit, that he who possesses her,
should understand, when things be excellent, should know the value of this, and
all his life be thankful to his good fortune for it: it is fitter to make a
Gentleman happy, than to give contentment to a tyrant; fhee might perhaps be
some amusement to him, when he were cloyed with killing of men; but withal,
she might be sure to be the next object of his cruelty, at the next fit of
his wicked humor. You know the Story of Mariamne; our Theaters at this day
sound forth nothing so much, as the cries of this poor Princess: he that put
her to death, loved her above measure, and after her death, kneeled down a
thousand times before her image, praying her to forgive him. Poppea was first
the Mistress, afterward the wife, and always the Governesse of Nero; she had
vanquished this Monster, and made him tame, yet at last he slipped from her, and
in an instant of his choler, gave her a kick upon the belly, which was her
death. His uncle Caius dealt not so roughly with Caesonia, yet in the greatest
heat of his fire, he made love to her in these terms: This fair head shall be
chopped off, as soon as I but speak the word: and told her sometimes, that he
had a greater mind to put her on the rack, to make her tell him, why he loved
her so much. The meaning Madam, of all this is, that the tamest of all Tigers
is a cruel Beast, and that it is a most dangerous thing, to be woo^d with
talons. I have seen the Book you write to me of, and find it not unpleasing;
particularly, where speaking of the makers of Pasquius, and of sa^ tyricall
Poets, he says, that besides the golden age, the age of silver, of brass, and
of iron, so famous and so much talked of in their Fables, there is yet behind
to come an age of wood, of which the ancient Poets never dreamt; and in the
miseries and calamities whereof, they themselves shall have a greater part than
any other. If I go abroad to morrow, I hope to have the honor to see you: In
the mean time, that I may observe good manners, and not be wanting in
formalities, I will say I am

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzae, 16. Aug. 1627.
To -- LETTER XLV.
MY Lord, besides the thanks I owe you for my Head, I have a special charge
from Madam de -- to thank you from her, and to give you a testimony of your
Coachmans skill. He is in truth, a great man in his profession; one might well
trust him, and slip from hence to Paris: He glides by the brinke of
Praecipices, and passes broken bridges with an admirable dexterity, say what
you can of his manners otherwise; Pardon me, my Lord, if I maintain that they
be no vices, and that you do him great wrong to reproach him with them in your
Letter. He does that by design, which you think he does by inclination, and
because he has heard, that a man once overthrew the Commonwealth, when he was
sober, he thinks, that to drink well, is no ill quality to well governing:
He takes otherwise no care for going astray, seeing he has a God for his
guide, and a God that was returned from the Indies before Alexander was come
into the world. After so long a voyage, one may well trust Father Denis, with a
short walk; and he that has tamed Tigers, may well be allowed to manage
horses. Your Coachman, my Lord, has studied thus far; and if they, who hold
in their hands the reins of the State, (to use the phrase of --) had been as
intelligent and dextrous as he, they would have run their race with a better
fortune, and our age should not have seen the fall of the Duke of -- nor of
the Earl of --: it is written to me from the Court, that --: These are the
only News I received by the last Post; but I send you, in their company, the
Book you desired, which is as you know, the book of the wickedness of the
world, and the ancient original of all the modern subtleties. The first
Christians endeavored to suppress it, and called it, Mendacoorum
Loquacissemum: but men at this day, make it their Oracle, and their Gospel:
and seek in it rather for Sejanus and Tygellinus, to corrupt their innocence,
than for Corbulo or Thraseus, to instruct them to virtue; at our next meeting
we shall talk more hereof: The great Personage I have praised, stands in
doubt, that his Encomium is at an end, and presses me to conclude, that I am

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Bolzac, 4. June, 1634.
To -- LETTER XLVI.
SIR, I am sorry to hear of the continuance of your malady, though I hope, it
be not so great as you make it. These are fruits of this unseasonable time, and
I doubt not, but your ^leame, which overflowes with the rivers, will also with
the fall of the rivers, return again to its natural bounds. I have had my
part in this inundation, and it would be no small commodity to me, that things
should stay in the state they now are in; for by this means, my house being
made an Island, I should be less troubled, than now I am by people of the
firm Land: But seeing upon the abating of the waters, depends the abating of
your Rhume, I am contented with all my heart, they shall abate; a^ above all
things desiring your health: yet withal, I must tell you, there is care to be
used: you must abstain from all moist meats, forbear the good cheer of
Paris; and follow the advice of an ancient sage, who counseled a man troubled
with your disease, to change the rain into drowth. You see how bold I am, to
send you my praescriptions; I entreat you to follow them, but not to imitate
me; for in this matter of Medicines, I confess my self a Pharisee; I commend
a Julippe to others, but I drink my self the Sweetest Wines. But to speak of
something else, I cannot imagine, why Monsieur de -- should keep me
languishing so long, and having made me stand waiting three months after his
time appointed, should now require a further prorogation; and a longer delay.
For my part, I verily believe, he spoke not in earnest, when he made you this
untoward answer, and that it was rather for a trial of your patience, than for
an exercise: He has the reputation of so honest and just a man, that I can
make no doubt of that he has promised to Monsieur de -- and I am persuaded, he
accounts himself more straightly tied by his word, than by his bond. Monsieur
the -- believes that I have fingred my silver a year since, and you know it is
a sum provided to stop three or four of my Persecutours mouths, who will
never leave vexing you with their clamours day and night, till they be
satisfied. It is therefore your part to use all means possible, to content
them, at least if you love your liberty; and take not a pleasure to be every
morning saluted with extreme unpleasing good morrowes. I expect hereupon to
hear from you; and am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 17. Jan. 1630.
To --. LETTER XLVII.
SIR, you are too just to desire such duties from a sick friend, as you would
exact from one that were in health. The reasons I can give of my silence, are
much juster than I would they were, and me thinks, three months continuing in
a Fever, may well dispense with any obligation whatsoever of a civil life.
Yet seeing you will needs have me speak, I cannot but obey you, though I make
use of a strangers hand to quarrel with you. I cannot endure the dissimulation
you show, in doubting of my affection, and of the truth of my words. I
understand no jeasting on that side; these are Games that I am incapable to
learn, and in matter of friendship, I am of that tenderness, that I am even
wounded with that, which is perhaps intended but for a tickling. I perceive I
have been complained upon to you, but I entreat you to believe, it has been
upon very false grounds; and I require no better justifier, than her own
conscience that accuses me. Within a few days, I will come my self in
person, and give you an account of all my actions; and will train my self on
to Paris, in hope to enjoy the happiness of your company. In the mean time,
be careful to cure the malady you tell me of, which brings us forth such
goodly Sonnets, and makes so well agree the two greatest enemies that are in
Nature, I mean, Passion and Judgment: so I bid you Farewell; and am with all
my heart,

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. August. 1639.
To Monsieur de Coignet. LETTER XLVIII.
SIR, I am much bound unto you for your writing to me, and for sending me News
that exceedingly pleases me. You may well think, I have no mind to cross my
own good; and to refuse giving my consent to the Earl of Exceters request. To
have so illustrious an Interpreter in England, is morethan a full revenge upon
all the petty Scribes that oppose me in France: it is the crowning and triumph
of my writings. I am not therefore so a Philosopher, that I place the honor he
does me, amongst things indifferent, but rather to tell you plainly, I have
perhaps received too sensible a contentment in it; and upon the point of
falling again into my old desire of glory; of which I thought my self to have
been fully cured: I send you a word, which I entreat you to deliver to him,
which shall witness for me, how dear and glorious, the marks he gives me
of his love and account, are unto me; Otherwise Sir, I doubt not, but I owe a
great part of this good fortune to the good opinion you have of me, which is to
be seen in every line of your Letter; and that you have confirmed the English
in this Error, which is so much in my favor. Only I entreat you, never to
seek to free them of this error, but so to deal with them, that if you
convert them from other, it may still be with reservation of this. The truth in
question is of so small importance, that it deserves not any curious
examination; and in which, to be in a wrong belief, makes not a man to be
either less honest, or more unfortunate: Never therefore, make scruple to
oblige me, seeing you shall oblige a thankful man, and one who is;

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 12. June. 1629.
To Monsieur de Neusuic. LETTER XLIX.
SIR, If I were only blind, I would try to make some answer, to the good words
of your Letter; but the pain, which my ill eyes put me to, makes me incapable
of this pleasing contention: and I cannot draw from my head, in the state it
now is, any thing else but Water and Wax. And besides the unhappie blindness
I speak of, I am in such sort overflowed with Rheumes; that if it were in the
time of the old Metamorphoses, I think verily, I should be turned into a
Fountain, and become the subject of some new Fable. I have lost as well my
smelling, as my taste; my Nose can make no difference between Spanish Leather,
and an old Cowes hide: and I sneeze so continually; that all my conversation,
is but to say, I thank you; to them that say, God help you. Being in this
estate, do you not wonder, I write unto you, and have the boldness to be
sending Letters? In truth, never complement cost me so dear as this, and if I
would make use of the privilege of sick men, I might very justly require a
Dispensation; but I had not the power, to let your servant go away, without
telling you, that you are a very honest Impostour; and that the Perigurain you
send, is the most refined Frenchman that ever ran afoote to Paris. It must
needs be, that the people of your Village is a Colonie of the Louver, that has
preserved the first purity of their language amidst the corruption of their
Neighbors. There never were such fine things written upon the bank of
Dordonne; at least, not since the death of Monsieur de Montaigne, yet I esteem
them not so much, because they are so fine, as because they come from you,
whose I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 25. Jan. 1633.
To Madam Desloges. LETTER L.
MAdam, I am always of your mind; and like not Ladies that would be
Cavaliers. There are certain bounds that part us, and man us out our several
duties and conditions: which neither you nor we can lawfully pass. And the
laws of Decency are so ancient, that they seem to be a part of the ancient
religion. Moses has extended the commandments of God, even to the distinction
of your apparel, and ours: and you know he expressly forbids to disguise our
selves in one another clothes. Women must be altogether women: the virtues of
our sex, are not the virtues of theirs; and the more they seek to imitate men,
the more they degenerate from their own kind. We have had some women amongst
us, that would ride Spanish horses would discharge Pistols, and would be
parties in maintaining quarrels. M. the Marshall Scomberg showed me once a
letter which he writ to a Gentleman of -- at the end whereof were these words;
I kiss the hands of this valiant and pleasing Lady, that is your second in the
day, and your wife at night. This Lady might perhaps be valiant, but to my
humor, she could not be pleasing. If she had had abeard, she could not have
had a greater fault. Women that are valiant, are as much to blame, as men that
are cowards. And it is as unseemly for Ladies to wear swords by their sides,
as for Gentlemen to have glasses hanging at their girdles. I profess my self
an enemy, Madam, to these usurpations of one sex upon another. It strikes me
with a kind of horror, when I read in history of the ancient women Fencers,
whom the Romans beheld with such pleasure in their Amphitheater; and I account
not Amazons in the number of women, but of Monsters and Prodigies. Sweetness
and tenderness are the qualities that belong to you and will your she Friend
give over her claim to these, that is, to the succession of her mother, and
the privileges of her birth? will she not be as well content as you, with the
partition which Nature herself has made? I cannot conceive with what face she
can go a hunting amongst such violence and tumults, and how she can run
hallowing all day, till she be out of breath, after a kennell of Hounds, and
a troop of Huntesmen. God made her for the Closet, and not for the Field: and
in truth, it is a great sin to distend so handsome a mouth, and to disfigure so
comely a face, with blowing a horn. To expose such excellent things to all the
boughs of the Forest, and to all the injuries of the weather; and to endanger
such precious colors with wind and rain, with the sun and dust. And yet,
Madam, to see hunting, without being a party, to go in Coach, and in Parkes
enclosed, where a multitude of beasts are kept prisoners, and come to dye at
Ladies feet, such a recreation as this, I do not condemn, being only
entertained with the eyes, and may pass either for a spectacle, or a walk;
and is as far from agitation as from rest. But this serves not her turn, she
calls these but lazy and sedentarie recreations, and takes no pleasure, but
when it is with hazard of her life. But what would be thought Madam, if one
should come and tell you, she is slain with a fall, by rank riding, or that
she has met with a wild Boar, that was too hard for her? In such cases,
ther^ would not only be no excuse for her death, but it would be a blot upon
her memory for ever: and to save her honor, there must be feigned some other
accident in her Epitaph. As for that other discoursing Lady you complain of,
and whom I know, she commits not, in truth, such extravagant faults as this
does; yet she has her faults too: and I can no more allow of women to be
Doctors, than of women to be Cavaliers. She should take you for a pateme, and
make profit of the good example you give. You know indeed, an infinite number
of excellent things; but you make no open profession of your knowledge, as she
does, and you show, you have not learned them to keep a school. You speak to
her, when she preaches to you, and making popular answers to her riddles,
and giving distinction to her confusion: you do her at least, this good
office, to expound her to her self. Neither in the tune of your voice, nor in
the manner of your expressing, is any thing seen in you, but that which is
natural and French: and although your spirit be of an extreme high
clevation, and far above the ordinary reach, yet you so accomodate it to the
capacity of all that hear you, that whilst the meaner sort do understand
you, the more able spirits do admire you. It is a great matter, Madam, to have
gotten the knowledge of such excellent things: but it is a greater matter so to
hide them, as if they were stolen, and to call them, as you do, by the name
of your secret Truanting^, Your Canvas, your Silk, your Needles, are seen,
but your papers are not seen; and those women that are taken with men that are
not their husbands, are not more surprised than you are, when you are found to
have an Author in your hand, that is not French. I know therefore, Madam, you
cannot approve of one so contrary to your self, how fairc^ show soever you
make, nor will ever change the plainness of your words, for her learned
gyb^sh. Pedanterie is not sufferable in a Master of Art, how should it be borne
withal in a woman? And what patieuce: can endure to hear one talk a whole
day together, Metamorphosis and Philosophiet to mingle the Id^s of Plato, and
the Praedicables of Perphinic together; to make no complyment, that has not in
it; a dozen Horizons and Hemispheares and at last, when she has no more to
say, then to rail upon me in Greek, and ^cuseme me of Hyperbole, and
Ca^eale. These be h^rdevises, she will have, in two verses, at least four full
points, she has (...) design to set on foot, and bring into use again, the
Strophes and Antistrophes, she gives Rules both of Epick and Dramatick ^esie,
and says, she cannot endure a Comedic, that is not within the law of four and
twenty ho^es: and this she is going about to publish through all France. If I
had a mortal enemy, I would desire no greater revenge of him, than to wish
him such a wife. Nothing has more confirmed not in my desire of solitude, than
the example of this Lady: and I see plainly, that a single life is the best
thing in the world, seeing it lies in covert, and is free from the cumber of
this talking Lady. I expect by this bearer the Essays you promised me, and am

Madam Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. September. 1628.
Another to her. LETTER LI.
MAdam, I cannot possibly live a^ie longer without hearing from you: but I
cannot hear of any of whom to hear it; and Leymonsins are as rare in these
part, as Spaniards since the war was proclaimed, I must therefore make use of
a messenger, whom you have raised to an Ambassador, to the end he may inform
me of your health and your friends, My love of you, draws on a curiosity:
for all things that are yours: and my (...) will not be in quiet, till I hear
how my masters, your children do, and what good news you hear from them.
Particularly I desire to know, whether you be yet a Grandmother in Holland:
and whether my Lady, your daughter in law, have brought you Captains or
Senators, at least, Madam, they shall be children much bound to their mother;
seeing, besides their birth, they shall owe her for their liberty, a thing
they should not do to a Fleming of Bruxels. I have seen the Cavalier you have
so often spoken of, and I think you judge very rightly of him. He consists
wholly of a Pickedevant, and two Mustachoes: and therefore utterly to defeat
him, there needs but three clippes of a pair of Cizers. It is not possible to
bring one -- -- to be afraid of him. He says, that if he wore a Lions
skin, and carried in one hand a Torch, and in the other a Clubbe, yet in such
equipage he would be more ridiculous than redoubtable. He believes he has
choler enough, but believes not he has any heart; he reckons him, in the
number of beasts that are skittish and resty, but not that are cruel and
furious: And when I tell him, he has been often in the field; he answers me,
it has been then, rather to feed, than to fight. You can, if you please,
return me a hundred fold for this my untoward short relation: and it will
be: long of you, if my man come not back laden with histories, which must
certainly have been written to you by the last Posts. Take pity upon the
ignorance of your neighbors, and do me the honor to bel^ive I am,

Madam, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Aug. 1635.
To Madam du Fos. LETTER LII.
MAdam, my dear Cousin; There is nothing heard in all quarters, but
benedictions and praises, which our poor pleaders give you. They invocate you,
as their Redeemer; and if Themis be the goddess of good causes, you, it
seems, are the goddess of good success. For my self, I have known a long
time, that you are powerful in persuasion, and never speak without
prevayling. This is the cause, why I have promised Monsieur de --, not that you
shall solicit for him, but that you shall speed for him; and I am this day
warranted of the Event. I could tell you, to make you respect him the more,
that he is able to thank you, in five or six languages; that he has a full
Magazine of Astrolabes and Globes; and that, being but of a mean stature, he
has yet, by his knowledge in the Mathematics, found a means to make himself
as high as Heaven. But I will content my self to say, that he is my friend,
and your Orator: that if my commendation, and your own glory be dear unto
you, you cannot but very shortly send him back with full satusfactuib, I
promised to send you the two Sonnets, you have heard so much spoken of, but my
bad memory, makes me fail in a part of my promise, and I can send you, but one
and a half:

The one entyre is this:

Tu reposois Dephnis, au plus haut de Parnasse,
Couronne de lauriers si touffus and fivers,
Qu'ils sombloit te Couurir des orages diverse
Don't la rigueur du sort trouble nostre bonac^.
Quand l'injuste Menalque a been eu cett' audace
D'employer les poisons sans sarabe couuerts,
Pour corrumpre ton No^ (...) ^plit l'univer^
Et me sprise du temps la fatale menace,
Mais si durant la paix, tes Innocents Escrits,
Forcerant d'avouer les plus ^ares asprits:
Que Florence devoit tu Temple ata memoire,
Ce style de combat. Cet Efford plus qu'humain,
Feravoir aqual poyut, (...) (...) mettre ta gloire,
Qu'and l'iujure t'a mis les arms a la main.
The half one is this:

Quelque fois ma raison par des foibles discans,
M'incite a la revolte, and me promet secours
Mais lors que tout de bon je me veur servir d'elle
Apres beaucoup de peine, et a'efforts impuissants
Elle dit, qu' vr^ est seule aymable and belle,
Et m'y rengage plus que ne font tous mes sens.
The Author of this last Sonnet, has made one in Spanish, which in the Court
of Spain, goes under the Name of Lopez de Vega, and another in Italian, which
Marino verily believed, he had read in Petrarke; It is a Spirit, that changes
himself at pleasure, and transformes himself into what shape he list: yet he
deserves better praises than this, and his Moral qualities are nothing behind
his Intellectual: I will tell you his Name, when it shall be lawful to love
him openly, and to make his Encomium without soruple. But first, it is
needful, that Fortune which has cast him upon an Enemies Country, should
bring him back to Paris, where both of us, mean to wait upon you, to make
our Court; and from whence I desire not over to return, but only to testify
to you more carefully, than heretofore I have done, that I am

Madam, my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
(...) Balz^e, 4. May, 1633.
To Madam de Campagnole. LETTER LIII.
MY most dear Sister, I send you the Book which you required of me, for my
Niece, and I believe, that this and her Prayer-Booke, make her whole Library:
she shall find in it, a Devotion that is not too mystical, nor too much
refined; and which has nothing but Moral and reasonable. I like this popular
Divinity, which meets us half way, and stoops a little, that we may not
strain our selves too much. It follows the example of its Author, who made
himself familiar with common people, and put not back so much as Courtisans
and Publicans, far from making division in families, and withdrawing women
from obedience to their mothers, and their husbands. It commends this
obedience, as their principal verue, and calls it a second worship, and a
second religion. I shall be glad to see my Niece make profession of a piety,
so conformable to natural reason, and so good a counselor of all other
duties. But let her not, I pray, climb higher, and undertake Meditations of
her own head: Grenada whom I sent her, has taken this pains for her, and
has meditated for her, and for all other that shall read his Books. There is
nothing more dangerous, than to mount up to Heaven without a helper and a
guide; and it is a great confidence, one must have in his Spirit, to let it go
so far, and be assured, it will ever come back again. It is not long ago,
there was in a Town of Spain, a Society of devoted persons, who continued in
meditation so many hours a day, leaving off all base works, to live, as they
said, a more heavenly life; but what think you, became of it? even a thousand
domestical disorders, and a thousand public extravagancies. The less
credulous, took the prick of a pin, for a Saints mark, the more humble,
accounted their husbands profane; the wiser sort, spoke what came in their
heads, and made faces perpetually. In so much, that when in the month of May,
there did not past three or four run mad; it was counted a good year. It
is fit to stay ones self upon the true virtue, and not to follow the vain
Phantasmes of holiness. And it is far safer, to ground ones self upon a
solid and certain reading, than to go wandering in a hollow, and unsteady
contemplation. If I had more time, you should have more words; but he that
brings you the letter, calls upon me for it, and I can no more to it, but that
I perfectly am

My dear sister, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. April. 1635.
Another to her. LETTER LIIII.
MY dearest Sister, all the world tells me^, that my Niece is fair, and you
may believe, I will challenge no man, for saying so. Beauty is in Heaven a
quality of those glorious bodies, and in Earth the most visible mark that
comes from Heaven. It is not fit therefore to slight these gifts of God, nor to
make small account of this spark of the life to come: It is not fit to be of
so cross an humor, to blame that which is generally praised. Mark when a
comely personage comes in place, having but this advantage of her birth, you
shall presently see all that were talking, to hold their peace; and what noise
soever there was before, you shall have all hushed, and an universal calm upon
a sudden: you shall see a whole great multitude, all busy in different
labors, to make presently but one body, and that only to stand to gaze and
wonder: some leave to make up the reckoning they had begun, some curtoll
their complements, and cut them off in the midst; every man puts off his
conceits to some other time, only to take a full view, and to contemplate this
divine thing that presents it self. If it be at a Sermon, they leave
hearkening to the Preacher, and they are no longer the auditors of M. de
Nantes, but the spectatours of Calista. The fair can never be seen without
respect, without praises, without acclamations. They triumph, as often as they
appear, and their youth has not more days, than their beauty has
Festivalls. But the mischief is, my dear Sister, that the Festivals are
short, the youth is not lasting, and the fair at last come to be ill favored.
Queens and Princesses grow old, and there is no old beauty, but that of God,
of the Sun, and of the Stars. These heads that now have neither skin, nor
flesh, nor hair; These carcasses and dry bones have been in their time, the
divinities and wonders of the world: and was heretofore called the Duchess of
Valentinois, the Duchess of Beaufort, the Marquis of --: Besides there may
happen diseases, which will do old ages work before hand, and are oftentimes
more ghastly than death it self. We are frighted sometimes to see the spoil
and ruins of Faces, upon which the foot of sickness has troaden, and there
is nothing, in which we may more observe the lamentable marks of the
inconstancy of humane things. From hence I conclude, that beauty being a
thing so frail and tender, subject to so many accidents, and so hard to keep;
it is fit we should seek after another beauty, that is more firm and
permament, that can better withstand corruption, and better defend it self
against the force of time. Above all, it is not fit, that women should be proud
of a quality, that is infamous for the losses and wracks of many poor
Consciences, and which as innocent and chaste as it can be, will yet be a cause
to raise in others, a thousand foul desires, and a thousand unhallowed and
wicked thoughts. Say, my Niece has some thing in her that is pleasing, some
thing that is fair and beautiful, as her friends conceive, yet she ought
always to be afraid of such a good, that is so dangerous for doing hurt to
others. I set before her eyes, the sad Picture of that which she shall be
hereafter; to the end, she may not grow proud of that which she is now. There
is no hurt in meditating a little upon this point. But allow her the liberty
we even now took from her; yet withal, put her always in mind, that of the
four beauties I have showed her in my Tasso; there is but one of them, that
will be a fit example for her to follow. She must leave Armida and Erminia,
for the Gallants of the Court, Clorinda is for the valourous men of Gascoigne,
and Perigord; but she that I propose for her Pattern, is Sophronia. And if
she have not courage enough to say to the Tyrant, as she said, It is I that
am the Delinquent you look for; let her at least, have the other conditions,
that are necessary to the being her follower, and imitate her in them. This
fair Saint made profession of modesty, and neglected her beauty; she was
always, either hidden under a veil, or shut up in her Chamber, and all the
world might suspect her to be fair; but there was scarce any at all that knew
it but her mother. She had no design to entrappe any man's liberty, and
therefore laid not her snares in their way, nor went to Church to see and to be
seen. My dear sister, I cannot choose, but take upon me here to be a reformer
of corrupt manners, and make my complaint to you, of a Custom, which as well
as many other naughty things, the Court has cast upon us. What reason is
there in the world, that women should enter into holy places, of purpose to
draw upon them, the view and attention of the Company? as much as to say, to
trouble and disturb the whole devotion of a Town, and to do as bad, or
worse, as those buyers and sellers did, whom Christ whipped out of the Temple?
By this means, good actions become evil, and Piety comes to have no better
odor before the Altaus, than Perfumes that are mustie and corrupted. Women now
adays, are bound to be seen to be at Church; and this very desire of being
seen there, is the ordinary profanation of the place where they are seen.
And in truth, seeing this place is particularly called the House of God, what
is it but to vilify God, even in the highest degree, to come and offend at his
own doors, and as it were to his face? It is even as great an Impudency, as
that of the first Angels, who sinned in Paradise. Yet herein certainly, the
Italian women are more pardonable than the French; for they indeed, have no
other breathing time of their unfortunate liberty, being at all other times,
kept up as slaves and prisoners: but in France, where women are not denied the
company and visits of honest men, they can have nothing to say, in
justification of this incontinency of their eyes, and of this unsufferable
vanity, to seek to part stakes with God, in men's vows, and to share with him
in his public Adoration. You little thought this morning to hear a Preacher,
and I as little thought to be one, but as you see, the zeal of Gods House,
has brought me to it; and finding my self at leisure, I was desirous to
bestow part of it upon you. The Text was given me yesterday, by the company
that was here; where my Nieces beauty was so much extolled, that, sending you
News, which are to her so glorious, I thought fit, to send her withal, a
cooling, to keep her glorying in some temper: and so my dear Sister, I take
my leave, and am with all my soul,

Your, etc.
At Bolzac, 3. May. 1635.
Another to her. LETTER LV.
MY dearest sister, having both of us but one passion, it makes us always
talking of one thing. My Niece is the subject of all our Letters, as she is the
object of all our cares. For my own part, I see not a good or a bad example,
which I make not use of, for her instruction, and endeavor to employ it to her
profit. You remember a woman the other day, who values nothing, likes of
nothing, excuses nothing; and let her be in the best and most pleasing company
that may be, yet she is sureto put them all into dumpes and melancholy. You can
come on no side of her, but she pricks and bites: all her coasts are craggie
and rockie. And it was not without cause my brother said, that if the man you
wot of, had married her, there would certainly have nothing come of that
marriage, but Teeth and Nails. It is impossible to live in peace with such a
savadge chastity. I make no more reckoning of it, than of that of the Furies,
whom the ancient Poets call virgins, and wonder not, that women of this
humor, love no man, seeing they hate the whole world. This sad and sullen
poison taking up all the room in their souls, leaves no place at all for
other passions that are sweet and pleasing. They fly pleasures, rather by
having their mouth out of taste, than by having their judgment in perfection:
and are so continually fretting, that they have no leisure at any time to be
merry. As long as they be chaste, they think they may lawfully be
discourteous, and scratch men, so they do not kiss them. They have a conceit,
that by wanting one vice, they have presently all virtues: and that for a
little good fame they gain to their husbands, they may keep them under yoke,
and affront all mankind. It is true, the loss of a woman's honor is the
greatest disgrace she can possibly incur; and which once lost, she has
nothing left her that is worth the keeping: But yet it follows not, that the
preserving it, is any such royal act; and I do not admire any, for not being
willing to live in misery and disgrace. I never heard, that a woman should be
praised, for not falling in the fire, or for not casting her selse down a
rock. We condemn the memory of them that kill themselves; but we give no
reward to them that preserve themselves. And so indeed it is, a woman that
magnifies her self for being chaste, magnifies herself for not being dead,
and for having a quality, without which she were as good be out of the world,
seeing she stays not in it, but for a plague to her name, and to see her own
infamy. I say yet more, that she ought not so much to consider the vice as an
evil thing, as to consider it as an inpossible thing, and not to have it so
much in detestation, as in ignorance. For indeed, if a woman be truly
virtuous. she will sooner believe there are Meremaids and Centaures, than that
there are any dishonest women: but will rather conceive that the world is given
to slandering, and that Fame is a liar, than that her neighbor is false and
disloyal to her husband: though with her own eyes she should see the fault
committed, yet it is her part to suspect her eyes mere mistaken, and that it
was but an illusion which she saw; at least, she should never give sentence
upon this sort of delinquents, seeing Christ himself would not do it to the
adulterous woman. When others wrong a woman, it is her part to be sorry: and
when others say, she has been unfaithful, it may be enough for her to say,
she has been unfortunate. And yet more than this too, I could wish, if it
were possible, that where she finds most weakness, there she should make
report of most goodness: und I would no^, that virtue should beget this bad
quality. It is an enemy to society, and deserves not to have so good a
mother: and one may well fly and blame the vice, so as the flying it, be
without oftentation, and the blaming it be without choler. For otherwise, it
would be as much as to require a statue for doing nothing: and in the smart of
the punishment, to seek for the pleasure of revenge. An honest woman reformes
the world by the example of her life, and not by the violence of her spirit.
She ought not to proclaim war against any; not against the most indiscreet
and insolent: and if there chance any licentious or uncivil word to be uttered
in her hearing, she ought to check it, either by giving no care, or by falling
into some other discourse, or by casting upon the speaker a beam of modesty,
that may cover his confusion, and pierce his very soul: and thus she shall use
a chastising without offending. There is as well a severitie in modesty, as a
sweetness; and which keeps insolence it self in awe: and a woman that carries
this excellent virtue in her eyes, keeps men within the bounds of their duty,
without ever falling into outrage, or into words of choler. Other virtues are
hidden, and have nothing in them that is visible, or that falls under sense.
This This virtue has a body of light, and rises up into the face, in those
pretty strains, which bashfulnesse that is her usher, as Aurora is the Suns,
sends up: into it. And in truth, the Purple, whereof the Poets speak, which
appears at the break of day, is nothing so rich and glorious, as that which
is disclosed in an honesty a little bashful; the effect whereof in noble
tempers is not an overflowing of blood, but only one single drop well
husbanded. It is not a mass of red, which sets the face on fire. It is only a
first impression, and as it were, a shadow of tincture, that lightly colors
it. This honest blush, which is so pleasing a thing in maidens faces, and which
I distinguish from that, which is sottish and untoward, is a bar, and
sufficient defense against the audaciousnesse of the most impudent; and when it
is seen to shine in a woman's look, there is no licentiousness that is not
dazeled with it, and is not stopped from daring to proceed. And therefore there
is no necessity of using any straining of the voice, any churlishness of
words, or any agitation of gestures, to do that, which may better be done by
silence, and with quietness. And indeed women are bound, if for nothing else,
yet for the very interest of their beauty, to shun a passion, that makes such
villainous faces, and sets so many wrinkles upon their countenance. I have heard
some of them complain, that the sent of a Rose was too strong, and that Musk
made their heads ache, because it had not mild sweetness enough: and why then
will they not take that sweetness into themselves, which they seek for so much
in other things? and find fault with the want of it, in that Art, which
proposes to it self no other end? If without this sweetness, there grow from
the most precious odours, a certain quality which offends them; and if there
be some Flowers, and some perfumes that please them not, what likelihood is
there, that Brimstone and Saltpeter can please them, and that their humor can
have any thing common with these violent substances? It is true perhaps, that
sweetness and mildness have their excesses; but yet, even those excesses are
more lawful, than the justest temper of shrewishness and incivilitie; at
least in a woman, they are much more commendable: and it becomes her better to
dissemble that she knows, than to discover verities that are odious: and
better she should be thought to come out of another world, than to carry to a
man the first news of her stinking breath; and teach another to know the
infirmitio of her race, which perhaps he knew not before. These liberties are
not sufferable in the freest conversations, they draw on other more dangerous
liberties; and though your sex be inviodable, and have the privilege of
sanctuary, yet profane persons stick not to lay hands on the Saints
themselves, and on their Altars, and nothing is so sacred, that can escape the
hand of sacrilege. Only those persons that can revenge offenses, may venture
to give offenses; and a man that will give the lie, must be of a condition to
fight a Duel, and maintain it by Arms. My Niece has no great need of these
precepts, nor indeed of any foreign instruction; she cannot wander from the
right, if she go not astray from her own inclination; nor can be troublesome
to others, if she borrow not a vice which is none of her own. I have therefore
represented to her, the woman of the other day: but after their example, who
showed their slaves drunk to their children, and that is to make her afraid of
fil^hy objects, and to make that hateful to her, which is not in it self
lovely; to confirm her in the principles which you have taught her, and to
draw her out some rules from her own actions: she is (I know) naturally good;
but the best natures have need of some method to guide them, and direction does
never any hurt to virtue: she is able to keep herself in terms extremely
obliging, without ever falling into the baseness of flattery: She is able to
please without colloguing; and though she call not every thingby the right
name, nor be so very curious to speak in proper terms, yet her style shall
not for that, be the less liked, nor her company the less desired. She may
call them wise that want the reputation of being valiant; and women that are
sad, she may say they are serious. If a man be not of a quick spirit, she may
say, he is of a good judgment: and if one be unfortunate in his actions she
may say, he has a good meaning in his counsails. But yet in this there is a
measure to be held, and a choice must be made, in laying her colors, that
she seek not to disguise all sorts of subjects: for there are some indeed
that are not capable: of disguising. Those that are pale, she may praise for
their whiteness: but those that have a dropsy, she must not praise for their
fatness: she may say, that scruple is a bud of piety. But she must not say,
that profaneness is an effect of Philosophy. She may make a favorable
construction of things doubtful, and sweeten the rigor of particular
judgments; but she must not contend against common sense, nor be opposite to
verities that are public and manifest. She must make a difference between
errors and crimes, between a docible simplicity and a presumptuous
stupiditie, between sots that are honest, and those that are wicked. And if
she happen to be in company, where some weak spirit is oppressed, as the
world is full of such that will triumph over the weak, and take no pity of
any, she must then, by all means, be a protectresse of such a one, and make
herself a Sanctuary for all those, whom stronger adversaries would otherwise
ruin. This only is to be observed, that she so undertake the maintaining of
weak causes, that it may appear by the tune of her voice, that it proceeds
from excess of goodness, and not from want of knowledge: and that she
compassionates humane infirmities by an act of charity, makes not herself a
party by false persuasion. I am now at the end of my paper; and should have
been a good while since at the end of my letter: but I always forget my self
when I am with you, and never think hours shorter, than those I bestow upon
your memory. And so my dear sister, I bid you farewell, not without great
longing to see you: and if you and all your company come not hither the next
week, I proclaim it to you, that I am no longer

Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. July. 1634.
THE SECOND PART of the third Volume of the Letters of Monsieur DE BALZAC.
To my Lord the Cardinal, Duke of Richelieu. LETTER I.
MY Lord, being stayed here by some occasions, I suffer this hard necessity
with a great deal of pain, and account my self banished from my Country,
being so long a time deprived of your presence. I deny not, but the victorious
and triumphant News, that comes continually from the Army, gives me some
resentment of joy, and that the brute of your Name in all quarters, touches me
very sensibly; but it is no perfect satisfaction to me, to learn that by
others relating, which I ought to know as an eyewitness, and I conceive so
great a pleasure to consist, in the sight of your glory, that there is not a
common Soldier under your Command, whose happiness and good fortune, I do
not envy. But my Lord, though I cannot serve you with my bodily actions, yet I
revere you day and night, with the thoughts of my mind, and in this so worthy
an employment, I never think the noblest part of my self, can do service
enough. Your Lordship, next to the King, is the eternal object of my spirit, I
never turn my eyes from the course of your life; and if perhaps, you have
Courtiers more officious than my self, and such as do their duties with
greater oftentation and show, yet I am most sure, you have no servant that is
more faithful, and whose affection comes more truly from his heart, and is
fuller of life and vigor. But to the end, my words may not be thought vain,
and without ground, I send you now a proof of that I say, by which, you shall
perceive, that a man that is himself persuaded, has a great disposition to
persuade others, and that a Discourse, founded upon the things themselves, and
^ated with the truth, both stirs men's spirits with greater force, and also
begets a firmer belief, than that which is but feigned, and comes but in the
nature of Declayming. This, my Lord, is a part drawn out from the whole body,
and a piece, which I have taken most pains to polysh; which, I freely vow unto
you, that all the hours of a calmer leisure than mine, and all the powers of a
more elevated spirit than ordinary, would have found work enough, to bring to
perfection. In it, there is handled, Of the virtue, and victories of the King;
Of the Justice of his Arms; Of Royalty and Tyranny; Of usurpers and lawful
Princes; Of Rebellion chastened, and liberty maintained; but because the
Prince I speak of, is a stirrer, and makes no stay any where, and that in
following him, I should imbarque my self in a world of several subjects; I
have therefore, prescribed to my self certain bounds, which in his actions, I
should never have met with: and after the example of Homer, who finished his
Ilias with the death of Hector, though that were not the end of the war; I
have thought fit, not to go further, than the taking of Suze, though this were
but the beginning of the wonders, we have seen of his. You know my Lord, that
this kind of writing, which I propose to my self, is without comparison, the
most painful of all other; and that it is a hard matter, to continue long in
an action that must be violent, and to be violent in an action that must
continue long. This praise belongs properly to Orators, I mean such as know
how to persuade, how to please in profiting, and can make the people capable of
the secrets of Governning a Commonwealth. For as for Philosophers, that have
written of this argument, their discourse is commonly so dry and meager, that
it appears, their intention was rather to instruct, than to reconcile; and
besides, their style is so thornie and cumbersome, that it seems they meant to
teach none, but the learned. And in this, there is no more difficulty, than
there is in healing of men that be in health. And for a man, to make himself
obscure, there needs no more, but to stay upon the first notions we have of
truth, which are never, either wholly pure, or purely mingled, and which
falling from the imagination upon paper, leave upon it such a confusion, that
it resembles rather an informed abortion, than a perfect production. Besides,
in the composition of a History, especially where the Politiques have to do,
an Author is carried, and borne out by his matter, and the things being all
made to his hand, which case him of the pains of invention, as the order of
the time caseth him of the care of disposing; he has little to do for his
part, but only to contribute words, which is by some made so small a matter,
that when Menander was pressed by some friends to publish a work of his, that
he had promised: He made answer, it shall presently come forth; for it is in a
manner all finished and ready, there wants nothing, but to make the words. But
in the persuasive kind of writing, (besides, that there must be a better
choice made, and a stricter order used, in placing the words, than in simple
Narrations, which for all their luster and riches of expression, require no
more but plainness, and fit terms) they which desire to attain perfection,
or indeed to do any thing at all of worth, endeavor all they can, to put in
use, and reduce to action, the most subtle Idaea's of all Rhetoric; to raise
up their understanding to the highest point of things; to search out, in every
matter, the verities less exposed to view, and to make them so familiar, that
they who perceived them not before, may by their relation come as it were to
touch them. Their design is, to join pleasure to profit, to mingle
daintiness and plenty together; and to fight with Arms, not only firm and
strong, but also fair and glittering. They endeavor to civilize Learning;
drawing it from the College, and freeing it from the hands of Pedants, who
mar and sully it in handling: and to say the truth, adulterate and corrupt
it, abusing this excellent and delicate thing in the sight of all the world.
They seek not to avoyde Rocks by turning aside from them, but rather by
slyding gently over them, and rather to escape places of danger, than to shun
them. And to make it appear, that nothing is so sour or bitter, but that it
may be sweetened and allayed by Discourse. Finally, they suffer themselves
sometimes to be transported with that reasonable fury, which Rhetoricians have
well known, though it go beyond their Rules and Precepts: which thrust an;
Orator into such strange and uncouth motions, that they seem rather inspired,
than to be natural; and with which, Demosthenes and Cicero were so possessed,
that the one of them swears by those that dyed at Marathon, and of his own
authority makes them Gods: the other, asks questions of the Hills and
Forests of Alba, as if they had ears, and were able to hear him. But if I
were one that did come any thing near so noble an end, (which I neither will
nor dare believe) and that I were able to make strangers see, that all things
in France are changed for the better, since the happy Reign of our King, who
no less augmenteth our spirits, than he increases our courage: yet it is not
I that should merit the glory of this, but I must wholly attribute it to the
happiness of my time, and to the force of my object. Howsoever, my Lord, if I
cannot be taken into the List of learned and able men, at least, I cannot be
denied a place amongst honest men, and loyal servants; and if my abilities be
worthy of no consideration with you, at least, my zeal and affection, are
better worth, than to be rejected. With which meditation, I am sometimes so
ravished, that I doubt not, but my resentments must needs content you; and that
it is no unpleasing recreation to you, to cast your eye upon a Philosopher in
choler. And though true love content it self with the testimony of its own
Conscience; and that I give you many proofs of my most humble service, which I
assure my self, will never come to your knowledge; yet for your satisfaction,
I desire you might hear me sometimes in the place where you are, and might
see, with what advantage, I maintain the public cause, in what manner I
control false News that runs about, and how I stop their mouths that will be
talking in disparagement of our affairs. It is certain, that it is not
possible our State should be more flourishing than it is, or that the success
of the Kings Arms should be more glorious than it is, or that the Peace of the
People should be more assured than it is, or that your Government should be
more judicious than it is; and yet we meet with certain spirits, that are
troubled with their own quietness, are impatient of their own felicity,
cannot be held in any good belief, but by prosperities that are supernatural;
and longer than they see miracles, give no credit to any thing. If present
affairs be in good terms, then they cast out fears of those to come; and
when they see, the events prove happy, then they fall affrighting us with
Presages. They take an Oath, to esteem of no persons, but forreyners; of no
things, but far fet. They admire Spinola, because he is an Italian, and their
enemy; they cannot abide to praise the King, because he is a Frenchman, and
their Master. They will hardly be drawn to confess, that the King has
overcome, though they see before their eyes, an infinite number of Towns
taken; of Factions ruinated; eternal Monuments of his Victories: and more
easily the King has gotten the applause of all Europe, than these men's
approbation. They would persuade us, if they could, that he had raised his
Siege before Rochell; That he had made a shameful Peace with the Protestants;
and that the Spaniards had made him run away. They do all they can, to
exterminate his History, and to extinguish the greatest light that shall ever
shine to posterity. I doubt not, but they cast a malicious eye upon my Book;
for presenting an image of those things which offend them so much. And they who
believe Fables and Romances, and are in passion, for an Hercules or an
Achilles, who perhaps never were; They who read with ecstasy of joy, the
actions of Rowland and of Reinold, which were never done, but upon Paper: These
men will find no relish in a true History, because it gives testimony to the
virtue of their natural King. They can like well enough, that against the
credit of all Antiquity, Xenophon being a Grecian, and no Persian, should
frame Cyrus a life after his own fancy, and make him die in his bed, and
amongst his Friends; when yet he dyed in the wars, and overcome by a woman:
and they can like well enough, that Pliny should tell a lie in open Senate,
and praise Trajan for temperance and chastity, who yet was given to wine, and
to another vice so foul that it cannot honestly be named; but they can by no
means like, that I, who am the Kings subject born, should say that of him,
which no man can deny to be most true, and that being to make a pattern for
Princes, I should rather make choice of his life, than either of that of Cyrus,
which is fabulous, or that of Trajan, which is not the purest, that I may not
speak of that of Caesar Bogia, which is all black with licentiousness and
crimes. Heaven it self is not able to give this kind of people a Governor to
their mind. He that was according to Gods own heart, should not be according
to theirs: They would not think Solomon wise enough, nor Alexander valiant
enough. They are generally enemies of all sorts of Masters; and accusers of all
things the present time affoords. They make our heads ache with crying out, that
there was no necessity to make a war in Italy; but if you had stayed still at
Paris, they would have cried out much louder, that it had not been honest, to
suffer our allies to perish. Because some of our Kings have made unfortunate
voyages beyond the mountains, therefore they will needs have it, that our
King, though he follow not their counsels, should yet fall into their
misfortunes. They accuse your conduct with old proverbs, because they cannot
with sound reasons. They say, Italy is the Churchyard of the French: and being
not able to observe the least fault in all your carriage in that country, they
lay upon you the faults of our aunestors, and charge you with the error of
Charles the eighth. Yet I conceive that these men's sin is rather of
infirmity than of malice, that they are rather passionate for their opinions,
than Pensioners of our enemies; and that they have more need of help by
Physic, than of restraint by law. But it is a grievous thing to see, how the
busybodies of our time, speak the same language, which Rebels did in times
past; and abuse the happiness of liberty, even against him, who has procured
it unto us. They come continually, and tell me, we are like to receive much
prejudice by the discontent of such a Prince, that is gone from our side. And I
answer them, it is better to have a weak enemy that cannot hurt us, than
hold a troublesome friend, that would do us no good. They will by all means,
that the King at any price, should succor Cazall; and I tell them, that he
has succored it already, by his conquest of Savoy: and that in the state as
things now stand, it cannot be taken, but to be delivered back. They are not
contented that you perform actions that are extraordinary, they look you
should perform some that are impossible: And though there arise sometimes such
difficulties in things, that they cannot by any possibility be encountered; I
say not, by defect in the undertaker, but by reason of repugnancie in the
subject; yet they will not take for payment, such reasons as wise men are
satisfied withal, but they would have the King do that, which the Turk and
Persian joined together, were not able to do. These things, my Lord, would put
me extremely into passion, and I could never be patient at such excess of
ungratefulness, if I did not remember, that there has sometimes been a
spirit, so sullen, and so saucy, that it dared to find fault with the works
of God himself, and was not afraid to say, that if he had been of his
counsel, as well in the creation as in the government of the world, he would
have given him better advice than he took at first, or than he now follows.
After so immense a folly, you must not think it strange, if there be some
Extravagants; and the vulgar at all times has been found but an unjust Judge
of virtue; and yet for all that, it has never been without admirers: and now,
if those that have but little instinct, and can do nothing but murmr, and
do not favor him, it is for us, my Lord, to testify unto you, that
reasonable men, and such as know how to speak, are of the better side.

Your most humble and most obedient servant, Balzac.
At Balzac, 4. Aug. 1630.
Another to him. LETTER II.
MY Lord, hearing that Monsieur de -- means to question me about the Benefice
you did me the honor to give me: and that by virtue of his dispensation, he
has sent to take possession, I have conceived no better shelter, to avoid this
storm, than under the greatness of your Name; nor any safer defense against
the forces of such an adversario, than the respect of such a Protector as you
are. I require not in this any strayning of your Lordships power; I know you
are sparing of it in your own proper interests, and reserve it for occasions
that are public and important: I only require the continuance of your love,
and that you would signify to him that troubles me, you would be glad he
would let me be at quiet. For besides that to stand in suit with a man of his
robe, were as much as to fight with a Master of Fence, and to put ones whole
right in hazard. It would trouble me, my Lord, though I were assured of
success, to think I should owe any part of it to any other besides your
self, seeing I account it more glory to receive from you, than to wrest from
another. Monsieur de -- may do well, to keep his dispensation for a better
market, and draw much more profit with a little patience. And indeed, I verily
believe, he looks for nothing to make him surcease, but for some
demonstration from you, of your desire: and that he rather has an ambition to
be entreated by M. the Cardinal, than any design to take your gift from me.
I humbly entreat your Lordship to give him contentment in this point, and not
suffer me to fall, at this first step of my Fortune; and that I may not always
be unfortunate, being as I am with all my soul,

My Lord, Yours, etc.
At Balzac, 8. Novem. 1631.
Another to him. LETTER III.
MY Lord, I am infinitely bound unto you for the honor you have done me, to
remember me, and for the pains you have taken, to write in my behalf to
Monsieur de -- -- It is true, your pains has not had so good success, as I
verily hoped it would: for though he had given out, that for his satisfaction
he required no more but some small sign, that it was your desire: yet having
received that sign, he continues still in the same terms, and holds the same
rigorous course he did. It makes me think, my Lord, that he knows not of
what worth your commendation is: certainly, if it had been employed for any
other but my self, it had found all the yielding and respect it meriteth: but
indeed, I cast unfortunatenesse upon all matters I deal in: my evil Fortune
suffers me not to make benefit of your love; you have no sooner a thought to
do me good, but presently a thousand impediments arise to hinder it. You give
me presents, and I do not receive them: You command I should be paid my
pension, and your command is not obeyed. Not yours, my Lord, of which one might
say, Est fatum quodeunque voles. You have read my book with pleasure, and
spoken of it with commendation; and yet I suffer persecution for making it, as
much as to say, for being a true Frenchman, and a lover of public liberty. For
as for the objections they make against me, they certainly are but colors and
pretenses: If my words be not learned, or eloquent, they are yet found, and
full of truth. There is not one to be found in all my work, which a mean
Advocate were not able to defend before the severest Tribunal in the world.
The makers of libels, who condemn them, are the men of all other, that first
corrupt them. I begin my Lord, to be weary of this long and obstinate
injustice; my Philosophy begins to fail me in this case: and I should be
clean and altogether out of heart, if I had not your goodness to rely upon.
For this, at this day, is the common refuge of all oppressed innocents, and no
man invocates it in vain. I therefore make my self believe, that it will at
last send me also some fair days, after so many storms and tempests raised
against me by mine enemies: and that after you have saved Nations, and set
Princes in their Thrones, it will be no hard matter to relieve a poor private
man who adores you, and whom calumny seeks to ruin. I know some my Lord,
whom you have made happy, and yet scarce knew their names; when you did me the
honor to give me your good word, and yet fare never the better for it. And
some I have known advanced by you, that lay hidden in the throng, when your
self drew me out, and placed me amongst the few, yet what get I by it? For
in truth I could never make any use of this advantage, because indeed I could
never serve you with such care and subjection, as the forwardness of your
favors obliged me to do. My indisposition has always hindered my good
designs; I have always combated with weakness of body, and never durst
venture to begin a life, which I was not assured I were able to hold out. This
has forced me, my Lord, to court you in a new fashion; and to seek to do you
service by my absence and ease, and not trouble you with unseasonable
officiousness, and with many low curtsies to no purpose. I am able to say,
unworthy as I am, that I was the first man that preached the wonders of your
life unto the people, exhorted all Frenchmen to do their duties; have in mine
own person given good example in the Provinces, and have healed many spirits
that were sick, and ill persuaded of the present government. I am not so well
known by my name, as by my forwardness in your service. And when the
spiteful rumor ran abroad of late, many persons of quality can tell, how
generally I took it: and how I resolved to follow you to the worlds end, if so
be the unfortunatenesse of France should remove you from the Court. Yet I am
not troubled, that I make you not these proofs of my Fidelity, though they
would be less difficult to me, than to entertain you, as now I do, with my
interests; which to say true, is a cruel torture I put my self to. It is not
my desire, you should have misfortunes, to the end I might make use of my
consolations: nor is it my wish, there should be disorders in my country, and
disgrace to my master, to the end I might the better show my selse a good
Frenchman, and a loyal servant. But yet my Lord, why may I not be of some use
in a calm, and have a place as well in the joy, as in the sorrow? You alone
are the author of your victory; but you alone cannot furnish your triumph,
but must have many Artificers to work about it. I have materials enough to
make many large Fabrickes; but to undertake the work, I must enter at your
Lordship I may have a little contentment, or at least, a little quiet. The
splendour of your person is so great, that it sends forth beams of light to your
remotest servants: and the power which heaven has given you, is so redoubtable
to all sorts of tyrants, that to give a period to my persecution, there needs
no more, but that you give some sign you mean to protect me; which favor I
persuade my self you will not deny me: for besides the common cause of being
oppressed, you have known a long time, that I make a special profession to be

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5. Ian. 1632.
To Monsieur Cytois, Physician to M. the Cardinal. LETTER V.
SIR, my curiofitie were undiscreet, if I should ask you news of occurrents
in the Army; but you cannot take it ill, that I ask you news of my Lord the
Cardinals health. I learn the progress of his glorious actions by the mouth
of Fame: but I must learn from you how he fares in his continual agitation; and
whether the temper of his body feel no alteration by the violent motions of
his spirit. I conceive that God doubles his force when there is need; and that
he has regard to the necessity of so many people that cannot miss him: but
I know also, that he makes use of the second causes, and that your cares and
industry concur with his providence. The services you do to one particular
man, are obligations to all the world. Never had any Science a more worthy or
more profitable employment than yours has: And if the Romans erected a statue
to Antonius Musa, for healing of him who oppressed their liberty, why may not
you justly expect a public acknowledgement for preserving of him, who makes
us all both free and happy? I send him the discourses which -- -- I humbly
entreat you to take care they may come to no other hands but his: and therefore
that you will keep them in your custody, that they may be safe until I come
my self to Paris. I expect this courtesy from that good will you have always
promised me: and here I make you this solemn protestation, that you can never
honor any man that is more passionately than I am

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 5. Aug. 1630.
To Monsieur de Chastelet Counselor of the King in his Counsel of State.
LETTER V.
SIR, it is great work of memory to be mindful of me at the Court: but it
is an effect of a divine goodness to make it rain dainties in the desert:
Since Manna, there was never seen there, such a thing as you sent me; and if
you were bound to furnish me with such fare, forty years of banishment at
this diet, would be to me forty years of felicity. To speak in plain
terms, your present is unvaluable: and to help my self in speaking of it, I
have been forced to fetch comparisons from heaven, because inferior things
are never able to express it. You do it wrong to give it the name of a
Preface: but what may we expect from the work it self, before which such a
preface is set? If the outside be so rich, and there be so great magnificence
in the Gate House, what will be in the Galleries, and Cabinets? and what will
the Palace be that is worthy of such an entrance? I see indeed that it is a
mark of greatness, but I fear withal, that it is a want of proportion, and
being not possible the rest should equal the the beginning, you will be
accused for disturbing the order of things, and for putting perfection out of
its place, which should not come in but at the last. See here an accusation
that is very nice, and whereof it is a glory to be convinced. In this there
is less account to be made of virtue than of vice; and the disorder which
makes a magnificence, is more worth than the method which retains a poverty:
Blame not sir, the event of this dispute: Beauty begets the prize in all
causes where the eyes are judges: and they who blame you for adorning too much
your refutation of the Books of Flanders, blame you for having your Armor too
much gilded, and that in striking you dazzle their eyes. It seems they know
not that the Lacedaemonians never tricked up themselves, but when they went to
fight; and that Caesar made his vaunt, he wanne battles with perfumed
Soldiers. The pomp of your style arrests not the sight without profit: It is
pleasing to the Reader; but withal it is fatal to slander. In it there is to
be seen the luster and braverie of Tournaments; but withal, there is to be
seen in it the force and terriblenesse of war. The only pity is, you had
not a competent Enemy to fight withal, and that so much force and valor
should be spent upon a feeble fury, and which is now at the last drop of its
poison. The wretched man you pursue, and who dies blaspheming; was not worthy
of so noble a Resentment as yours, having nothing considerable in him, but that
you vouchsafe to speak of him: you make him of some worth by alleging him so
often. In undoing him, you make him famous, and his objections will one day not
be found, but in your answers. It is five and twenty years since he was a
fugitive from his order, and should have had his trial before the General of
the Jesuits. And if these good Fathers did not deal too gently with
delinquents, and change imprisonment into banishment, he had from that time
been suppressed, with all the filthy books he has made ever since. But it
was necessary, that (to crown his inconstancy) after he had abandoned above
a dozen sides, he should now for his last prize, become a parasite to the
Spaniards, and a Secretary to those bad French that are at their Court. Let it
never trouble us Sir, that he calls us Flatterers: Atheists call honest men
superstitious. Catiline called them all slaves that would not be parracides;
and it has always been impossible, to be virtuous with approbation of the
wicked. They are delinquents themselves, that find fault with our innocence,
and they are idle fellows, who prostrate themselves every day before a Don
Dego, or a Don Roderigo, and yet think much we should do any reverence to M.
the Cardinal Richlieu. But it is fit they should be taught, that here is the
true worship, at Bruxells but Idolatry; and that to adore a foreign Power,
and such a one that does mischief to the whole earth, is not, at least an
action so truly French, as to revere a virtue, that is native of France, and
that does good to all the world. Seeing they abuse our tongue, in praising
their Tyrants, and justifying our Rebels; It cannot be denied us, to bring it
back to its natural and proper use, and in more honest subjects, to purify
and make clean those words and phrases, which they have prostituted to the
conceits of the Marquis of Aytona, or made to serve the passion of Spain. If
tyranny were more to be feared than it is, and that the unfortunatenesse of
France should make it reach hither; yet it should never make me to unsay the
propositions I hold, and it shall be all my life a most pleasing object to me,
to see my self enrolled in the Catalogue of Authors, condemned by the enemies
of my Country. I think, I may boldly say, I was one of the first mainteiners
of the truth, and he perhaps that laid open the field, where so many Orators
and Poets find themselves exercise: It is time now, that I leave it to younger
men, and such as are more able than I am. Yet I entreat you to remember Sir,
that I give place without running away; and that it is the coldness of my
blood, and the abatement of my strength, that forces me, (...) not any want
of courage or change of will. Never think I will ever fail in these: I
always preserve in my heart, the principles of good actions, I mean, good
desires; and when I can no longer be a runner in the Race, yet I will be one of
the most earnest Spectatours, and fight at Cuffes, when I can do nothing else.
In the mean time, to the end, that a good part of my ancient travail may not
be lost, and that I may not make that an unprofitable secret, between my Muses
and me, which may perhaps serve for some edification to the Public: I think
fit, to make you account of certain things I have heretofore conceived; and to
show you, that in actions of my duty, I oftentimes content my self with the
testimony of my own Conscience. These are Pieces that were wrought before the
second voyage into Italy, and before the lamentable Divisions of the Royal
Family. In the puritic of public joy, amidst the applauses of all the Kings
subjects; and even of those who have since lost their loyalty, and now lie
railing upon us at Bruxells. I send you some sheets, as I first light upon
them, and I send them Sir, rather to do you Homage by laying my Compositions
at your feet, than to make a Challenge, as opposing them to yours, rather to
acknowledge the superiority of your Eloquence, and to go in your Lyverie,
than to make my self your Competitor, and seek to brave you, with so rash a
Comparison. If you find any relish in Discourses so far short of the force
and merit of yours; and if you think they may give my Masters of the
Universitie, any the least contentment, I earnestly entreat you, to present
them a Copy; and withal, my humble submission to their judgment. I know,
this Society is at this day the supreme Tribunal that Censures all works of
the Brain, and gives Rules to all other Tribunalls of France. I neither doubt
of the susficiencie, nor suspect the integrity of the Judges that praeside
there: Moreover, I confess Sir, it could never have a more happy Conception,
seeing your self was the first that spoke it, nor a more illustrious birth,
seeing M. the Cardinal was a Patron to it; and therefore, borne in Purple, as
were those Princes in Constantinople, whom I would call, Porphyrogenetes, if
the Academie had Naturalised this Foreign word. The honor it has done me,
to make me a member of their body, without binding me to part from hence, and
the place it has given me, without taking away my liberty, are two singular
favors I received from it, both at one time. And to say the truth, it is no
small benefit to a man of the wilderness, that turns his face sometimes
toward the world, and is not altogether divested of humane affections, that
he may enjoy together, both the repose of solitude, and yet flatter his
imagination with the glory of so pleasing a Society. This I cannot do without
thanking you for so great a favor; and if they understand not of my Resentment
by your mouth, they may have just cause to condemn me for one of little
Gratefulness. Lend me therefore, I beseech you Sir, some five or six words, I
would ask you more, but I know they are of that worth, and so high in their
account, that these few will be enough, not only to satisfy for the complement
I owe; but for the Oration also, it is expected I should make them. You will
not, I hope, deny me the testimony of your love, and I require it of you by
the memory of the other Obligations I owe you. Atque per inceptes promissum mu^
Jambos: you know my meaning, and that I have a long time been, and am

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Jul. 1635.
To Monsieur de Bois Robert. LETTER VI.
SIR, I hear you have been seen at Paris, from whence, I conclude, you are
not at the war in Flanders, but are content to go and give it your
malediction upon the Frontiers. If you would acquaint us with the passages of
that Country, you should infinitely oblige your old friend, who feeds upon no
other nourishment but News, and takes no News to heart, but those which
concern the King. He is so careful of the Reputation of his Arms, that he
cannot abido his victory should be spoken of with doubtlng: To make him
confess, we have lost one man, it is necessary there should be four
Regiments defeated; and when he is spoken to, of the Emperors aid, that this
is a Remedy to be looked for, when the contrary part is dead. To make this man
a Present, the Poet you wot of, made lately some Verses upon the estate of
affairs in Lorrayne, and answers another Poet, who had written, that the King
would never be able to hold it, and that the relliek of affection, which the
Country bears to its ancient Duke, would never suffer any familiarity or
friendship to reflect upon us. The -- -- that are the Latins of this Country,
would make him believe, that he has found a mean between the Character of
Catulus, and that of Martial, and that he has avoided the dryness and
harshnesse of the former times, without engaging himself in the luxury and
intemperance of the latter times. With these new Verses, I send you the old
Prose you desired, and which has lain so long asleep in my Closet. Though
they be writings of an old date, yet you know, they are always in season; and
seeing they entreat of the sovereign ve^tue, that is of M. the Cardinal,
they entreat of a mattet that is immortal, and can never loose the grace of
being new. Thermopylae and Platea, are to this day the common places of the
Graecians that are in the world; and our remotest posterity, which shall more
quickly enjoy the labors of this rare man, than we do; shall speak more
often, and more honorably of them than we do. I believe, the Letter to
Monsieur Chastelet, will not dislike you, and that you will find something in
it worth your reading. I had word sent me from Paris, that his style was too
much painted, and too full of Figures for a military style; but you shall see,
how in praising him for the rest, I justify him in this; and with what byace I
defend the cause of worthy things. I entreat you to ask him for me, the last
Libells of --: and to deliver them to -- to bring them to me. You have heard by
-- the cause I have to complain of Monsieur de --: Delays in such cases are
very dangerous, and if you have not already made an end of the matter, I fear
me, the Stock that was appointed for paying of me, will go some other way.
Do herein what you shall think fittest, and I shall remain

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. Jul. 1635.
Austrasia infaelix, ne somnia blanda tuorum,
Neu memores Aquilas, Imperiumque vetus.
Quamvis and Titulos and Nomen inutile Jactes,
Multusque in vano Carolus ore sonet.
Carolus ecce iterum, Nostri virtute Capeti
Concidit, and lapsas luget Egenus opes.
Vel solo Dixisse sat est, capta Oppida nutu
Atque ultro exutum terga dedisse Ducem.
Austrasia huic vilis nimium and neglecta fuisti,
Nec te ita qui tenuit, credidit esse suam.
Credidit hostiles fugitivus linquere terras,
Sed te qui propriam jam tueatur adest.
Ille Triumphata redijt qui victor ab Alpe,
Et per quem placidis Mincius errat agris
Ille suo natus Juvenis succurrere saeclo,
Non tantum Patriae sistere Fata suae.
Cur sequeris Funus? Vacua^ cur diligis umbra^?
Evereque colis diruta saxa domus?
Desere Fessa tuos suprema clade jacentes,
To validam and stantem, Deseruere tui?
Prima mali patiens, atque inter Gallica pridem.
Fulmina, and Arctoas non been tuta minas:
Tandem pone animos, ac Nostra ass^esce vocari
Ni facias, Ceoinit quae mihi Phoebus, habe.
Alternis vertet te Celta and Teuto ruinis,
Et nifi Pars uni es, Praeda duobus eris.
To Monsieur Favereau, Counselor of the King in his Court of Aids. LETTER
VII.
SIR, He whose Verses you commended, believes upon your word, that he is a
great Poet: but I told him, that your words are always favorable, and that
he should not flatter himself with an approbation which you never denied to
any. He has, since that, showed me other Verses, which he made for M. the
Cardinal, and entreated me, to show you some of the places, which I thought
the most accomplished, but upon this condition Sir, that at least for this
once, you shall be a conscionable Judge, and shall tell us upon your Oath,
whether you think this good, or that bad:

Quid reforam Oceanu^ tibi ne vialentior obstet
Oblitum solitus segnius isse vices?
Et (...) concordes siluisse ad Claffica ventos,
Surgeret ut tacito machina fixa mari.
Machina qua^ vastos Gens sera tulisse Gigantes
Credat in Aequorei Caerula regua Jovis.
Quidreferam Captas primis rumoribus arces,
Castraque nec faciem sustinuisse tuam?
Ne^pe aliquid caeleste tibi est, quod cu^cta vere^tur
Praesentesque trahis semper ad arma Deos.
Non hostem timuere hosts, sed Judice viso,
Horruit ad certam pallida turba necem.
Si pugnas vicisse parum est, etc.
Cernis ut ad subitum conspecti muricis ignem
Depressum attollat Parthenopaa Caput.
Quae quondam vim passa, ferumque exosa c^bile,
Gestit in antiquos Castra redire thoros.
Non animum faedi amplexus, faedaoscula muten^
Sed prior invi^to durat amore fides.
O quoties superos Mortem Manesque rogavit.
Dum fugeret passus Maure superb^.
O quoties voluit fieri vel in aequore rupes!
Frustrarive tuas aquoris unda manus!
Fata obstant, dominu^que imponunt multa queren^
Quo gravior Siculus non fuit ante Cyclops.
Qui dapibus diris, qui sanguine vescitur atro,
Qui formosa sacra polluit ora lue.
Qui furto, non Mart potens etc.
HIc placidis Doris Tellurem amplectitur ulnis,
Ac leviter summas languida mulcet aquas.
Littus Amore calet solo, cui Myrtea sylva,
Sufficit and virides Citria sylva comas.
Quo dulces Zephyro^ animas fragra^tibus um-
Miscet, and Ambrosio tingit odore Venus. (bris
Exul hyems fugit inscopulos, ubi mollia tantum
Frlgora, and ^ivas jussa parare nives.
(...) quid memore^? teneri domus ^urea v^ris
Hic (...), aeternis Ora bent^ ro^is.
Nec steriles ostentat opes, sed Praside Baccho,
Luxuriant pleno Flora Ceresque sinu.
Et dubitat tantae Ludovix accodere doti.
Hectoreis Ludovix jam quoque major avis!
Et Nymphae, ingenuos morientis despicit ignes,
Nec memor est altra quam premit esse suam?
Ru^pe moras Arma^de, haec pars pulcherrima reru^
Te vocat, and segnes increpat usque moras.
Parthenope te maeste vocet etc.
I have some conceit, this last Description will not dislike you, and having
heard say, as well as I, that the Kingdom of Naples is a Paradise inhabited by
Devils; you will find some ^ollish in the fiction of the (...) Nymphe, and
not be troubled with the Encomiums which our Friend affoords the Spaniards.
Naturally he does not much love them; but since the war has been
proclaimed, and that all traffic with them is forbidden, now his nature is
turned into Reason, and now he says, He should not think (...), a true
Frenchman, or a good Citizen, if he should hold intelligence, so much as with
Seneca; much less (as you may perceive by the Character of his phrase) with
(...); whom Scaliger has handled so hardly, or with another of that Country,
of whom he is continually repeating these words, which I think fit to let you
hear: Hispani Poetae and Romani Sermonis Elegantiam contaminarunt, and cum
instatum quoddam and ^dum, and Gentis suae morib^ congruens inve^issent
Orationis genus, (...) Exemplo suo caeteros, a recta ill a and in qua,
praecipua Poetarum sita (...) est, imitation^ naturae. Itaque fore post Augusti
tempora, ut quisque max^ versum instaverat, sen^ (...) cont^rferat, eo denique
modo locutus fuerat, quo nemo serio soleret loqui, it a in pretio haberi
caepit. Quinetiam fucatus ille splendour, and adulterina Eloquentiae species,
ita nonnullorum qui verae Eloquentiae gustum non habent, ^vit animos, ut his
quoque temporibus extiterint Hispani Duo, quorum alter, Lucanum Virgilio, alter
Martialem Catullo, anteponere veritus non est. Quorum abutroque ita diss^, and
siquis Deus potestatem mihi optionemque faciat etc. You see by this, that the
Spaniards have marred all in the world, and have always been the corrupters
of all good things. It is not the Politics only, that they have spoiled,
making it an Art of wickedness, and a science of Piracie; but they have done
as much hurt to other inferior knowledges, and have (...) no kindlier with the
servants, than with the Mistress. It is they that brought in the first haerefie,
and the first novelties in the Latin Eloquence. It is they that have pi^
quarrels with Cicero and Virgill; that have made Books with nothing but
Antitheses, and as one should make Feasts with nothing but Salt and Vinegar. I
make you report of a Poets opinion, who requires yours upon the fragments I
send you, where his desire is, to come as near as might be to that ancient
grace, which was to be seen in the Roman writings, till such time as the
plaster and dawbings of the Spaniards, had marred their purity. I entreat you
to send him your judgment of it; and in the mean time, will assure you, that
he is as much as I can be

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. September. 1635.
Another to him. LETTER VIII.
SIR, I am your vexation in ordinary, and because you have not rejected my
first importunities, you have given me encouragement to continue them still.
He that brings you this Letter, believes that my commendation would do him no
hurt with you; and I believe so too; and seeing his interests are very dear
unto me, I earnestly entreat you, to let him find that our common belief is
not ill grounded. The savours you do me, are so much the more pure, in that
they look for no requital, and that you have no friends that have suits at
Balzac. You therefore may work, as your custom is, by the only motions of
your virtue; and as it is fit, you should be more ambitious than I, so you must
be content, to leave me all the profit of our friendship, and keep for your
self all the glory. I expect an answer out of Holland, where, I doubt not, but
your work is in high esteem, as well for the merit of the matter, as for the
excellency of the form: I mean, as well for that it is the Production of a
great Poet, as for that it is the action of a good Citizen. As soon as I hear
news from thence, I will acquaint you with it; and entreat this favor from
you, that you will believe I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 10. June, 1635.
To Monsieur Girard, Secretary to M. the Duke D'Espernon. LETTER IX.
SIR, your last Letters have exceedingly comforted me, and you have such
things for me, that they make me forgetful of all my miseries. With such a
friendship, I can mock at ill fortune, and it makes me taste contentments,
which good fortune knows not of. It is true, that your absence is a perpetual
cooling Card to my joy; and possessing you but in spirit, it requires a very
strong imagination, to desire nothing else. Shall we never come to be Citizens
of one City? Never to be Hermits in the same Desert? Shall my Counsel be
always twenty miles from me? and must I be always forced to pass two Seas to
fetch it when I need it? I hope your justice will do me reason, and that
Heaven will at last hear the most ardent of all my prayers; but in the mean
time, whilst I stay waiting for so perfect a contentment, I would be glad to
have of it, now and then, some little taste: which, if it be not in your power
to give me; at least lend it me for some few days, and come and sit as
supreme President, over both my French, and Latin. I promise you, I will never
appeal from you to any other; only for this once, give me leave to tell you,
that the word Ludovix, which you blame as too new, seems to me a more
Poetical and pleasing word, than either the Aloysius of the Italians, or our
Ludovicus; and besides, It savours of the Antiquity of our Nation; and of the
first language of the Gauls; witness these words, Ambiorix, Eporedorix,
Orgetorix, Vercingetorix, etc. In which you see the Analogy to be plain; yet
more than this, I have an Authority, which I am sure, you will make
difficulty to allow: you know Monsieur Guyet, is a great Master in this Art;
but perhaps you know not that he has used this very word Ludovix, before I
used it; for I took it from excellent Verses of his:

Non tulit hoc Ludovix, justa puer acer ab ira,
Etpatriae casum sic videamus, ait.
For other matters Sir, you may add to that which was last alleged in the
cause of Madam Gourney, this passage out of the divine Jerusalem, where Aladin
calls Clorinda the Intercessour of Sophronia, and of her lover,

Habbian vita Rispose and libertade
E Nulla a tanto Intercessor si neghi.
I kiss the hands of that fair creature you love, and am with all my soul.

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 20. September. 1635.
To my Lord the Earl of Port. LETTER X.
SIR, I have received a letter from you since your being in England, but not
being able to read the Gentleman's hand that writ it to me, for want of a
decipherer, I have been forced to be uncivil till now, and have therefore not
answered you; because indeed I know not whom to answer: but now, that this
Gentleman (whose name is a mystery in his letters) is by good fortune, come
again into this country, I can by no means suffer him to part without some
testimony of the account I make of your favor, and the desire I have to
preserve it, by all the possible means I can. I will make you Sir, no studied
Protestations, nor send complements to a man that is borne in the Country of
good words, I will only say, there are many respects that make your person
dea^ unto me: and that besides the consideration of your virtue, which gives
me just cause to honor you, that also of the name you bear, and of the rank
you hold, are things that exceed the value of indifferency. I love all them
that love France, and wish well to our great Prince, of whom in truth I have
heard you speak so worthily, that as often as I remember it, it stirs me up
to doing my duty, and to profit by so good an example. If he had been
seconded in Italy, we should have seen all we could have hoped. But God
himself saves none but such as contribute themselves to their salvation.
Saguntum was taken while the Senators were deliberating: and a wisdom that
is too scrupulous, commonly does nothing for fear of doing ill. The most part
of Italians are themselves the workmen, to make their own fetters: they lend
the Spaniard their blood, and their hears, to make a slave of their country,
and are the particides of their mother, of whom they might have been the
redeemers. But of all this, we shall talk more at Paris, if you come thither
this Winter, as I am put in hope you will. In the means time do me the honor
to let me have your love, and to believe me, there is none in the world more
truly than I,

Sir, Yours, etc.
At Balzac, 10 Sept. 1630.
To my Lord the Bishop of Nantes. LETTER XI.
MY Lord, the joy I take in the recoverie of your health, is not yet so pure,
but that it always represents unto me a terrible Image of your last sickness.
The imagination of a danger, though past and gone, yet makes my momorie afraid,
I look upon it rather in safety, than with assurance. We missed the loosing
you but very narrowly: and you were upon the point to leave us Orphans. I
speak it seriously, and without any flattery at all, all the victories we have
gotten, or shall get, would never be able to make us amends for such a loss:
you would have made our conquest turn to mourning: M. the Cardinal would have
found something to complain of in his great felicity, and would have watered
his triumph with his tears. Let it not be Gods will to lay this cross upon
our time: and if it be a cross inevitable, yet let it be deferred to our
posterity. It is necessary the Pho^nix should live out her age, and that the
world should be allowed time for enjoying the possession, and so profitable and
sweet a life as yours. It is true, the world is not worthy of you; but, my
Lord, the world has need of you: your virtue indeed should long since have
been crowned, but that your example is still necessary: and the more happy
ones there be in heaven, the fewer honest ones will be left upon earth. Love
therefore your self a little for our sakes; begin now at last to study your
health, which hitherto you have neglected, and make a difference hereafter
between cold and heat, between good and bad air; between meats that are
sweet, and those that are bitter. Though you take no care of your health for
your own sake, yet you must take care of it for the common good: For, I
beseech you my Lord, tell me, what should become of the cause of the poor?
what of the desolation of widows? what of the innocence of men oppressed? I
speak not of the hope of such as hope for preferment by you: for though I write
to you my Father, and call you Monsieur, -- -- yet I am none of that number. I
desire nothing from you at this time, but that which you may give me without
asking it of another; your love and good will is the only object of my present
passion. I renounce with all my heart, all other things in the world, so I may
keep but this, and shall never complain of my shipwreck, if it leave me so
solid a planke as this to rest upon. Be^ pleased to do me the honor to
believe it, and that I am with all my soul,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 15. June. 1635.
To Monsieur Senne, Theologall of the Church of Saints LETTER XII.
SIR, I have been in ecstasy to hear of your health, and that you keep your
body in that reasonable fullness of flesh, which contributes something to your
gravitie, and adds nothing to your weight. I would not wish you to seek to
abate it, nor long to be like the city and tawnie skins of the first
Christians. For all Tertullians saying, all Saints have not been lean and
melancholic. The last that we have seen, were of your color and (...); and
you do an honor to Divinity, to preach it with a bright visage, representing
in some sort the state of future glory you speak of the people. Monsieur de
-- made me so rich a description of your health, that I could not choose but
begin my letter with this complement. I have seen since Monsieur de -- who
delivered me one from you, and with-it, our friends book, for which I thank
you with all my heart, I have yet perused only some Tracts, which in truth
seem very learned, and are as intelligible as the obscurity of the matter
would well bear. It is true, the Title deceived me; and seeing you will have
me speak freely what I think, I must tell you, I think they are nothing
less than Orations, and that they are (...) (...) be^ read upon a Join
stool, than pronounced at a Tribunal. I had thought to have found in them the
persuasive motives of Orators, in the highest strain of their style, and I
find nothing but the dry doctrine of Philosophers, and of them neither,
nothing but the ordinary language of their precepts: that it makes me think of
these new Companies of soldiers which are levied under the name of Horse, but
are put to serve on foot, when they come to the Army. I say not, it is
necessary to handle school (...) with all the pomp and force of (...), I
only say, that such discourses ought not to be called Panag^rickes, or (...),
and that there is either craft or rashness in this proud ins^iption, which
promises more than a Philosopher can perform. Cicero (...) it of
improprietie, as you shall see at the end of this Letter: and you cannot but
confess unto me, that our friend has mistaken himself two ways: First, to
believe he ought to play the Orator in Divinity: and scondly, to imagine,
that to make Orations with success, he need but to draw forth some (...) out
of Plutarchs; lives, and to allege the so famous Bucephalus, that was broken
by (...) the great. These are ornaments so vulgar and so stale, that to use
them at this day, is rather a mark of Clo^nishnesse, than of neatness. When
fashions are left off in the City, they are then taken up in the Country; and
there are none now but poor Gentlemen, that will offer to wear the massiest
silver lace, when it is once fitterd, or the richest Plush, when it is once
grown thread bare, Both the one and the other have been in fashion, but they
are not so now. They were heretofore novelties, but are now but Rellickes. The
first comparison that was made of the burning of Dianaes Temple, was excellent:
all other since have been but idle. And it is not enough, that the spring from
whence water is drawn, be it self clear, but to draw that which is clear,
it is necessary also that Lawndresses and Passengers have not (...) it. I make
no doubt Sir, but that which you will show me, shall be very choice and
perfect. You are I know, of too dainty a taste to be contented with every
sauce. I am very impatient till I see those rare productions: and I should ere
this have seen them, but that your promises are as deceitful as the Titles of
your Book; which notwithstanding is otherwise full of (...) discourse, and
profound knowledge. It is now four months that I have waited for you, and you
have still continued to wrong me, in continuing to break your word: yet as
much wronged as I am, I leave not to be

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 1. October. 1635.
The Opinion of Cicero concerning the style which Philosophers use intheir
Writings.
LOquuntur Philosophi cum doctis, quorum sedare animos malunt, quam incitare.
Siquidem de rebus pacatis ac minime turbulentis docend cansa, non capiendi
loquuntur, ut in eo ipso, quod delectationem aliquam dicendo aucupentur, plus
nonnullis quam necesse sit, facere videantur. Mollis ergo est eorum or atio and
umbratilis, neque nervos and aculeos oratorios habet. Nec sententijs est, nec
verbis instruct a popularibus, nec junct a numer (...), sed soluta liberius.
Nihil iratum habet, nihil atrox, nihil mirabile, nihil astutum; Casta,
verecunda, incorrupta quodammodo virga Itaque sermo potius quam oration dicitur.
Quanquam enim omnis locutio oration est; tamen unius orationis loc^tio hoc
proprio signata nomine est.

To Mounsieur Granier. LETTER. XIII.
SIR, my persecution should be sweet unto me, if in suffering it, I might have
the happiness to see you; but your absence makes it insupportable: and it were
as good for me to go and be killed in the place where you are, as to come
hither and die with languishing Being here against my mind, I find nothing
that pleases me: and the objects which I beheld before, as the riches of
Nature, I cannot now look upon but with horror, and count them but as the
movables of a Prison. I sigh continually after your Cabinet, which has so
often served for a haven to my tossed spirit: and from whence I have so often
fetched Arms and courage to defend me against Fortune. I am not out of hope to
see it once again, and to sit me down in that green chair, where you know
I have used to be inspired, and foretell things to come, as Sibil did from her
Tryvet. In the mean time I must let the unhappy co^stellation pass away; and
must give place to the choler of heaven. So long Sir, as you vouchsafe to
remember me, and to hold me in the favor of Messieurs du Puy; I shall not want
a good portion of consolation. These are persons that without wearing purple,
or bearing office, are yet illustrious and in Authority, at least in the
reasonable world, and amongst men, that can rightly judge of things. No
employment is so honorable as their Leisure: no ambition so worthily at work,
as their virtue takes it rest. You shall do me a singular favor, to let them
know from me, in how greet (...) I hold them both: and that (...) (...) the
Gallery of Mouns^ (...) (...) better persuaded than I am of their inco^: merit,
I will sometimes expect to hear from you; and will always be with all my
heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 3. Septem. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Brye. LETTER XIV.
SIR, My dear Cousin, I have received three of your Letters, within these
(...) months: the other you speak of, are not yet come to my hands, of which
loss. I am very sensible: for being deprived of your conversation I cannot but
exceedingly esteem of that which (...) it to me. I here oftentimes told you,
that you are naturally eloquent; but yet I must confess you have gotten new
graces, by being in Ciceroes country, and the Air of Rome seems to have
purged your spirit, of all vulgar conceits. Monsieur de -- is in this of my
opinion: and you have written to us such excellent things, that they were able
to comfort us for your absence, if we loved you but a little; but in truth, no
Copy can be so good, as the Original; and if you come not back very shortly,
I could find in (...) heart, to go as far as Navona, to have your company.
Your last Letter renues in me my old loves, and makes me with so much pleasure,
remember the sweetest part of the earth, that I even die with longing, till I
see it again. It is a long time that Italy has had my heart, and that I sigh
after that happy cowardice, with which the valiant reproach the wise. If I
could have lived, as I would my self, I had been a citizen of Rome ever since
the year 1620. and should now enjoy that happiness in possession, which you
but only make me see in Picture, but my ill fortune would not suffer me: she
keeps me in France, to be a continual object of persecution: and though it
be now four years since I left the world, and lost the use of my tongue; yet
hatred and envy follow me in to the woods to trouble my silence; and pursue
me even in Dens and Caves. I must therefore be (...) to go beyond the Alps
to seek a s^ctuary, where I shall be sure to find, at least my old comforter,
who will be pleased to (...), that I am more than any other in the world,

Sir, Your, most humble etc.
At Balzac 10. May. 1635.
To Mounsieur de Silhon. LETTER XVI.
SIR, I have word sent me from Paris, that you make complaints against me: but
being well assured, you have no just cause, I imagine, it is not done in
earnest, but that you take pleasure to give me a false Alarm. Yet I must
confess, this cooling word, I hear spoken, puts me to no little pain: for
though it make me not doubt of the firmness of your affection, yet it makes
me challenge the malice of my Fortune. I have beeue for some time so
unfortunate in friendship; that it seems there needs nothing but pretenses
to rid me of them; the sweetest natures grow sour and bitter against me;
and if this sit hold, I shall have much ado to keep my own brother of my
side. I would like as well, to be a keeper of the Lions, as of such harsh
friends; for though I were more faithful than Pylades and Acates put together;
yet they would find matter of coffeehouse; and my fidelity should be
called dissimulation. I cannot believe that you are of this number; but if you
be, it is time for me to go hide my self in the deserts of Thebai^, and never
seek conversation with men any more. It is my grief and indignation that
write these last words; for my patience is moved with the consideration of the
wrong is done me: and if you should deal as hardly with me as others have
done: It were fit, I should resolve to live no longer in a world, where
goodness and innocence are so cruelly persecuted. These six months, I have
received from you, but only one Letter; to which, I made no answer, because it
was delivered me, but in April: at which time, you sent me word you should be
in France. Since therefore by your own account, you were gone from thence,
before the time I could write unto you; would you, I should have written into
Italy, to Mounsieu^ de Silhon; that was not there? And that I should have
directed my Letters to a name, without either hands or (...) (...) receive and
read them? You are too wise to deal so unreasonably with me; and I should
call your former justice in question, if you take it ill, that I did not
guess, or rather (...) of the stay of your voyage: and yet af^ a (...)
examination of my conscience, I can (...) no other ground for your complaints,
(...) only this: (...) I am ashamed to charge so (...) a spirit as yours with
(...) weak a co^ceit^ I must have had a ^will at command to send of my (...),
and to deliver you my Letters, being so uncertain (...), of the pla^ of your
(...), and in truth, if I had had such a messenger, I had soo^ thanked you,
then I do, for your excellent (...): and should not all thi^ while, have kept
within the secret of my heart, the just (...) it des^rves. It has taugh^ me
Sir, an (...) number of good Maxims; the style pleases me exceedingly, and I
see in it both force and beauty, thorough all the passages, even that passage
which did not so fully please me, yet has as fully satisfied me, as the rest
of the work: and though of my self I be blind in the knowledge of holy
things, yet the luster of your expressing, and the facility of your method
illuminate my ^ight. When my health shall give me leave to go from hence, I
will then for your gold bring you copper, and will receive your corrections and
advise, with as much reverence and submission, as any Novice: but in the mean
time, I cannot choose but put my hand to my wound, and require you to give a
reason of your doing. I know not from whence should come this coldness in you;
seeing for my self, I am all on fire: nor how, you, with your great wisdom
should be altered and grown another than, seeing I continue still the same,
with nothing but my common sense. Great spirits are above these petty
suspicions which move the vulgar: and I wonder you could conceive ill of my
affection, knowing how well you had preserved your own. If it be the jealousse
of eloquence that provokes you; I am willing with all my heart, to leave you
all the pretensions I can have to it; and if you please, I will make you a
Surrender before witness. Consider me therefore, rather as your ^ower, who is
willing to (...) your troop, then as your rival to strive (...) prece^ence.
Give me leave to live: a man that cannot be lost, what neligence be used in
keeping me; and remember that the least respected of all my friends is much
dearer to me, than all Sciences or all Books. Yet such is my unhappiness,
that few of them return me the like, but seem rather they would make a
benefit, of my pains and sorrows. Because they see I am persecuted, they will
make every the least courtesy they do me to be of great value, and set an
excessive price upon their friendship, because they know I stand in need of
it. But I desire them, and you also to take notice, that my friendship was
never grounded upon any interest; but my love is ever without any mercenary
design, or hope of benefit. If they be not willing to embroile themselves in
my affairs, I would have them know, I am as unwilling as they, they should:
and if they be not strong enough, to defend the truth in public; and when it
is opposed; at least let them not disavow it, when they are in place of safety;
let them not deny their friend when the storm is over, and that there is no
longer any danger in confessing him. You saw my heart, the first time you saw
my face; you were at that time my Confessor; and I have not a sin that is
hidden from you. I conceive you are too generous to make advantage of this
excess of freeness you find in me; and I do not think you so subtle, that
you would make a show of discontent, for fear least I should begin first.
These are subtilties indeed of the country from whence you come: but in my
opinion very remote from your natural disposition: and you need not make
complaints of me, to prevent the complaints I might else make of you. It is
certain, that if I had not equity enough to excuse my friends for things they
were not able to perform; I might then perhaps have color to complain they
performed not their promise: but I am one, that know there happen a thousand
impediments which hinder a man from keeping his word, and that every thing that
is promised and not done, is not presently a violating of faith, or a breaking
of promise. Some have labored to persuade me, that --: but I never believed
any such thing, and I could never imagine that you would go about to build
your reputation upon the ruins of the reputation of your friend. If any shall
make use of such like artifices, to do ill offices between you and me: I
earnestly entreat you to make use of the like remedies, to preserve your
opinions sound, and not to suffer your judgment to be corrupted. I take God to
witness, there is nothing in the world more dear unto me then your
friendship; I make public and open profession of honoring you: I highly
esteem a number of eminent qualities in you, both Moral and Intellectual; I
have oftentimes shed tears, when I read in your Letters of your griefs; all
this, me thinks should deserve a little affection, and make the Fathers
themselves that are my adversaries, not take it ill that you should love me;
especially when they shall know, that I passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 8. Feb. 1631.
To Mounsieur de Saint Mart. LETTER XVII.
SIR, I am paid for my pains before hand, and look for no greater recompense
than you have already made me. My ambition should be very excessive, if it
were not fully satisfied with your excellent Verses: and if I did not think my
self happy to be honored by a hand, which crowns none but Sovereign heads,
and travells not, but about triumphall Arcks, and public Monuments. I have
long since known, that all excellent things grow in your Garden; and that the
Latin eloquence, which is but borrowed by others; and a stranger every where
else; ought with you to be accounted as your patrimony: but I knew not till
now, that this rare quality, is accompanied with so perfect a courtesy; and
that a man so worthy of his name, and that adds new glory to that of the great
Scavola, could admire any other men's wonders, besides his own. I will do all
that possibly I can, to deserve this your favorable judgment, and not to make
you sorry for being deceived to my advantage: but howsoever, if I be not able
to preserve your good opinion by my merit; I hope at least to merit your favor
by my affection, and to make you see that I truly am,

Your, etc.
At Balzac. 2. Sept. 1630.
To Mounsieur D'Argenton Counselor of the King, and Master of Requests in
Ordinary. LETTER XVIII.
SIR, having taken the pains that I have done, I cannot altogether disvalue my
work; yet I am not a little glad to be confirmed in my opinion by a man of
your worth: and that my labor is not unpleasing to the soundest judgments.
The second censure you make of it, assures me of the integrity of the first;
seeing I should be too presumptuous to believe, you could be deceived twice
together. But let us stay there, I beseech you; and think not, I will ever
entertain the vanity you put upon me. I neither pretend to instruct the
world, nor take upon me to teach you, in any thing: it is enough for me, that I
can find wisemen some recreation; and can lay things beforeyour eyes, which
you know already better than my self. I may perhaps be some help to your
memory, and refresh your old Ideas; but to add any thing to your knowledge,
and impart to you any new Doctrine, this requires qualities that are not to be
found in me. I rather hope to be much bettered in knowledge by you; and make
account, to account you hereafter, for one of my Oracles. Prepare your self
therefore to be persecuted with Questions, and look to receive importunities
from me in ordinary. Thus I use my friends when they are abler men than my
self; and this advantage which is not great, is accompanied with this
inconvenience, which is not small. You shall begin to find it, at our next
meeting: but in the mean time, I entreat you to believe, that what badde
design soever I have against you, yet I remain perfectly to be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 17. Sept. 1631.
To the most Reverend Father, Leon, Preacher of the Carmelites. LETTER XIX.
SIR, you do me too much good at once: your friendship is of great worth being
alone; and you send it to me accompanied. It brings with it an infinite number
of excellent things, and resembles that happy River which leaves plenty in all
places where it passes. The Present I have received, comes from such a
fruitful Vine: it is not a vain show of magnificence, which gives only a
light satisfaction to the eyes; but I find it essential and solid; and any
spirit that is capable of speculation, may well find nourishment enough in the
juice only of your Preface. I will not take upon me any more, though you
solicit me to do it; and instead of giving my advice, would have me, I
should pronounce a Decree. Take heed my good Father, what you say; and
consider what a goodly thing it would be to raise my Village into a Parliament,
and make appeals, from Paris to Balzac. Though you had humility enough to
submit to an unlawful Magistrate: yet I have not presumption enough to intrude
upon an unlawful charge: Remember your self besides, that your Book is dated
from Mount Carmell, which is to say, out of our jurisdiction, and that Decrees
are of no force, where time out of mind, there have been Oracles. You know
what Suetonius says of it, in the life of Uespatian, he makes no bones to make
a God of a Mountain. I like not the boldness of such Metamorphoses: yet I am
not ignorant, how far the force of pletie may reach; and knowing it has
right to remove Mountains, I doubt not but Carmell at this day may be in
France; and that upon a place so holy and so high, there may descend more grace
and light from heaven, than there ascends ignorance and vapors from the earth.
Accept from me this true confession I make unto you, and dispense with me for
that sovereign judgment you require of me: Though I am not willing to be your
President, yet I am not the less,

My most Reverend Father; Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. April 1635.
To Mounsieur Chaplain. LETTER XX.
SIR, I have now these three weeke^s taken mine ease, in spite of my self;
and one of my feet, which I have not very free, keeps me in my bed, with more
inconvenience than pain. Heretofore it has put me to torture; and therefore
I count it now a favor, that it only keeps me in prison, which I sweeten as
well as I can, with my. Books and my friends. You think you contribute
nothing to the comfort I receive; but I assure you, the best part of it comes
from you: and nothing comforts me so much for the fair days I lose, as that
excellent Ode you sent me: I am even ravished with every part of it; the choice
and marshalling of the words; the structure and harmony of the composition; the
modest greatness of the conceits; the force which savoursnot of any violence;
all these are worthy to be ranked with the best Antiquity. In some places you
do not only touch me, but touch me to the quick: the agitation of the Poet,
is transferred upon the reader; and no Trumpe^ makes so loud, and silver a
sound, as your Harp does:

Quand la Revolte dans son fort
Par une affreuse and longue more
(...) cherement l'usure de ses crimes:
Et que ses bo^lev ars en fin assuje^
Contre les appareils des arms legitimes
Implorerent en vain le secours de Theti^.
Ils decriuent l'horrible pas,
O^ par cent visibiles tr^pas
On crut de nostre Camp retard^ la valla^:
Et figurent encore au milieu de nos rangs
Themis qui te preta sonfer and sa ballo^,
Affin de decider ces fameux differens.
Ils chantent l'effroyable foudre
Qui d'vn mo^ement si so^dain,
Partit de ta puissante main,
Pour mettre Pegnerol en poudre.
Ils disent que tes bataillons
Comme autant depais tourbillons
Ebranlerent ce Roc jusques dans ses racines,
Que mesme le vaincu t'eut pour liberateur,
Et que tu luy batis sur ses propres ruins,
Un rampart eternel contre l'vsurpateur.
Either I know not my self in Verse; or certainly these Verses will live to
the (...) posterity: they will be alleged for proof and testimony in the
counsels of the last Kings that shall reign upon earth; and perhaps too, they
shall serve for a Law, and for a Decree, as well as Homers Verses did; by the
authority whereof a great war that was kindling between the Seigneury of
Megara and Athens was reconciled. I know for my self, I shall never stay till
your death, for putting you in the number of my Authors: and as often as in my
presence, there shall be speaking of the siege of Rochell; of the forcing of
Suza; of the taking and keeping of Pigneroll; so often shall I allege the
divine Verses you have written of them: and these also, which I lay not less
carefully up in my memory,

Ils disent que les Immortels
De leur culte and de leurs Autels
Ne doiuent qu'a tes soins la pomp renaissante,
Et que ta preuoyance and ton Authorite
Sont les deux fors Appuis don't l'Europe tre^blante
Soutient and raffermit sa foible liberte.
Dans un paisible mouuement
Tu t'eleues au Firmament,
Et laisses contre toy murmurer sur la terre.
Ainsi le haut Olympe a son pied sablonneux
Laisse fumer la foudre, and gronder le Tonnerre,
Et guard son sommet tranquille and lumineux.
And these other, which to him, to whom you address them are as much worth as
a triumpha^ Ar^h:

Ton courage aux Monstres fatal,
Est tousiours plus fort que le mal.
Sur le solid honneur sa base est estabile:
Le droit and laraison l'accompaguent tousiours,
Et sans que sa vigueur soit jamais affoiblie,
Qu'ou cede ou qu'ou resist, il va d'un mesme course.
And these other that are so sage and moral.

L'or pour luy cesse d'estre un metal pretieux,
La beauty perissable est un bien qu'il mospuso:
Pour l'un il est sans mains, and pour l autre sans yeux.
And these other that are so noble and so Poetical;

Cepandant que la Lune accomptissant son course
Dessus un char d'argent enuironne d'estoiles
Dans le sombre univers represente le course.
And now after all this; tell me, if I have not profited by my reading, and
have not made good use of your presents. I should quickly grow rich, if you
would send me such presents often; but this is too inordinate a desire, I must
be content with one croppe in a year; and I may very well entertain my self
a long time, with that you have already sent me, for which I thank you with
all my heart, and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 12. July 1633.
To Mounsieur Bonnaud, Counselor in Ordinary to my Lord the Prince. LETTER XXI.
SIR, I acknowledge nothing in your Verses due to me but only my name, all the
rest belongs to some body else; and is unfitter for me, than a Crown for a
private man. I cannot therefore value my self the more, for having a thing I
cannot use; nor is it fit I should put on Ornaments, which being as unfit for
me, as in themselves they are rich, would disguise me rather, than adorn me. A
courtier would complain that you mock him; Et que vous en faites une piece, A
Doctor would say, you undertake a Paradox, and try the strength of your wit,
upon the noveltie of an irregular subject. I think, I must my self be of this
opinion; and charge you Sir, with abusing Poetry; and for choosing an incredible
thing to make it believed. Nevertheless, seeing the Philosopher Favorinus
took upon him to praise a feavour: and the Romans adored it: I wonder not at
your design; for I perceive, there is nothing so bad of which may not be
spoken some good; and whereof, Quelques vus n'ayent Chaume le feste. After this
extravagant Encomium, and this ridiculous Temple; you might do well to take my
miseries too, and consecrate them in your stances, and take me too, and make me
a thing adoreable and divine: for they are but the sports of your wit; which
delight, though they do not persuade and amuse with pleasure, because they are
witty; but do not deceive me because I know their craft. For the assurance you
give me by your Letter of your friendship: I am infinitely beholding to you,
and make account to reap no small benefit by it, for having a soul as you
have, full of virtue, you make me a Present that is invaluable, to bring me in
to so worthy a possession: and whilst you offer me ^eenesse and fi^elity, you
offer me the two greatest rarities this age affords. I believe you speak more
seriously in Prose than you do in Verse; and that you are content to be a
Poet, but have no meaning to be a Sophister. I likewise entreare you to
believe, that the least word I speak, is accompanied with a Religion, which I
never violate; and that there is nothing more true, than the promise I here
seal you, most perfectly to be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 6. October. 1635.
To Mounsieur Souchote. LETTER XXII.
SIR, by your reckoning you have written to me thrice for nothing, when indeed
I knew not of your first Letters, but by your last: if I had received them, you
may be sure I should have answered them; for though I be not very regular in
observing compliments, yet I am not so negligent of necessary duties, that I
should commit so many faults together. How profound soever my slumber be; yet I
awake presently, as soon as I am once stirred; and specially when it is by so
dear a name, and by so pleasing a voice as yours is. Never therefore require
me to give it in charge to some other, to let you hear from me; such a request
would be an offense to our friendship, an action fitter for a Tyrant than a
Citizen: it were to take me for the great Mogull, who speaks to none but by an
Interpreter. I like not this savage stateliness; it is far from me to use so
little civilitie toward men of your worth: when it is I, that am beholding to
you; I pray let it not be my groom that shall thank you for it. I will take
the pains my self to assure you I am wholly yours; and whereas, I did not bid
you farewell at my going from Pari^; you must not take it for an argument of
slighting your person; but for an effect of the liberty I presume of, and of
the renouncing I have vowed to all vain ceremonies. They that are my friends
give me this leave; and you are too well acquainted with the soliditie of
things, to ground your judgment upon apparances; neither do I think you will
require them of me, who am as bad a courtier, as I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 20. July 1630.
To Mounsieur Tissandier. LETTER XXIII.
SIR, you shall receive by this bearer the rest of the works of --: or to
speak more properly, the continuation of his Follies. They are now as public;
as those Du grand preuost divine, que vous auez visit autres fois dans les fame
uses petites maisons. He uses me still with the same pride and insolency he
was wont: and you would think that he were at the top of the Empyriall
heaven, and I at the bottom of hell; so far he takes himself to be above
me: but I doubt not, ere long, his pride shall be abated, and his insolency
mortified. He shall shortly be made to see, that he is not so great a man as he
thinks himself; and if he have in him but one spark of natural justice;
he shall confess he has triumphed without cause, and must be feign to give
up all the glory he has gotten unlawfully:

Turno tempus erit magno cum optaverit (...)
Intactum Pallanta:
Mounsieur de --, is still your perfect friend, and he never writes to me, but
he speaks of you. He is at this present at Venice, where he meditates quietly
the agitation of all the world besides; and where he enjoyes the honest
pleasures which Italy affoords to speculative Philosophers. But Sir, what mean
you by speaking of your tears; and of the request you make unto me? Do you
not mock me, when you pray me to comfort you for the death of your
Grandfather; who had lived to see so many Families, so many Sects, so many
Nations, both to be borne and die: a man as old as Here^ it self: the League
was younger than he; which when the Cardinal of Lorraine first conceived; he
caused a Book to be printed, wherein he advertized France of the conception
of this Monster. You weep therefore for the losses of another age; it is
Anchyses or Laertes you weep for; at least it is for a man who did but suffer
life, and was in a continual combat with death. He should long ago have bin
one of the Church Triumphant, and therefore you ought to have been prepared
for either the loss, or the gain that you have made? Mounsieur (...) was not
of your humor; I send you one of his Letters, where you shall see, he was as
much troubled to comfort himself for the life of two Grandmothers that would
not die, as he was for the death of a brother that died too soon. I commend
your good nature; but I like not your Lamentations; which should indeed, do
him you sorrow for, great wrong, if they should raise him again to be in the
state in which you lost him. It may suffice to tell you, that he is much
happier than I; for he sleeps, and I wake; and he has no more commerce with
men unreasonable and inhumane, and that are but Wolfes to one another. You know
I have cause enough to speak thus; but out of this number, I except certain
choice persons; and particularly your self, whom I know to be virtuous; and
whose I am,

Sir, Most humble, etc.
At Paris, 3. December, 1628.
The Letter of Peter Bembo, to Hercules Strotius.
AVias ambas meas, effoetas deplorat as que faeminas, and jam prope centum
annorun mulieres, mihifata reliquerunt; unicum fratrem meum, juvenem ac
florentem abstulerunt, spem and solatiamea. Quamobrem, quo in ^rore sim, facile
potes existimare. Heu me miserum: Vale;

Id. Ian. 1504. Venetijs.
Another to him. LETTER XXIV.
SIR, if it had not been for the indisposition of my body; I had not stayed so
many days from thanking you for your many courtesies; but for these two
months I have not stirred from my bed; so cruelly handled with the Sciatica,
that it has taken from me all the functions of my spirit, and made me utterly
uncapeable of any cenversation: otherwise you may be sure I should not
voluntarily have deprived my self of the greatest contentment I can have, when
I have not your company: and that I should not have received three Letters
from you, without making you three Answers. Now that I have gotten some quiet
moments from the violence of my torture; and that my pain is turned into
lamenesse: I cannot choose but take you in hand, and tell you, in the first
place, that you are an ungrateful man, to leave our Muses, and follow some of
their sisters, that are neither so fair, nor so worthy of your affection. I
entreat you to believe, it is a temptation your evil Angel has cast upon
you; and that you ought to reject it, as the counsel of an enemy. Things are
not now to begin; it is no time now to deliberate; you are gone too far in
the good way to look back, and to be unwilling to finish that little which
remains. To leave eloquence for the Mathematickes; is to refuse a Mistress of
eighteen year old, and to fall in love with an old woman. God keep you from
this unhappiness, and inspire you with better thoughts, than those that have
carried you to this desire of change. It would be a disloyalty, I should never
pardon you; but should blame you for it as long as I live. For making that
reckoning of you as I do; and expecting great matters from you: it were an
infinite wrong you should do, to make me lose the most pleasing of all my
hopes. I therefore by all means entreat you to persevere in your first
design, and to resolve upon a voyage of 3. months, to come and be reconciled
to her whom you have offended, and to make her a public satisfaction by the
edition of your writings, by which it will plainly enough be seen, the great
favors she has done you. And for my part, I promise you a chamber, where you
shall have the prospect of a garden twelve miles long; and so you shall be at
once, both in the city, and in the country. Besides, I bind my self to set
before your Book an Advertisement to the Reader, to the end that no man may be
ignorant of the part I bear, in that which concerns you. Consider whether you
like of these conditions, and whether you have courage enough to come and lodge
Au Pre aux Clerks: where I will wait for you, without any design of knowing,
either what you mean, or what you mean to do. You shall be sure Sir, to have
there admirable visions, and shall meditate nothing but with success. And in
truth, seeing the least motion of your spirit, puts me into ecstasy; what will
it be, when you shall employ your whole forces? And if your conceits be so
just, and so well governed, in the midst of confusion, and unseasonable
disturbances: what a man will you be, when you shall be at leisure, and have
the liberty which now you want? Take my word for it, you need not fear the
censure of the world; I Will undertake, you shall have the approbation of all
honest peoples provided, that you make a truce with your Mathematics, and
never intricate your brains with that melancholicke and doting Science, which
cost Archimedes his life; at least, before you cast your self upon such high
and sublime speculations, it is fit you should get you credit by exercises that
are more sweet and popular. And now Sir, this is all you are like to have at
this time, from my Sciatica, that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 23. March 1628.
Another to him. LETTER XXV.
SIR, I do but now receive your Letter of the twelfth of this Month, which
confirms me in the opinion I have always had; that my interests are as dear
unto you as your own. To compliment with you for this, would be to thank you
for being good, as much as to say for being your self; It is much better to
return you friendship for friendship, then to pay you with unprofitable words.
In a word Sir, I make profession to be an honest man, and therefore all the
thankfulness that can be desired from a person obliged you may expect from
me. As concerning -- -- I assure you I wish him no ill, because I conceive he
has done me none; it is sufficient for me that my friends have no good
opinion of his opinions; and that his own friends begin to take notice of
his false dealing. In all this there is nothing either new or strange; I am not
the first innocent that have been persecuted in the world, and if I could not
bear detraction and slander, I should be more dainty then Princes, and their
principal officers are, who forbear not to do well, though for their well
doing they be evil spoken of; the best and soundest part is of my side, I want
no protector either Males or Females, and if I would make use of all my
advantages, I could oppose Doctor to Doctor, and Gown to Gown;

Fratribus and fratres, and claustra minantia Claustris.
But it is fit sometimes to make spare of ones forces, and to restrain
resentment within less bounds then justice allows. The Prince you desire to
hear of, is yet in the Idea of the king his father, far from coming as yet
to Paris or Thoulouze; for my self I am always blocked up by my 'Sciatica,
and I think all the storms of the middle region of the air fall down upon
my unhappy legs; but it is you that will bring me health and fair weather,
and your presence will work that miracle which I expect from Mounsieur de
L'orme; come therefore I entreat you speedily, and suffer not a man to die for
want of succor, who passionately is,

Sir Your, etc.
At Paris 30. March, 1628.
To my Lord, the Duke of Valette. LETTER XXVI.
SIR, it greeves me much that the first Letter you see of mine, should not be
pure and free from all my interests, and that in stead of intertaining you with
matters of weight and proportionable to your spirit, I should bring it down to
the petty affairs of a private man; yet I cannot believe that you being all
gracious and all generous as you are, will think any occasion of doing good
unworthy of you, but that your virtue in this does imitate the supreme, which
is never so busy in governing of heaven and the other nobler parts of the
world, but that he takes care as well for governing the meanest of all his
creatures. I humbly beseech your Lordship to consider me in this last quality;
and if it be no incivilitie to make such a request, that you will undertake
the business I present unto you, but as a disburthening you of some more
weighty; if it be not that my unfortunatenesse makes the easiest that are
become unpossible, I see no reason you need to employ your whole forces about
this matter; there needs no more but only the motion of your will, and a light
impression of your credit, with -- -- to give it all the soliditie and luster I
desire. I should not seem to understand the terms of the last Letter he did
me the honor to write unto me; if I had not yet some little hope left, and a
kind of satisfaction in my own conscience. Yet I allege to him no merit of
my part, but much generousnesse of his, nor speak of any services of mine to
recompense him, but of his goodness that prevents them, and subjects not it
self to the rigours of ordinary justice; This my Lord is all the right I
allege for my self, and all the title upon which I ground my pretensions; but
now I leave following it my self, and put it wholly into your hands; a place
perhaps to which my ill fortune her self will bear a respect; but if she
shall be opposite to your desire, and prevail above your favor, yet at least
I shall thereby know the force of destiny to which all other forces give place,
and which cannot be mastered by any force, nor corrected by any industry; but
yet it shall not hinder me from resting well satisfied, seeing I shall in this
receive much more from you then I am denied by him, if I hold any part in your
grace and favor, which is already my comfort against whatsoever ill success
can happen. It suffices me to be happy with this kind of happiness, which is
more dear to me than all the happiness the Court can give me, being a man no
more ambitious then I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. December. 1634.
To my Lord, the Bishop of Poitiers. LETTER XXVII.
MY Lord, although Mounsieur de -- has promised me to give you assurance of
the continuation of my service, yet I cannot forbear to add these few lines
to his testimony, and to tell you that which I tell to all the world that your
virtue is a transcendent far above the abilities and carriage of our age. It
is a match for antiquity in its greatest pureness and severitie. When the
Camilli and the Scipioes were not in employment, they reposed themselves and
took their ease as you do; and when I consider sometimes the sweete^ life you
lead at Dissay, I conclude that all the employments of the Palace, and all
the intricacies of the Court are not worth one moment of a wise man's idleness.
It is well known that from your childhood you have despised vanity even in
her kingdom, and that in an air where she had attractives able to draw the
oldest and most reluctant spirits. All the pomp of Rome has not so much as
given you one temptation; and you are so confirmed in a generous contempt, that
if good Fortune her self should come to look you out, you would scarce go
out of your Closet to meet her in your Chamber. This is that I make such
reckoning of in your Lordship, and which I prefer before all your other
qualities; for those how great soever they be, are yet but such as are common
with many base and mercenarie Doctors, where as this force and courage are
things that cannot be acquired in the noise and dust of Schools. You found
not these excellent qualities in the Vatican Library, nor yet got them by
reading of old Manuscripts; you owe them indeed to Mounsieur your deceased
father, that true Knight without spot or wrinckle; equally skillful in the art
of war, and in affairs of peace, and that was the Heroes of Muret, of
Scaliger, and of Saint Mart. I propose not a less object for my worship then
they did, neither indeed is it less, or less religious then theirs was; and
though you did not love me as you do, and though you should denounce war
against me, and become head of a faction to seek my ruin, yet I should not
for all that forbear to revere so rare a virtue as yours is, but should still
remain,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. May, 1630.
To Mounsieur Guyet. LETTER XXVIII.
SIR, I fear not much to lose a thing I esteem but little, but holding your
friendship in that account I do, if I should not have it, I should never see
day of comfort more; you must not therefore think it strange that I was moved
with the Alarm that was given me, for though I know my self to be innocent,
yet my unfortunatenesse is such that I conceive any bad news to be no more
then my due. Now that Mounsieur de -- -- has quieted the agitation of my
mind, and has assured me of your love, I cannot forbear to signify unto you
the joy I take, telling you wit tall that so I may preserve a friend of your
merit and worth, I do not greatly care for losing him that will leave me.
There is little to be seen amongst men but malice and weakness, and even of
good men the greatest part is scarce sound; there is a cause why a firm and
constant spirit as yours is, is of wonderful use in society, 'and it is no
small benefit to them that are wearied and overtoyled as I am, to have a person
to rest upon, that cannot fall. There is need of courage to maintain a
friendship, and indeed of prudence to perform the meanest duty of life; it is
nothing worth to have a sound will, if the understanding be defective, our --
does a great matter, to make vows and sacrifices: Nil veta furentem, Nil
delubrajuvant, he complains without cause upon his tax and other inferior
matters, this is to accuse innocents: the evil no doubt comes from a higher
place, and it is the brain that is cause of all the disorder. The knowledge I
have hereof makes me have compassion of him, and excuse in a Doctor of three
score years old, those base shifting tricks that are not pardonable in a
Scholar of eighteen. Any man but my self would call his action a cowardice
and a treason; but I love to sweeten my grief as much as I can. I cannot
become an enemy at an instant, and pass from one extremity to another, without
making a little stay by the way. I honor still the memory of our former
friendship, and cannot wish ill to a man to whom I have once wished well; but
this is too much, I to complain and you to quarrel; do me this favor I
bese^ you to make choice of something in your study for a consolation of my
solitude. I have already the (...) of Mounsieur the Admiral de la Volet, but I
would feign have the Epitaph of my Lady the Duchess of Esper^, and those
admirable Elegies you showed me once; In quibus (...) es Tibullo ^milis quam
Tubullus sibi; I entreat you to deliver them to Mounsieur -- who will see them
safely delivered to me; if you please we will use him hereafter as our common
correspondent, who knowing me to the very bottom of my heart, will, I doubt
not most willingly add his testimony to my protestations, that I truly am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 25. Septem. 1630.
To Mounsieur de L'orme, Physician in ordinary to the King, and Treasurer of
France at Bordeaux. LETTER XXIX.
SIR, it is not now only that I make a benefit of your friendship, I have had
profit by it a long time, and you have often bin my advocate with so great
force, and so good success, that they who had before condemned me, were glad
to revoke their sentence as soon as they heard you speak yet all this while
you did but only speak well of me, now you begin to do well for me; it is
you whom this year I may thank for my pension. Without you Sir my warrant
would never have persuaded my partner, it would presently have been rejected,
and he still have continued einexorable. But it must be confessed there is no
wild beast but you can tame, no matter so bad but you can make good; as you
heal maladies that are incurable, so you prevail in causes that are
desperate, and if you find never so little life and common sense in a man, you
are able to restore him to perfect health, and make him become a reasonable
man. I desire not to have the matter in any better terms then you have set it,
I am glad I shall not need to invocate M. the Cardinal for my dispatch, and
that Mounsieur -- has promised not to fail to pay me in September. If he
should pay it sooner, I should be feign to desire you this favor, to keep it
for me till that time. Now I only entreat you, to draw from him a valuable
assurance of it, and for so many favour's and courtesies done me, I shall
present you with something not altogether so bad as those I have already showed
you; and seeing one cannot be called valiant for having the better of a
coward, neither can I be accused of vanity, for saying I have exceeded my
self. I am therefore bold to let my Letter tell you thus much, that if my
false Pearls, and my counterfeit Diamonds have heretofore deceived you, I do
not think that the show I shall make you of my new wares will use you any
better. Yet my meaning is not to preoccupate your judgment, who neither of my
felfe not of my writings will have any other opinion then what you shall please
to allow me. Since the time I have wanted the honor of seeing you; I have made
a great progress in the virtue of humility, for I am now proud of nothing but
of my friends affections; Let me therefore never want yours, I entreat you,
as you may believe, I will all my life, most passionately be,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 8. December. 1629.
To my Lord -- -- LETTER XXX.
MY Lord, I hope you will not take it ill, that I put you in mind of a man, to
whom you have heretofore made demonstration of your love; and that after a long
intermission of these petty duties which are then troublesome when they are
frequent, you will give me leave to tell you, that I have indeed omitted
them, but more by discretion than by negligence. I know Sir, you have no time
to lose; and to put you to the reading of unprofitable words, what were it; but
to show an ignorance, how much the King imployes you, and how much the State
needs you? It is therefore the respect I bear to your continual employments,
that has caused my ^lence; and I should be very absurd, if in the assiduitie
of your cares, I should present you with little pleasing amusements; and should
look for an answer to some poor compliment, when you have so many
commandments of importance: and so many orders of necessity to deliver forth.
It is enough for me that you do me the honor to cast your eyes upon the
protestation I make you; that in all the extent of your command, there is not a
soul more submisse, nor more desirous to bear your yoke, then mine is; and
that as much, as any in the world, I am,

My Lord, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 10. Aug. 1630.
To Mounsieur Senne, Theologall of the Church of Saints. LETTER XXXI.
SIR, you need not wonder to see your name in the Book I fond you: Lovers you
know, leave marks of their passion; and if they were able, would fill the
whole earth with their Ciphers and devises. It is a custom as ancient as the
world, for with that began writing also (...) and at first, for want of
paper, men graved the names of those they loved, upon the ba^ of tree^. If any
man wonder, I should be in love with a Preacher; why wonders he not at that
Roman, of whom a Grecian said, that he was not only in love with Cato, but
was enchanted with him? You have done as much to other^ in this country; and I
have as many Rivalls as you have auditors. Yet there is not the same Object of
all our affections: they run after your words, and hang at your mouth: but I
go further, and discover in your heart, that which is better than your
eloquence. I could easily resist your Figures and your Arguments; but your
goodness and your freeness take me captive presently: I therefere give you
the title of a perfect friend in your Encomium: because I account this, a more
worthy quality, than to be a perfect Orator: and because I make most
reckoning of that virtue in a man, which humane society has most neeede of.
For other matters, Remember your self, in what terms I speak of the
business you write of; and that only to obey you. I have been contented to
alter my opinion. I was well assured, the enterprise would never take effect;
but I thought it better to fail by consenting than by obsti^acie, and rather
to take a repulse, than not to take your counsel. I have known along time that
fortune means me no good, and the experience I have of her has cured me of
the malady of hope and ambition. Make me not fall into a relapse of these
troublesome diseases, I beseech you; but come and confirm my health: you Sir
that are a sovereign Physician of souls, and who are able to see in mine,
that I perfectly am,

Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. Febr. 1635.
To Mounsieur de Piles Cleremont. LETTER XXXII.
SIR, having heard of the favorable words you used of me at the Court; I
cannot any longer forbear to give you thanks; nor stay till our next meeting
from telling you, how highly I esteem this favor, I cannot but confess, I
did not look to find so great a graciousnesse in the country of
maliciousness; and seeing, that the greatest part, eveu of honest men, have so
much love for themselves, that they have but little or none left for strangers;
I thought with my self, that the infection of the world had but lightly
touched you; and that either you had no passions in you at all; or at least,
but very cool and moderate: but I see n^w, that you have more generousnesse in
you than is fit to have, amongst men that are interessed; and that you put in
practice the Maxims of our Ancestors, and the Rules of your Epictetus. It is
I that am for this, exceedingly bound unto you; seeing it is I that receive the
benefit of it, and that am the Object of your virtue You may then believe, I
have not so unworthy a heart, as not to feel a resentment answerable to so
great an Obligation; at least Sir, I hope to show you, that the Picture mine
enemies have made of me, is not drawn after the life; and that their colors
disfigure me rather then represent me. I have nothing in me Heroical and
great, I confess: but I have something that is humane and indifferent. If I be
not of the number of the virtuous; I am at least of their side. I applaud them
whom I cannot follow, and admire that I cannot imitate. I am glad if I can be
praised, not only of the judicious and wise, such as you, and our Mounsieur de
Boissat are, but even of the simpler sort that are honestly minded, such as --
I know Sir, how to love in perfection, and when you shall know me better, you
shall confess there is none that can be more than I,

Your, etc.
At Paris 2. April 1635.
To Mounsieur de Uoyture. LETTER XXXIII.
SIR, If I did not rely upon your goodness, I should take more care than I do
in preserving your favor: and I should not let a messenger go from hence, by
whom I should not persecute you with my Letters. But knowing, you are no
rigorous exactor of that which is your due; much less expect I should give you
more; I have conceived, I might be negligent without offense; and that having
an absolute power over me as you have; you would use it upon me, with the
moderation of good Sovereigns. And I should still continue to follow mine own
inclination, which finds a sweetness in idleness; if I did not think it
necessary to advertise you that I am in the world; least you should think all
your courtesies lost, that you have done me. I would have been glad I could
have loved you all my life long without any kind of interest, or temporal
consideration; yet it troubles me not to give honor to my friend, by giving
him matter for his virtue to work upon. I am content you shall hold the higher
part in our friendship, which is to do good, but then I look to hold the
lover and less noble part, which is to acknowledge; and this is so settled in
my heart; that a greator cannot be desired from a man exceedingly sensibly, and
exceedingly obliged. But though it were so, that you had no tie upon me; and
that without ungratefulness, I might forbear to love you; yet I entreat you
to believe, that the knowledge I have of your worth and merit; would never give
me leave to do it; but that the natural respect we owe to things that are
perfect, would always bind me infinitely to honor you, and to be with all my
soul, as I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 15. July 1630.
Another to him. LETTER XXXIV.
SIR, you are welcome from Flanders, from England and from Spain. I am not
only glad for your return; but I refresh my self after your voyages. For if
you know it not, I must tell you, that my spirit has gone these voyages with
you; and you never passed the sea, that I was not near a shipwreck. They that
knew what it is to love; will not mislike the noveltie of this compliment, I
have borne my part in all the fits of your Feavour: I have drunk part of all
your potions; I have accompanied you in all your strange adventures. It is
therefore great reason I should give you thanks, for giving my friendship
rest, and that by fiuishing your travel, you have finished my unquietness. It
is better Sir to be a private man at home, where there is courtesy and
freeness, than to be a Lord Ambassador among public enemies; and if the
Jews said well, that the Graves of Judea were more beautiful than the
Palaces of Babylon; why may not we be bold to say, that the Dirt of Paris, is
better than the Marble of Madrill? It is a juster thing to adore M. the
Cardinal, than to put off ones hat to the President Rose, or to the Marquess
of Aitona; and it would have been a news no less shameful than lamentable,
if we had come to read in the Gazets these pitiful words; A Son of France
was waiting for the King of Spaines rising up;

Atque ibi magnus
Mirandusque Cheus sedet ad Praetoria regis
Donec Hesperio lib^ Uigilare Tyr^no.
Thanks be to God, the face of things is changed, and a great Princes liberty
has cost but the life of a good Horse. At our next meeting, you shall tell me
all the fortunes you have passed; and in requital thereof, I will tell you
news out of the Wilderness: and it shall be at Mounsieur de Ch^ Chamber, that
our conference shall be; at least if you care any thing for it; and that I be
in his favor still. How soever, this I am sure, he can never love any man that
honors him more perfectly than I do, or that has a greater opinion of the
beauty and nobleness of his mind. He is always one of the dear objects of
my thoughts; and I still take him for one of those true Knights, which are no
where to be found now, but in the History of France. I want such an example
before my eyes; tostirre up the faintness I feel in my duty; and to thrust me
forward in the love of Virtue. The least of his words makes my spirit but
higher and greater, the only sound of his voice gives the both life and
strength; and I doubt not but I should be twice as good as I am; if I could but
see him once a month, and make a third in your excellent conferences. But this
is a happiness which is at home with you, but far off from me, though I
have a design to come nearer to it; you enjoy it to the full, and leave to
others only a desire of it and a jealousy, and jealous indeed I should be if
I did not love you more then I love my self, and if being bound to you for a
thousand favors I did not acknowledge my self more bound to take a
contentment in your good fortune. Enjoy then your happiness, sir and never
fear I will oppose it, seeing I shall always prefer your contentments
before my own, and shall be all my life,

Your, etc.
At Balzac 5. November. 1634.
To Mounsieur Mestivier, Physician to my Lord the Duke D'Espernon. LETTER XXXV.
SIR, I am a thirst for the waters of Uya, ever since I heard you think them
to be wholesome; the reputation you give them has made me to send for them, to
try whether this Drug will do me any more good then others; I am apt to believe
for the satisfaction of my taste, that there are no better medicines then those
that, are least compounded, and which come ready made from the bosom of our
common mother; but specially I have a confidence in nature when she comes
authorized by your judgment, and has the warrant of so esteemed a name as
yours, and by this means Sir you have saved me a voyage into Italy; For so
but for you I was taking a journey of two hundred and fifty Leagues upon the
word of an ancient Poet, to the end I might be of those happy ones, of whom he
writes these verses,

Non ven (...) relecant, nec vulnere vulnera sanant,
Pocula nec tristi gramine mist a bibunt.
Amissum lymphis reparant impune vigorem
Pacaturque aegro luxuriante dolor.
I have since received your learned Letter, wherein you prescribe me the order
I must hold in using this wholesome disorder, and teach me to drink with art;
in truth you have more care of me then I am worthy of, my health is no matter
of any such importance that it should be managed with such curiosity. It is
not worth the pains you have taken in treating of it so learnedly, and writing
these two leafes of paper you have sent me. The publik which you will have to be
interessed in it will acknowledge no such matter, it has no use in these
turbulent times of contemplative Doctors. The active life is that defends the
frontiers, and repells the enemy, and the lea^ musket in the army of M. the
Cardinal of Va let is at this time of more use then all the Peripatetiks and
Stoiks of this kingdom; we may therefore think that the public you talk
off dreams not of me, nor is engaged to preserve my idleness, but it is you
that love me, and would therefore make me of more worth then I am, thereby to
have the more color for your loving me. I am much bound unto you for this
favor, yet I doubt whilst you set me at so high a price, there is none will
take me for such as you would vent me; but I regard it not, I bound my
reputation by your account, and desire no other Theater nor other world but
you; It suffices me that in your spirit I enjoy the glory you give me, and
sweetly possess my good fortune, which I know I merit not if you weigh it in
the Skales of Scrupulous justice, but which you will yet preserve to me, if you
have regard to the passion with which I testify unto you, that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 3. Septem. 1635.
To Mounsieur de Mesmes D'Avaur, Ambassador to the King at Venice. LETTER.
XXXVI.
SIR, if the persecut^on continue, I shall be forced to give place to envy,
and to go wait in the place where you are for a change to time, which in this
kingdom is so adverse unto me. It is indeed my adversaries design to make
all sorts of governments my enemies, and not to suffer me to breath at liberty,
either in Monarchy, Aristocracie, or Democracie. You have seen his manifests
printed, which have flowne beyond the Alps; you know the cunning he uses to
draw the public state upon me, and to make me ill thought of, as well by the
Kings Allies as by his Subjects. He goes about to banish me out of all states,
to shut all places against me that are open even to fugitives, and not to leave
my innocence one corner of the earth to be in safety; yet Sir let him do his
worst, and practice what he can, I hope you will bear me out to say, that he
shall never hinder me from having a place in your heart; nor be able to take
from me this pleasing refuge. And besides that Ambassadors houses enjoy the
privileges of the ancient Sanctuaries, and that there is neither justice nor
violence but has respect unto them; I assure my self your only affection
will interesse it self for my safety, without any other public
consideration, and that you will defend me as a thing dear unto you; though
the defense of a man afflicted were not otherwise in it self, a thing worthy
the dignity of an Ambassador, and wheresoever you shall have power to speak,
I shall be sure of a strong protection, being as I am assured of your good
word, and this eloquent mouth, which persuades the wise, and makes that appear
which is just, shall gain no doubt a good opinion of my cause to the
undertaker, and a favorable censure of those judges at least that I
acknowledge. I expect this issue from your almighty Rhetoric, and hope Sir
that in these troublesome incounters you will double your love and your good
offices unto me. Though I should be worse entreated of the world, and of
fortune then I am, and should have nothing before my eyes, but lamentable
successes, and deadly presages, yet you would remember how that Cato stood
firm upon ruins, and held himself constant to a side which the gods
themselves had abandoned. I do not think my case is yet in this extremity,
it has yet subsistence and foundation; and as it is not so badde but that an
honest man may maintain it with a good conscience; so neither is it so weak
but that a mean courage may undertake it without fear. The Gentleman that
brings you this Letter has promised to make you a more ample^ relation hereof,
and to inform you of my whole story. I humbly entreat you to give him
audience, until I come and crave it my self; and that I assure you in your
Palace amongst your other Courtiers, that I truly am^

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris 20. December. 1627.
To Mounsieur de Thure, Doctor of the Sorbone, and Chanon of the Church of
Paris. LETTER XXXVII.
SIR, my dear Cousin, the news you sent me surprised me not, I am so
accustomed to receive disgraces, that I find in this nothing extraordinary; it
is true I am a little more sensible of it then of the former, and the place
from whence it comes makes me take it a little more to heart; yet seeing you
seem to compassionate my misery, I find my self comforted of one half of
it; and having you for my Champion, I fear not what my persecutors can do
against me. Suffer me to call them so, that solicit your College against
me; and make it less favorable to me, then I had good right to hope for. It
is not their zeal of Religion, nor interest of the public that sets them on
work; it is an old spite they bear me, which I could never master with all
my long patience, it is the hate of a dead man which lives still in his Tomb;
it is his rellicks that war upon me; and whereof some ill disposed French do
serve themselves to disgrace a work which has no other end but the honor and
service of the King. I never doubted of your good nature, and I know if need
were, your charity would cover the multitude of my faults; but in this ease I
think I have reason rather to ask justice at your hands, and to tell you,
that if you take the pains to consider my words as I meant them, and not as my
enemies corrupt them, you will easily grant they contain nothing contrary to
the orthodox doctrine, or that is not maintaineable in all the Schools of
Christendom. This being so my dear Cousin, I doubt not but you will strongly
defend my cause, at least my person, and will be pleased to assure my Masters
of your fraternity; that having always accounted their College as the Oracle
of true Doctrine, and as the interpretor of the Church in this kingdom; I
could not wish a more sweet or glorious fruit of my travailes then to see them
entertained by so learned and holy personages, that my greatest ambition is but
to merit their good acceptance, and to deserve their favorable censure, and if
for obtaining of this I have not either happiness enough, or not enough
sufficiency, I have at least Docible^esse enough to learn of them that which
I know not, and to confess that in their learned conferences they possess the
secret and certainty of all holy points, whereof we in our private
meditations have but suspicions and conjectures, that if I were assaulted by
strangers I could perhaps make a shift to resist, and that with success, but
that I prefer obedience which I owe before a victory which I might get; that
I desire not to contest with my fathers, nor pretend to have reason against
their authority, to which I submit my self in such sort, that I am resolved to
assure my self of nothing, but upon their word and credit, and from hence
forth to acknowledge no truth, but that which they shall please to teach me: I
leave it to you to augment, to reform, or embellish this compliment, as you
shall think fit; I make you Master of the whole business: and never mean to
disavow any thing you shall do, being absolutely,

Sir my dear Cousin, Your, etc.
At Balzac 18. Ianu. 1632.
To Mounsieur de Uougelas, Gentleman in Ordinary to my Lord, the Kings only
Brother. LETTER XXXVIII.
SIR, I humbly entreat you to take for your self, all the excuses you make to
me; and to believe that I have always a love answerable to your virtue:
though I say it not so often, as by the laws of Civilitie I am bound to do.
Since the coming hither of Mounsieur de --: you have been the most ordinary
and most pleasing subject of all our conference; and I am much more curious to
hear of your studies, than to hear all the news of the great world. Yet I
intend not hereby to ask it of you with importunity; and to engage you in a
Commerce of unprofitable words, which would but wrong your necessary
imploiments: I am well enough satisfied with the assurance I have of your love;
and am well contented you should keep your compliments for those you love not
so well, when I shall find my self to stand in need of you: I am not grown
so bashful, but that I can use the liberty, I have long used; and yet do you
no inconvenience by my freeness. Hitherto it has afforded you nothing but
trouble; and it was your evil Angel that inspired you with a desire at first
to be acquainted with me. But one day perhaps I shall be mure happy; and for
so many and great favors you have done me, it may be you may draw from me some
small argument of acknowledgement. In the mean time Sir, I desire you, not to
cast upon me a reputation, which I am not able to maintain; make no more
mockes at my prattling; and hide the shame of your friend, which your other
friend has published. He only is guilty of the fault that was done; and you
may well think, I was not so impudent to send false Latin to the University
of Paris, as much as to deliver false money to the Mint; and think to make
Mintmen take it for current. It shall suffice me, that you approve of the
French, I mean to bring you; or at least, that you make it worthy of your
approving, by making it new, with your corrections. If Mounsieur Far^t be
returned from Brescia, you shall make me beholding to you, to assure him from
me, of the continuation of my service, I make infinite account of him, and am
with all my soul,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 15. May 1629.
To Mounsieur Gerard Official of the Church of Angaulesme. LETTER XXXIX.
SIR, my last Letters, are great Books; and I have nothing to add, but only
that I entreat you to t^ke the pains to read them over again, and to draw
them into heads for the help of your memory, which though I know to be very
excellent, yet I know also, it is extremely full of business, and that I am
but the five and twentieth of your Clients I set down nothing so precisely,
but that I leave you liberty to change my orders, if you find them not fit;
and to sail with the wind. Nothing but good success can be expected from
your sterning^; you will so manage, I assure my self, my resentments with
Mounsieur de --, and make him see so much respect and modesty in my griefe^,
that he will perhaps be sorry he ever disobliged me. I assure my self also,
that when you fall upon my Chapter, where I treat with Mounsieur -- that you
will not carry your self, as only my instrument, and as one that has charge
of me; but that you will do as an honest man should, that is persuaded to it
by the truth, and interessed in the cause of oppressed innocence. Concerning
the perfumes I desired of you, I could wish you would bring me a shopfull; but
you must use some body else to choose them for you, for you know them not your
self, but only by name; and you may perhaps have the oil of Nuts given you
for the oil of Iasmin; Et du pain d'espice, pour des pastilles. So it is that
petty things are unknown of great personages: you would think you should do
your self wrong to descend to such pedling wares, and of an Ambassador, and a
Philosopher, become a Merchant and an Apothecary; yet Aristipp^s would be
dealing in things, that you think scorn of, and said, that he and the King of
Persia, were the two unfortunate Ones, whom Diog^nes pitied. You send me word,
that Mounsieur de -- has great Designs in the Commonwealth of Letters; and
that he is resolved to be an Author and a Preacher both at once. If you remove
him not from so dangerous a resolution, you shall see Books that will be the
Funerals of common sense; and let but the name be changed, and it will besaid
of his Sermons, as an excellent man of our time, said of the Sermons of Friar
Lazarus;

Peu de zele, moins de Science
Faisoit que Lazare bossu;
Preschant des Cas de conscience
N'estoit quasi pas apperceu.
As much as to say; that though the Clock has been long a striking, and that
he has been talking a long hour, yet so little heed is taken of him, that
none will believe there is any man in the Pulpit. Before he comes to the Ave
Maria, all his Auditors are out of the Church, and he may call them Apostataes
from the word of God, and Fugitives from the Church; yet with all he can say,
he shall never make one of them to come back. I have not these two years
written thus much, with my own hand; it is to me, as one of Hercules labors:
and can you then doubt, how much I would be willing to do, to do you service?
I kiss the hands of all the Family, which you see; and which I honor
exceedingly; and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. Febr. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XL.
SIR, I love you better than I thought, since you parted from hence, I have had
a number of Alarums for you: and though I stand in convert yet that keeps me
not from the foul weather of your voyage. But I hope by this time you are upon
returning; and that shortly, we shall sit by the fires side, and hear you tell
your adventures of Beausse, and of Mantelan. Whatsoever Mounsieur de -- have
said unto you, when you took leave of him; I do not think, that in all the
whole Discourse, there can one passage be found, that is subject to any badde
interpretation: if it be considered as a member depending upon the body, and
not as a piece that is broken off. There may perhaps be found some
proposition, a little bold, but never to go so far as rashness: the
Antecedents and the Consequents so temper it, that if a man will not be too
witty in another man's intentions, he can never make any doubt of mine. It was
never intended, you know, but only to prove a Monarchy to be the best form
of government, and the Catholic Church to be the only Spouse of Christ,
Neither yet do I write so negligently, but that I am ready to give a reason of
that I write; and am able to defend my opinions against those particular
persons that oppugn them; for as for the sovereign authority, you can
witness for me with what humility I submit my self unto it. The day after
your departure Mounsieur de -- -- came to Balzac, whom I kept with me three
whole days; I never saw man less interessed, less ambitions, less dazeled
with the splendor of the Court; and to speak generally, better cured of all
popular diseases. By this I come to know the nobleness, and even the
soveraigntie of reason, when it is well schooled and instructed, we need not
mount up to heaven to find cause of scorn in the littleness of the earth,
the study of wisdom will teach it as well: A wise man counts all things to
be below him; Palaces to him appear but Cottages, and Scepters but baubles,
it pitties him to see that which is called the greatness and fortune of
Princes, and from the height of his spirit,

Il void comme f^rmis m^rcher nos legions,
Dans ce petit a^as de poussiere and de bove
Don't nostre vanite fait tant de regions.
I have at last found the Letter you required of me, which I now send you by
this Post; our good father has taken a coppie of it, and says it is fit to be
kept for an eternal monument in our house; and adds moreover that Erasmus
never had so much honor done him by the Sorbone, which instead of condemning
my divinity has given a fair testimony in praise of my eloquence; for so he
pleases to call the little ability I have in writing; for it is his custom to
make choice of very noble terms for expressing of very vulgar qualities. For
your self Sir, you know it very well, and I entreat you to advertise our
other friends that know it not, that all this testimony and all this honor
that is done me, is happened to me by a meare mistaking. I had satisfied the
desire of the Sorbone long before it, if I had understood they desired any
satisfaction from me; but two Editions of my book coming forth at one time,
my charitable neighbors in my absence delivered the Sorbone the less
corrected Copy, in which indeed my proposition was not so fully cleared and
unfoulded as was fit, but never told them that in the other Copy I had clean
taken away all color of wrangling, and justified before hand, that wherein I
imagined they could find any thing to say against me; I expect to hear by
the next messenger of your coming to Paris, and am with all my heart,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Paris, 25. Ianu. 1632.
Clarissimo Balzacio, Facultas Theologiae Parisiensis, S.
REdditae sunt nobis ad Calendas Aprilis abs te Litterae, vir clarissime,
omnibus quidem gratissimae, non eo solum nomine, quod multam in ordinem nostrum
observantiam praese ferrent; sed etiam vel maxim, quod propensissimam tuam
voluntatem, immutandi ea quae in Principe t^o, offendere mentes Christianas
possent. Hunc in librum inquirendi, Fama quae nec te latere potuit, non tam
occasionem nobis, quam necessitatem attulit. In quo sane uti nulla nisi
disertissimo, sic incogitanti quaedam excidisse deprehensa sunt, ex eorum
relatione quibus recensendi ejusdem delegata provincia fuerat. Praecipua eaque
maxim instituti nostri huic Epistolae subnectemus; quae and si judicabantur,
minus ad orthodoxa doctrine a nussim quadrare, aequum tamen pro Christiana
charitate ac dignitate tua duximus, ut omnem judicij aequitatem amicae
monitionis humanitas praecederet, quo tu ipse operi tuo emendando quaqua operam
dares. Istud vero quam pro voto nostro succ^sserit, vel ex eo intelleximus,
ipse quod tua sponte in idem consilium conspiraveris docilitatem facultati
nostrae, ad id tua Epistola pollicitus. Quod and maxim tibi gratulamur, neque
velimus tamen in Illud incumbas, ordinis nostri duntaxat authoritate motus, uti
benevole recipis, sed ipsius veritatis: cui nunquam faelicius triumphant
inge^ia, quam dum cedunt, summissis praesertim per religionis obsequium armis,
quorum usus quantum subsidii, ad decertandum conferret, tantum non posset non
affere Impedimento, ad victoriam; siquidem, hoc in genere, Uincere nisi victi
non poss^mus. Nae tu etiam talem deinceps debebis Modesty tuae gloriam, Cujus
laud, non minor inter Christianos audies, quam inter mortales Facundia
audiisti hactenus; ejusdem merito, lubentissimos laudatores habebis, quos alias
multa urgente querimonia, off^oii ratio coegisset velinvitos esse Censores.

De Mandato D. D. Decani and Magistrorum Sacrae Facultatis Theologiae
Parisiensis, Prt. Bouuot.
Apud Sorbonam: Anno Christi, 1632.
Another to him. LETTER XLI.
SIR, my Philosophy is not of so little humanity, but that I grieved
exceedingly at the reading of your Letter, and was touched to the very quick,
for the death of -- yet seeing he is happier then they that mourn for him; and
that he has left the world, in an age when he yet knew it not; I think it no
wisdom, to be obstinate in an ill grounded sorrow, or to account that an
evil to another, which is the greatest good, could have happened to my self.
Christianity will not let me say, Optimum non nasci, Bonum vero quam citissime
interire: but it hinders me not to believe, that one day of life, with
Baptism, is better then a whole age of iniquity. I write this letter to you
from -- whether I am come to lodge, after I had entertained my Lord -- until
n^ght. I conceived, there was some necessity, to deliver him your Letter with
all speed; and therefore I exposed my person to all the injuries of an
incensed sky; and ventured to make a voyage, that would have frighted a stouter
man then my self. By this you may know that I count nothing difficult, which
reflects upon any interest of yours; or which concerns your contentment; and I
love you so much, that I should not say so much, if I had more craft in me then
I have. But my good Nature exceedes al other considerations of vulgar Prudence;
and I would not keep you from knowing what great power you have over me,
though I knew before hand, you would abuse this power. For other things, I am
very glad to hear, you begin to grow sensible of the charms of music, and
that Consorts are in reputation with you. Yet I have seen the time, when your
ears were no learneder then mine, and when you made no great difference
between the sound of Lutes, and the noise of Bells. See what it is to frequent
good company; and to live in a Country of neatenesse. I that stir not from
the Village, know no other music, but that of Birds; and if sometimes I hear
a more silver sound; it comes from those noble Animals, which Mounsieur
Heinsius praises so much: and which by Lucians saying, serve for Trumpets in
the Kingdom of the Moon. I give you a thousand thanks for your news; but
specially for the last: it is certain, that the choice of Mounsieur de
Belieure to be Ambassador for Italy, is a thing will be generally well liked;
men talk wonders already of his beginnings: of the readiness and Vivacitie of
his Spirit, of the force and stay^dnesse of his Judgment, besides some other
excellent qualities of his Age, from which we may hope for much. And for my
self, who am one, that love my Country exceedingly; I cannot but exceedingly
rejoice, in this new fruitefulnesse which comes upon him, at the latter end of
his old age. It does me good to see famous deceased men, to live again in
their excellent posterity; and I doubt not of the good success of a
Negotiation, where a Belieure, a Thou, or a Sillery, is employed. These were
our Heroes of the long Robe; and the Princes of our Senate: and now their
children (that I may continue to speak Latin, in French) are the Princes of
our youth, at least they are names more happy, and that portend more good to
France, then the name of -- and no doubt, she will have cause to thank M. the
Cardinal, for respecting races, that are so dear unto her: and for stirring
up in the Kings the old inclinations, of the Deceased King his Father. I fall a
sleep always, when I am talking with you, and am rather in case to make ill
dreams, then good discourses: and so I take my leave of you, my dear and
perfect friend, as I also am to you, as much as possibly can be,

Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. Octo. 1634.
To Mounsieur Talon; Secretary to my Lord the Cardinal De la Ualette. LETTER
XLII.
SIR, I took infinite pleasure, to see my self in one of your Letters; and
Mounsieur -- -- who imparted it to me, can witness for me, with what
greediness I read that passage which concerned me. I cannot say, that he is
here, though it be true, that he is not in Gascognie; for we enjoy nothing of
him here but his Image; he is so married, that he would think it a disloyalty
to his wife, if he should dare to laugh when she is not by. All his sociable
humor he has left with her, and has brought nothing to us, but his
Melancholy. When I would make him merry, he tells me, I go about to corrupt
him. All visites he makes in her absence, though it be to covents, and
Hospitals, yet he calls them De bauches. So as Sir, you never saw man better
satisfied with his present estate; nor a greater enemy to single life. He is
not contented to pity you and me, and to lament our solitude; but he
reproacheth us outragiously, and calls us unprofitable members of the
Commonwealth, and such as are fit to be cut off. As for me, I make no defense
for my self, but your example; I tell him, let him persuade you to it first,
and he shall soon find me ready to follow his counsel. I hope we shall meet
together ere long; and then we shall not need to fear his being too strong
for us, in our conferences, when we two shall be against him alone. Provide
therefore Solutions for his Arguments; but withal deny me not your assistance
in other encounters, where it may stand me instead. You can never do
courtesies to a man more capable of acknowledgement; nor that is more truly,
then I,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 12. Febru. 1633.
Another to him. LETTER XLIII.
SIR, I am exceedingly well satisfied with the news you send me; and with the
assurance you give me by your Letter of the continuation of your Friendship.
Not that I was afraid, I should lose it, but because it is a pleasure, to hear
ones self called happy; and that one cannot have too many titles for a
possession, which can never be too much valued. I take not upon me to contend
with you in Compliments; or to dispute of civility with you, who live in the
light of the world; and have whole Magasins of good words. For besides, that I
never had any skill of the Cou^; it is now so long I have been a countriman,
that it were a miracle, if I had not clean forgot it all. Pardon therefore a
rudeness which I cannot avoid, and seeing I am not able to answer you; give
me leave to assail you, and require you to give a reason of the present state
of things: What can you say Sir, of these wretched Flemmins, who shut their
Gates against good Fortune when she would come in to them? and are in love with
their Fetters, and their Keepers? I do not think there be truer slaves in all
Asia: and I do not wonder our Arms can do no good in their Country, seeing
it is a hard matter to take a yoke from men's heads, who prefer it before a
Crown: and Soveraigntie when it is offered them. Sick men are then to be
despaired of, when they throw their medicines on the ground, and account of
Potions as of Poysonings. It is not therefore our fault if they be not cured:
we have active power enough to work, but it must upon a matter that is apt
and disposed. I expect hereupon a Decree from your politician; and remain,

Your, etc.
At Balzac 1. July 1635.
To Mounsieur D'Espernon, Marshall of the Kings Armies. LETTER XLIV.
SIR, my compliments are very rare; and I take no great care for preserving
your friendship. I account you so true of your word, that I cannot doubt of
having your love, seeing you have done me the honor to let me have your
promise. It is to no purpose to solicit Judges that cannot be corrupted; It
is enough for procuring their favor, that the cause be good. You see
therefore, I do not much trouble my self to commend mine unto you, and I
present my self so seldom before you; that if you had not an excellent
memory, you had certainly forgot me long ago. I pray you not, to do me good
offices: for knowing that you let slip no occasion of doing good: I may be
sure to have my part of your good deeds, though you have none of my prayers.
Your new Acquests at the Court; make you not leave that you have on this side
the Loyre: your friends that are always with you; take not up all your heart:
there is some place left for your friends farther of: of which number I am one;
and more in love Sir, with the comtemplative life, than ever. I am always
under ground and buried with my trees; and they must be very strong cords, and
very violent commandments that should remove me: yet I am contented to give my
thoughts a liberty: and my spirit is often in the place where you are; and my
absence is not so idly bestowed, but that I can make you a reckoning of it. I
speak to you in this manner, because I know you are no hater of delightful
knowledges, and have an excellent taste to judge of things. Though by
profession you be a Soldier; yet I refuse you not for a judge, in our
peaceable difference; being well assured, there are not many Doctors, more
accomplished, or of a founder judgment than your self. This quality is no
opposite to true valor; the Romans, whose discipline you seek to
reestablish; used to lead with them the Muses to war; and in the tumult of
their Armies, left always place for these quiet exercises. Brutus read
Polybius, the night before the battle at Philippi; and his Uncle was at his
Book the very hour before he meant to die. Never therefore fear doing ill,
when you follow the example of such excellent Authors: none will ever blame
you for imitating the Romans, unless perhaps the Crabates or other enemies,
as well of Humanity as of France. But to be thus blamed by Barbarians, is an
infallible mark of merit; for they know no points of virtue, but such as are
wild and savage; and imagine, that roaring and being furious, are far more
noble things, than speaking and reasoning. I leave them to their goodly
imaginations; and come to tell you, that though your Letter to my Sister, be
dated from the Army in Germany; yet it is eloquent enough to come from the
Academy of M. the Cardinal; it neither smells of Gunpowder, nor of Le pais de
adieu pas; I know by certain marks, I have observed in it, that your Books,
are part of your Baggage; and I find nothing in it, that is worthy of blame,
but only the excessive praises you bestow upon me; and if you were not a
stout champion, and able to maintain it with your sword, you would certainly
ere this, have had the lie given you a thousand times for praising me so. I
should be verry sorry to be a cause of so many petty quarrels; and so unworthy
of your courage; a foreign war has need of your spirit; make not
therefore any Civil, for my sake; I desire no such violent proofs of your
affection: it serves my turn, that you love me quietly; and if you so please
secretly too; to the end, that our friendship being hidden, may lie in covert
from; injuries; and that possessing it without pomp, I may enjoy it without
envy. I reckon it always amongst my solidest goods, and will be sure never to
lose it, if perfect faithfulness will serve to keep it; and if it will suffice
to be; as I most passionately am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. Ianu, 1635.
To Mounsieur de Roussines. LETTER XLV.
MY dear brother, I have upon this last occasion, received nothing from you,
but the offices I expected; I know you to be just and generous, and one that
will always religiously pay whatsoever you owe, either to Blood or friendship,
yet this hinders me not from being obliged to you, and to your good Birth for
it. This has bestowed a friend upon me, which I never took pains, either to
look out, or to make; It is a present of Nature, which I should have taken, if
she had given me my choice. I desire you to believe, that I never stood less
in need of comfort than now; Loppose nothing against the rage of a thousand
adversaries, but my scorn: I am Armor of proof against all the tales from
the Suburbs St. Honor; and from all the Libells of the street St. Jacques.
They increase daily in sight, and if the heat of their spirits do not abate,
there will shortly be a little Library of follies written against me. But you
never yet heard, of such a gravitie as I have, nor of a mind that could take
such rest in the midst of storms and tempests as I do, and this I owe to
Philosophy, under whose covert I shelter my self: it is not only, higher
than mountains, where we see it rain and hail below us: but it is stronger
also than a Fortress, where we may stand out of danger, and make mouths at
our enemies. All that hurts me in the war of -- --; is that, which concerns
the interest of others: it grieves me extremely, that his cruelty should leave
me, and fall upon my friends. I wish I could have bought out the three lives,
that touch the honor of -- with a third Volume of injuries done to my self,
and where no body else, should have any part: and I may truly say, that this
is the only blow, which that perfidious enemy has given me, that goes to my
heart; and the only of all his offenses that I have felt. I entreat you to
let my friend know of my grief; and to make sure unto me this rare personage
by all the cares and good offices your courtesy can devise. His Virtue ought
to be inviolable to de traction, but drtraction will not spare Virtue it self,
but takes a delight in violating the best things. I have reason to place him in
this rank, and considering him as one of the most accomplished work of Nature;
I must needs consider withal, that Nature it self, is sometimes calumniated.
Madame de -- enquires often after you, and has a great opinion of your heart
and spirit. You may be sure, I say nothing in opposition to the account, she
holds you in; but am rather glad to see my judgment confirmed by so infallible
an authority: see, you be always good; and always lay hold upon our ancient
Maxims; and be assured, I am and always will be

My dear brother, Your, etc.
At Paris 15. Ianu. 1628.
To Mounsieur Breton, LETTER XLVI.
SIR, you are a man of yourword, and something more. You promise^ less than
you perform, having undertaken to furnish me but with Gazets; you extend your
largess to large volumes of Books. This Jonnius, whose Verses you sent me is
no ordinary man. The boldness, and beauty of his phrase, comes very near the
greatness and magnificence of Horace. He chooses and places his words with
the same preciseness, and care; he speaks always loftily, and if in all
things there be bounds and limits; he sometimes seems to go beyond them. For
example, upon the Canonization of Ignatius, made by Pope Gregory the fifteenth;

Nam te ille primus Vaticanis ritibus Admovit aris Caelitem
Mixtumque superis aureo curru dedit perambulare sydera.
A Pagan Poet could have said no more of the deifying of Julius Caesar, yet in
saying so much, he should have said too much: there being great difference
between consecrating the memory of a mortal man, or the giving him a
Divinity, between the declaring, or the making a God; between being Augustus,
or being Jupiter. I know not also, why speaking of Protestant Ministers; he
stands so punctually to descant upon the word, which of all co^ceits is the
poorest;

Maleque ominata Verba and inter Obscana
Exinde lege publica reponendum
Solus Ministri Carnifex geret nomen.
I should think, that this descanting, make^s not much for the honor of
Princes chief counselors; and it seems, the Poet in this place, forgot M.
the Cardinal; who guides the public fortune and governs the world under this
name of Minister. There is no great reckoning to be made, no great matter to be
built upon three or four little syllables, which signify nothing, but what
custom, without any reason pleases, and are of no more value than use gives
them. This word Vates, is taken sometimes for a fool, sometimes for a
sor^erer, sometimes for a Prophet: and the word Prophet it self, is sometimes
taken for a Juggler; witness the Greek; Proverb (...): Will you upon this go
rail upon Prophets, and send them with their name to the Grave, or shut them
up Dans le petites maisas? and yet further to endeere this subtilty of Ionicus,
you may say that Ministers at all times have been enemies of Christ, and prove
it by this, because a Minister was one of those that stroke him on the face in
presence of the high Priest; as it is said, U^us ex Ministris Caiphae, etc. The
ground upon which such Figures are built is so weak and ruinous, that there is
no means to make it stand firm: our adversaries may make use of it as well as
we, and to be even with you for your Text of the Minister of Caiphas, they
will I doubt not bring you another Text where our Savior himself is said to
be a Minister, come to execute in the world the decrees of him that sent him,
and to do the eternal will of his Father. This is called triumphing for
syllables and words, and running after Phantasmes. If the ancient Rome had used
to play in this fashion, Bishops called by them Pontifices would have been but
makers or Bridges, nor Dictators any more then Schoolemasters. Poc^e Brutus
would have been the Butt for all the arrows of his time. The Assinu, the
Porc^ the Beshie would not have had one day of rest, they would have been
forced to get themselves adopted into some other Families, and to change their
names, thereby to save themselves from the opprobrious Figures of Orateurs and
Poets. I meant to have written but two or three lines, and I am come to the
bottom of my Paper; this is the pleasure to be talking with you that deceives
me thus, and makes me think that we are walking together and conferring about
our Books and Studies. After all that has been said, I conclude that your
Poet is a great Lyricke Poet, and would have had a Pension of Augustus, and
have sat at Table with Mecoenas. I bid you good night, and am,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 10. Febru. 1631.
Another to him. LETTER XLVII.
SIR, I am at leisure for no body but you, and though I am pestred with a
multitude of small affairs, yet I quit them all to come and tell you, that I
have received your last dispatch, and find my self infinitely obliged to
Mounsieur de -- seeing you put me in hope that he will spend this winter at
Paris, I purpose at that time to be a daily waiter upon him, and try what I
can do to mend my fortune. I am told that you are grown friends with the
graces, and will no longer be any enemy to honest pleasures. Hold you firm I
beseech you in this resolution, and never give it over if you mean well to
your life. There is no danger in refreshing your self sometimes with pleasing
company, that so you may return more fresh and vigorous to your learned
exercises. It is better to be innocently merry at the Inn in Venice, then to
go kill ones self in the vaute of the Church, as the poor -- I lament him in
truth as a man dead and miserable, and it greeves me he had not time to
bethink him of his souls health, and to ask pardon of God; but to concerve
that by his death a great light is extinguished, and that the world has lost a
great man; I knew him too well to have any such opinion. He was to say true a
man of metal, and (...) d^ine (...) of wit that were not unpleasant so long
as they were not biting; but who would endure him to be enrolled amongst
modern Authors, or give hisverse a place amongst the Poets of this time? yet
he him self counted his courage and his military virtues as nothing in
comparison of his eloquence and excellent gift of speaking and writing, wherein
he was so highly conceited of himself, that only for telling him one day of
it he never loved me after, and is dead I assure my self with a heartburning
against me for it. They that reproove me for writing Nonvelles. Victorienses in
my first Letter to M. the Cardinal, make it appear they are no far
travellours in the Latin Country, and never come to discover Victrices literas,
Laureatas literas, Nuntiam laurum, etc. Malice is a very unjust thing, but
ignorance much more; Homine imperito, you know the rest. And never take offense
that there be some will not so much as allow me for a Grammar Scholar, and
perhaps have reason. We oftentimes think our selves to be the true owners of
things, of which indeed we are but usurpers; there is nothing secure against
wrangling, every thing is matter of suite in this wretched world, yet I mean
not so easily to yield and give up my right, for if I were not able to write
according to the rules of Art, I must certainly be one of a most dull
capacity, and altogether incapable of all discipline. For did I learn nothing
by seeing the Cardinal Perron? nothing by being a Scholar in the French
tongue under Master Nicholas Coeffeteau? nothing by a thousand conferences with
the good man Malherbe? and lastly nothing by lodging with father Baudoin? Vel
in Bicipiti somniasse Parnasso? for one is as much as the other, as you know
well. This man in truth is no ordinary father, his conceptions and productions
are without intermission; he fills our studies with his books; he amends,
reformes, embellishes the books of others; he smells a Barbarism or an
incongruitie seven miles off; he has counted by tale all the improprieties
that are in -- --: he is admirable in the knowledge and use of all particles,
and I am sure he loves me not so little to hide any secret or mystery of all
his knowledge from me; I entreat you to kiss his hands for me, and to believe
that I am most truly,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 20. Aug. 1630.
Another to him. LETTER XLVIII.
SIR, three days since I imparted my melancholy and my unquietnes unto you,
and how much I was moved at the cruelty of -- I have since received your
Letter of the ninth of this present, which does not indeed take all my pain
from me, because it declares not what is done against me, but yet asswageth it
a little, because it declares that nothing is done against me that is deadly.
However I must put on a resolution for all events; and comfort my self with
Philosophy, and with you; you that are my true and faithful friend, and that
stand between me and all the stones my enemies throw at me. Your affection
is no small help to me in these troublesome encounters, and the tenderness
you show to have of me, binds me in a very sensible obligation to you.
Concerning the ill will of -- it can do me no great hurt, and pardon me if I
do not think my honor is engaged to make so bloody a war upon him as you
would have me. The less show is made of resenting petty injuries, the better
and the more readily they are repelled; if I should think upon answering him,
I should but make a comment upon his gibrish, for them that understand him not;
and thereby bring his folly into the more credit and request. When time and
place serves we will handle him as he deserves, and doubt not but his
lightness shall light heavily upon him; only do you collect some common
places upon this matter, and remember your self of all that has passed
between -- to the end the history may not be lost. I have had speech with the
man whose whole life is nothing but a continual meditation of death; I never
found him so austere, nor so great an enemy of bravery as now; his devotion
respects neither right of nations, nor laws of civillitie. I have not been
able to get him to write to that person that loves him so dearly, and
complains to you so often about it. All the answer he returns to his long
Letters, are but these three words of the Gospel, Noli amplius peccare, which
in sweeter and more courtly terms is as much as to say,

Lites heures au lieu de lire ses poulets
Defile tes coliers, faits-en des chapelets, etc.
I received the other day a most elegant and gentle Letter from one Mounsieur
Ytterius, a Lawyer of Antwerpe; but I know not by what means it came to my
hands, nor by what direction to return an answer. Pray enquire after him, and
let our friends know that in spite of the Marquess of Aytona, I have
adherents in Flanders, and therefore he need not make his bragges for having
burnt my book at Bruxells. Scilicet illo igne, vocem omnium Gentium, and
libertatem Europae, and conscientiam generis humani abolere arbitrabatur. By
the next Post I will write to Mounsieur Hottoman, and will give Mounsieur de la
Pigeonnerio thanks for the verses you had of him to send me. We have read
them here in good company, both of Males and Females, and they all agree that
the Fathers my adversaries are none of those Christian Ulysseses, he speaks
of, that have nailed their Passions to the cross of Christ. I forgot to ask
you of Mounsieur Seton, and to desire you to call to him for the papers he
promised me. I regard him as one of the great Doctors of our age, and make use
of the riches of his Spirit with so great privacie that he seems to be but as
it were my Treasurer. I know not how to make an end, nor yet am willing to say
more, because I must reserve something for Monday next. I therefore take my
leave, assuring you there is none more truly then I,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 7. Jan. 1631.
To Mounsieur Girard, Official of the Church of Angoulesme. LETTER. XLIX.
SIR, I make use of you with the like liberty as I desire you would make use
of me; if therefore you have any spare (...), you may allow it to the affairs
of -- but so as you allow it to mine first, and that you make a difference
between friendship and courtesy. I doubt not but you will give your best
advice to the Gentleman that is recommended to you, and will set forward the
best you can the design we have to make him one day an honest man. I find the
Book more neately and more correctly printed then I could have imagined; and I
would tell you that you are an able Grammarian, but that I fear your Divinity
would be angry for giving you so small a Praise, and so much vilified by the
Messieurs our Masters. The two tracts you sent me are as different of style as
they are of matter. Any man that can but relish the ancient purity will take
the first of them for the work of some Roman that lived in the times of the
republicke, but the other can be but the writing of some Gaul or Spanyard
that came to declaime at Rome, in the reign of the sixth or seventh Emperor.
One meets at the beginning with something that dazells and makes a fair show
of some great good to follow, but at the bottom there is no such matter to be
seen; nothing but swelling and obscurity, oftentimes false trains, and every
where bragges and bravadoes that are not tolerable. It is a pleasure as I am
told to hear this famous Author talk of himself; he thinks his Pen as
much worth as the King of Swedens sword, and no less fatal to states and
Princes. He says it is he that bestows glory or dishonor, makes men famous
or infamous as he pleases, and that he has means enough to be revenged of
the Emperor or of the Pope, if the Emperor or the Pope should offer him any
wrong. Scaliger, Lipsius and Casaubon were by his own saying but his
Forerunners, and all the light of the former age, but the Aurora of his, and
yet for all this he has but a very little head, and but very staring eyes, and
but a very sumbling speech, and but a very silly discourse, that you may know
his judgment is not the predominant part of his soul. But the world talks
otherwise of him; that he is a lost man, and one that has forfeited his
brains, not only swallowed up of a strong and vaste imagination, not only
bending under the burden of an overcharged memory, but apt to lose himself in
the walks of Platoes Philosophy, for which yet he is become an Apostate from
Aristotels doctrine. I confess unto you now that the time has been I have
made much reckoning of this man, and am still of those ill husbands that give
presents, but pay no debts. It is certain I discharge my duty extremely ill;
and Mounsieur Videll has just cause to think me the most uncivil man that
lives. But you know the secret of this matter, and that in my incivillitie
there is a kind of Religion which I have not dared as yet to violate. Unless I
should sin against my^ faith given, I can neither enjoy the good he has done
me, nor give him the thanks I owe him, and this is the extremity of my
misery, that I have received a most precious gift, and yet can neither be rich
by it, nor thankful for it. Take some course for Gods sake, that I may
dispense with an oath that is so contrary to honesty, and so directly crosses
the right of nations and all good manners. Entreat our friend to give me my
liberty again; which I have solemnly promised to employ wholly in doing him
service, and in accommodating that confusion which makes me commit this
disorder. Mounsieur de Plassac has so powerfully confuted that which I writ
the other day to Madam D'Anguitour, that I am become persuaded my self, and am
no longer of my own opinion, but willingly confess that if I should be
obstinate in desending my false maxims, I should do as ill as make a schism
amongst Ladies, and be the Author of a most pernicious doctrine. I have put
his Letter in my packet, that you may see I yielded not for nothing, and that
you may show it also to Mounsieur -- who has desired me he might see it. The
Encomium of Mounsieur de la Valette, which your brother desired of me; is in
the 103. Book of the Histories of Mounsieur de Thou. Change but the date
only, and you will agree with me, that it was certainly made for our
Mounsieur de la Valette, that is now. I send it you by this Post, and remain,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac 4. December. 1632.
RUpem-brunam profectus, p^atis, muris, cum ab oppugnatione tentata cum damno
suorum repulsus esset, rursus redintograta verberatione, ubi vidit ab ea part
conatu^frustra esse; jam ruini^ ab obsessis sarta; alio tormentat ransfert;
dumque in ijs Collocandis laborat, ictu majoris selopeti, (...) capite
fauciatus est; ex eoque vulnere, post duas horas decessit, incredibili sui Regi
Desiderio relicto; cui strenuam admod^m, sac fi^am operam semper navaverat.
Erat vir summa fortitudine praeditus; in per^culis; Empert^itus; in adversis,
Constans; in prosperis; moder^, liberalis, comis, magn^ in expli^ negotiis
sollertiae, in imperio ac magistratu, quam privatus, m^r. Espernonius quem ille
haeredem reliquit, cum casum acerbissime tulit: quippe fratre charissim^, and
firmissime Fortune suae invidiosae munimento Orbatus.

To Mounsieur de Gues. LETTER L.
SIR, my most dear Father, you have obliged me exceedingly unto you; for
imparting unto me the good news that is come, and for communicating with me,
the joy you take, in the happy success of the Kings Army. I do not think he
has a better subject in all his kingdom, then your self; never servant was
more zealous for his Masters greatness; never Persian more religiously adored
Monarchy. You love your children, I know infinitely, yet this is but your
second love; that of the State, and of the Public, goes far before it, and
I fear me, you would give us all for the poorest Frontier Town of Flanders,
or for any paltry Fort of Millan. That which I read in the Postscript of your
Letter, did not so very well please me, the good opinion, which Mounsieur de --
has of me, is more a burden to me, then an honor: and I could wish, he would
make less reckoning of me, so he would let me be more at quiet. You have a
strange friend of him; to take me for his common places, and to think that I
am an Index. for finding out conceits and figures. In the matter, you
propounded to me on his behalf; I can say no more then what I have said
already, but if he please to take the pains to Translate^ my French into
Latin, he may easily do it in such sort, that he shall be taken for the
Author, and I but for the Translatour. I have told you, of the Dignity of the
Language, in which he means to write, and what great advantage it has over
ours; it is certain, that it elevates and raises up the low thoughts of the
Authors; and gives much more to them, then it receives from them. Whereas ours
contrariwise, has no beauty, but as the Authors embellish it and set it out;
It has no subsistence: but by the matter, no force, but from the subjects that
are handled. I have made choice of some, which I thought fittest for his
purpose; if he find them for his turn, he may make use of them: and better
them much, by putting them into Ciceroes style and phrase: and these are they.
Good men ought to desire great Dignities, as a necessary means to perform
great achievements; which if they perform not; both God will call them to
account, for his graces, no better employed, and the world will justly
complain, it is left a prey to the wicked; and that the desire of their own
private quiet, makes them abandon all care of the public. This is to tell you
my Lord, that you ought to reserve your humility, for actions that pass
between God and you; but that for other matters, you cannot have too much
credit, nor too much greatness, seeing it is fit that wisdom should be
obeyed, and that there are some virtues which cannot be acted by those that are
poor, etc. Though we be not so out of the world, but that we hear news of
it; yet it passes through so many places, that it cannot choose but receive
diverse impressions; and can never come to us in purity, seeing it gathers ^dde,
in coming but from the Louure. Yet I have come to know, and fame has sounded
in our desert, the great battles that have been fought for the honor of
Fance, and how you have vanquished the spirits of strangers; which is a greater
victory, then to vanquish their forces. I have come to know, that Italy has
rigged up all subtilties, and employed them to deceive us, and yet could not,
and that these Spirits which thought to reign in all assemblies, and to be the
Masters of reason, have not been able to defend themselves against you, but
with spite and choler, Nor to complain of any thing, but that you persuaded
them to that, which they came resolved never to do, so as they which called us
Barbarians; and got always as much by their Treaties, as they lost by our
Victories, have found at last, that there is wisdom on this side the Alps, as
well as beyond: and are driven to acknowledge, that we had a man amongst us
now, able to hinder them from deceiving us as they had done. They wondered to
see a servant, that could not endure there should be a greater Master then his
own, that felt the least evils of his Country, as if they were his proper
wounds, and thought it a hurt to himself, if there were but an offer made, to
touch the Dignity of this Crown, but when they saw that you: applied remedies
upon the sudden, to all inconveniences which they thought you could never
have avoided, that you not only answered all objections they made, but
prevented all they intended to make, that you dived into their souls, and
took hold of their intentions there, and at the first conference, made answer
to that which they reserved for the second, then in truth their fleame turned
into choler, and then you quite rooted all their humane Prudence, and all
their politic Maxims, etc. I am not able to dissemble the joy I take, to
hear that your good services are acknowledged, that when diverse counsels had
been tried, yet yours at last was still feign to be followed, and that in
guiding the fortune of France, you are no less President of all affairs of
Europe. It is true, that of all external contentments, I have none so sensible
to me as this, but on the other side, when I hear that your health, is
continually assaulted, or at least threatened by some accident or other; that
the rest which the quietness of your Conscience ought to afford you, keeps you
not from having unquiet Nights, and that in the midst of all your glory, and
good successes, yet you oftentimes are as it were weary of your life, then in
deed, etc. And can it not be, that you should come to hear the public
acclamations, but in the unquietness of your watchings? nor of your praises,
but in your pains: Must the Sense suffer, and the Spirit rejoice? Must you be
upon the Rock, when you are in your Triumphs? Must you do two contrary works
at once, and at the same time, have need both of moderation, and of Patience:
if virtue could be miserable, and that the sect which accounts nothing evil
but pain, nothing good but pleasure, were not universally condemned.
Certainly the divine Providence, would at this day be complained upon, by all
places of this Kingdom: and all honest men, would in your behalf find
something amiss, in the worlds government. But my Lord, you know better then
I, that it is the happiness of beasts only, of which we must believe the
body, for as for ours, which resides in our highest part, it is as little
sensible of disorders that are below her, as they which are in Heaven are
incapable of offenses by storms of the air, or by vapors of the earth. And
this being so, God forbid, that I should judge of your condition, by the state
of your health; and not think him perfectly happy, whosoever is perfectly
wise. Do but imagine with your self, that you have made a division of the
infirmities of humane nature, with other men, and then you shall find the
advantage is on your side, seeing there is in you, but a small portion of
pain, for infinite passions and defects that are in others. Yet I cannot but
think, that the term of your patience is near expired, and that the time to
come, is preparing contentments for you that are wholly pure, and will make you
young again after the time, as before the time you have made your self old.
The King that has need of your long life makes no wishes in vain, and heaven
hears not the prayers of the enemies of our state. We know of no successor
fit to undertake what you leave unfinished, and if it be true that our Armies
are but the arms of your head, and that God has chosen your counsel for
establishing the affairs of this age; why should we fear a loss which has
no right to come but to our posterity? he will not in this only point leave
imperfect the happiness he has promised us; he loves men too well to deprive
them of that good which you are borne to do them. When Armies are defeated
there may new be levied, and a second Fleet may be set forth when the first is
lost; but if you my Lord should fail us, etc. It shall be in your time that
people oppressed shall come from the worlds end to seek the protection of this
crown; that by your means our Allies shall be well paid for their losses,
that the Spaniards shall be no conquerours, but the Fronch shall be the f^rs of
all the earth. It shall be in your time that the holy seat shall have her
opinions free; that the inspirations of the holy Ghost shall be no more
oppugned by the cunning of our adversaries, and that there shall be raised up
courageous hearts, worthy of the ancient Italia, and able to defend the common
cause. Finally my Lord it shall be by your wis^dome that there shall be no more
tyranny in Christendom, nor rebellion in this kingdom: That the people shall
leave in their superiors hands both liberty and religion; and that from this
legal government, and from this perfect obedience there shall arise that
happiness which Politicians seek for, and which is the end of all civil
societies. My hope is that all these things shall come to pass thorough your
wise government, and that after you have made sure our peace and our
neighbors, you shall your self enjoy the benefit of your good deeds with
pleasure and at your case, and shall see the state of things continue
flourishing, whereof none but your self have been the Author. I earnestly
entreat you so to deal with Mounsieur de -- that he may rest contented with
this; and dispense with me for any new meditation which would require more
leisure then I am like to have. This bearer will deliver you the History of
Queen Elizabeth, which may serve you for a recreation till the end of the
week, and then I shall come and ask your opinion, and desire you to give me
some light of that time out, of the great experience you have of many things. I
desire of God with all my heart that he will be pleased to afford you yet some
great matter to exercise your self in, and that this wise old age of yours
which we so much admire may long continue to be a strength and ornament to
your family. These are my earnest wishes, and withal, to make you by a perfect
acknowledgement of your favors, a perfect proof that I am,

Sir, my dear Father, Your, etc.
At Balzac, 7. June 1634.
To Mounsieur de Boisrobert. LETTER LI.
SIR, the Muses never favored man as they do you; you are the only man that
need neither retr^ite nor leisure for your meditations; In the troubles of the
world you possess your spirit in peace, and seeing the brute of the court
diverts not your attention, neither can the Sea and all its waves hinder your
compositions. It is no small advantage to find that solitude in ones self,
which others seek for in the Desert, and not to be bound to go out of the
world for setching in of sound opinions and persuasive words. If the merit of
yours take place, we shall shortly see at Comaedies as many long Cassocks as
short robes, and the most austere Philosophers will have their hands and eyes
in the recreations of the people, and so Sir of a mischief you shall make a
remedy; you shall set timourous spirits at liberty, and shall free us from two
terrible monsters, scrupulousness, and vicious bashfulnesse. You make me long
to bear a part in this action, and in this sort to defend the Theater; to take
the field after you is not so much to fight as to pursue the victory, and I
think it no wrong to virtue to justify an innocent pleasure, and that which
is only worthy of her; this we owe to Jason, to Masinissa, to Brutus, and to
other worthy men, who live at this day in the person of the man you so much
commend, and whom I admire as often as I hear. It is certain that the grace
with which he pronounces verses gives them a degree of goodness which the
Poets could not. They are more beholding to him that pronounces them, then to
him that made them, and this second father (if I may so speak) purges by his
adoption all the vices of their birth; the tune of his voice accompanied with
the dignity of his gestures gives a kind of nobleness to the most vulgar and
base conceits. No soul is so strongly fortified against the objects of sense
which he forcethnot; No judgment so wary and so well prepared, which is not
caught with the imposture of his words in such sort, that if in this world
there be any happiness for verses, it is certainly in his mouth, and in his
pronouncing, by which as evil things get the color of good; so good things
get the uttermost of their perfection. Let me know Sir whither I hit right upon
your inclinations, and in the mean time I give you many thanks for your many
favors, particularly for the Letter of my Lord you took the pains to send
me. He writes indeed in the style of a Conqueror, and these words Accepi,
legi, probavi, savor much of these, Veni, vidi, vici, of Julius Caesar, and of
these (...), of another Caesar that was afterward. Though I should never
receive other mark of his love but this, yet were this a full recompense for
all the passion I owe to his service; yet I must tell you, I cannot forget the
honor he has done me, in procuring me a promise that I shall be paid of --
-- I have done all possibly I could to blot this thought out of my mind, but I
confess unto you that my imaginative part is a little strong. I could never
hitherto satisfy my self herein, and what bad answer soever I receive from
men yet still I rely upon this word of God, who commands me to hope well, and
therefore I wait still for the accomplishment of the Oracle. All our world is
extremely bound unto you for remembering it, and I am my self more then all the
world together,

Sir, Your, etc.
At Balzac. 3. April, 1635.
FINIS.

