CORPUS Christi: BY EDMUND GVRNAY

Printed by Cantrell Leg, Printer to the University of Cambridge. 1619.

To the very Worshipful, RICHARD STUBBE, Esquire. *
SIR: I request you to be Godfather unto this Infant, as you have been
sometime unto my self. It is thought an abruptness to imprint anything
without a Dedication, which makes me thus bold with your name. I hope you will
take it at my hands no otherwise then as a token of my thankfulness for your
manifold and fatherly affection. In which respect I principally commend it unto
you: as also unto your two Daughters, my Cosen Yeluerton, and the Lady
Strange: I must also commend the perusal of it unto Mr. Robert Rudde of St.
Florence in Southwales, and Mr. Henry Godly of Onehouse in Suffolk, my very
good and learned Tutors, togetherwith my singular friend Mr. Doctor Porter of
Cambridge. Finally, the use and benefit of it I commmend, as unto my Christian
Friends the Parishioners of Edgfield, so also unto as many as love the single,
gentle, and powerful truth, especially in the Text following.

MATTHEW. 26.26. This is my body.
THAT this then is the body of our Savior, it is without all question: Yea,
not only His body, but even Himself (a part being put for the whole) it may
be affirmed: but whether it be His body indeed, and substance; or only by way
of Sacrament; that is the terrible and unappeasable question at this day. The
strife betwixt the Archangell and the devil about the body of Moses, Iud. 9.
might well prefigure this strife, but exceed, it could not. And no marvel if
^he strife be so great, considering in the end that one of the two must be
convinced, both of highest impiety against God, and also of extreme folly
amongst men. For whether to deny Divine honor unto the Creator, or to impart
Divine honor unto a creature, both are most impious: so again, to affirm
that to be corruptible bread, which indeed is very God; or that to be very God,
which indeed is corruptible bread; both are extremely foolish. You see then,
Reader, ^ow nearly it concerns you to be thoroughly advised what part you take
in so momental a cause: for if you choose neither, then are you co^demnable of
irreligion: and if you clean to the false, then are you culpable of impiety or
idolatry, if not blaspheming. For the better directing therefore and
stablishing your choice in so concerning a cause; and whereby you may happily
find a thread of expedition unto the truth herein, we commend unto you the
perusal of this Treatise. Wherein if you shall but so long endure us until we
have, first laid down the equity, conueniencie, and necessity of the one
Exposition; and then the vanity, impiety, and deformity of the other; we make
no question, but you will more lively embrace the truth, and more mortally
abhor the falsehood in this point, then ever you did.

We then which expound This, to be His Body, only by way of Sacrament, and as
water in Baptism is His blood; do take the intent of our Savior in this
business to be for the ordayning and fastening a second seal unto his New
Testament: that whereas now He had undergone the condition of man's nature, and
was about to finish the price of our redemption; He thought good not only to
have it recorded in Scriptures, and published all the world over what he had
done for us (though that might have been thought sufficient for believers,)
but also to ordain certain visible tokens and forms of remembering His such
performance: that so as His word did inwardly, these seals might outwardly,
severally in Baptism, and jointly in this Communion, express and impart unto
men the benefit of His incarnation and suffering; and we thereby to have both
His hand and seals to our redemption. Which seals also that they might the
more inseparably be made one with His testament, and withal at the first blush
more lively represent the substance thereof; He thought good to stamp and
imprint them with his own image and superscription: and therefore here in the
text calls the bread expressly His body, as an other Scripture likewise
calls the other seal, His blood: (the spirit, 1. Ioh. 5.^.
water, and blood are one:) And all this finally the rather, that whereas the
old Testament had beside the same word inwardly containing it, also a couple of
outward seals to give a sensibility unto it; and they also both severally, as
in the circumcision, and jointly as in the feast of Passover, in like manner
exhibiting the use and benefit of it; and finally being likewise clothed and
stamped with the names of the things signified (Circumcision being called the
Covenant, whereof it was but a seal, and the Feast the Passover, whereof it
was but a celebration) it might hereby come to pass, that the new Testament
should most perfitly resemble as well as accomplish the old; and the old as it
did prefigure and fore-runne, so also might it embrace, acknowledge, and give
place to the new. Now as touching our Saviors form of speech, in calling
that His body, which we expound to be but a Sacrament thereof; we further
add, that such: concisenesse of speech, is ordinary with the Scipture, with
our Savior, and his Apostles, and finally with all sorts of men. As for the
Scripture; that every where uses such significant figures, and especially when
it poynteth unto our Savior: as, when it calls Him, a rock, a stone, a lion,
a lamb, a star, a door, a vine, the way, the truth, the life, the
resurrection, our head, our root, our garment, our dwelling, our shepherd,
our peace, etc. But above all, our Savior Himself so abounding in this kind,
as that He ^orbare not in His public morals (when He meant to be most plain,)
to bid men out off the offending hand, and pluck out the offending eye; as if
He expected even from the vulgar to be otherwise understood then the letter did
import: and as for those of the wiser sort, He often grew angry with them for
taking Him at the letter; as with Nicodemus for so plain understanding His
term of being borne again; with the Disciples for their no better
understanding the leaven of the Pharisees; and with the Capernites for their
like carnal understanding the eating of His flesh. The Apostles also, as they
followed Him in the steps of His life, so so did they usually follow Him in the
same character of speech: in so much as Paul was not nice to say plainly, 1.
Cor 10.4.
the rock was Christ: as also he says to all believers, now are ye the body
of Christ, 1. Cor. 12.27.
and members in particular: Ephesians. 5.30.
Yea, we are the members of His body, of His flesh, and of His bones. And S.
John forbeares not to say, 1. Ioh. 5.8.
that the spirit, water, and blood, these three are one: Apoc. 1.5.
and that we are washed in his blood: both which sayings do give as great and
greater dignity unto Baptism, if the letter should be pressed, then the
calling bread His body, can give to this other Sacrament. And yet should not
he be thought (at least) distempred in his wits, that would hereupon infer
a substantial change of that water? though with far less dishonor unto God
might such a consequence be inferred, and with far better color: for as much
as Baptism (if comparisons may be made in holy things) is the Sacrament of our
first quickening, as this is of our nourishing; and more noble it is of the two
to make alive, then to preserve life: Baptism again being but once
administered, but this often; Baptism being expressly charged upon the
Apostles to be administered unto all nations, being also made a Mat. 16.16.
ioynt-condition with faith unto salvation, whereas this other in neither case
is mentioned: and finally our Savior Himself openly partaking Baptism, and
gracing it with miraculous opening the heavens; whereas this, if He did at all
partake it, was in private, and without any granted miracle. Yea last of all,
the Fathers honoring Baptism with as high terms as might be; one saying of
it, Ambr. de. Sacr. 1.5.
The water has the Grace of Christ, in it is the presence of the Trinity. And
an other thus; In the Sacrament of Baptism we are made bone of His bone,
Chrysostom. in epist ad Ephesians. Hom. 20.
and flesh of His flesh. Aug. de vtil. per ^. c. 1.
And Austine thus: Without doubt every believer is made a partaker of the body
and blood of Christ, when in Baptism he is made a member of Christ* yea,
though before the eating thereof he depart the world. Leo. Ep. 13.
And Leo, calling it the wonderful Sacrament of regeneration, says in an
other place of it; Sermon. 4. de Nativ.
Christ gave that to the water, which He gave to His mother. In which sense
also Paulinus: The heavenly water (says he in his poem) marries with
elementall water; and so (concipit vndi Deum) the water conceiueth God our
Savior. So likewise the Rock which is called; not the body of Christ, but
expressly Christ; may it not far advance it self above this bread, if the
letter be stood upon? especially for that the Rock most miraculously, and
Savior like, did gush forth water to the refreshing a huge multitude in the
wilderness; whereas this Bread which our Savior speaks of, made not the
least show of difference from common bread: the Rock also being but one and
the same in particular, whereof it was first spoken, the rock was Christ;
whereas the bread which at this day is administered, is not that bread in
particular, whereof our Savior said, it was His body; nor can attain to that
name and honor, but by the help of inference and figures, and that no less
then thirty to make their exposition good, Jewel art. 12. diui^.
(as dainty as they are of figures) as a late Father of our Church has
observed. Again, if the letter must be of such force (though the letter is
made to serve not to master our meanings) why may not every believer account
himself a member of Christ indeed, and substantially according to those
alleged sayings of Paul? especially considering how the believers are in
Scripture usually said to be changed, converted, renewed, new created, etc. but
never was it so said of this bread? Or why shall not every believer expect as
well a litterall performance of that promise of Christ, when He says, Apoc.
3.20.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock, and willsup with him that opens? it
being of the two, more conceiueable (how think you) that He should personally
become our companion at supper, then the supper it self. To conclude; As
Christ's Apostles, and the Scriptures, so finally all sorts of men, both holy
and common, do ordinarily use words, both beyond and beside the litterall
sense: partly of necessity, when either they be driven to borrow a word, or the
hearer cannot so well understand a proper word; and partly again for breuity
sake (when there is no likelihood to be mistaken,) as when we call that our
hand, which is but our handwriting; that the Lion, which is but the sign or
picture of the lion; that our will, or our deed, which is but a notifica^ion
thereof; or as Joseph said, the seven ears are seven years, when ^e meant
they did signify seven ^eares; and Daniel saying likewise, the tree which
thou saw it is by self, O King; meaning it was ^tended to decypher the
Kings partly also hyperbollically, when we affirm more then can be, to bring
men believe as much as may be; P^t 9.1. 1. King. 1.^0.
which form of speech the Scripture also does not abhor: and partly finally
to make our speech thereby the more pearcing, significant, and emphaticall; as
when we say, the fields laugh, the sea roar, etc. or when we call that our
heart, our joy, our glory, or our strength, which we glory, delight, or put
confidence in. So as if our Savior in the text did either necessarily, (in
regard of our weakness) or briefly, or significantly, or (as departers use to
speak) pathetically, or (as founders take leave to speak) peculiarly, call
that His body, which he meant for a pledge; or earnest seal, sign, token,
commemoration, celebration, exhibition conueyance, deed and sta^e, Ses^e,
testament; or to use one word ^orall, which is generally used of ^ll; a
Sacrament of His body yet ^ould not His phrase be thought ^arsh, intricate, or
unusual even (...) the ears of ordinary men: but unto them which have their
^ares never so little touched ^ith the language of Canaan, how ^n it seem
otherwise then most ^ire, sincere, and sensible; yea, as ^itable and proper
unto the ^nse we plead for, as can be de^sed.

Testimonies out of the Fathers prove this Sacramental Ex^sition, we might
allege store ^ as Tertullian, saying thus: Tert. cont. Man. 3.19.
-- cal^g the bread His body, to the end ^ may understand that he has gi^
bread to be a figure of His body. ^mens thus: The wine signifies the ^od
allegorically. Origin thus: Clem. pr^ Alex. in Ped. 1.^.
If ^ take this saying [ Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, Orig.
in Leu. hom. 7.
etc.] according to the letter, the letter kills Ambrose thus: Ambr. de off.
c. 48.
In the Law was shadow, in the Gospel an image, i^ heaven the truth. Chrysostom.
in Ioh. Hom. 46.
Chrysostom thus What is it to understand carnally simply as the things are
spoken, an^ to seek no further. Hieron. in 1. Cor. 11.
Hierome thus Christ left bread and wine, as he the goes a voyage leaves a
gage. Aug. epist. 23.
Austin^ thus: By reason of the resemblan^ betwixt the Sacraments and the
things, the Sacraments often take the names of the things: and elsewher^ *thus,
De doctrine. Christ. l. 3. c. 10.
This is a perfect way to discern whether a speech be proper a^ figurative;
that whatsoever in Scripture cannot stand with integrity ^ manners, or verity
of faith, that r^solue thy self is figurative: where upon he further
infers, the our Saviors phrase of eating h^ flesh, was figurative, because
acc^ding to the letter to (...) a sinful ^ calling it also a carnal sense,
Ibid. cap. 5.
to take figurative speeches properly, and a miserable bondage of the soul.
But this kind of proof, which proceeds upon testimonies, in this our short
intended Treatise, we purpose to be sparing in both because out of the mouth
of two or three, as well as ten thousand witnesses, a truth may be established;
as also for that late Writers of principal reading and learning, have already
published, and still do, entire Tractates, containing the full consent of
Antiquity in this point: the corruption also of editions, imperfection of
translations, and unworthiness of Authors, may make us the less to set by
this Testimonial proof in matter of faith; which finally when it was at the
best, was never esteemed otherwise then a foreign proof, and such at the
Scripture both old and new does rather repel us from, then inuit us unto,
when it says; Say not, Deu 30.1^. Romans ^.5.
who shall go up to heaven, or beyond the seas to bring His word unto us. for
it is very nigh^, ^en (...) mouth, and in thy heart: which holy direction we
of these latter times may take more especially unto our selves, for that we
live near or nearest unto those days whereof the Lord thus speaks; Ier.
31.31.
Behold, the da^es come when I will put my Law in their inward parts -- and
they shall no more every man teach his neighbor: for they shall all know me.
They therefore which find not light enough near hand; and a^ it were within
doors; let them, if they so think good, go seek abroad for it: but else
when light so abounds in the house (and what house is void of necessary light
when the Sunneshines) then to go into the yard for it, is but a gadding
disposition, and which loves rather to gaze about then to take pains, rather
slothful to behold the light then to make right use of it: the best light
also for man to work by either in things heavenly or terrene, being the
temperate and shadowed light; that which is so open and glaring being a dazler
and confounder, and which who so uses himself unto, may hap in the end to
be deprived of the light he has, and be driven to seek out of himself to be
resolved in most palpable things. A notable example whereof our Adversaries
have made them^elues in the present cause. For whilst they would not be
con^ent with that light which the window of our Saviors words lets in [ Do
this in remembrance of me, Luke 22.19.
] but must needs be rouing and ranging abroad, passing and compassing seas and
lands, tossing and ransaking all manner of writings whereby to find in this His
Body, an other manner of matter then a remembrance; it is now at length
befallen them, partly being confounded in their imaginations, and partly
being perverted in their judgments (thorough a skorne to be content wit a
home-growing truth after so great trauells) that now they cannot perceive a
difference betwixt His remembrance, and His very real presence; betwixt the
sign, and the thing; the shell, and the kernel; the shadow, and the
substance: whereby finally by the just judgment of God, who suffers men to
believe lies which will not obey the truth, they have not only lost the
substance by catching at the shadow, with the dog in the fable; not only
smothered and overwhelmed the Sacrament, by houering and doting upon the
outward element, as children with hugging and dandling choke their birds; but
also by conferring upon it the same incompetible respects which their
forefathers did upon the brazen serpent, they have in the end perverted it unto
the like abomination: and in stead of a faithful remembrancer of Gods
infinite love unto man, erected unto themselves a most execrable fore-staller
of their hearts and devotions unto God, and so set up the most pernicious Idol
that ever was. Which, Christian Reader, that you may more plainly acknowledge,
do but a while draw near, and as it were from the top of a peer with me,
behold what a tail of most foul, stupendous, and impious, or rather
blasphemous consequents it draws after it: that so you may, as ex vngue
leonem, so also ex cauda draconem cognoscere, and accordingly abominari. For
upon their expounding This, in the text, to become His body and person indeed;
both body, soul, and divinity, (as the Council of Trent decrees) really,
Council. Trid. less. 2. Can. 3. and can. 1.
verily, and substantially (for else they agree with us;) judge whether these
Conclusions following do not spawne and issue; as, First,

That the Mediator being

That when he means to be

That when He means to be had made, and which, for ought can be perceived,
still is the same.

will be exalted among the heathen, and will be exalted upon the earth: (Psalm.
46.10.) yet will in the Heathens eyes become more mean then the meanest worm,
and at least seem to them no better then a piece of bread.

Idols of the Heathen, for that they can neieher speak, nor stir, nor save
themselves out of captivity, (Isa. 42.2.) does notwithstanding present Himself
in such a form to be worshipped, which every living thing can make a prey of.

where (Himself has said it, Matt. 15.17.) whatsoever enters is cast forth
into the draught.

That He unto whom it was

That He is incomparably

That as often as this Body is departed, or new informed: 3. An inuesting those
acccidents or breaden substances, with the perfect body of man: 4. The so
qualifying that body, both for shape, quantity, and properties, as that it
cannot be outwardly discerned from a morsel of bread: 5. That body to be
subdued unto the jaws and digestions of the receiver, without having a bone
broken: 6. That the humane body which thus is eaten, is always in the heavens
notwithstanding: 7. That there being but one body for all the world, yet
shall every true believer, wholly eat that particular body substantially: 8.
That the appearance of all these miracles, is withheld from sense and
reason: 9. That as many several administrations, so many several performances
there are of all these miracles: 10. Finally, that the Apostles, and their
successors for ever, were endued with this divinity of power, to cause all
these foresaid miracles as often as they shall think good, unto the end of the
world.

That He which has so done marvelous acts, as that they ought to be had in
remembrance, (Psalm. 111.) He which will have His works considered to the very
sparks: (Eccl. 42.) And He whose works do not hinder one another: (Eccl.
16.26.) is not with standing the author of all those inglorious, obscure, and
selfe-confounding miracles.

That all these so strange, intricate, undergo and perform, for no necessity
of man, but this; namely, to assure men of His incarnation, and suffering for
them.







not believe Moses and the Prophets, (Luke 16.31.) will neither believe the
greatest miracle: yet not withstanding must they which have Moses, and the
Prophets, and the Gospel continually published amongst them, notwithstanding
expect a continual course of the greatest miracles, toward only the confirming
their belief.

That He which will not save (Wis. 14.5.) will notwithstanding use incredible
miracles toward the producing that effect (the strengthening of faith,) which
both, does loose the grace the more it is supported by miracles, and also has
a special means ordained of God, for the breeding and furthering of it,
namely, public preaching: and finally, the all-sufficient and most necessary
operation of the holy Ghost, promised and assigned thereunto.

planting and watering are one, (1. Cor. 3.8.) begetting and preserving (as
generation and nutrition) proceeding of the same causes: yet are such kind of
miracles to be expected, for the confirming and strengthening faith, which are
not able in the least measure to beget faith: nothing being of force to
convert outwardly an unbeliever unto the faith, but that which the light of
nature (beyond which his capacity cannot reach) can entertain; whereunto
these supposed miracles are most repugnant.

planting and watering being one; and of the two, planting being the more
noble: yet must the Redeemer in His own person water, whom by His ministers He
daily planteth.

That the Sun in the firmament

That whereas Kings and whom they think good with dignities and benefits, by
the means of a Patent, or a Seal, without stirring a foot further: yet the
King of Kings having given His Patents and Seals, His Covenants and
Testaments, yea Himself once, and Sacraments ordinarily, with His grace
continually, must notwithstanding come Himself in person, or else His gift
must be of no force.



bruise a broken reed, (Esa. 42.2.) but will so tenderly handle and foster it,
as shall make it grow together again; does notwithstanding deal so
extremely with His littlest ones, as unless they can believe that to be
their Savior, which all the world would take to be a morsel of bread, they
must look for no salvation.

That whereas the strong believer Moses, did doubt whether water would follow
upon his striking the rock, (Numb. 20.10.) though God had expressly promised
as much, and was ready to effect it: whereas also that virtuous Sarah, and the
blessed Marie did likewise make question how those miraculous conceptions could
betide them, which Angels from heaven did sensibly and expressly promise them:
yet notwithstanding must it be expected at the hands of the weakest believers,
(when they shall see that which is confessed, and must be acknowledged for
ordinary bread) that they presently upon the speaking two or three words,
believe upon pain of damnation, that it is outright become their very God:
and that without having more motives so to believe, then they have to believe,
a rock, a lion, a lamb, or etc. (by which names He is as expressly called,
as ever He was by the name of this bread) to be their God.

Moses and Elias) and that but severally; yet when He means to make His
personal approach unto His Spouse, the Church, He then on the contrary puts
off all His glorious apparel; and without so much as a messenger going before
Him, without any noise, either of a wind, as at the descending of the Holy
Ghost, or of a voice, loud, or soft, to give notice of His coming, He always
exhibites Himself unto her, thus contrary to Himself, in the common,
senseless, and silly form of belly-bread, made a little before of the Baker,
and (a strong motive unto the Church, no doubt, to put all her confidence in
Him) which every worm can ouer-master.

That He which in Scripture they worship that, which their common sense can
tell them is a sensles creature: does not with standing ordinarily present
Himself to be worshipped in that form which common sense does generally tell
us is a senseless creature.

(handle me, and see me, etc. Luke 24.) is not sufficient to prove, whether
that which men handle, see, and taste, be a piece of bread.

whereby to practice charity, etc. are notwithstanding generally, either so
weak, or so false, as that certainly they cannot discern a morsel of bread
from the body of a man, a common creature from the Creator.

Finally, (to ransacke this Iosuah, when He caused the Sun for a season to
stand still at his prayer, as that He decreed never so again to hear the
voice of a man, (Iosuah, 10.14.) yet notwithstanding since that decree, He has
bound Himself that at the voice, not of one man, but multitudes of men
continually succeeding, should be caused, not a creature but the Creator, not
to stay awhile in the heavens as that planet did, or as Himself did when He
was beheld of Steven at his Martyrdom, but to leave His throane, (His glory at
least) and then to descend in such manner and form, as (did not the necessity
of our confutation drive us unto it) were not once to be named.

These consequents, Reader, how truly they follow upon the exposition in
question, for breuity sake we leave to your self: only this you know, that if
but one of them all did truly follow (being false) it is enough to convince
the principle it self to be according. But if they all, or most of them, do
both truly follow, and also are most false, vile, monstrous, and abominable;
then if you can discern a lion by his nail, judge this opinion to be a
monster by his tail of abominations trayling after it: yea say if it be not of
the very breed of that Red dragon, Apoc. 12.4.
which with his tail drew the third part of the stars, and cast them to the
earth: for surely had it strength to his length, what would it else but reach
up to the heavens, and wrestle with the stars, yea fasten upon the throne of
the highest? Or say if that Beast could have more names of blasphemy upon his
head then this has? Apoc. 13.
For if it be Aquin. 2.2. q. 3. a. 3. c.
Blasphemy to attribute any thing unto God, which is not convenient; then what
shall it be to attribute that unto Him which is as despightfull and
reproachful as can be imagined? For what meant Moses when he took that golden
calfe, and beating it to powder, made the Idolaters drink of it? what was his
meaning? was it to do a honor unto the Idol, or to ingraine the people in
Idolatry? was it not in his utmost hate and detestation of the Idol, and to
show the people how that which they had made their god, was not able to save
it self out of the filthy gutter? Could there then be imagined a more
abominable reproach against the highest, then once to imagine the like manner
of receiving Him? Or does their adoring Him, as they pretend, before they thus
receive Him, help the matter? So did the soldiers first cry, hail King,
before they spit on Him; so did Judas first kiss Him, before he betrayed Him;
and so their first (like) adoring Him, and (then with their good wills) eating
and swallowing Him up; what ^ it else but so much the more ^lasphemous mocking
Him, ^hen it is accompanied with ^ch abominable entertainment? yea, what more
abominable usage can be imagined? ^ore dishonorable to the per^n of God; more
cross to His ^isedome, providence, justice, and government; more re^ugnant
unto His goodness, ^entlenesse, tenderness and ^ercie; more obscuring,
con^unding, defacing, and begoa^ng His most divine, most ho^, most pure, and
most glorious attributes, and properties? ^magine who can? Imagine, O ^ucifer,
if thou can? and if ^ou can not imagine more ^bellious, more treacherous,
^ore impious, more hellish ^pposes against the State and Person of thy Creator;
the^ (since thy malice is incurable^ and yet an excellent caldron to boil
thine own torment) ca^ out unto thy imps and furies t^ ^plie their
fire-workes: for the maine engine wherewith o^ late thou have enclosed suc^
multitudes of Idolaters vnt^ thy kingdom begins to crac^ call therefore upon
thy hang men to devise new tortours, vp^ on thy penmen to forge new ^ authors,
to bowell, mangl^ poison Fathers, and perue^ Scriptures: let them face dow^ all
the world that all are blin^ and must be blind in this myst^ry (of darkness
thou meanest; yea let them turn themselue^ into Angels of light, and become
zealous pleaders of God cause: let them tell us (among other stuff) that His
body i^ of a peculiar nature; for that It could walk upon the water, could
vanish out of sight, and is a glorified body: as if also the body of Peter did
not (by the like miraculous suspension) walk upon the water? as likewise
Philip vanished out of sight; or as if glorification did take away the bodily
nature; or that He spoke not of His body before it was glorified? But
principally and with most fell violence let them cry, out upon all arguing and
reasoning in this business. And withal let them allege, how, God sees not as
man sees, nor is affectable as man is; that He often thinks that precious,
which man thinks vile; He could pass through the womb of a woman without
defilement, etc. but above all, let them never forget to tell us of Gods
Omnipotence, and that we infinitely rob the same, by denying these their
monstrous supposes, as if there were any thing impossible with Him? And
thereupon finally let them glory in the strength of their own Faith, for that,
it is so strong (numbd, seared, and senseless indeed) as that with ease they
can believe, that which their adversaries are afraid once to imagine. And then
last of all, let them close up all with this pleasing conceit, that surely
their opinion is invincible: for why? because (no doubt) it is builded upon a
rock; yea the most high and mighty Rock, the omnipotence of God. But, a
less, poor, miserable, abominable fools! For if he be a fool that builds
(though never so good stuff) upon a sandy foundation; then how abominably
foolish is he, that builds most rotten and most vile stuff, upon the most
precious foundation? As if cob-webs were any whit the stronger for being built
in palaces? shall they not so much the sooner be swept away? so this their
like planting such spider-like, abominable stuff thus at the right hand of
God, so far shall it be from getting strength thereby, as that from thence
it shall receive most terrible confusion. The power of God, who denies it, yea
we glory in it that it is omnipotent: all things are possible unto Him; we
know it: Scripture teaches it: namely, so far forth as they carry an honor
in the performance. For else, why says an other Scripture, it is impossible
that God should lie? but to show us, that no kind of dishonorable actions
(whereof lying is one) may be ascribed unto Him: All power also to disgrace,
diminish, or destroy (finally) either it self or other, being impotence and
vnstaiednesse. Before therefore they had presumed to affirm that God can do
so, or so; they should first with fear and reverence, have considered whether
it might stand with His glory, so, or so, to work. For that His power does
never work outwardly to the creature-ward, but as it is first beckned unto,
and cited by His glory: that being the ground and square of all power and
possibility whatsoever: even the power of sin being grounded hereupon,
because the glory of God is advanced by subduing sin: All sayings, finally,
interpretations, and expositions whatsoever, being no further allowable, but
so far forth as they make for, or at least may stand with, This divine Glory.
The Church therefore interpreting those terms of Face, Eyes, Hands, Arms,
Wings, Foot, etc. to be attributed unto God improperly, and by way of His
gracious condiscending unto, and sympathizing with man's nature; because being
literally taken, they are derogatory unto His eternal glory, whereunto
simplicity and uniformity is of absolute necessity. Are then thy supposes
dishonorable unto God? So far then is the Omnipotence from effecting them, or
yielding unto them the least possibility of proceeding from Him, as that
infinitely it bars, repells and abhorres them. True indeed, time was, and we
bless the time, when He took contempt upon Him; (so loved He the world, man's
misery otherwise being endless;) but what of that? is therefore honor and
dishonor unto Him all one? He passed through the womb of a woman without
defilement; true: but was it without abasement? where then is the merit
thereof? Psalm. 123 5.
Or he that humbles Himself, in that He does behold the things done in heaven
and earth; did He not infinitely more humble Himself in descending into the
heart of the earth? Or because also He was scourged and crucified without any
defilement, shall that also be counted all one unto Him, that so thou may
crucify Him, yea drink His heart blood again and again? We grant also that
as He is pure God, He is not only vnpollutable, but also vnaffectable with
man's actions. But shall man therefore be careless of his actions? The
blasphemies of wicked men do no way hurt, or come nigh Him; shall it therefore
be lawful to blaspheame? If thou sinnest (says Job) what do thou against
Him: Job 35.6.
or if thou be righteous, what give thou unto Him? will thou therefore be
indifferent whether thou sinnest or not, whether thou does well or not? He
sees not as man sees; well: His Eternal and incomprehensible nature indeed,
sees all things in a moment, and without observing time, place, or
circumstance: But as He has set Himself in reference and aspect unto his
creature, especially that creature whose nature He has assumed, He now has
determined to see, though not peruersly as wicked men, nor shallowly as all
men, yet by those courses and forms of conceiving, which he has ingrained His
creature withal: And therefore now forbeares not to say, Genesis 18.21.
I will go down, and see whether they have done according to their cry, and
if not, I will know: yea, now He will be affected with his creature, will be
angered and pleased with it, will accept honor and even outward respects from
it: the holy Baptist therefore professing himself not worthy to untie the
latchet of his shoes; and the good Centurion esteeming him too great to enter
the roof of his house: yea now He calls for the bending of every knee, and the
falling down before His footestoole, with all possible praise, honor, and
glory. Remember therefore, O presumptuous man, (worms meat, dust, and
ashes,) remember, that His revealed Law, not his incomprehensible nature, must
be thy square and governor. His law bids thee every where ascribe unto Him
all glory, praise, power, and dominion; give Him therefore that He calls for:
and seeing He calls for honor, see thou offerest nothing unto Him, but that
which, at least, thou think to be most excellent, and most honorable: and
whatsoever thou would esteem vile, inglorious, or contumelious, if it were
offered unto thy self, so far must thou be from offering that unto Him, or
supposing it by Him, as thou would be from blaspheming. Thou reachest forth
thy hand in love or favor unto some man; he biteth it, or puts it in his
mouth; does he honor thee in so doing? or if thou take such usage for a
foul indignity, will thou offer the like unto Him, unto whom thou owe all
honor, fear, dread, and reverence unto? Or belike when He so calls for
honor, glory, majesty, etc. He means some other matter, or retains some
special notion under those words, which man never meant? As if God speaks
unto us in any other language but our own? or when He forbids murder,
adultery, stealing, etc. He means any thing else by such words, but as man
(the maker of words, as God is the maker of all things) intended them to
signify? Then know, O perverse man, that when he generally calls for honor,
glory, majesty, wisdom, justice, etc. to be ascribed unto Him, He means
nothing else but those respects and offices (save only in the highest degree)
which man that made those words did first mean to understand by such words;
unless thou meanest to make His word of no effect, yea a very snare and
intanglement unto us, and to speak by contraries, and so to blaspheme it as
thou do his Omnipotence. But finally, were it so that these supposes did not
indeed dishonor God, and so consequently might be allowed amongst things not
impossible; must they therefore of necessity be believed? because dooms day
may be to morrow, must it needs therefore so befall? God can raise children out
of stones, and humane bodies out of morsells of bread; must it therefore so be
expected? does possibility impose necessity? to what purpose then is there so
great labor to prove a possibility of these things, which both they are
infinitely shut from, and also were it granted them, they are never the
nearer. As little does it help them, but more and more condemn them, when
they challenge all argument, and renounce all kind of evidence which either
sense or reason offreth in this cause. For are not Sense and Reason the very
ordinance of God, imprinted in man's nature when it was most perfect? yea, in
the estate we now are in, are they not the only means whereby we are both
capable of His will, stand liable unto his laws, and tractable to His
purposes? Does not every word of God presuppose at least a reasonable
understanding, being otherwise as commendable unto the beast? yea, when the
Lord means most palpably to convince men, does He not refer them to their
senses? Are not not all His expostulations and messages whatsoever, directed
unto the conscience, whose ground is Sense and Science? Luke 24 39.
does He not send the unbeliever to his touch, 1. Cor. 11.14.
to feel the truth of his resurrection? the Ruffian to the light of nature, to
see the deformity of long hair? and the hypocrite to the common opinion, to
see the madness of speaking in an unknown tongue? 1. Cor. 14 23.
yea, does He not every where convince men of the greatest sin, even of
Idolatry, only by this; because they worship that which their common Sense
could tell them was a senseless creature? whereas if the power of common sense
be so blind, or so weak, or so false, as that it cannot certainly say,
whether the thing it sees, handle, and tastes be a morsel of bread or not;
how shall it be able to say, whether that which it worshippeth be a stone or
not, yea and that so infallibly, as that the worshipper thereof shall be
condemned, by the sentence of the most upright Judge, to be an Idolater
thereupon? For may not the Idolater justly plead, that howsoever his common
Sense told him it was a stock, or a stone, yet might it indeed be very God,
as well as that which common sense affirms to be a morsel of bread, is
notwithstanding very God? And if it be replied upon him, that he might have
found Scripture to warrant the person of God in the appearance of bread; may he
not readily answer again, that there is as much Scripture to warrant the
person of God in the appearance of a stone, for that the same Scripture calls
as expressly the same God by the name of a stone, and a rock, whereof for ought
he knows, his God may be a piece? And thus by the disabling the judgment of
common sense, shall the Idolater be furnished with a fair excuse; and may in
the end be justified for taking a tree, Isa. 8.17.
and making a fire to warm himself with one part, does make a god of the
other: as well as they which of the same dough fill their bellies with one part,
and then fall down in adoration before the other. So as this renouncing of
common Sense, what is it but to cut in sunder the strings of Gods providence
(wherewith he leads men in and out before Him, like a flock of sheep,) and
flatly to pervert the rule, and blaspheme the proceedings of His Justice? True
indeed, the Scripture often tells us, that humane wisdom and understanding is
vanity, foolishnes, yea, enmity with God; partly because the wisdom of most
men is foolishness indeed, and partly because in comparison with Gods
wisdom, the best is but foolishness: but principally, because under the
dominion of unbelief, malice, and concupiscence, it is abused, perverted, and
made enmity with God, as a weapon in the hand of a rebel becomes enmity
against his Prince: But shall we therefore from theselike respective,
comparatiue, and abusiue speeches, proceed absolutely to frustrate and disanull
the faculties themselves? Because the corruption of nature must be wrought out,
must therefore nature it self be destroyed? Or because the light of nature
must be subject unto the Faith (and so is a Prince to his Physician, or Pilot,
in their elements) shall therefore the faith clean put out the light of
nature? does ruling over subjects consist in destroying subjects? cannot my
beast be subject unto me, unless it falls down under me? or because the Eye
cannot hear, shall therefore the Ear put out the eye? So because sense and
reason cannot lay hold of future things, shall therefore the Faith deny their
judgment in present things? yea take away these reasonable powers, and what
shall become of the Faith? can it be ingrafted into the beast? For as the
natural man is the wild olive, until he shoots into the true vine; so is the
faith without effect, and must rerurne to Him that gave it, unless it finds a
reasonable (though a wild) stock to receive it, and find materials unto it,
Or again, how shall an infidel be converted (though in the act of conversion
these natural faculties most of all must be restrained) if Sense and reason be
thus wholly laid aside? For the only means which Grace uses unto man's
conversion, being preaching and miracles: take away Sense, and what shall
become of preaching? how shall we hear, or how shall we read? So again take
away reason, and what shall become of miracles? how shall they move admiration
and astonishment, or get acknowledgement? In so much as it might be a short
decision of this whole cause, to retort their argument, and say; Common Sense
does acknowledge no substantial change in this bread, nor any manner of
miracle whatsoever; therefore no such matter in this business may be
supposed. For all the miracles that ever we read of, not only were
acknowledged by these natural faculties, but also were immediately directed
unto them, whereby to be conuaied unto the heart of the natural man, toward his
conviction or conversion. For the first intent of all miracles being to
convince unbelief; either in whole, as in the unbeliever, or in part, as in
the weak believer: As for the unbeliever; nothing can possibly come at him but
that which this natural light (beyond which he has no capacity) can
entertain: and as for the weak believer; considering that weakness of faith
is (in degree) a want of faith, neither again can he be outwardly wrought upon
toward the remoouing that his weakness, but by those manner of means which can
in some measure work upon unbelief it self. So as those manner of miracles
which this outward light of nature cannot acknowledge, must needs be as vain
(and therefore not of Gods working,) as to point out the way to a traveler,
and then to put out his eyes: the proper intent of all miracles being this;
outwardly to point unto that supernatural power, which inwardly Grace only
does reveal. True indeed if the light of Grace does affirm or reveal any
thing which this light of nature cannot conceive, or does contrary, there must
it be suspended and renounced: but no such matter is there in the present
business. For neither does the Scripture, nor (Scriptures expositour) the
Church (the only windows of the light of Grace) affirm any substantial
change, any miracle, any con-or transubstantiation whatsoever to be wrought at
this time. For first concerning Scripture; where does that affirm or import
any such matters? That He took, brake, blessed, and gave bread, etc. all the
reports of the first institution do avouch: but that this bread was converted,
changed, or any way in the nature thereof altered, but as all other bread is by
the force of natural digestion, no Scripture makes any the least mention. It
says, This is my body; true: and who says otherwise? but what meant He? when
He called Peter a stone did he mean to turn him into a stone, as He did the
unbeliever into a pillar of salt? He called also Herod a fox, Judas a devil,
and the Pharisees vipers; Himself also is usually called a ^yon, lamb, stone,
rock, etc. ^s we have noted; cannot these sayings be true, unless they
prove so indeed? If then the words may have an other mea^ing, and that by the
law both of common and divine forms of ^peech; must we needs suppose ^ese most
incredible, mon^rous and impious operations, ^nely for this end to help the
words to a meaning? yea had it ^ot been far better to have ^rofessed
ignorance of their meaning, then thus to con^ound and offer violence unto God,
and all his courses to^ard the filling up of dead let^rs with a meaning? Or
belike cannot the intent of our Saui^ur in this His Ordinance take ^ffect,
unless these miracles, and especially His real presence a^waies concur? So
indeed they must say, or else nothing i^ left them. But say then; wha^ was the
intent of this our Sau^ours Ordinance? If it was for His remembrance; we know
that the remembrance of a thing is not only possibl^ without the presence of
it, bu^ also does necessarily imply the absence of it, and no way po^sibly can
be one and the sam^ with it. So far also is the remembrance of a thing from
requiring any substantial change as that the more stable the elements and
tokens are, so much the more firm and constan^ remembrance shall be cause^
thereby. Secondly, if our Saviors intent in this His ordinance was not only
for His remembrance, (though to say more, what is it but to add unto His own
words,) but also to give the receivers a full and real possession of Him and
all His benefits: yet also may such a purpose be effected, not only without
any compounding or changing of natures, or this real presence, but also
without these elements or Sacraments at al; namely, by the publication of the
Gospel, wherein these benefits and all manner of promises, are most
immediately tendered unto the faith of the hearer. Hierom. in Psalm. 147.
In which respect one of the Fathers forbeares not to say, I take the Gospel
to be the Body of Christ, and that more truly then the Sacrament: as also an
other; Greg. Niss. in vit. Mos.
Who so has abundantly drunk of the Apostles springs, has already received
whole Christ: and a third, Tertul. de resur.
The word made flesh, must be devoured with hearing, chewed with understanding,
and digested by believing. Thirdly, if our Saviors intent was not only to
refresh His remembrance unto us, or to give us a full possession of Him, but
also to give us State and Sesne of such possession; yet neither hereunto is
either His Real presence, or these miraculous supposes any way requisite: no
more then they be requisite unto the same intent in the other Sacrament of
Baptism. Fourthly, if the intent of this our Saviors ordinance be, not so
much for our spiritual partaking Him (which is the work of faith alone,) nor
again only for our visible partaking Him, (which is the intent of every
Sacrament,) but further that we may mutually and jointly so partake Him, which
is the most proper in^ent thereof) yet as we be seue^lly made His visible
mem^ers, by the sensible partaking ^aptisme, where no such pre^nce nor wonders
are suppo^d: so may we be jointly and ^utually made His visible bo^e, by the
sensible partaking ^is communion, though still ^e elements remain simple, and
the same. Fifthly, were it to ^e supposed, that the intent of ^is His ordinance,
were to ^ue grace and faith unto the ^ceiuer; yet as the brazen ser^ent was
never more then (as ^zechias called it) a piece of ^asse, 2 King 18 4.
though all that looked upon did live thereby: so might these ^mple elements
never exceed ^eir naked and simple natures, ^ough as many as did eat ^ereof
should get grace thereby. Or finally, shall we suppo^ the intent of this
Ordinance ^ be (as some of the Aduersari^ would have it,) for the exerci^ and
trial of our faith, whereb^ to learn to believe His omn^potence, in first
believing H^ bodily presence in so unlike appearance? and is this a fit
e^ercise for to learn a weak fai^ to believe, by putting upon such manner of
supposes? h^ that shall complain of a wea^ stomach, shall he be prescribe to
go eat the strongest mea^ or he that can hardly stand o^ his legs, shall he
for his re^uery be advised to run race^ then indeed may he that complains of
a weak faith, be w^shed unto the exercises of the strongest faith; and he the
would feign believe that the Son of God was once made man for him, let him be
taught for a preparatiue to believe, that he thus daily takes the form of a
piece of bread for him; and so not only the means shall prove incomparably
more hard to brook, then the end, most preposterously, but also that which was
intended to comfort, or (suppose) to exercise the weak faith, shall ouerwhelme
and break the back of the strongest faith: though (who knows not) the intent
of this Sacrament is to refresh and nourish, not to exercise the faith; and
that the way thereunto should be by supplying new strength, and producing more
plain evidence; not by increasing the burden, and further perplexing the
Senses. Last of all, what intent or benefit can there be imagined for the
behoof of man, which our Savior cannot effect unto us without his bodily
presence? yea, the least miracle that ever we read of, and whereunto the
Omnipotence of God did least of all descend, were it but the softest voice, or
the reaching forth of a hand, etc. would it not far more move and work upon
the hearts of men, (were miracles now to be expected,) then this all-surpassing
Reall-presence, and most stupendous concurring operations? We conclude then,
that no possible or imaginable intent of this our Saviors Ordinance, does take
any the least furtherance by these manner of supposes, but rather is utterly
oppressed and confounded thereby. For whereas the principal intent thereof, is
to put us in mind, that He took the form of a man for us: what do these
supposes, but teach the flat contrary, namely, that He has left the form of
a man, and has betaken unto Him the form of common bread; yea, not only the
intent of this Sacrament, but even the foundation of the Christian faith is
distempered; and (as much as in man lies) ouerturned hereby. For if He that is
a perfect man, seems to be a morsel of bread; if He seems to be bodily
eaten, and seems to be chewed with the teeth, when indeed He is neither so
eaten, chewed, or any way touched: shall not men hereby learn to imagine, that
likewise when He was here upon earth, He might seem to be a man, and yet was
not; seemed to bleed, suffer, and die, and yet indeed did not; and so the life
and power of our Salvation to come to nothing? If then neither the words of our
Savior, nor any imaginable meaning of them do enforce this Reall-presence,
where is the Scripture that must make us put out our eyes, and renounce all our
wits for gainsaying it? or that Scripture which tells us that we must eat
His flesh, etc. does it of necessity bind us to believe, that here it is in
the form of bread? as if the true eating of this flesh indeed, did not consist
in our only believing on Him, and that before ever we taste of this Sacrament?
Or must we suppose, that though no Scriptures expressly affirm these things,
yet by inference or circumstance they may imply as much? yea rather the clean
contrary: For had our Savior intended, that this His Ordinance should be
accompanied with these so uncouth and incredible operations, together with such
deformity of His presence, would he not have given most express intelligence
and warning thereof at the first institution? would He have given them no
expectation of such wonders toward? no caveat to hear with the right ear, and
see with a single eye, as always in matters of more importance then
appearance, He used to quicken His hearers withal? yea, had the Disciples
supposed any such wonders, would they have bin so silent, without so much as
asking, how can these things be? or they which were so apt to make questions,
and difficulties, and to wonder at his ordinary miracles; Luke 5.9.
yea, to be so astonished at a strange draught of fishes, could they let pass
this mass of miracles unregarded? Or if they so easily swallowed all these
things, how was it that by and by after, when our Savior did but say, Ioh.
16.1^.
Yet a little while, and ye shall not see me; and a little while and ye shall
see me, etc. they were so troubled, as that they professed they knew not what
He said? could they conceive immediately before, how He could be here and
there, and every where, in all the corners of the earth bodily present, and at
the same time, and yet now could not understand, how a little while they should
see Him, and a little while not see Him: and that when he told them that He
went to the Father? Or must we suppose that the Disciples were so fully
resolved of our Saviors deity, as that therefore at this supper they made no
marvel at any thing which He said or did. But had it been so, they would never
so have forsaken Him presently after supper, and run away from Him, neither
would they so slenderly have believed His resurrection, as to think it an idle
tale, Luk 24 11.
when it was first reported; especially being a thing far more credible, and
far more becoming the Almighty (then the most tolerable amongst these
supposes,) and whereof He had often forewarned them, and showed many
experiments of his power therein. But be it so, that the Apostles were so past
all maruelling at our Saviors works: yet could they be so unmindful of the
weak belief, which future times are more and more subject unto, as in their
Epistles and Gospells to leave no mention of these wonders, concurring at every
Sacrament, and being of such necessity to be believed? which also had they
with many repetitions and inculcations put posterity in mind of, yea even
inserted into their Creed, yet all would have been little enough to have
procured unto it the meanest degree of unfeigned belief. Or again, how is it
that they so often rehearse in the Gospells the other miracles, and yet will
not vouchsafe any of these once the naming? was His turning water into wine so
memorable, and yet His turning a morsel of bread into the perfect body of a
man, or making them both one (which is worse) not worth the speaking of? Could
His multiplying loaves be more wonderful, then this multiplying humane bodies?
or was his transfiguration on the mount more marvelous, then this His
transformation, or, transubstantiation, if it were not counterfeit? Or was the
Apostles power over Scorpions and serpents more worthy to be recorded, then
this incomparably exceeding (supposed) power over the Mediator, to cause Him
corporally to descend, when they and their successors should think good? To
conclude then, as no Scripture affirms or implies, so all circumstances are
most contrary to this Real presence, and the rest of those intolerable
supposes, which the light of nature is so shent for gainsaying. What then, in
the second place, says the Church? For the Church having nothing but either
from nature, as they are men; or from Scripture, as they are holy men; it must
follow, that where nature and Scripture are silent, the Church must needs be
silent. Aug in 3. libris. Nazian. in Poem.
Those Fathers also which took upon them to write the meruells of both the
Testaments, for as much as they made no mention of these which are pretended,
may it not be a fair argument, that the Church never knew them? would they
have omitted those wonders, which in regard of obscurenesse more needed, in
regard of strangeness more challenged, and in regard of (supposed) necessity
more required, notice and Faith at the hands of men then any of the rest? Yea,
Aug Tom 3. l. 3. de trin. cap. 10.
he which writ them at the full (as all things else) least he might be thought
of forgetfulness to have left out this biggest miracle, thus says of the
Sacraments in an other place, that because they are known unto men, and by men
are wrought, they may have honor as things appointed unto religion, but wonder
as things marvelous they cannot have. Even thus much alone might it not be
sufficient to conclude the Church to be negative concerning these supposes? or
must we rather go search from age to age, the particular determination of the
Fathers and writers in their times about these matters? So indeed would the
Adversaries have it: not because they think to help their cause thereby, but,
partly because they have no succor left, where-vnder to shelter themselves,
but this pretense; and partly for that by this kind of search, they hope to
gain time, and never come to an end. And yet notwithstanding even in this kind
has the facility of our writers followed them, and discovered unto the world
how the ancient Fathers never dreamed of these their monstrous supposes. And
for a taste thereof, my self was purposed, Christian Reader, to have noted from
the first (in time) of note, Clemens Romanus, and so through Ignatius, Iustine
Martyr, Ireneus, Tertullian, Clemens Presb. Alexandrinus, Origin, Cyprian,
Eusebius Emissenus, Eusebius Caesariensis, Concilium Nicenum, Athanasius,
Cyril, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Greg Nissen: Chrysostom, Greg. Nazien. Hierome,
Austine, Fulgentius, Vigilius Council. Con^nt. Beda, Theodoret* Bernard, ^rtram
Pascha^us, R^banus M. Dru h^u Lumbard Bonauen^ure, Ius canonicum, until the
^imes of the first protestation, ^he elements in this Sacrament were never
esteemed to depart with their nature, nor were ever counted more then as ^gnes,
seals, tokens, figures, ^acraments, etc. of this His bo^y. But, partly for the
reasons ^leadged in the beginning, I ^orbeare that labor; and partly because
this kind of proof, ^ough the Authors were never so worthy, must be answe^ed
in the end as that woman of ^maria was by her country^en; Ioh 4.42.
now believe we not for thy ^ying, for we have heard Him our selves: there
being a nearer and more contenting evidence, which the providence of God has
ordained, to stablish the heart of man, then the authority of any (especially
far set) whatsoever. But as touching the testimonies which they allege, we
thus shortly answer: First, the Authors which they vouch, so far forth as that
notorious Expurgatoriu^ Index has had the trimming, or rather the bowelling of
them, so far we might well return them, as authors and sayings of their
own framing* Secondly, as holy and excellent terms and respects as any of
them ever gave to this Bread; they gave every way as holy and as great unto the
other Sacrament of Baptism. Thirdly, were it so that never so many made for
the^, yea should Angels from heaven teach us to worship God in the shape or
show of bread, or in the likeness of any thing either in heaven or earth, we
must abhor them. Fourthly, were it so that some ^ate Writers amongst their
other works have infolded ^ or rather rehearsed) this their opinion; yet as
holy Aaron was ouer-borne by the multi^de, to set up that golden ^alfe, which
the people was so had upon: so may it be ima^ined that men, well otherwise
^ffected, might in the like dread ^f a more fearce beast, then the multitude,
be carried with the ^reame of the times, and yet ^etest it as Aaron did, though
^o more excusable then Aaron ^as. Last of all; those testimo^es which they
truly allege out of the ancient Fathers, for many hundred years together,
immediately succeeding the first institution, are urged and pressed of them
beyond and contrary to the intent of the writer: namely, by taking those
sayings according to the fullness and propriety of the letter, which they by
way o^ figure only, hyperbollically, o^ comparatively, used to amplifi^ and
exaggerate the worthine^ of this Sacrament unto the receiver. As one saying of
it thus Think not that thou receive bread, or wine, when thou come to these
mysteries, etc. even a neighbors will say when the^ inuit one another, look
for ^ good cheer etc. meaning tha^ good cheer is not the inten^ of their
inuiting: yea some peradventure not forbearing to sa^ flatly, that the bread
and the wine are converted into His body and blood, even as money may be said
to be converted into land, a penny into a penny loaf, etc. An other again
saying; the same thing which is believed with our faith, is received with our
mouth: even as the seal and the instrument, or the instrument and our act is
all one. And some finally saying, in the bread, is received that which did hang
upon the cross; meaning, that nothing else is intended in the receiving that
bread, but the benefit of Him that so died. These manner of phrases, and
patheticall amplifications, the Fathers are not scrupulous sometime to bestow
upon this Bread: yet so as withal it may easily be discerned, how they never
had therein any further intent, but partly to weane the conceit of the receiver
from regarding the belly-elements; and partly by so attributing unto the sign,
the virtue and power of the thing, the spirit of the receiver might the more
kindly glide out of earthly shadows and resemblances, into heavenly
apprehensions and fruitions: so as from such kind of comparatiue, ardent, and
hyperbolicall speeches, for any to gather positive and absolute conclusions,
beside the impiety of it, what is it else but extreme rudeness and violence?
And as well may they conclude, Deuteronomy. 9.1.
that the Anachims had cities fenced up to heaven; 1. King. 1.40.
or that the earth did rend with the sound of music; because so says the
letter of certain Scriptures: or that David was no man, because so ^e says, I
am a worm and no ^an: or, that Paul was nothing, because he that planteth,
etc. is nothing, but God, etc. or, that we ^ust not bid a friend to din^er,
because our Savior says, ^d not thy friends, but the poor, (...):. even all
these may they ^nclude, as well as conclude ^at there is no bread in the
Sa^ament, because a Father ^th, look not for bread when ^ou come thereunto:
yea and (...) well may they conclude ^m the same Father, that we ^ust not
think to receive His ^die at this Sacrament, be^use also these be his words in
^ other place; Think not that ^n receiuest by the hand of man, Chrysostom sermon
de E^char. 12.
^e Body of God, but that with ^gs thou receiuest fire from hea^, etc. Yet
these manner of ^ings they are which the Adversary culls forth; and stretc^ing
them upon his monstro^ opinion, according to the v^ most and hyperbolicall
exte^ of the letter, does thereupo^ boast, that the Church and F^thers are
wholly of his side: a^ so as one of the Fathers says ^ the Pharisees, Hieron.
in Matthew lib. 3. cap. 16.
that simplicem ^ quendo literam occidunt fil^ Dei, may it most truly be sa^
of them, that by their sticki^ in the naked letter, they bo^ (as much as in
them lies) kill t^ Son of God, and also poiso^ the good meaning of the
F^thers, and all for the supporti^ and maintaining their most ab^hominable
Idol. But, bless be God, the Church was a^waies waking, and quick enough to
discover, and cry o^ against such abomination and as she never failed to
r^store the truth and Sacraments unto their integrity, as at any time they
grew tainted with unwholesome compounds, or ^estered with traditions: so
especially has She in her elder ^eares, purged and redeemed them even with her
blood, from ^asses of encumbrances and ^orruptions. In which business, ^f Her
zeal to restore this Sacrament to the first simplicity, made Her pare it to
the quick, and withal peradventure to ^ereaue it of some allowable respects,
yet did She therein no otherwise then as necessity required: considering how
prone ^ans nature is to go a who^ng after every fancy, and to ^ne the glory
of the invisible God, not only into the simili^de of a beast that eats hay,
^ut also into the similitude of that which beasts and worm do consume and
eat. For such is the property of deceitful error, when it cannot put the
head forward, even (serpent like) to put the tail forward when it cannot get
in by mo^ likely courses, to fetch about b^ courses most unlikely: when (...)
sees us strongly provided o^ the left side, to trip us up (assail^ at least) on
the right side: when it cannot entice us from the lou^ of good things, to make
us do^ upon the colors and shadow of such good things: when (...) cannot
draw us from the lou^ of Scriptures, to make us familiarly draw so near, as
to pinch press, and tread upon Scripture: when it cannot perswad^ us that
there is no such fruit i^ them, then to persuade us t^ take the very leaves
and lette^ for the fruit of them: under which oftentimes if they carry any
breadth, it self will privily lurk, and make them swell so fairly, and show
so goodly, as not only the fruit shall be shadowed and sowred thereby, but
also it self in the stead thereof most greedily gathered and entertained. As
(for a fair example) these words of our Savior [ This is my body,] when it
perceived them to carry more breadth and compass then the meaning intended
did require; what does it but crowd it self within them, and filling them
according (indeed) to the latitude of the letter, has gotten it self to be
preferred (of the blind) before the meaning intended; namely, because by it the
letter is more fully replenished: even as the theife, which therefore
challenged the garment, because his back did better fit it. And this has
always been the practice of this subtle serpent, to work both backward and
forward: as yet more specially we may note in this business of the Sacrament.
For whereas at first it persuaded men to make no reckoning of it, but to resort
unto it as to an ordinary feast, as if they had no other houses where to eat
and to drink; 1. Cor. 11.
Hieron in 1. Cor. 11.
and, (as a Father says) rather to fill their bellies, then for the mystery:
now at last, after they were beaten from such gross prophanenes, principally
by the Apostles admonition, to discern the Lords body (from the use, not from
the substance of bread;) and partly by the diligence of succeeding Pastors,
continually beating their conceit from minding the outward element, (thinking
it needles to put men in mind that still the outward element remained,) what
does this cunning serpent, but according to his old rule, assail them with a
most contrary persuasion; that when they would no longer esteem it (grossly)
as ordinary bread, he might make them now believe that it was no bread at all;
and so consequently (for some thing it must be,) His very body indeed. Even
as those Barbarians did by Paul, Act. 18.
when first they judged him to be some murderer, and after, upon occasion of a
little miracle, would needs make him no ^esse then a god; so this sallying
^eruersenes of man (always ^bbing or flowing in extremi^ies for want of
foundation to settle upon) through the instigation of this crooked serpent,
dealing by this Sacrament; whereas at first it esteemed it little, or no whit
better then common bread, now, upon occasion of those wholesome caueats of the
Fathers, will uphold it to be no less then very God: first, not discerning
the body of the Lord; now will not discern the body of the bread: first, not
discerning the spiritual end of it; now will not discern the elementall
beginnings of it: first resorting unto it to fill their bellies with it; now
will resort unto it, as if they had no other God, to worship and adore it. Which
monstrous extremity, being at first not perfectly discerned; partly because
it was so incredible, and partly because the first broachers of it were
construed according to the Fathers phrase, and as having no other intent in
bestowing such superlatiue terms upon it, but ^hereby to gain reverence unto
it, and to prevent a relaps unto that Corinthian grossenes, was therefore
accordingly the ^esse gainesayed: but when the corruption plainly appeared,
and began to be authorized; ^hen did the Church double her most vehement
asseuerations, and protestations against ^t: yea, they heaped up their ^ues for
the ramming up this gappe, which this monstrous opinion began to make, until
the people of God might better awake: which when they did; and withal more
perfectly espying what a monster made toward them, cried out unto the Lord of
His goodness to succor them. Then He also awaked as one out of sleep, and
li^ a giant refreshed with wine, d^ smite our enemies in the hinder parts,
drive them home to their dens, put them to a perpetua^ shame: And finally,
wringing the sword out of the Beasts hand, which while the keepers slept, had
made such havoc withal; restored it in good time unto the true protectors and
defendors of the Faith. Blessed be His Sovereign goodness and Almighty mercy
therefore.

Notwithstanding as he which is converted, owes this office of thankfulness to
strengthen others; and who so is delivered out of thrall, cannot perform a
more acceptable sacrifice unto his Redeemer, then by furthering others unto the
like freedom: so does it concern us, not to take our final ^est under our
arbours, or enjoy ^ full fruition of this sweet li^erty, so long as we know any
^f the people of God elsewhere ^ill to groan under the like ^aptiuity. For this
cause, as they ^home God has possessed with temporal power, cannot ^ore
commendably extend it, ^hen toward the rescuing of those which so groan and
^ffer (the persecuting our bre^ren for the truth sake, being far more just
cause of hosti^y, then the vexing our con^derats for traffic sake:) so ^e
which rather enjoy the be^efite, then have the command ^ such outward power,
and are ^iuiledged to sleep (as it were) ^ the day, in respect of bodily
faires, whereby the better to ^tch in the night unto invisible business; what
should we d^ else but lift up our voices, a^ advance our pens, at least, bo^
for the encouraging the goo^ hearted unto perseverance, a^ also to keep the
drowsy mi^ded from falling into the li^pit of darkness any mo^ And the
rather, let us prouo^ and stir up one another so^ do; considering the doub^
diligence of the Adversary (a^cording to the children of the generation,) and
how vncessa^ they are (hoping belike wh^ they cannot prevail by arg^ment, to
tire by importunit^ in all kind of writings, pain and trauells, choosing,
rath^ then fail, with those Ephesia^ to support this their Dia^ though it be
with nothing b^ hourly outcries: and shall ^ then think it modesty or po^cy
to be silent? For what though the cause happily did not need our help, or that
the truth were plain enough? what then? Does God call for thy service, because
He needs it? Is it any thing to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Is it not
for thy exercise and benefit, that He puts duties and services upon thee, that
thou thereby may sweat out thy corruption, gather up thy scattered soul,
make it capable of bliss, and so wax able to relish heavenly things? Speak
then the truth, O man, whether the truth needs it or not: speak it for thine
own good: for it is sweet: speak it, because thou have a tongue: Psalm. 116.10.
I believed (says the sweet Psalmist) and therefore I spoke: 2. Cor. 4.3.
we also believe (says the most fervent Apostle) and therefore speak: Then if
we all believe, Psalm. 34.3.
let us all speak, and magnify His name together: let us drown the noise of
iniquity with the voice of truth and righteousness. And if the Adversary thinks
with outcries to make great their Diana of the Ephesians; let us on the
contrary be more loud, and more constant to cry, Abominable is Diana of the
Ephesians. As for fair and soft courses of argument, it is but lost upon
selfe-condemned heretics; as we have more then probability to take these men
to be, and that indeed they believe not themselves, that, which with extreme
terrors and tortours they force upon the faith of others: whether it be their
policy (most damnable though foolish) that by making men swallow this
monstrous opinion, they may then readily bring them to bibbe ^n all other
creeping unclean errors whatsoever: or whether it be their pride, as
disdaining to be thought ever once to have erred, but in sharpenes of wit to
go beyond all the world, beyond all sense and reason, yea beyond God Himself:
or whether it be their foolish dotage upon a few late forefathers (above a
thousand years since the first institution) whose blind children they choose
rather to be, then the right-sighted children of God: though therein also they
contrary their best forefathers, which preferred the first rising of the
Gospel, before the old Idols of their heathen parents: or whether finally, the
cause be in their siluer-smithes, and shrine-makers, those chalicers, iuglers,
and wire-drawers, which finding daily as much foyson and fa^ from this breaden,
as those Priests of Bell ever found from that bourd, or those Ephesia^
crafts-men from their Idol; do set the people in the like foaming rage
against all that go^ about to unmask this their belly-god: whatsoever be the
cause of this their wilful besottednesse, there is no hope to prevail with
them by argument: all such courses are bu^ lost labors, and whereby partly
they gain time, as he tha^ undertook to make an ass to speak, and partly
wind them selves from the point: choosin^ with pleaders of foul cause^ to be
any where rather then i^ the matter, wherein they kno^ they shall be grauiled
and confounded. To such therefore, Reader, be thou as far from offering
argument, as they will be far from embracing the truth, which howsoever in
other matters they sufficiently can discern, and with much perspicacitie
afford; yet in this business, they are resolved they must be blind, and will
be blind: and therefore to offer them light herein, what is it else but to show
them their deadly foe to shoot at? the strength of this their hold being
affected and wilful darkness. But as for such as have not yet cast
themselves into the nurture of these leaders, and yet do retain a better
opinion of (falsely so called) Catholics; though knowledge, wisdom,
temperance, justice, gravity, and courage (if these be the only motives of
their affection) have abounded even in Pagans, heathens, Philosophers, and
natural men, (yea, and a scorn of equivocation or treachery against their
enemies:) yet if they have not so utterly renounced their own light, as not to
be able to discern betwixt the most distant things that are, (the Creator,
and the most common creature) such we make no question, will soon be brought
to abandon the wilful maintainers of this monstrous opinion. And as we hope,
a little the sooner, if they shall direct their consideration along, by the
thread and byasse of this present Treatise. The principal intent whereof, though
it was for the protesting and exercising our due and necessary indignation
against this Idol, which so aduanceth it self in the Church of God, and in
that very roabe which was ordained for the Body of our Lord; yet, as we hope,
we have not so given way to our zeal, but that sufficient matter has gone
together withal, as well for the inlightning and resolving others, as for the
inflaming of our selves. Notwithstanding, for as much as that Spirit which
requires feruencie, does also commend unto us the love of our enemies, (and
who are a Christians enemies, but Gods enemies,) therefore, Christian Reader,
according to the example of that blessed Steven, who at his last gasp, prai^d
for those which immediately before he had charged with al^aies resisting the
holy Ghost; Act. 7.
let us also thus far pray for our Adversaries: that so far forth as they
do not maliciously renounce the light, nor wittingly make Inquisition for the
blood of those that love the light; they may find at the mercy of God some
degree of that Grace, wherewith that raging persecutor Saul, was tempted into
the humble professor Paul: yea, Lord; they that are content to part with
preferment, liberty, love of friends, and life (it seems) rather then with
that (falsehood) which they are persuaded is the truth: would no^ they do much
more for the truth it self? That Truth the^ which many contemn, (a^ least
which so run over,) le^ them be vouchsafed: were no^ their ears bung'd up,
the^ might prove vessels far be^ ^er retentiue, then many which yet are not
refused. But ^ll things shall be done in His ^e time; to whom be ascri^ed, all
honor, and glory, and ^raise; all might, majesty, and ^ominion; all fear,
respect, ^d subjection; all grace, good^esse, and long suffering; all ^art,
good will, and good ^eaning; all thanksgiving, lo^ing kindness, and devotion, in
^e love, grace, and fellowship ^f the Almighty, Three-in-^ne, for ever, and
ever, Amen.

FINIS.

