The Garden of Pleasure: Contayninge most pleasante Tales, worthy deeds and
witty sayings of noble Princes and learned Philosophers, Moralized.

No less delectable, than profitable.

Done out of Italian into English, by JAMES SANFORDE, GENT.

Wherein are also set forth diverse Verses and Sentences in Italian, with the
English to the same, for the benefit of students in both tongs.

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman.

ANNO. 1573.

HONI: SOIT: QVI: MAL: Y: PENSE: 1573.



OSTEON KAI ELPISTEON

(...).
(...).
Ad comitem Lecestriae.
DORICE.
(...)
(...).
IDEM LATIN.
Inclyta virtutis volitet tua fama per orbem,
Et sero moriens sis super astra, precor.
ITALICE.
Prego che la vostra chiara fama
Di virtu, per tutto'l mondo voli,
E che dopo lunga vita, l'alma
Del vostr' alta person, al cielo voli.
GALLICE.
Qu'en tout ce siecle bas ta haute renommee,
Auecques dignite soit de toutz celebree,
Que la mort viene tard pour te clorre les yeulx,
Qu'apres la mort tu sois au grand palais des cieulx.
ANGLICE.
I pray that your renoumed fame
of virtue may be blown
Each where, and living long, you may
above the stars be known.
To the right honorable, Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leycester, Baron of
Denbigh, Knight of the most noble order of the Garter.
IT is left in writing that when the Teians could not abide the spitfulnes of
the Persians, forsakyng their City, they removed to Abdera, a City of Thrace,
and that hereof grew this Proverb, (...): whereby is signified, that in great
adversity we should not despair, but have some hope: and that there is some
place for us to flee unto for succor, if any (beyond all measure) continues
to molest us. This I write to this end, that being (I know not by what
destiny) grievously troubled fevv years past, and finding true that of the
unfortunate there is no fortunate friend, I had recourse altogether to my
former studies, which for a time I had left off, and eftsoons took books in
hand, which are the faithfullest counselors, in adversity the best
comforters, and whose fruits in both fortunes are the richest possessions: for
learning by no means can be taken away: all other things as fickle being
placed in fortunes hand, ebbing and flowing like the sea, vvaxing and vvaning
like the Moon, are full of change and mutabilitie, so that a life void of
afliction has happened to none: and true it is as Hesiodus says, time is
othervvhile a mother, othervvhile a stepdame: and therefore Pliny says, that
he is in doubt, whether nature be oftener a stepdame, or a mother, as she
which brings forth so many poisons, and so many remedies. There is none
almost but has sustained some grievous misfortune in the course of his life,
and he that has passed the most part of his age without trouble, is many
times assailed with some sharp storm of fatal adversity in the end, as
Policrates the tyrant of Samia was, who being proud of his long prosperity,
and desirous to prove the malice of Fortune, cast a ring of great value into
the sea, which being svvallovved by a fish, and the same taken came again to
his hands, so fortune hitherto ceased not to flatter him, but at last she gave
him a most cruel fall for being taken of his enemy, he ended his life miserably
upon the gallovvs together with his false felicity, which shows that
continual prosperity is not good and turns lastly into adversity
remediless, that none should flatter himself in vvelfare, and that it is
better othervvhyle to endure some storms of trouble in youth, than most
miserable adversity in elder age. VVho^ fortune cherishes in the beginning in
the end many times she brings to destruction, and when she most favors,
she is chiefly to be feared. Master Frances Pescione a learned Italian said,
that adversity is better than prosperity, for the one makes a man to know
himself, and to remember his mortal state, the other enge^dreth pride and
forgetfulness of our human condition. Fortune bears rule over the body,
but not over the mind, she works her tyra^nie on outvvarde things, and not
on inward: and if the mind be with holsom doctrine diligently prepared, the
cruelty of fortune may be the better endured, nay rather nothing at all
esteemed, if with the divine Plato, and after him with the Stoike Epistetus
we hold, that the mind alone is man, and that the body is nothing else but
the prison or sepulcher of the soul, whose evils as they are greater and more
grievous than them of the body, so is the mind by no means more to be
comforted and kept in constancy, than by good doctrine and reading of vvorthie
authors, to whom I have fled for comfort and counsel, as the Teians for
succor went to Abdera, and out of whom I have gathered such things as have
privately recreated and comforted me, translating them, as also (as I trust)
shall delighte all such as do read the same. I have long time thought with
my self whom specially I should make patron of this book, and among many
noble personages, your honor came to my remembrance, who is able to purchase
him credit and authority with those me^ unto whom your godliness,
goodness and constancy (which you have hitherto always shevved, and do yet
show in maintayning true religion) is thorovvly known. Wherefore I beseech
you most ernestly to accept this token of my good vvil, and at leisure to read
it, for I hope it vvil not seem unpleasant to your lordship and others, in the
reading, asvvell for the pleasant verses of sundry Italian Poets therein
recited, as also for the grave and plesaunt sayings and deeds of diverse
princes, and Philosophers, sentences, and proverbs, in it contained. The
Almighty, who has blessed you with his heavenly gifts, vouchesafe to
preserve you in health, and increase and multiply your honor and his good
gifts in you.

Your honors most humbly to command. JAMES SANFORD.

To the Reader.
THere are two things (gentle Reader) which I trust will make my book
acceptable to thee, to wit, pleasure and profit: and he which lincketh them
together, bears away the prick and praise (as Flaccus says.) I have in
sundry places where the verses of diverse excellence Jtalian Poets are cited,
translated them, and joined the English and Italian together: the like have I
observed in certain Proverbs and Sentences in the end of the book, which
beside other profit that may be received of them, they will somewhat help and
delighte Gentlemen, and others that desire the knowledge of the Italian tongue.
Wherefore take in good part these my labors, which J wish to profit thee so
much in reading, as I have bin delighted with them in writing.

Sayings and deeds notable, as well grave as pleasant.
That books are wise and faithful counselors.
KIng Alphonsus of Arragon, being asked what counsaylours he best allowed of,
and found most profitable, answered forthwith books: because they without
fear, without flattery, without grief or any reward, tell me faithfully all
that which I seek to know. And Cicero said: Oh dear books, O pleasant
family, books do always stand thee instead: if thou list they speak, if
thou will, they hold their peace, they are ever ready at thy commandment:
they be not outrageous, not rash, not ravenous, not greedy, not obstinate, as
every other family.

That a merry conceit stoutly and pleasantly spoken by the Captain, gives
courage to the Soldiers.
WHen a soldier came to Leonides, and told him that the number of his enemies
was so great, that for their darts men could not see the Sun, he answered him
pleasantly, saying: And will it not be a great pleasure to fight in the shadow?

That Nature vvarneth us to shun superfluous babbling.
ZEno seeing a young man that babbled ouermuche, said thus unto him: Mark this
my son, that Nature has made us two ears, and one mouth, because we should
hear much, and speak little. The same Zeno being demanded how far truth
was from falshoode? answered: As far as it is from the eyes to the ears.

That according to the judgment of the wise, man's ignorance is exceeding
great.
SOcrates, he which by the Oracle of Apollo was judged the wysest man alive,
held that Ignorance was the mother of presumption: And therefore used
oftentimes to say: This I know only, that I know nothing. And Themistocles,
the wise and sage counsaylour, being an hundredth and six years old, said at
his death that he was unwilling to dye when he had begun to know how to live.

That constant and valiant men make a jest of grief and pain.
SOlemon the Sophist, when he was greatly tormented with the gout, mersly
said: If I have need to go, I have no feet: If I have any thing to do, I
have no hands: but if the gout take me, I have both hands and feet.

That the chances of Fortune are strange and marvelous.
ONe Mark Antonio Batistei, an Italian, having lost five hundredth crounes in
a drowned ship, went as desperate to hang himself. But being about to
fasten the roape to a beam, he found there hidden by chance a thousand
crowns: wherefore he being exceeding joyful and merry, took them, and
exchaungyng the halter for the crowns, went away. Now behold, not long
after, the owner came thither to see them, and handle them, who not fynding
them, but in their place seeing a halter, was overcome with so great sorrow,
that without any more ado he hoong himself with it.

That with the constancy of the mind, the strokes of Fortune and men are
borne off.
SEneca says, that wheresoever a man does hide himself, Fortune and the
malice of the people will find him out: and therefore the mind ought to draw
too his invincible rock of constancy, where dispising al worldly things, the
darts of Fortune and men without any hurt shall fall down to his feet. And
master Jews Almanni, a very fine Italian Poet, to the like purpose said: Al
miser huom non gioua andar lontano,
Che la Fortuna il segue ouunque ei fugge:
Mal, valorose, and saggio
Stelle, Fortuna, and sort.
Vince, and rinasce in morte.
that is, It naught auayles the wretched wight
To go far from his wonted place,
For Fortune follows him in sight,
Whereuer he does flee, apace:
But he that worthy is and wise,
Does overcome by wisdoms might
The Stars, and Fortunes cankred spite,
And does in death eftsoons arise.


That wise men make aunsvvere to every deep demand.
THales Milesius one of the seven sages of Greece, being demanded what thing
was of all other the most ancient, he answered, GOD because he has always
ben: what thing the fairest? the world (said he) for that it was the work of
god: what was the widest thing? place, because it comprehends every other
thing: what thing was most profitable? hope, because when all other wealth is
lost, this remains always: what thing was best? virtue, because without her
no good thing can be spoken: what thing swiftest? the mind of man, because in a
moment he rangeth throughout the whole world: what thing strongest? necessity
or destiny, because it overcomes every other accident or chance: what thing
most easy? to give an other man counsel: what thing most difficult? to know
ones self: what thing wisest? time (said he) because it attaineth al things.

How soon brute beasts are satisfied and how insatiable men are.
SEneca was wont to say: The Bull fills himself in a little medowe: a wood
is sufficient to feed many Elephants, but man through his ambition and
greediness, can neither be satisfied with the whole earth, nor yet with the
Sea.

That experience is gotten with time.
ARistotle said that young men can not be wise, because wisdom is gotten by
experience, and experience by time. And he said moreover, that where wisdom has
most credit there fortune has least to do. And he in like manner has written,
ye young men are simple, soon won, and light of belief, because they have not
proved or known ye doubleness, craft, and unfaithfulness of wicked me^:
therefore S Peter ye Apost. admonishing youth has divinely said: Adolescentes
subdits estote senioribus.

That craft is deceived with craft.
COrax promised Sosius to teach him rhetorike, and Sosius promised to pay him
his hire when he was taught. But having afterward learned, he would not
satisfy him, wherefore Corax sued him. Sosius trusting in his art of
Sophistry, asked him wherein rhetorike consisted? Corax answered, it consists
in persuasion. Then said Sosius, if I persuade the judges that I owe thee
nothing, I will pay thee nothing, because I shall overcome in law: if I
persuade them not, I will not pay thee, because I have not learned to persuade:
therefore it will be best for thee to give over thy enterprise. But Corax that
knew more than he, wrested his argument after this sort, and said: Nay rather
if thou persuade the judges thou shall pay me, because thou have learned to
persuade: if thou do not persuade them, thou shall pay me, because thou shalt
lose to me the matter in suite, so that every way thou ought to content me.

That by the multitude of laws made, the abundance of vices is declared.
ARcesilans said, that even as where there are many physicians, there are also
many diseases, so where there are many laws, there be also or else have been
many vices, because vice does grow before the law.

The opinion and counsels of Epicurus.
EPicure said, that thou should rather see with whom thou ought to eat
and drink, than that which thou ought to drink and eat: For to live
alone without friends, is the life of Wolfes, and other wild beasts. The
same Epicure said: we are borne at one time, neither is it granted to be
twice borne: and also that which we little esteem, we are ever in danger
of death. Therefore thou being not owner of to morrow, prolong not the time,
but live meryly to day.

That the nature of man is wavering and troubled with diverse passions.
THe noble Laurence Medices being in a very good company, and devising together
touching the natural things of man, this man said one thing, and that man an
other: wherefore he being requested to say his opinion, he declared it
courteously without any study in this manner. Teme, spera rallegrasi, and
contrista,
Ben mill volte in di nostra natura
Spesso il mal la falieta, and il ben l'attrista
Spera il suo danno and del ben ha paura.
Tanto ha'l viuer mortal corta la vista:
Al fin van'e, ogni pensier, and cura:
that is, A thousand times a day our nature is in hope and fear,
In mirth, in sadness too, and many times a heavy cheer:
The good in her does work, and th^'ll does eke her merry make,
She hopes her hurt and loss, and for the good does fearful quake,
Our mortal life does still but little see:
And at the end our thoughts and cares vain be.


That Fools cannot stand quiet.
WHen Solon was in company, and held his peace according to his woonte, there
was a presumptuous fellow that said to him that he spoke nothing because he
was a fool. To whom Solon without otherwise altring himself, answered
wisely, saying: That there was never found a fool that could stand quiet.

That abstinence is the defendresse of virtue.
SOcrates in Plato said, that he that desires to love virtue as much as he
ought to love his country, loves above al things abstine^ce, and flees will
and appetite as Mermaides.

Epictetus the Philosopher comprehends the whole sum of Philosophy in these
two words (...) that is, bear, and forbear: in the first he admonishes us,
that we should endure adversity with a stout courage, in the second that we
should absteyne from will and appetite.

What is the best and the vvorste part in man.
ANacarsis the Philosopher being demanded what was the best and worst part
in man, answered the tongue. The same Philosopher was wont to say, that it was
better to slide with the feet than with the tongue.

That Princes ought to see justice kept.
CAmbyses a most severe King, caused a judge, although his very friend, to be
skinned, who judged according as he was brybed, and not according as reason
required: and causing the judgment seat to be covered with his skin, made
afterward the son of him being dead to sit upon it in judgment. The
same prince above his own royal seat, had in great letters of gold these
verses written in effect: The King with great rygoure ought heed to take,
That Judges the law do lame never make,
For if she bend, and wreath aside her face,
Both honesty and reason lose their place.


That true Nobility is deryued from Virtue.
POpe Vrbane the fourth, a French man borne, was of a base lineage, but very
well learned and eloquente, wherefore upon a time the King of Spain
vpbraydyng him with his fathers vnnoblenesse, he answered him after this
manner: It is no virtue to be borne noble, but to do noblye (as I have done)
is virtue and nobility. The same Bishop give freely for nothing all offices
and benefices, saying, that he that buyeth an office, must needs sell it.

That he is young that is in health, and rich that is not in debt.
VIncentio Pescioni, a wise and a pleasant Italian Gentleman, trauayled in good
company, and they chanced to reason among themselves on a time, of age: And he
being asked how many years old he was, he answered that he was in health.
He being asked of an other how rich he was: he answered that he was not in
det: declaring that he was young enough that is in health, and rich in deed
that is not in det.

That good counsel does overcome an army, and that one error causes great
ruin.
EVripides spoke oftentimes this sentence woorthye of remembrance, that in
war one counsel alone overcomes every kind of army: So contrarywyse an
error brings both thee and thine to ruin. Socrates comprehended in the
same sentence not only war, but all man's life. And the most noble Boiardo
very trimly has written heerevpon.

Sautamente si suol spesso vsare,
Questo nobil prouerbio fra la gente,
Che si bisogna molto ben guardare,
Dal primo errore, and inconueniente
E sempre may con l'arco teso stare:
Sempre may esser cauto, and prudente,
Diligente suegliato, accorto, attento,
Ch'un disordin che nasca, ne fa cento.
This proverb is wisely much wont to be used
Among the people, that we ought to be heedfull
Of the first error and fault not yet committed,
And always with bow bent in hand to stand watchful,
Wary, wise, diligent, prudent, and advised,
That one growing misorder bread not an hundred.
That by means of subtle and pretty jesting, men sometimes avoid both damage
and shame.
ONe Francesco de Semiuara was put in prison, because he had playde away his
substance at dyce: for the which he being sorrowful, said: This Mayor puts
me in prison because I have played mine own, what would he do, if I had playde
his? The Mayor hearing this pleasant saying, caused him to be taken out of
prison, and forgave him.

That it is more miserable to be borne than buried.
THe people of Thrace were wont to weep bitterly when their children were
borne: But when they were dead, they accompanied them to their grave singing
and laughyng. The which custom Euripides approves in these verses saying:
The young borne child with tears bewail we ought,
As he that is to great miseries brought,
But he being dead, and from troubles at rest,
For his short life we ought to make a feast,
And carry him laughing unto the grave.


That neither for friendship, neither for any other thing, we ought to do
things dishonest.
PVblius Rutilius, a noble and severe young man, refused a certain dishonest
demand of a friend of his, whereupon he being angry said unto him: And what
need I thy friendship then, if thou do not for me that which I require thee?
But what need I of thine (answered Publius) if I should do for thee things
dishonest?

That in matters of life and death a man ought not to put him self rashly into
any man's hands.
THe most noble Alcibiades being cited in Sicile by the Atheniens to purge
himself of a mortal punishment, would not appear. Wherefore a Sicilian
said to him: What be you in doubt of your chieftayns? I will not in this case
(answered Alcibiades) trust to my mothers judgment: what do I know whether
she will take the black for the white or no?

That the fashion of the nose does sufficiently declare the nature of a man.
THe Persians loved bending noses, which the Greeks call Grypi and they loved
them so, because Cyrus, whom they loved above all other their kings, had a
nose of that fashion. But there be two sorts of Grypi or bendyng noses, the
one is, that descends from the forhead, and goth as it were straight even to
the end, as Cariline had: the which sort Aristotle holds for the sign of
an ambitious and shameless person, referring the likeness of that nose to the
Goat, and the mind to the nature of the Raven. The other sort departs from
the forheade, and about the middle of the nose, it somewhat ryseth up, going
afterward toward the end, it has a comely turning, as had that great
Captain called Scipio Affricanus.

This Aristotle judges to be the sign of a valiant and honest man: And that
nose is lykened to the Eagles beak, and the mind to her nobleness.

A most noble comparison of Ciceros.
CIcero said, that as men without any inforcement, do move the parts of the
body by the will and mind: so God through his divine power does move and
alter the whole world.

That learning is much set by of wise men.
ALphonsus king of Arragon, Naples, and Sicile, having understood that a
certain king of Castile had said, that learning was not meet for noble men
and gentlemen, he exclamed, saying: These are the words of an Ox, and not
of a man.

That we ought not to be so homely with Princes, that decorum, that is,
semelinesse or that which becomes the person, be ouerpassed.
AVgustus the Emperor was never wont to make refusal to no person almost,
when he was bidden to meat: a certain Senator desyring him to supper, he
went, but he entertayning him very nigardly, and almost after his ordinary,
Augustus at his departing listened to his ear, and said aloude: I knew not
that I was so great a familiar of thine.

That their soueraintie is short which rule by violent means.
WHen it was reported to Dionysius, that his son to whom the kingdom
descended, had ravished and defloured a noble man's daughter, he caused him to
be sent for, and sharply reproving him, he demanded whether he knew that he
being his father, had ever used any such violence? You had not (answered the
young man) a king to your father. And thou (said the old man) shall not have
thy son a king, if thou commit these enormities.

That truth of all things is the mightiest.
Darius asking certain Philosophers, which of these three things was the
strongest, either wine, or a woman, or truth: Zorobabel answered, that truth
was the strongest of all, which all the residue allowed, and thereto gave their
consent. And Lodouico Martelli an excellent Poet, upon this virtue says: La
verita e figliuola del Tempo
Ha forza and virtu sopra ogni cosa,
Onde sempre risplende come il sole.
that is, Truth is times daughter, and over all has might,
Wherefore she still shyneth as does the sons light.


That speediness to become great in a realm, does prevent envy.
PLutarke says, that we must abstain from beans, that is, we ought not to
meddle with the ministration of a common weal, because it is full of perils,
nor can not be without rebuke or damage. In old time the consent of people was
declared by beans, which yet remains at Venice. Notwithstanding, whosoever
will have promotion in the common wealth, ought to procure diligently to come
soon in reputation and power: for by speedynesse envy is avoided. And
Aristotle to this purpose says, that fire smoketh not, nor glory breeds
not envy, if the one and the other do quickly shine abroad.

A merry aunsvvere to a fond demand, of one asking, when the greatest
confusion shall be among men.
THe most learned and famous William Budee, being demanded when the greatest
confusion that might be among men, should be, he readily answered: at the day of
the resurrection of the dead, when every one shall seek the parts of his
body. He spoke it in mirth, because that then therein shall be no confusion.

What the companions and daughters of pride are, and vvherin false felicity
does consist.
CHristopher Landin says, that the companions of Pride are, Curiosity,
arrogancy, ambition, covetousness, superfluous joy, feigned humility, and
liberty to offend. And that the daughters are irreverence, heresy,
disobedience, vaynglorie, hypocrisy, bosting, obstinacy, discord, and envy.
And in an other place to an other purpose he says, that the false felicity
of the world consists in these five things, Lordship, riches, honor, fame
and bodyly pleasure.

That clemency shyneth in a Prince above other things.
THe young Theodosius was a Prince of wonderful gentleness and clemency. He
being demanded how it was possible, that he did not put to death none of
them that offended him, said: I had rather be able to raise up the dead, than
to put to death the living: for there is nothing in men more praise worthy,
(but specially in a Prince,) than to forgive injuries. And the divine Petrarch
said; And yet must clemency not refuse the society of due punishment.

Nobilissimum vindictae genus est parcere, The noblest kind of reue^gement is
to forgive.

That love causes infinite erroures, with the damage and shame which
follows it.
Master Jews Alamanni, a very courteous Gentleman, seeing a freende of his
desperately in love to commit infinite errors, with the most grievous loss
of his substance and honor: and finally to be made a mocking stock to every
man, he pleasantly admonished him after this manner, saying: Egia gran tempo
ch'io conosco assai,
Quanto amor sia nimico al buon consiglio:
Ma tra noi e ^al conoscenza homai,
Che sicurta come vedete piglio,
Di ricordarui, che sta sempre in guai
Chi in donna adora il variabil ciglio:
Et quanto piu n le'huom sormontan gli anni,
Pin si scema il favor, crescon gli affauni.
That is to say, It is now long agone since I well knew
How great a foe love is to counsel grave,
But now already is such knowledge true,
Between us two, that (lo) I boldness have,
To tell you, that he dvvelles in during pain,
That does adore the woman's changing browe:
And as frail years increase, so favors reign
Surceasserh, and great sorrows daily grow.


Why Princes learn better to ride than any other thing.
CArneades the Philosopher was wont to say, that Princes sons do learn
nothing better than to ride: because that while men flatter them, they can not
perceive the truth of things: but the horse, that passes no more for a king
than a kyte, will overthrow him, if he ride not well and wisely.

That in all things we ought to choose the cunningest men.
THe counselors of Florence devising among themselves about the skillful
making of a graven image, they called to them one Donatello, a famous and an
excellent Grauer and paynter, who asked for his workmanship fifty crowns? the
counselors thinking that it came not to so much, were displeased with him,
and gave it to do to one of the same science called John, being but a mean
grauer: He did it (for the time he had) as well as he could, and demanded
afterward fourscore crounes. The Counselors maruelling at so great a sum,
were sorry that they put it into his hands, showing him that Donatello, a man
so excellent, asked but fifty to do it. Lastly, they being not able to agree
among themselves, they remitted the matter to Donatello, who by and by gave
judgment, that the counselors should pay John threescore and ten crounes. Then
the Counselors being moved, remembering that he himself would have been
contented to do it for fifty, Donatello courteously said: It is true, and I
was well contented, because I might have done this image (being the workman I
am) in less than a month, but this poor man (that scarsly can be my scholar)
has been about it above six months. Hereby at one instant he wittyly revenged
himself of the injury received of the counselors, and reproved the other for
insufficiency, and worthyly praised himself for his virtue.

That some are sorrowful for things that make other joyful.
ONe of Perugia was sorrowful and wept miserably, because his wife hanged her
self on a Figtree. To whom a neyghbor of his, whispering in his ear said:
Friend, how is it possible, that in so great prosperity thou fyndest tears to
weep? Give me I pray thee, a graffe of that Figtree, for I would plant him in
my garden, to see what my wife can do.

That subtlety used in season is sometimes an incredible help.
THere was in Andwerpe an excellent advocate, which had taken in hand to
defend, (as the manner is) a man of a most wicked life, when he was before the
Judges, he said to the iusticer, who takes part against the persons
arrained, and who also was desirous to have that fellow hanged. Sir, be you
content, that I defend this honest man? I am content said the Iusticer. Then
the advocate turning to the Judges said: Mark Sirs, this man ought not to be
hanged, for the Malgraue himself (such is the title of the Iusticer) that has
accused him, and that sought for his life, has consented that he is an honest
man, and honest men, as you know, are not hanged.

Why fortune is blind, foolish, and foul.
THe Philosophers say that fortune is blind, foolish, and soul. Blind,
because she sees not where she throws her self. Foolish, for that she is
variable, uncertain, and unconstant. Foul, for that she is wicked, greedye,
and dishonest. Wherefore the most learned Alciate to this purpose says: When
young Octauian had won Brutus in the field,
Before he killed himself with sword imbrude with blod,
He cried maynly now does hapless virtue yield,
Vanquished alone by gredie fortune naught and wood.


That the common people do bevvraye themselves, both by their deeds and
words.
WHen upon a time a joyful feast was to be made in Florence, for some good
news, a woollen weauer, intending to have himself known, and to appear
honorably after his manner at the sightes and plays, carried forth his wives
clothes, to the intent to lend them to some use: His wife making much a do
for this, the husband said: Hold thy peace thou wayward woman, for to do my
self honor, Chiasso is a stinking lane in Florence.
I will not only send out thy clothes, but also put thee in Chiaslo.

The Bay tree has diverse and noble virtues and significations.
THe Bay tree is consecrate to Apollo, because he running after Daphnis, a
very fair damsel, of whom he was enamored, she through fear recommended her
self to Jupiter and he for pity turned her into a Baye tree. Whervppon from
that time forward, Phoebus took some of the branches to trim his harp, and
wears them always about his forhead: And also it is consecrate to him, for
that he is the god of divination, because that if one put the leaves thereof
under the head of an other that sleeps, it makes him to dream of true
things. And the bay tree ever grows green like unto virtue, which is always
green. And alone among all other trees, is safe from lightning, as virtue alone
is safe from envy. And it is called Laurel of laud, and so in old time it
was called, by reason that the ancient Greeks, and afterward the Romans did
with marvelous praise trim the temples of those conquerors, that did enriche
or defend the weal public, even as they also trimmed those Poets, which
excellently did set forth the virtues of other: Wherefore the famous
Petrarcha, which was called to so great honor at Rome, says: Le corone de
flori all donzelle,
Quelle d'alloro a' Cesari e poeti
Si danno, e gli ornan come l'cielle le stelle.
The crowns of flowers, of virgins pure are worn,
But them of bays, the Cesars heads adorn,
The same also are unto Poets given,
Trimming the temples as the starr^^ do heaven.


How one may receive commodity even of his enemies.
ANtisthenes said, (other attribute it to Xenophon) that a man ought to mark
that which his enemies say: for they be the first that know his errors. And
he added, that as the good Physician takes some remedies even of serpents, so
ought the wise man take some profit even of his enemies.

That Fortune, for the continual turning of her vvhele, suffers no man in the
highest degree to rest in quiet.
PEter of Albiz^ being in so great worship in Florence, that he surpassed all
other citizens of long time, both for authority and prosperity, it happened
that he making a goodly banquet to many of his friends, there was sent to him
a bolle of silver full of confites, and among them lay hidden a nail. The
which nail lay afterward uncovered, and being seen of all the feasters, it
was interpreted, that he was put in remembrance, that he stayed the wheel
of Fortune, because she having brought him to the highest, it could not be,
but that if she continued to make her wonted compass, she would turn him down
to the bottom. The which interpretation was first verified by his ruin, and
afterward by his violent death. Wherefore wisely says Solon, that none can be
called happy until he happily die.

That crafty men do cover vices under diverse colors.
WHen the Philosopher Aristippus was blamed because he lived too sumptuously,
he said pleasauntly: I believe that it is no ill, for if it were offense, men
would not do as they do, in the celebration of the feasts of the gods.

That an unjust Judge gives sentence on his side that gives him the greatest
bribe.
ONe of Pistoia being called to be an arbitoure between two that were at
varia^ce, took of the one a vessel of oil, with promise to give sentence
with favor: The other knowing of this inco^tinently sent him home to his
house a very fat hog, desiring him that he would be favorable. Whereupon the
good judge gave sentence on his side that gave the hog. Which his adversary
understanding, ran forthwith toward him, and was sorrowful for the trust he
had of him, and for the reward he sent him: the judge pulling him aside, said:
Understand brother, that there came into my house a hog, which fynding thy
vessel, brake it, and the oil ran out, so that I have forgotten thee, but
doubt not an other time I will restore it thee.

That in adversity true friends are discerned from feigned.
CIcero said, that like as the swallows apppeare in summer, and in winter are
not seen, so feigned friends in time of prosperity show themselves, and in
adversity absent themselves. And Ennius sententiously to the same purpose
says: Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur,
In doubtful matters he is tryde,
A friend, that faithful does abide.


And Ouide likewise herevppon wrote after this sort: Tempore felici, multi
numerantur amici,
Dum fortuna perit, nullus amicus erit.
When wealth abounds, then many friends we number may
When goods decay, then friends do flee away.


And Ariosto notably says, Alcun non puo saper da chi sia amato,
Quando felice in su la la ruota siede:
Pere che ha i very, and finti amici allato,
Che monstran tutis vna mede sima feed
Se poi si cangia in tristo il lieto stato,
Volta la turba adulatrice il piede,
Et quel che di euor ama riman forte,
Et ama suo Signor dopo la morte.
No man can tell who loves him in his mind,
When happy he does sit upon the wheel,
For that he feigned friends and true does find,
By him in whom he one self faith does feel,
If louringly once fortune look behind,
The flattring flock then turns back the heel,
And he that loves with heart will never wave,
And loves his lord when he is laid in grave.


What great faithfulness a chaste woman bears to her husband.
ARmenia, a noble woman, and of excellent beauty, coming from a great feast
that king Cyrus made, was demanded of her husband by the way how she lyked
the beauty of Cyrus, (which was such as all men marvelled at) she answered
chastely after this sort: Husband, to tell you the truth, as long as I was
there I did not once look up: therefore I can not tell you how fair or foul
Cyrus, or the other be.

That controversy in law, is the loss of of time, money, and friends.
TWo kinsmen fell at variance for a matter, in which each of them claymed a
propretie: after variance they went to law, and after law to open contention,
which is proprely to say, to open war. Then one of them wyser than the
other, called his fellow aside, and in effect used these words unto him,
saying: Kynsman, first this I put thee in mind of, that it is not honest that
covetousness should separate us when as Nature has joined us together. Moreover,
you must understand, that al controversies in law are no less doutful than
war: Every man may at his pleasure begin to strive, but when he list, he can
not end. Our variance is for three hundredth crowns, if that we go to law, we
shall spend half so much more upon Notaries, proctors, advocates, Judges, and
in making of friends: we must needs attend, flatter, travail to and fro,
weary our selves, never be quiet: and finally when I recover my suit by
judgment, the loss will be greater than the gain. Is it not better kinsman
that we here agree among our selves? and that we divide between us the money
that we should give to these greedy persons? Grant me one moytie of your
challenge, and I will grant you the moytie of mine: In so doing, we shall obey
nature, we will be in hazard, and shall avoid infinite troubles. But where as
also you will not yield to any thing, I yield to the whole: for I had rather
that this money should remayn to you, than come to these thieves. Whereupon the
adversary being moved, as well for the reasons, as the courtesy of his
kinsman, yielded to him willingly, and wisely agreed among themselves.

Philosophers make but a trifle of Fortune.
ASclepiades the philosopher falling blind by chance, was nothing at all
sorry, but rather jesting merryly said: I have made a good hand, for before I
went alone, and now I go with company.

A man's virtue is esteemed even of the enemy.
MEtellus surnamed for his victories Macedonicus, when he heard that Scipio
Africanus was dead, although he were his mortal ennimie, he went forth of
his house sore grieved and miscontent: and coming into the market place, many
times he horribly cried, saying: Run my citizens run, for the walls of our
city are fallen down.

That debtes ordinarily do take a man's sleep from him.
WHen a Roman knighte was dead, it was found that he owed more than five
hundred thousand Ducates, the which thing in his life time he had with a
merye cheer kept very close. Afterward his goods came to be sold: and among
the rest of his household stuff, Caesar Augustus commanded that his bed should
be bought for him, saying that it would serve to make one sleep, seeing he
that was so far in debt could sleep thereupon.

That wise men think it a folly to endeavor to come to highness and honor.
THe Earl Maria Matthew Boiardo, a very wise man, reproving a cosyn of his,
that inconueniently went out of the Duke of Milans wages to go serve the king
of Naples, who made him great profers, and greater promises, said unto him: Ye
wretched wightes, that never sleep in rest,
Ye that desire to clymbe to high degree,
That with so many griefs and sorrows pressed,
Do you turn back to honors fickle glee:
Means must be sought to have your sore redrest,
For that your wi^es from you berefte we see.
And well you ^oe not know what you would have,
For then you would your selves from follies save.


The man that is auaunced to high degree, oftentimes forgets both his
friends and himself.
ONe Benedetto of the Albizi, (a family so called) went to rejoice with his
friend for the good fortune happened to him: which friend of his, was to the
dignity of a Cardinal promoted. But the Cardinal being swollen and puffed up
with pride for that degree, making as though he knew him not, he asked him what
he was. Whereupon Benedetro a noble young man and a stout, being displeased,
changed forthwith his purpose for the which he came, and said: And it please
you my Lord, I am come for our frendships sake to lament with you your
fortune, or rather blyndnesse, that has brought you to this degree: for such
as you be, as soon as you clymbe up to the like honor as this is, you lose so
much your sight, your hearing, and the other senses, that you do not only
forgette your selves, but your friends also.

The folly of a prince, the displeasure of a woman, and the unfaithfulness
of a friend, what disorder they bread.
CAndaules king of Lydia, had a very fair wife, for whose beauty he thorough
joy waxed foolish: and it was not enough for him to praise her to all men, and
discover to all men the secrets that he used with her in wedlock, but also
would have witness thereof: so he showed her on a day through a clefte bare
naked, without her knowledge, to his dearest friend Ligus. Who seeing so fair
a thing, was so far in love with her, that he thought of nothing else, but
how he might obtain her, either by love or force. The woman on the other
side, perceiving her husbands doings by his speech, and that he had lastly
showed her to Ligus in that sort, thought that she was betrayde, and that the
King would participate with other his delights: whereupon she took so great
anger, that forthwith she was at the commandment of Ligus, and consented to
the death of her husband, and gave her self to the murdring adulterer,
together with the kingdom.

That three things change the nature of man.
ARistotle said, that thou shalt see three things, (if thou do mark them
well,) that cause the Nature and condytion of a man to change, that is:
Lordship, a woman, and wine.

That the ^uttleties and deceytes of Cortizans, or rather vvhoores, are great,
and not to seek.
A French gentleman being in Rome, went on an evening to lie with a Cortizan,
the which in the night taking occasion, untied a piece of a chain of gold
which he had. The next morning he putting it about his neck, he found that
where it was woonte to come four times about, it would now come but three
and a half. Then the Cortizan coming before him, looked upon him with show
and countenance of marvel, and said thus: Sir, do you feel any grief as
me thinks you do? and the woman said moreover: I can not tell whether you
have taken any cold, because your head is waxed great, and your face swollen:
and in speaking this, she put a glass in his hand of that sort, which makes
things appear greater and larger than they are. The Frencheman lookyng in a
glass, and seeing so great an alteration of his head, he stedfastely
believed that his head was swollen, and had taken some strange disease:
whereupon being very sorrowful, and maruelling no more at his chain, wore it on
that fashion, afterward woefully telling his friends of that swelling of his
head.

That business requires the owners countenance and not deputiship.
CAto oftentimes said, that the countenance of the owner helps much more than
deputiship, meaning that every man ought to be present in doing of his
things, and not absent to commit them to other. So a Persian being demanded
what was the best thing to fatten a horse, he answered the owners eye. And an
Africane being demanded what doong was the best to fatten the ground, he
answered the owners footsteps, both signifying the presence. Likewise the Poet
Ennius to this purpose said: If thou be wise, weygh still in mind
This precept, not to look that friend
Or kinsman do, for thee any way,
When thou thy self, may do and say,


That beauty is a heavenly gift and grace of the ancients in diverse sorts
praised and esteemed.
SOcrates called beauty a tyranny of short time: Plato a privilege of
nature: Theophrastus a secret decayte Theocritus: a delectable damage:
Carneades a solitary kingdom: Domitius said, that there was nothing more
acceptable: Aristotle affirms, that beauty is more woorthe than all the
letters of commendation: Homere said, that it was a glorious gift of nature:
and Ouide alluding to him, calls it a grace of God.

That the wickedness of governors does oftentimes cause, that the people
rebel against the prince.
BAttus of Dalmatia, being demanded of Tyberius for what cause he rebelled so
many times, and had made so great a slaughter of the Romans, he answered: You
your self Caesar be the cause, for you appoynte not for your flock shepherdes
for keepers, but ravenous wolves. Wherefore Plato, divinely says, that we
ought to be very circumspect and take great heed, how the governors, and
commissaries or Lieutenants of cities and countries be brought up, and
accustomed, to the end that like hungry dogs they become not wolves, and
devour the flock.

A notable way to know the quality of a man.
PAlingenius says, that who so ever will know of what quality a man is, let
him consider what manner friends he has: for nature does willingly accompany
her like: the Florentine says for a proverb: Jddio fa gli huomini, and
s'appaiouo, that is, GOD makes men, and they be seen. And Cicero in the person
of Cato, says: Pares cum paribus facillime congregantur. And in an other place
he writes: Mores dispares, disparia studia sequuntur.

That stout men and true Christians dye for the faith with incredible
constancy.
MAcedonius Theodolus, and Tatianus, being both Bishops and martyrs, were (in
the time of Iuliane the Emperor) roasted for the faith upon a grediron. So
they having fire underneath them that burned cruelly, Macedonius turned to the
judge, and smyling said: Oh if thou take pleasure to eat maus flesh, turn
the other side to, to the end thou may find us well broyled and seasoned.

That in this life are two states to be desired, the one of Princes, the other
of fools.
SEneca said, that in this world there must needs be borne a king or a fool:
A king to be able to revenge wrongs, and to be able to correct and chastise
men's vices: A fool, for not to acknowledge offenses, and not to think of any
thing.

To break faith and promise is a thing detestable and grievously to be punished.
Mercury delighting among other things, in theft, in strife and robberies,
had stolen Apollos kine, which none saw but one man called Battus: to whom
Mercury gave one, with condition, that he should conceal the theft. Afterward
to make trial of his faith, he turning himself into the likeness of Apollo,
came unto him, and promised him a Bull, if he could tell him of his kyne.

Battus blinded with the gain, discovered them. Whervppon Mercury being
displeased, turned him into a stone, which of the ancients is called Index,
lapis parius, lapis Heraclius, lapis Lydius, and Coticula, in English a
touchestone.

How ill fortune may be more easily endured.
THales Milesius being asked, in what manner a man might more easily abide
adversity, he answered: he shall endure it, if he see his enemies in worse
estate than himself. And the noble Alamanno says to this purpose.

The man unhappy has two co^forts true laid up in store
The one is, to recall to mind the time he lived before
In greeater grief, the other is also to have in mind,
If in the world in worse estate he does an other find.
With what suttletie great princes ought to reign after the opinion of
Homer.
Jews the eleventh King of France, had (as it is very well known) great
war, and much to do with the lords and barons of his realm, among which
the Constable was also his adversary, albeit secretly. But afterward when
that the king had overcome all these lords, the Constable who (as I say) was
not manifestly discovered, sent to excuse him self to the King, showing that
he had been always loyal and trusty to him, and to have done his majesty
great service, wherefore he desired to know if he might with his good will
return freely unto the Court? To whom the King, who knew every thing, and
that would assure him, and correct him, answered: That he needed not to
excuse himself unto him, because I do very well perceive (said he) the
Constables loyalty, and the great service he has done me, wherefore I yield
to his request, and I must needs say, that I do stand in need of such an
head. Afterward, tourning him about to a Secretary, said very softly in
his ear: It is true that I need that head, but off from his shoulders. And
said moreover: He that knows not how to dissemble, knows not how to
reign. This is the same King that was woonte to say, when pride rydeth,
damage and shame go behind.

That to be deceived of friends is to be excused, but to suffer to be beguyled
of enemies is to be reproved.
AGesilaus said, that he blamed not them that were deceived of their friends,
but he blamed them exceedingly, that did let their enemies deceive them:
wherefore (he said) that I always trust my friends, but never my enemies:
and he added this proverb: God keep me from my friends,
For from my foes I will beware.


That a ready answer delivers a man out of danger.
PYrrhus king of the Epirotes, having understanding that at a certain supper
some had spoken amiss of him, he caused them to be called to him, and asked
them if it were true, that they had spoken that against his honor which was
reported to him? Then one of the hardiest among them seeing the matter
discovered, wittyly answered after this manner, saying: If we had not lacked
wine Sir, we would have spoken much better of you than it has been told you,
but the wine failed to soon. The which pleasant scuse and plain confession,
turned the kings anger to laughter.

That the fruit is gathered according as the seed is sovvne.
SEruilius going about to dissuade a law, that Pinarius made before, said: Tell
me Pinarius, if I speak against thee, will thou speak amiss of me? according
as thou sowest (answered Pinarius) thou shall reap.

That man's desire is kindled through things forbidden.
WHat great force liberty has in man, and how much things forbidden do
kindle him, it may be considered by this example. There was in Arrezzo in our
time an old man which never was abroad out of the country, which the captain
understanding, caused him on a day in sport to be called to him, and told him,
that he understood yt he went ofte^tymes abroad out of the country to speak
with the enemies. The old man maruellyng, swear stoutly, that never in all his
life he was without the gates: but the Captain making as though he believed
him not, commanded him under grievous punishmente, never after to go abroad:
to be short, the old man being kindled with desire upon that forbiddyng,
was the next day after found without the countreye. The like story is of
Jews, the eleventh king of France, and of an old man that never went out of
Paris.

That valiant men and of profound vvitte, do conquer their enemies with ready
and witty answers.
THe old Cosimo of the Medici, Duke of Florence, besides his other great
qualities, was in his sayings and answers very witt^ and grave. To master
Renald of the Albizi, (although other write to Palla Strozzi, who being by his
means banished from Florence, had sent him word, that the hen keckled,) he
answered, that she could ill keckle out of the neste. To other rebels, that
sent him word, that they slept not, he answered, that he believed it,
because he had plucked sleep out of their heads. To some citizens, who after
their return from banishement, said to him, that he wasted the City, and did
contrary to Gods commandment, to drive out of it so many honest men: he
answered that it was better to have a city wasted than lost, and that two
yardes of skarlet would make an honest man, and that states were not held
with Pater nosters. To women that asked him a little before his death, why he
kept his eyes shut, he answered smyling, to accustom my self to death.

Leasing is hateful and insufferable in all men, saving in Physicians.
PLato said, that lies are to be born withal in Physicians, in others not:
because Physicians ought to comfort the diseased, and to promise them health,
even til they be at deaths door, be it true or not. Dant the Italian poet, does
not only forbid lying, but also to tell any thing that is like a lie, warning
us wisely in this sort: Sempre a quel ver c'ha faccia di menzongna,
Del'huom chinder le labbra, fin che ci puote
Pero che senza colpa fa vergogna.
that is, A man must still refrain to speak that thing,
Which has the show of untruth and leasing,
For that without fault shame thereof does spring,


That riches in the judgment of Philosophers do provoke wicked and hurtful
desires.
ANtippus the Philosopher, having turned all his patrimony into ready money,
went to the sea side, and there cast it in, saying: Hence with a mischief you
ungracious appetites, for I drown you, because you should not drown me.

That vanity and lightness are peculiar endovvmentes and qualities of women.
IN a company of gentlewomen and gentlemen of nobility, there befell a
discourse of a noble woman of Siena, commonly accounted fair and honest: and
albeit she were praised there in a manner of all men (as she that deserved it)
there was one, who either for desire to speak against, or for some repulse
received of her, reproved her of vanity and lightness. Wherefore the honorable
lady the Pecci, which was present, forthwith said: Nay if you take vanity and
lightenesse from women, what shall they have left?

That a princely magnificence ought to be measured with the nobility of the
giver, not with the baseness of the receyuer.
PErillus one of the friends of Alexander the great, desired him money for the
dowry of one of his daughters, wherefore Alexander appointed that he should
have fifty talentes given him: but Perillus said, that ten were enough for
him. I think well (said Alexander) that ten ar enough for thee, but it is not
enough for me to give so few.

That love is a monster, like to Chimera.
CHimera was a monster, which as Fulgentius writes, is painted with three
heads, the first of a Lion, the second of a goat, the third of a serpent:
which monster he lykeneth to love in this manner, saying that love has three
heads, the beginning, the middle, and the end. The beginning, for that it is
cruel and proud as the Lion, he understands by the first head of Chimera.
The middle, because it comes to the art of a goat and leacherous, as the
Goat is, he understands by the second head. The end, because there
remains the poison of sin, and wound of repentance, he understands by
the serpent, being the third head of Chimera.

That the deceytes of some women toward their husbands are great and grievous.
WHen Henry the eyghte reigned, there was in London a gentlewoman, poor in
goods, but rich in beauty, and very wanton. She had twelve sons, the first
was her husbands, the residue other men's. Now she falling grievously sick, and
waxing worse and worse, was suddenly in danger of death: Wherefore upon a
time she causing her husband to be called to her, said unto him: William (so
was he called) I must now mock thee no longer, understand that of all these
sons there is none thine but the eldest: because I was true to thee but the
first year.

The husband was astonyed, and all those children, which by chance sat
there about the fire eating, were at a stay. The mother followed her purpose,
and began to reckon up in order their fathers. Which the youngest hearing (Oh
myghtie nature) not above four years old, which had bread in one hand,
and cheese in the other, laid down his meat, and holding up both his hands
together, in trembling wise turned to her, and said: Oh my dear mamme, give me
I pray you, a good father. The woman coming to his father, named a famous and
a rich man: Wherefore the boy being very merry, and taking his meat again,
said: I am in very good case, seeing that I have such a father.

A shrevvd and pleasant rebuke of Diogenes toward a vvanton young man.
A Young man very wantonly attired, asked Diogenes concerning some matter, who
said to him, I am not to answer thee, except thou first lift up thy clothes
before, to the end that I may see whether thou be a male or a female before I
tell thee mine opinion.

That overmuch talk is very troublesome to the hearers.
APollonius blaming ouermuche speaking, said: If these loathsome babblers did
receive so great grief in their long discourses, as they give to other, they
would speak less.

A subtle cruelty, but tyrannous and monstrous.
CAligula the Emperor, was a most cruel monster, who when a sick man left
him some thing by his will, and afterward dyed not of that disease, to the
intent he might be sure to have his bequest, caused him wickedly to be slain,
saying that he had made a mock of life, seeing that he had left an heir
behind him: Wherefore Plaurus says very well: Man to man, is no man but a
Wolf.

That prosperity and adversity changes commonly the nature of men.
ONe Robert of Pandolfo Pandolphini, resoning of the prosperity and adversity
of me^, and how these made them much to change in nature and condition,
suttlely affirmed, that it was no marvel. For the coming from one state to an
other (said he) is even as if one would go from one country to an other:
where of necessity, we must send an other heir.

That a liar is not believed when he tells the truth.
ARistotle being demanded what liars got in telling their vain leasings,
answered, nothing else but that when they tell the truth, they are not believed.

The customs of Princes are diverse, according to the diversities of their
natures.
POpe Nicolas the third of the Orsini, a man learned and very well manered,
banished out of Rome, advocates, proctours, notaries, and that like generation,
saying that they lived by poor men's blood. But Martin the fourth his
successor, caused them to return again as soon as he was made Pope, saying
prouerbially, that they were good men to draw water to his mill.

When a man of all other living creatures, is the best, and when the vvorste.
ARistotle said, that it is a privilege of nature, that the Lion is not cruel
to the Lion: not the Leopard to the Leopard: not the Tiger to the tiger, not
finally the Dragon to the dragon use violence: but that every kind of brute
beasts does peaceably assemble together, and fight against other kind of
living creatures unlike to them. Only man (said he moreover) does persecute
man, so that he alone of al other creatures in his kind cannot live in
safety. Wherefore Aristotle to this purpose prudently said: that even as a man
when he is ruled by reason, is of all other living creatures the best, so when
he is not ruled thereby, is of all the worst.

That unreasonable demaundes deserve foolish aunsvveres.
PLautius pleading, and crying out in a certain controversy, asked Cestius
with a loud voice, for what cause a glass falling down should break and not
a sponge? To whom Cestius accordinglye aunsweared: and for for what cause do
thrushes fly higher than boats?

That many persons do foolishly, and to be mocked, that abate their age.
ONe in the pesence of Cicero said that he was thirty years old. Cicero
answered it is true: for it is more than twelve years past since I heard him
speak it. And to an other, that to the end he might seem young, rehearsed many
follies of his age, he said: When we studied logike together, thou wast not
borne.

That poverty makes a man safe even amidst murderers.
HIlation of Athens, was extremely poor, and meeting thieves in a wood,
changed nothing at all, but laughing said: You are deceived: wherefore they
asking him why he laughed, and wherefore he was not afraid as other were, he
answered: because I am naked, I am not afraid.

That husbands ought to give credit to their vviues, that their children be
their own.
BArnarde Amidei was sorrowful, because it was reported, that his only son
was not his, but an other man's: wherefore Petrarche his friend pleasantly
reproved him, saying: Thou ought rather believe thy wife than an other,
because that she knows it better than any other: And to this purpose I will
tell you a pleasant tale. It is not long agone, since there was at Siena. a
noble man which had a very fair wife, but somewhat suspected of unchastity.
So they having one only son, it chanced that the mother had him one day in
her arms, and played with him, wherefore the father seeing him, looked now on
him, now on her, sighing, in such sort that the woman asked him why he sighed:
I would spend (said he) sighing afresh, the moytie of that I have, to know
certainly that this child were mine, as thou know that he is thine. To so
strange a saying, the woman without changing her countenance, answered: You
need not pay so much, if you will give me the value of a thousand ducates,
I will certify you. The husband thynking it impossible to be certified,
promised largely. Wherefore certain of their kinsfolk being called to be
judges, and the case being told them, the wife took the child in her arms,
and turning unto her husband, said: Sir, you confess that this little
infant is mine, is it not true? I do confess it (said he) but what of this?
Then she reaching him forth to him, added moreover: Hold here, for I will
give him to thee. Now be you sure that he is yours. The kynsfolke being very
well satisfied with laughter, commended greatly the wise woman, and worthyly
condemned the man.

What kind of men are most noble.
DIogenes being demanded who were the noblest men in the world? he
answered: Those which despise riches, glory, pleasures, and finally life: And
which overcome the things contrary to these: To wit, pouertye, infamy,
grief, and death, enduring them with an unconquerable courage. And Socrates
being demanded what Nobility was, he answered, temperance of the mind and
body.

That it belongs to a Princes magnanimity to forgive offenses received in
baser Fortune.
BY reason that king Charles the eight dyed without heirs males, the Croune
of France came by succession to Jews Duke of Orliens. Now when some of his
favorers had maliciously put him in remembraunnce, that the time was come to
revenge the miseries that were done him when he was duke, he answered with a
valiant courage, That it belonged not to the duke of Orliens, that the king of
France should revenge his wrath and grudge.

That the divine majesty is a thing to men incomprehensible.
SImonides the Philosopher, being asked of Hiero the tyrant what manner thing
GOD was? took one days respite to make answer, the next day he took two
days, afterward four days, so doubling the time. In the end Hiero asked him
for what cause he made no answer, but still asked longer time. Because the
more I think upon this (said Simonides) the darker I find the thing, and the
more I confound my self therein. And the most percing Dant wisely says: Matto
e chi spera che nostra ragione,
Possa transcurrer l'infinita via.
Che tiene vna sustantia in tree person.
State contenti humana gente al quia,
Che se potuto baneste veder tutto,
Mestier non era partorior Maria.
that is, He is unwise that thynkes his wit so sure,
That it may ouerrunne the endless way,
Which holds in persons three one substance pure,
With things below (O men) contented stay,
And if you had been able all to see,
Then Mary needed not delivered be.


That a man's goodness appears in every fortune.
ONe Amerigo Zati intending to buy a slave in Constantinople said to him: If I
buy thee will thou be honest? and although you buy me not, (answered he) I
will be honest.

That the maliciousness of man's nature has need of matter to work upon.
ONodemus Chius, having overcome a certain conspiracy, was counseled by them
that took his part, to banishe all his adversaries out of the City. But he
wisely answered: I shall save my self very well as I am, for if all my
enemies go away, and matter sail to exercise the spitefulness of man's
nature, discord and debate would soon arise among our friends.

That some kind of follies are pleasant and delectable.
ONe Atheus became so mad, that he told all men, that he was the owner of all
the ships that belonged to Pireus. So when they came home, without asking
whether any made a good voyage or not, with marvelous joy he assembled them
together: likewise when they departed, with infinite remembraunces and lessons,
he licenced them. Wherefore when afterward by the diligence of his kinsfolk
and friends, he was healed of that humor by good Physicians, he pleasantly
said: Doutlesse my friends, you have me slain,
Since you have taken from me all pleasure,
In dravving me by force from so svveete an error.


That it is most profitable in the state of vvedlocke seldom to gather the
fruits of matrimony.
LIcurgus being demanded for what cause he forbad by his laws, that the
husband should not sleep with the wife, but would that the one and the other
should spend most part of the day and night with their equals, and that they
should not but now and then, and privily come together, he answered for three
causes: first because they should be the lustier, not using carnal copulation
superfluously. Secondly, because love between them should be always fresh and
lively. Thirdly, because their children should be the stronger. Solomon
says, that there be three sovereign goods of Matrimony, concord, faith,
and offspring.

That wisdom and experience is more to be required in a captayn, than
strength and outvvarde shevve of body.
WHen a Captain was to be chosen in Athens for some great enterprise, the
rulers brought to Isocrates and Timotheus, one Charetes, a strong and lusty
man, but unskillful and rash, saying: Such a personage is fit to be a
captain: No by God he shall not said Timotheus, but he shall bear the captains
cloak and harneis: because he ought to be made a captain that sees very
well that which he has before him, and that which he has behind him.
And Epaminondas of Thebe^ seeing a great army without a captain, that is,
without a valiant general, said: Oh what a great beast is there here without
a head? And Chabrias of Athens (after Erasmus, others attribute this to others)
to like purpose said that sentence worthy of remembrance: That an host of
hearts is more to be feared that is ruled by a Lion, than an host of Lions
ruled by an Heart.

That the victory and luckynesse of the army do depend of the captiaines
virtue and manhood.
THe Numantines very warlike men, being discomfited and put to flighte by
Scipio Emilianus their elders reproving them for their cowardnesse, said: Are
not these the same Romain sheep, that we before this have so many times
overcome and vanquished? To whom one of the young men answered: It is true that
they be the same sheep, but they have changed their shepherde.

That it is a detestable and a foul thing to suffer gold to bear rule in every
thing.
PRopertius detesting the great covetousness that reigned in his time, sets
it forth effectually in this sort, saying: Now this may well be called a
world of gold,
Because therewith all things are bought and sold,
For gold thou shall be lou'de, and set alofte,
For gold thou shall a virtuous man be thought,
For gold is love and honor also gotten,
For gold is faith, for gold the laws are broken.


And Alamanno describing the very same infirmity of our times says: J gran
perigli, ^lung hi error d'Vlysse
Scilla, Cyclopi, Harpie, Syrte and Syrene
Di cui per mill gia si disse, and scrisse,
Son quasi nulla a gran trauagli, and pene,
C'hoggi part maggior del mondo cieco,
Sol per oro acquistar qua giu' sostiene.
Ulysses dangers great, and vvandrings long,
The Scyls, the Cyclops, the Syrtes and Marmaydes song,
Of which a thousand erst did speak and feign,
As none, are to the trauayles great and pain,
That now most part of this blind world and vain
Does here below in getting gold sustain.


That liberality and clemency are the best instruments to rule.
POntanus said that they which desire to rule ought to have two things in
mind, the one to be liberal, the other to be gentle. Because that Prince
(says he) which uses liberality and gentleness, makes his enemies his
friends, the unfaithful, faithful, he purchases other friends, he wins
love and favor, even of the inhabitaunts of the farthest parts of the world:
and finally he is made like to God, whose property is to do good to every man,
and forgive sinners.

That wise men leave not a certain gain for an uncertain, although it be
much greater.
WHen a fisher had taken in the sea a little fish, he went about to persuade
the fisher to give him liberty, saying: I am now so little, that I shall do
thee little goo^, but if thou do let me go I shall grow, and so thou shalt
have more profit of me. To whom the fisher said: I were a very fool, if I
should leave that gain which I have presently in my hands, although it be
little, for the hope of the gain to come, albeit it were very great. And he
added this saying of Terence: Ego spem praetio non emo.

How much Gods help can do in humane things, and contrariwise, how much
Gods wrath does hurt.
ATlanta of the Island Scyros, being a very fair maiden, and swiftest of
foot, baing wowed of many lovers in way of marriage, made a law, that he that
would have her, should run with her, and if he overcame her, she should be
his wife: and being overcome he should suffer death. The which thing was
attempted of many, but all had the foil, and so they lost their lives. It
chanced that Hyppomenes seeing on a time such a wonderful beauty, was
kindled with the love of her, in such sort, that he was determined to get
her by way of the cruel law. But having well bethought him of his enterprise,
he went afterward (like a wise man) to ask counsel of Venus. Who
courteously gave unto him three apples of gold out of the garden of the
Hesperides, and taught him how he should use them. So he being entered in his
course, the maiden Atlanta ran swiftly before him. Wherefore Hippomenes,
according as Venus had taught him, cast one of the three apples upon the
ground, whereupon the maiden waxing very desirous for that brightness, stouped
down to take it up, but forthwith through her swiftness she ouertooke him and
ran paste him. Then Hippomenes, cast down the second that was fairer and
goodlier than the first, so that the maiden also more desirous to have it, lost
so much time to take it up, that the lover making have took a little vauntage,
which she being swift, soon recovered. Notwithstanding he seeing her almost at
the end of the course, cast with good courage the third apple upon the
ground much fairer than both the other, of the which the damsel being so
much the more desirous, with steadfast hope to overtake and outrun her lover,
stouped down to take it. But in the mean season Hippomenes running apace,
ouerpassed her, and was at the mark before her. In this wise he being
conqueror, joyfully obtained the fair Atlanta to be his wife. Wherefore he not
being able to endure the love he bare her, in carrying her into his countreye,
brought her into ye holy wood of Cibel mother of the gods, and there without
reverence of the place, had to do with her. Wherewith Cibele being offended,
turned them both into Lions, and set them (as it is also seen) to draw her
charyot.

When we must dine and suppe according to Diogenes the Cynike.
DIogenes the Cynike, being asked of a certain friend of his what time was
best for a man to dyne and suppe, he answered: He that is rich, when he
will, and he that is poor, when he may.

That wise men make a jest of superstition.
A Citizen of Rome, rising in a morning, found that his shoes were gnawne with
myse in the night, which thing seeming to him monstrous, and taking it to be a
naughty sign and token, went incontine^tly sore dismayed to find Cato, and
when he had found him, with great heaviness he asked him what so strange and
marvelous a thing betokened. To whom Cato laughing answered: It is no marvel
brother that the myse has gnawne thy shoes, it had been a marvel if thy shoes
had gnawne myse.

That foolish and impertinent tauntes are soon wrested against the taunters.
Caius Lelius being a very noble man born, it happened that a man basely borne
quarelling with him, said unto him: Thou art unworthy of thy ancestors, and
thou (said Lelius) art worthy of thy now living parents.

That a man's counsel ought timely to be thought upon, contrariwise a vvomans
sudden.
DEmocritus the Philosopher says, that in councelles there is nothing worse
than speediness, for that is full of errors, whereof soon ensues
repentance. And Bias of the same profession of Philosophy in like manner
said: that counsel had two great enemies, to wit, spedinesse and anger. And
Ariosto to this purpose says: Th'vnthought counsels of women be better
Than them which are of study proceeded,
For this gift alone to them is proper,
Among so many from heaven bestovved.
But may that mischief of men be redrest,
Which ripe advise does timely not avail,
Where we to ponder often in mind do fail,
Sometimes is study great, and labor pressed.


That vaynglorie is oftentimes reputed for folly.
A Knight of Milan, a vain and boasting man, came to Florence in embassage:
and when among other his vanities, he used braggingly to change oftentimes the
chain he did wear at his neck, Niccolo Niccolini, a man learned and ready,
maruelling at his fashions, and despising such great boasting, said: One
chain is inoughe for other fools, but this man's folly is such that he
needs many.

That vain ceremonies do little differ from vain lies.
MAster Giouanni della Casa said that this word cirimonie, that is,
ceremonies, is strange in the Tuscan tongue, for that the ancient Tuscanes knew
it not, and therefore they could not give it any name. And he said moreover,
that impertinent ceremonies do ordinarily little differ for their vanity, from
lies: and that sometime they be not only lies and vain flatteries, but
wickedness and treason, because by the means of them, men do not only flatter
and deceive, but oftentimes murder and betray their neighbor.

That every man ought to speak of his own, and not of an other man's
profession.
HAnniball of Carthage being come (as a banished man to Ephesus) to king
Antiochus, was upon a day requested of his friends to go to hear Phormio, an
excellent Peripa^e^ike, who discoursing many hours of the office of a captain,
and of the art of war very ^loquently, contented his hearers maruellously.
Wherefore Hanniball being asked of them how he liked so worthy a man, he
smylyng answered: I have seen in my time many old men dote, but I never saw
none that doted more than Phormio does.

That God has appointed to every man his office, and that he does not allow
that men should go beside it.
VEnus being beaten of Diomedes, would with weapon be revenged: but Jupiter
calling her, said: Daughter mine, thy office is not to be occupied in warlyke
affairs, but about women, and lovers. Wherefore attend about love, kisses,
embracings, and pleasures: And as for warlike affairs, Mars and Minerua have
the charge thereof.

That it belongs to wise and noble princes to maynteyne the safety and
strength of the co^monaltie.
TItus servant to Alexander the great, went about to persuade him to enhaunce
all the customs of his empire. To whom Alexander nobly answered in this sort: I
hate that gardener which plucketh up the roots together with the herbs: And
love that shephearde which sheareth the sheep, and skinneth them not. An
answer doutlesse right worthy of Alexander the great.

That Peace has five great enemies.
PEtrarcha was wont to say, that five great ennimies of peace do dwell with
us, to wit, covetousness, ambition, envy, anger, and pride: and that if
these ennimies were banished, perpetual peace (without doubt) should reign
among us.

An advised and a biting answer.
THere came a young man a Greek to Rome, who very much resembled Octauian the
Emperor, and all the people beheld him: wherefore the Emperor caused him to
come before him, and maruelling at so great a likeness, asked him whether his
mother was ever in Rome. To whom the young man stoutly answered no: and not
contented herewith, said moreover, but my father has been here oftentimes
Inferring hereby, that he could not be the son of Octauians father, but that
Octauian might be his fathers son.

That a bold and wary aunsvvere delivers men out of great dangers.
A Man of the Country going home from the field, found by channce a young man
upon the bed with his wife, and being about furiously to give him a great
blow upon the head with an Axe that he had in his hand, the woman with
steadfast look cried out: do it not, for he does this for the God of love, and
I do it for three bushels of corn, that he has promised me. Now peradventure
the Countreyman fearing the gods displeasure: or else being pleased when he
heard of the three bushels of corn, turned back, and the lovers finished
their labor.

That bounty, without good choice is worthy blame.
SOcrates (after Erasmus, other attribute it to Democritus) seeing a man so
prodigal that he gave to every person without any choice, said: I would thou
might dye an evil death, seeing that thou making every man partaker of the
Graces which are virgins, doste make them harlots. And Ennius to the like
purpose said.

Benefacta male locata, male facta arbitror, that is Pleasures ill employed,
displeasures I do deem.

That providence auoydeth the greatest dangers, and rashness works the
contrary.
THe swallowe falling into the company of other birds, as soon as she first
saw hemp sown, said: we had need pick up this seed, for I see well that we
are laid in wait for: but they laughing her to skorne, called her foolish
prophets. When the hemp was grown, the swallow told them that it stood them
upon to look about, and for all this they scorned her. The hemp ripeneth,
and the swallowe again gives them warning to go away. In the end seeing that
they made no account of her counsel, she withdrewe her self from the birds
company, and drew near to man, where she lives, where she sings, and
abides in safety: but by the means of hemp, nets and snares are made for
other birds.

That rigor and sharpness of masters makes servants unprofitable and
unapt.
ARistotle said, that we ought to have regard and compassion of servants:
for if they do weep and fear continually, although they were never so witty
by nature and willing to do well, the force of their wit and mind is taken
away.

That God alone is the absolute protectoure of the whole world.
THe Earl Matthew Maria Boiardo, a lord no doubt of great learning and
judgment coming into the company of diverse Philosophers, which dyuerslye
discoursed of Fortune, and so being heerevppon asked his opynion: He
courteouslye spoke after this sort: Destiny, Fortune, and Predestination,
Chance, adventure, and fatal necessity,
Do give great anoy to men of each nation,
And are more famous than every great novelty.
But in fine, God alone of all things is ruler,
And he that is prudent, may the stars master,
He that's not wise, pacient, stout and hardy,
May lament of himself, and not of destiny.


He that does his own business, defiles not his hands.
ANtisthenes the Philosopher passing thorough the street with a piece of dry
flesh in his hand, some of his friends maruelling at him said that it was a
shame that such a one as he was, should carry of himself such things abroad,
and not give them rather to his servant: whom Antisthenes answeryng said: But
why marvel you? I carry this thing for my self, and not for an other.
Whereunto the Florentins alluding, say in a proverb: Ch^ fa i fatti suoi, mo^s'
imbratta le mani, that is, He fouleth not his hands that does his own
business, meaning hereby, that it is no shame for a man to do himself that
which he has to do.

An opinion of Ciceros concerning the sharpness of vvitte.
IT is manifest (says Cicero) that the wits of men that inhabit under a
pure and subtle air, are sharper and apter to understand and perceive things
than they that dwell in a gross and thick air: Moreover the quality of the
meat that is used (says he) makes much also to the sharpness of the wit.

That a just Prince ought to minister Justice even against his own kinsfolk.
AT Florence in the time of Duke Alexander there was arrested one of the
Medici, an unruly fellow, and such a one as would pay no man. This seeming to
him very strange went incontinently to the Duke, sorowing exceedingly, that so
small regard was had of his excellency, because he that was of the same
stock, was of such a one, with citations by way of Justice shamed, and in the
end attached. But the duke, who was a very ready man and a wise, said to him
forthwith: Oh go and pay him, for he will cause thee to be put in prison, which
will be a far greter shame unto us.

That learned men do willingly feed themselves with learning.
THe Emperor Charles the fourth, taking great delight in learning, went to the
schools of Prague, and having stayde there more than four hours to hear
worthy men dispute, perceived that some of his nobles said that supper time
passed away: wherefore he nobly answered: Let him sup that will, as for me,
I feed me more with this, than with a supper.

That the study of love lets and turns away every other study.
Jerome of Padua, a man very studious and learned, red almost day and night,
to come to his desired end: but falling in love, in such manner governed
himself, that Alciate made upon him these verses in effect: The Lawyer that
had always bent his mind
To studies grave, is wholy now enclinde
To vvanton love, ^e can himself withdraw.
So Venus does with Pallas bid auaunt,
From minds enflamed, and does the world daunt.


That death is abhorred even of them that are in most misery.
A Rhodian for that he had spoken amiss of Dionysius the tyrant, was put in an
iron cage like a wild and cruel beast. But first his nose and ears were cut
of an eye and al his teeth pulled out, and his forhead marked with a hot iron.
Thus daily the executioners tormentyng him in the syghte of the people, made
him live and dye. Whereupon certain friends of his, upon a time aduysed him,
that he ceassyng to eat and drink, should give place to so great
infirmity, and and his life. But he not yet astonyed, answered. A man ought
always to hope well, as long as he has life, which (as the most learned
Erasmus said,) may be an example to those, which through every misfortune
will furiously run to the halter.

That men of a ready vvitte, do easyly rid themselves of unreasonable
demaundes.
SEruius Geminus going on a day to visit Lucius Mallius, a most excellent
paynter, and seeing his children very deformed, could not refrayn, but said,
that he maruel^ed excedingly, that he made so fair pictures, and so foul
children: To whom Mallius redily answered, saying: marvel not Seruius, for I
make pictures in the day, and children in the night.

That a man ought not to seek revenge, and ought to despise all temporal
things.
MArsilius Ficinus said, that patience is so much to be praised, as impatience
to be dispraysed: and that a wise man ought not to be moved with the voice of
the people, which cries reue^gement, reuengeme^t, because the people is a
beast with many feet without a head. He said moreover that he which has a
noble stomach, ought to despise things of short continuance, and that all
Temporal things are but for a while: of the which the time passed will be no
more, the time to come is not yet, and the present time is as it were
indivisible, because it begins and ends at one instant.

That wine ought to be watered.
PLato warns us that for the health of body and mind, we should temper
Bacchus as a drunken God, with the Nymphs as sober Goddesses: the which
Meleager confirms with his Epigram thus interpreted: The Nymphs did Bacchus
wash, when he a boy had lepte,
Out of the fire, with ashes foul, who yet was covered kept:
Wherefore a friend unto the Nymphs is Bacchus vvood:
But he like is to fire, except thou lay his burning mood.
And Propertius trimly says: Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas. That
is: By wine beauty fades, and grace is defaced.

That to have many enemies, is less dangerous, than to have one alone.
A Certain man perceiving that he had through his wickedness hurt a thousand
persons, both in good name and substance, was wont also boastingly to say,
that there was no greater safety than to have infinite enemies, because one
looks that the other should be revenged, and so none seeks of them to
revenge. But take heed (said he) of one enemy alone.

That the love of the people is a thing of all other most unconstant.
MAster Francis Petrarcha touching the inconstancy of the people, said thus:
fair wether of the spring, the mornings sweet wind of summer, caulms of the
sea, the state of the Moon, the love of the people, if they be compared
together, the palm and the price of mutabilitie shall be given to the last.

Fit means to come soon to a Monarchy.
ALexander the great, being demanded by what means he had in so short space
gotten the government of so great a world, he answered, with counsel, with
eloquence, and with warlike discipline.

That a man can not excuse his faults in ascribing them to destiny.
ZEno of Cittium finding that one of his slaves had played the thief,
commanded that he should be hanged: whereupon the slave excusing him self,
and saying that he ought to be pardoned, because it was not his fault, but
destiny, that he was a thief. Zeno answered, and thy destiny is to be
hanged, and so he sent him to punishment.

That money lets sleep.
ANacreon the Philosopher, having received for a gift of Policrates prince of
the Samians, the value of ten thousand Duckattes, entered into so great
thoughts and fantasies, that he passed three days and three nights without
sleep, wherefore he being afraid with that sudden change, and with so great
a discommoditie, carried by and by the money to the king, saying, that he
restored it again because it let him from sleep.

The description of a man after Aristotle.
ARistotle being asked what man was, he answered, the example of weakness,
the pray of time, the play of Fortune, the Image of inconstancy, the subject
of Envy, the stuff of worldly calamity, the residue choler and phlegm.

That the policy of a valiant Captain is of great effect and force in
war.
AVrelian the Emperor going with an army to the city of ^iana, found the
gates shut, and the inhabitauntes in defense thereof, wherefore he being sore
displeased, said: If I enter into this city, I will not leave one dog alive.
The soldiers hering these words, and waxing very coragious by reason of the
booty, made an exceeding great invasion, so that Heraclemeon a citizen being
afraid, for fear, and for money betrayed his country. When Aurelian was
entered into the city, he caused Heraclemeon the traitor alone to be slain.
Now the soldiers demanding the sack and spoil of the city (for so much
as it seemed to them that the Emperor had promised it) he, who meant not so,
made them answer: I said, that I would not leave one dog alive in this
city, wherefore kill, if you think good, all the dogs that are here.

That envy hurts asvvell privately as publicly.
ANtisthenes, the Philosopher said, that a man ought principally to take
heed of the envy of his friends, and of the wyles of his enemies, and added
hereto, that even as corn is purged from cockle, and an army knaves, so ought
the public weal be purged from the envious. And the learned Palingenius,
against this accursed plague of envy says thus: A monster vile is envy
doubtless ay.
A cruel plague, a sharp assayling grief:
She virtue persecutes, the good she rentes,
She spitefully backbites the upright man,
She pardon none does give to friend nor kin,
And if she may, due honor from him takes.


That in every state or degree of men virtue is necessary and most profitable.
SOcrates being demanded which living creature in the world seemed to him
fairest, he said: the man that is beautified with virtue. Alexander the great
was wont to say, that he had lieffer to excel all men in virtue than in rule.
Democritus said (some attribute it to Socrates) that the roots of virtue are
bitter, but the fruit very sweet and good for every thing. Aristotle
commanded that this most noble virtue should be embraced with more
feruentnesse, than the lover embraces his love or mistress: because (says
he) virtue is necessary for young men, delectable to old men, profitable to
the poor, an ornament to the rich, a glory to the happy, a solace to the
unhappy, she lightneth nobility, and ennobleth vnnoblenesse.

That Princes of great worthiness be such as freely confess the virtue of
their enemy
PYrrhus did twice valiantly overcome the Romans in open battle, but with so
great a loss and slaughter of his men, that he himself crying out said: Oh if
once more we overcome the Romans, we shall lose the field.

The Oracle of Scipio Nasica touching the Roman state.
Marvelous is the judgment and foresight of wise men: some said, the Roman
Empire is now in safety, sith that Carthage is destroyed, and the Greeks
brought in subjection. To whom the wise Scipio Nasica in manner of an Oracle
answered: Nay rather we are now in great peril, seeing that we have no more
adversaries or ennimies to fear or dread. The which foresight, how divine it
was, the pride, the corruption, the discord, and finally the ruin of that
inuinciple people did soon declare it.

That wise men ought not to give themselves to service or administration.
CHrysippus being asked for what cause he gave not himself to the
administration of the weal public, he answered: because if I should do ill, I
should displease God: and if I should do well, I should displease men. But
Sidonius his scholar wittyly wrested this sentence, and said: Nay rather you
ought with all endeavor to give your self to such service, because if you
should do well you should please please God: if you should do ill you should
please men.

That we ought much more to look to the ending than to the beginning of
great and perilous enterprises.
WHen king Francis the first of that name was determined to go into Italy with
a huge army to recover the dukedom of Milan (which was after that he was
taken prisoner at Pauia) he consulted which way be might enter into that
country or province. So afterward when his majesty with his counselors
were resolved, Amaril his fool at his coming from the counsel, met him, and
said: Sir these your wise men seem to me fools. Why said the king? Because
they (said Amaril) have taken long aduisement, which way you might best enter
into Jtaly, but they have not yet spoken one word which way you might best come
out: wherefore beware sir that you abide not there.

That religious and wise Princes do choose rather to dye, than to live unmeet
to govern.
THe young Augustus Emperor of the East, being a hunting, and discovering a
heart, shot a poisoned arrowe to him, but in the leusing of his arrowe he hurt
by misfortune one of his hands, in such sort that the poison working, the
Physicians said, that to save his life it was needfulll to cut off forthwith
that hand, before the venime were spread abroad throughout the body. Then
Augustus sighing said: I had rather dye than do this, because Caesar can not
with one hand alone rule the world uprightly, and so miserably he dyed.

The great efficacy and virtue of poverty.
DIogenes was wont to say, that poverty is the aid of Philosophy, because
that which Philosophy goes about to persuade with words, poverty compels
with deeds. And Ariosto said, that poverty is a candle that discloseth
man's miseries, although it discover also his worthiness and virtue, seeing
that after Aristotle, in adversity chiefly virtue shows her operation.

That Pallas and Bacchus agree not well together, to wit, that virtue can not
dvvell with drunkenness.
Virtue is transformed into diverse shapes. Sometimes she is transformed into an
olyue tree that was found out by Pallas: the vine, which was the invention of
Bacchus, began to fasten and twine about him, wherefore the Olyue tree used to
him these words, saying: Why to me do thou vvanton vine offense,
Of Pallas I the tree am termde, get hence
With thy thick boughs that hold me fast about,
Elsewhere new props to stay thy self seek out:
For Bacchus does with deadly hate pursue
A virgin young, that is of, virtues crew.


How much silence is allowed, how profitable and sure it is.
SImonides the Philosopher, being blamed on a time because he naturally spoke
so little, he said: I speak so little because I have many times repented me,
when I had spoken too much: but I never repented me when I had too long held
my peace. Apollonius said, that babbling is full of error, and silence is
safe and void of care. And Seneca in like manner says, that there is nothing
that makes one better in quiet than few words and many thoughts Because
(says he) the pleasantness of speech is so sweet a meat, and so alluring,
that she by little and little enticeth a man no otherwise than wine and love
does, to discover secrets, and afterward to sow occasions to sin. Whereupon
it is read, that Anacarsis the philosopher wrote on his painted image, this
sentence: Abstain from the tongue, from the throat, and from Venerie.

That it is of no less virtue to know how to keep silence, than to learn
how to speak.
A Certain young man full of words sought to speak with Isocrates the orator, to
the end to be his scholar. But Isocrates required double wages. He being asked
for what cause, he answered: For that I had need to teach thee two arts: the
first is to keep silence, and the second to speak.

That we ought utterly to forget our enemies.
PLato said, that not only a man ought not to speak of his enemies, but also
put them out of remembrance, as nature does, who puts away her contrary.

That Sophistry and boasting has no place among wise and learned men.
A Certain sophister desirous to set forth to Diogenes the sharpness of his
wit, met him on a day, and said: Diogenes, that which I am, thou art not:
which the Philosopher granting, he added heereto: I am a man, Ergo thou art
no man: No no, said Diogenes: begin with me, and thou shall argue well. To an
other, that for ostentations sake, spoke vaynely many things of heaven, he
said: How long is it agone since thou came from thence?

That the substance and vaynglorie of this world is in the end both sleep
and vvinde.
A Covetous man falling grievously sick, drew near afterward to deaths door,
and knowing in the end that he had nothing to carry with him into an other
world, turned him lastly to his kinsfolk and friends, that were about him, and
said: Take now example by me my dear companions, to the end that in heaping
up of riches, you trouble not your selves more than honesty requires: because
I that have spent all my life time in scrapyng goods and tresure together,
must now leave this life, besides which I have enjoyed nothing: and of so much
land, and precious apparel yt I have, I shall possess nothing else but five
foot of ground, and an old sheet. The great Saladine (forsomuche as he has
been a noble prince, I compare him not herewith the covetous man, but set him
in this place as an example of the vayneglory of this world) appointed at his
death that this Epitaph should be put upon his tomb. Saladine king, and
owner of Egypt, of Arabia, of Soria, etc. possesses at this present but two
yards of ground. And therefore Peter Sabinus says well. Recte viue deo,
caeterae fumus erit. that is, To Godvvarde live upright, the rest is nothing
else but smoke.

And Dant says Non e il mondan rumor altro, ch'un fiato
Di vento, c'hor vien quinci, and hor vien quindi,
Et multa nome perch multa lato,
that is, Naught else is worldly rumor but a blast
Of vvinde, that vvhirles from place to place full fast,
And changes name because it changes side.


That with the counsel of the wise, the craft of the deceitful is overcome.
TWo crafty fellows came to a rich woman, and gave her certain money to
keep, with condition that she should not restore it them again, except they
came both together. Within a while after, one of them came clad in black, leave
to look to, and sorrowful, who affirms, that his companion was dead: and the
woman believing it, paid him the money that was left with her, and thervpo^ he
made have away. Not long after the other came, and said that she had made wrong
payment, and finally he brought an action against her. Now the woman finding
her self deceived, was almost in despair. But ^e^osthenes ye most excellent
Oratoure, putting her in comfort became her advocate and spokesma^: and when
the matter was called upon, he answered him in this sort: This honest woman
is ready to restore the money that was left with her to keep, wherefore bring
according to your own request, your companion, because as you say, the
cannot deliver the money to the one without the other.

How life flees away, and death follovveth.
SAint Ambrose says, that our life is like to him that sayleth on the sea,
because he that sayleth, whether he stand or sit, go or lie, he is ever
carried from place to place, with ye violence of the ship. Likewise whether a
man sleep or wake, go, or stand still, will he or will he not, continually by
the force of time he is carried to the end of his way. To the which purpose
the sage Petrarcha says. La vita fugge, and non s' arrestae vn' hora
Et la Morte vien dietro a gran giornate.
that is, Life flees away no time we constant find.
And death draws on with iourneis great behind.


That victory ill used, tourneth to the loss of the conqueroure.
THe people of Volterra when they had rebelled against the Florentines,
purposed afterward to reconcile themselves upon certain conditions. Wherefore
master Thomas Soderina a wise and expert man, gave advise with many reasons,
that they should in any wise agree with them: But Laurence of ye Medici was of
the contrary opinion, so that he made a great army and sent them to Volterra,
Laurence himself being general thereof. Now when the Volterrans saw no
remedy, they opened the gates, and yielded themselves to the discretion of the
Florentins. Who entering in with the Army, it chanced that for some disorder
the city was wholly sacked, and the people moreover evil entreated. So when
news came to Florence they were received with exceeding great joy. Wherefore
one of Laurence dearest friends rejoicing, reproved Master Thomas for his
counsel saying: what say you now to this that Volterra is won? To whom
Soderna answered, me thinks it is lost, for if you had come to agreement with
them of Volterra, you might have had profit and surety by them. Now forasmuch
as you are to hold the City by force, in the time of war it will breed
your anoye and weakness, and in the time of peace bring you to damage and to
great expenses.

How sharply, according to Justinian, flatterers are to be punished.
POpe John the twentieth was wont to say, that he knew very well when he was
flattered, notwithstanding that he took great delight therein. Contrariwise
Justinian the emperor, being on a time foolishly flattred of a Greek, that
lykened him to God, leapt unto him, and al bescratched his face: Whereupon he
finding himself ill handled, said: Noble Caesar, why scratch you me by the
face? and the Emperor said to him: why bytest thou me thou Gnato of Terence?

That it is a dishonestie for a man to set forth himself with other men's
labors.
PAlla Strozzi having made certain Verses, found that a freende of his, to
whom he had frendlye showed them, had not only taken a copy of them, and made
diverse privy to them as his own, but also had in his own name caused them to
be printed, as though they had been of his making. Wherefore Palla being sore
offended, and fynding his friend in certain men's company, said very well in
this sort: Chi ruba un corno, un cauallo, un anello
Et simil cose, ha qualche discretione,
Et potrebbe chiamar si ladroucello:
Ma quel che ruba la riputatione,
Et dell'altrui fatiche si fa bello,
Si puo chiamar assassino, and ladrone,
Et di tanto piu odio, pena e degno,
Quanto piu del dover trappasso il segno.
Who so does steal a horn, a ring, a steed,
Or some such thing he somewhat wise is thought,
And may be termde a petty thief in deed:
But he that others praise to rob has sought,
And reapeth fruit of others sown seed,
A thief and murderer be calde he ought,
And he the more he does from duty swerne,
The more cruel hate and pain does deserve.


That wise princes make small accounte of the vain speech of the people.
FRauncis the first king of France had levied a certain subsidy of his
subjects, by reason whereof diverse weremuche grieved: And as the men of that
countreye are rash in speech, they without any respect, misused the king in
language, which when it was reported to the King, as crimen laesae maiestatis,
as high Treason against his person, was no whit moved, but smiling said: let
them say what they list, for they may well speak for their money.

That biting answers are meet for sharp demaundes.
IN the civil wars betwixt Pompei and Caesar, Cicero on a time came to the
army of Pompei, that is, of the public weal, where by and by he was rebuked,
because he came no sooner. I come time enough, said Cicero; for it is not yet
ready: reproving them, for that they were not prepared, as it was requisite for
such a great war. And to Pompei himself, who asked him to the end to prick
him, where his son in law Dolabella was, he readily answered, he is with
thy father in law, for Dolabella was with Caesar, then being father in law to
Pompei. Inferring moreover, that the kindred between Caesar and Pompei was the
cause (as he in that season many times had remembered) of the greatness of
Caesar and that greatness decay of the common wealth.

That scoffing many times lights upon the scoffers head.
A Florentine passing through Siena, upon a lean horse, and of an
extraordinary length, one of Siena, to the end to mock him said: Ho sir on
horseback, what is the Canna worth? (this is a mesure of 4.) Flemish else)
now the Florentine perceiving himself to be pricked, lifting up forthwith his
horse tail, readily answered: enter in here into the shop, and I will sell
thee good cheap.

These two words mine and thine mar the world.
POlitiane said that God had given water to every thing living in the water:
so all the earth without any division to every earthly thing: but that man is
the unhappiest of all other living creatures: he requires that he alone might
bear rule over the whole world: and herewith are brought into the world two
words, to wit, mine and thine, which are the occasion of al men's strife. And
therefore Pythagoras the Philosopher ordained that all things should be common
among friends. Plato enacted the same between the Citizens of his new public
weal: and others have gone about to bring this in among al me^

That vile counsels are to be despised of noble and worthy men.
ARistodemus was thought to be a cooks son, notwithstanding came in great
favor with king Antigon^^, and on a time he went about to persuade him to
abate his expenses, and to use less liberality than he ordinarily used. But
the noble king smiling said to him worthily: O Aristodemus these words of
thine smell of the kitchen.

That the virtue of courtesy is had in price even of murderers, and that it
makes them gentle and pitiful.
MAster Alexander of Siena, a liberal gentleman, and a benefactour to al men,
riding a journey fell in the hands of murdering thieves, the which besetting
him, would have slain him, but one of them knowing him, cried out
incontinently, alas kill him not, for he is a rare man, he does pleasure to
all men, and has done me a hundred good turns. For the which words his
fellows being moved with pity, did not only refrain to kill him, but
altogether kept him company kill he was out of danger: wherefore Ariosto nobly
said: Studifi ogniun giouar altr^^, che rade
Volte il ben far senza il suo premio sia,
E s' e pur senza, al men non te n' accade,
Morte, ne danno, ne ignominia ria,
Chi nuoce altrui, tardi, o per tempo cade,
Il debito a scontar, che non s' oblia.
Dice il prouerbio, ch' a trouar si vanno,
Gli huomini spesso, e i monti fermi stanno.
That is, Let one man seek an other to sustain,
For selde a good turn is without his meede,
And though it be without yet no names stayne,
Nor hurt, nor death may thy destruction breed.
Late or betime, he that does other pain,
Does pay his debt, that in the heart does heed.
The proverb says, that men do go their way,
Oftetimes to find, and the hills do firmly stay.


That the ignorant sell their labors dearer than the learned.
THere was not many year past a citizen in Florence, who although he was a
Doctor of the law, yet he had no great learning, and consequently little to
do. Upon a time when he was entertained in a matter in law, asked for his
counsel and pains xxv. Ducats. How so? said his client, master Mark of the
A sini, an excellent good doctor, who I have entertained in the same matter,
was contented with six Crowns, and you will have above five and twenty. And
no maruayle said the Doctor, that he is contented with so little, for he
has daily one matter or other in hand, but as for me, I have nothing to do
but three or four times a year.

That the ignorant lawyer is like to necessity, which has no law.
ONe Laurence Gualterotti being asked of one of his friends touching the
sufficiency of the foresaid Florentine Doctor, he said, that he was like to
need: how answered his friend? without law, said he, allud^ng pleasantly
to this proverb, that Need has no Law.

That the honor of every man depends of his own deeds, not of others
words.
OEdipus being banished out of his country, went to Athens, to king Theseus
his friend, to the end to save his life, which his ennimies sought for. And
when he was come in Theseus presence, and hearing a daughter of his speak,
knew her by the voice, and because he was blind, stayed not to salute Theseus
any otherwise, but rather as a father was mindful only to comfort and
cherishe his child. And by and by remembering himself, went about to excuse
him self to Theseus, and to ask him pardon. Wherefore the good and wise king
brake off his words, and said to him: be of good cheer Oedipus for I honor
not my life with the words of other, but with my deeds.

Many excellent means to keep the mind quiet.
DIogenes admonishes us to set forth against Fortune, the constancy of the
mind: against the laws, nature: against the senses, reason, saying, that by
these three ways men's tranquillity and quiet is preserved.

That youth had need of good bringing up, to the end to bring forth good
fruit in age.
CIprian says, that even as of a tree, that has not blossomed, no fruit can
be gathered, so of a man's age, in whose youth has been no good discipline, no
good fruit can be received. And he added moreover, that if in youth there be
no obedience, there will never be in age any good discipline.

A singular mean to constrayne every man whosoever he be, not to refuse a
present.
WHen Alexander the great had given fifty talents to the Philosopher
Xenocrates, the Philosopher refused them, saying, that he had no need of them.
Wherefore Alexander said to him: and have you no friend that you stand in
need of? Oh all the riches of Darius are not sufficient for me to give my
friends, and know not you how to bestow fifty Talents among yours? what
Philosophy is this?

That envy follovveth glory.
ARistomenus says, that even as a man which goes in the sun, is of
necessity accompanied with his shadow, so he that walks in the way of glory,
is likewise followed of others envy: and said moreover, that misery alone did
not breed envy.

A parable shevving that malmsey is good at all times of ones meal.
PIouano Arloto a Florentine was a pleasant companion and a witty fellow, who
went upon a time to dinner to Fraunces Dini a worshipful citizen of Florence,
and when he was set at the table, Fraunces said unto him: Piouano I have
malmesey shall we have it before dinner or after? To whom Piouano answered in a
parable, saying: The blessed Marie was a virgin before her delivery, in her
delivery, and after her delivery. Wherefore Fraunces understanding him, would
have nothing drunk but malmesey all dynner while.

Why the head waxes hoare before the beard.
PIouano being demanded for what cause the head came hoare before the beard,
answered: because the hears of the head were twenty years elder than the
beard.

He is more miserable that comes under the power of wicked people, than he
that is delivered and scapeth their hands.
IN the time of Pope Calistus there came a jolly man to Piouano, and said: Sir
give me your alms for Gods sake, for I am escaped out of the hands of the
Catelans. I had more need have an alms of thee (answered Piouano) because I
am entered in among the^: for Pope Calistus was a Catelane.

That it is less damage to give one thing to them that are in need, than to
lend two.
WHen two of Piouano his neighbors being very poor men, but honest, asked
him in time of dearthe, two bushels of corn for one in lone. Piouano answered
the^: I will do better, I will give you one bushel for one, and so he did them
pleasure, and saved two bushels of corn, for he should never have had them
again.

He that restores not, requires in vain to borrovve again.
TO an other that after the same sort would borrowe of him three bushelles of
corn, he answered: I am contents, go up above in such a place, and take it.
He went, and found no corn there nor any thing else: so he returning to
Piouano said unto him, that there was no corn where he sent him, and Piouano
said to him, then thou have not brought thither that which I lent thee the
last year: thou thy self art in fault, and may be sorry therefore, for if
thou had brought it thither, thou should have found it. He went his way
like a fool as he came, and at harvest he restored to P^ouano that which he
ought him.

A profitable manner of praying.
PIouano was asked of a gossip of his, what was the best prayer he might say
in the morning when he rose: say (said Piouano) a Pater noster with these
words: My Lord Jesus Christ save me from a banckrupt citizen, and from a
citizen that has recovered him self: save me from the conscience of priests,
from poticarie drugs, from the and cetera of Notaries, from him that hears
two Masses in the morning, and from him that swears by his conscience.

The principal and pleasauntest Proverbs and sentences of the foresaid
Piouano, are these follovving, which because many of them have a better grace
in the Italian than in the English tongue, I thought good to put them in both
languages.
TAnto e il mal, che non mi nuoce,
Quanto e il ben che non mi giona,
So great is the il that does not hurt me,
As is the good that does not help me.
Chi lascia la via vecchia per la nuona,
Spesse volte inganato si ritruona,
He that for the new leaves the old way,
Oftentimes is found to go astray.
Donato e morto, and ristoro s^^ male,
Given is dead, and restored is naught,
Al Medico and Anuocato,
Non tener il'ver celato,
Conceal not the truth
From the Physician and Lawyer,
Barbier giouane, and medico vecchio,
A young Barber and an old Physician.
A spertare, and non venire,
Star nel letto, and non dormire,
Seruire, and non aggradire,
Non tree case da morire.
To look for, and not to come:
To be in bed, and not to sleep:
To serve, and not to be accepted,
Are three deadly things.
Tutto quel che luce, non e ero,
All is not gold that glisters.
Chi non vnol durar fatica in questo mondo, non ci nasca,
He that will not endure labor in this world, let him not be barn.
Non e virtu, che pouerta, non guasti,
There is no virtue ye poverty destroys not.
L'abbondanza delle cose, genera fastidia,
The abundaunce of things ingendreth disdaynfulnesse.
Chi ben siede, mael pensa,
He that fitteth well, thinks ill.
L' allegrezze di questo mondo duran poco,
The mirth of this world dureth but a while,
Chi mi fa meglio, che non suole,
Tradito m'ha, o tradir mi vuole,
He that uses me better than he is wont,
Has betrayed me, or will me betray.
Ch^ sa quel ^he non des^e,
Gli auie^ quel che non creed.
He that does not that which he ought,
That happes to him which he has not thought.
Chi ha tem^^, ha vita,
He that has time, has life.
Tutte l'armi de Brescia non armerian la paurae,
All the wepons of Brescia can not arm fear.
Poco fa ch^ a se non g^oua,
He does little, that helps not him self.
Quanto pin s'ha piu si a^sidera,
The more a man has, the more he desires.
Tanto e mio, quanto io godo, and do per Dio,
So much is mine as I possess, and give for Gods sake.
Ne femina, ne tela, non piglia alla candela,
Choose not a woman, nor linen clothe by the candle.
Parente con parente, gnai' a chi non ha niente,
Kinsman with kinsman, woe be to him that has nothing.
Chi e (...), and non e tenuto,
Puo fare il male, and non e creduto,
He that is guilty and is not stayde,
May do ill, and is not believed,
Con art, and con iuganno,
Si viue mezzo l'anno:
Con inganno, and con art,
Si viue l'altra part.
With art, and with deceipte,
Men live half the year:
With deceit and with art,
Men live the other part.
But for so much as I am come to the proverbs, I will also put in this place
some of them that Boccace otherwhile used, both in speaking and writing, the
which be these.

Chi muta stato, muta condition,
He that changes state, changes condition.
La necessita non ha leg,
Need has no law.
Assai' sa, chi non sa, se tacer sa,
He knows enough that knows naught, if he knows how to hold his peace.
Huomo assallato, mezzo presso,
A man assaulted, is half taken.
A ma, chi to ama,
Love him that loves thee.
La prima part del pazzo, e di tener si sauio,
The greatest token of a fool is to accounte him self wise.
L' huomo propone, and Dio dispone,
Man purposes, and God disposes.
Peccato vecchio, penitentia nuoua,
Old sin, new repentance.
Peccato celato, e mezzo perdonato,
Sin that is hidden, is half forgiven.
Oncia di stato, libra d'oro,
An ounce of state, and a pound of gold,
Chi ben vine, ben muore,
He that lives well, dies well.
Chi la dura, la vince,
He that endures her, overcomes her.
Riguardae al fine,
Mark the end.
Fuggs quel placer present, che ti da dolor futuro,
Flee that present pleasure, which afterward makes thee sorry.
Ogni astremit a e vitio,
Every extremity is a fault.
Ogni parola, non vuol risposta,
Every word requires not answer.
A qual si voglia dolor remedia la patienza,
Patience remedieth all kind of sorrow.
La cossienza serve per mill testimoni,
The conscience serves for a thousand witnesses.
La vera leg, e la naturae,
Nature is the true law.
Ogni timidita, se seruita,
All fear is bondage.
Dalle cose passate, si giudicano le present,
Things present are judged by things past.
Assai presto si fa quel che si fa been,
That which is done well, is done soon enough.
A tutto e remedio, eccetto che alla morte,
There is a remedy for all things, saving for death.
La leg nasce dal peccato, and la gastigo,
The law grows of sin, and chastises it.
Pari, con pari, been stae, and dura,
Like with like well agrees and endures.
Chitroppo abbraccia, nulla stringe,
He that embraces too much, binds nothing, and as the common English
Proverb is, All have, all loose.
I patti rompone le leggi,
Covenant breaks law.
Vn' huomo val cento, and cento un huomo non vaglione.
One man is worth a hundred, and a hundred is not worth one.
Jl sanio non si dee vergognar di mutar proposito,
A wise man ought not to be ashamed to change his purpose.
La marauiglia e figliuola dell'ignoranza.
Marvel is the daughter of ignorance.
J fatti sono maschi, and le parole femine,
The deeds are many, and the words womanly.
Quanto piu s' honorano le richezze, tanto piu vilipendonsi le virtu,
The more that riches is honored, the more is virtue despised.
Il tempo e padre della verita, Et l'esperienza, e madre delle cose,
Time is the father of truth,
And experience is the mother of things.
Chi semina virtu, raccoglie fama,
Et vera fama supera la Morte,
He that sows virtue, reapeth fame,
And true fame overcomes death.
That the laws thorovve ignorance and wickedness are much corrupted by the
Judges.
ALexander Alessandrini, a very excellent doctoure and advocate, when he had
lost at Rome, against all right and reason, a matter of weighte, forsook
willingly his practice, and gave himself to the study of humanity, saying
that the greatest part of them that in these days sit in judgment, as
ignorant men do not understand the laws, or as naughty men do corrupt the
laws.

That the readiness of mind and tongue is peculiar to valiant men.
WHen news came to Athens, although false, of a certain victory for their
profit. Stratocles, such as they were, declared them forth with to the
people, and persuaded them to make a feast and rejoice. Afterward when the true
news of the contrary came, and how their army was put to flight and
discomfited, the people thynking themselves mocked, were in a rage, and
thretned to put Stratocles to death, who were sorry that he had lyned so long.
Whereupon he hearing these words went forth boldly to ye people, and said: And
why are ye weary of me you unthankful persons? what hurt have I done you to
keep you three days long in feasting and mirth?

That sleep is the brother of death.
GOrgias Leontinus lying at ye point of death gave himself by little and
little to sleep, wherefore his cousin Polidorus askyng him how he did, he
answered, well, I feel ye sleep will give me over to his sister. Alluding to the
opinion of Homer, ye sleep is ye brother of death

That a man's dealing is full of deceit and trouble.
PEtrarcha said, that hunters and fowlers use not so much study, and pitch not
so many nets and snares for wild beasts and birds, as crafty men lay for the
simple. And added moreover, if thou will not then be deceived, either dye, or
deal not with men.

What, and how many kinds there are of vvorldly or human goodness, and
whereupon the true felicity depends.
THere are three kinds of goods (after Aristotle) in man, to wit, of fortune,
of the body, and of the mind. The goods of Fortune are riches, and
souerainties: them of the body, health, and good complexio^: them of the mind
knowledge, and virtue. But of the last alone (said he moreover) depends the
true felicity, for that it is the proper operation of our mind, and not of
the body neither of fortune.

Notable conceits of Timon of Athens.
TImon of Athens was a very severe cittize^, who when he was asked for what
cause he so hated men, answered: I hate not yet them all, but the wicked for
their deserts, others, because they hate not the wicked. The same Timo^ was
wont to say, that there were four beginnings of al mischiefs, envy, pride,
covetousness, and ambition.

With what lets the desires of virtue are assailed.
DAnte said, that such as sought the way that leads to ye sovereign good, are
as it were always assailed with three principal impediments, which with all
endeavor they ought to break. The first of them he said to be the delight of
the senses, figured by the Lioness, fair and hot by nature, and she for
luxuriousness accompanied with gluttony and sloth. The second to be the
glory of ye world, expressed by the proud and disdainful Lion, and he for
ambition and pride, accompanied with an^er. The third to be the getting of
worldly wealth, signified by the she wolf, malicious and hungry: and she for
covetousness follewed at the hard heels with envy.

That hunger and thirst are the sauce of meat.
BOccace said, that there is nothing that makes meat and drink better to
rellishe than hunger and thirst: gyuing for example, how Darius in fleeing from
Alexander ye great, being very dry, had drunken very foul and stinking water,
and said afterward that he never drank a better drink. And that Ptoleme King
of Egypt, going a hunting, and having lost his way was hungry and went to a
shepherds house, where finding nothing but tough brouns bread, affirmed
afterward, that he never did eat better meat.

That the desires of men are diverse.
Diverse and worthy of consideration are the disires of men. Saint Austine
wished that he might see Christ carnally, Sayncte Paul preaching, and Rome
triumphing. Augustus desired Scipios stoutnesse of mind, Pompeis benevolence,
and Caesar's fortune. Caligula a most cruel Emperor wished, that the people
of Rome had had but one head, to the end he might have stricken it off at one
blow. Philoxenus desired to have his neck as long as a Cranes, to taste for a
longer space his meat and drink.

That presents ought to be forbidden them that are in office.
Caius Cincius a severe and just man, set forth a law to the people, by the
which he forbad that ye Senators should take no presents: wherefore Caius Centus
a greedy and covetous man, stoutly stood against it, and said: know thou
what thou say Cincius? To whom no less stoutly he answered: I say Caius
that thou should buie that which thou must occupy.

In what great misery worthy men are brought sometimes through the fault of
others.
BEllisarius the Captain of Justinian the Emperor, overcame the Vandals,
triumphed over the Persians, delivered Italy many times of Barbarians,
wherefore the Emperor through envy and suspicion, providing for so great and
prosperous success, instead of a reward caused his eyes unjustly to be pulled
out. So the most noble man was lastly driven to live by begging. And he
standing in a little cottage that was placed in one of the most frequented
streets of Rome, asked alms with these words, saying: Ye that pass by, give
poor Bellisarius, a farthing for Gods sake, who for his virtue was renoumed,
and for envy of others is made blind. To this myserie Fortune brought so
great a man. Wherefore Petrarcha said very well.

Fortune does never begin for a little,
When man a sport and mocking flock is made.
That humain creatures do receive diverse qualities and gifts of the Planets.
Diverse philosophers disputing together of that which an humain creature
received from the influence of the Planets, grew to this opinion, that man of
Saturn had his understanding, of Jupiter strength, of Mars, the mind, of the
Sun virtue, of Venus moving, of Mercury sharpness of wit, and of the Moon
the nature of generation. The Physicians say, that man in his creation
receives of the Sun, the Spirit, of the Moon the body, of Mars the blood,
of Mercury the wit, of Jupiter desire, of Venus pleasure, and of Saturn
moisture.

The rich man compared to the Peacocke.
IVno is the goddess of riches and kingdoms, to the which Goddess, the
Pecocke is given, to signify, that the conditions of rich men are like the
nature of the peacocke, for as much as he ever climbeth upon the roofs houses,
and upon the highest buyldings, so the rich man always seeks for degrees of
honor and preeminence, and if they be not given him, he takes them. The
Pecock skreaketh and cries, so the rich man lifts up his voice, and sets
out his loftynesse of mind. The Peacocke is decked with fair feathers, he
takes delight to be seen, and so is desirous to show and behold his eyed
tail, that he discovers his filthy parts behind: so the rich man is stored
with purple and riches, and delyteth in flattery, in pride, and in vain
glory: And whilst he goes about to show his body well trimmed, well fed,
nice, and perfumed, he shows a brutish mind void of virtue, full of folly
and all vanity.

That a man's words are the image of his mind.
SOlon said, that words are the image of the deeds, nay rather of the life
of a man, and that in a glass the fashion of the body is not seen better set
forth, than in speech the form of the mind. And Socrates alluding so that
opinion, when a child was sent him by one of his friends, because he saw
him, and examined him somewhat in that which he thought best, said, speak if
thou will, that I may know thee.

What thing the people is.
PLato said, that the people is a great beast like a huge giaunt, according to
whose appetite things are called just, fair and good, and contrariwise unjust,
foul and naught, and not as they are in deed.

That wine ought to be drunk moderately.
ANacharsis the Philosopher said, that the vine did bear three grapes, the
first of pleasure, the second of drunkenness, and the third of grief. The
same philosopher being asked how a man might keep himself from drunkenness,
answered: Have always in mind the loathsome fashions of drunkardes.

That jealousy brings forth wicked effects.
A Certain old man of Paris, called Claude had to wife a very fair and wise
young woman, with whom he was maruellously in love: but he was so jealous, that
setting al other business aside, he suffered her never to be out of his sight,
and to Church and every where he followed her and watched her, so that the
woman thinking with her self that she received great wrong, as she did in
deed, waxed very angry, and was determined notwithstanding so great watch, to
do to him that he deserved, and that which she in my judgment would never
have done, if he had been a reasonable man. So she casting her eye upon a
goodly young man, appointed him by means of a trusty maid of hies, to please
her desire, as often as might be, for the doing whereof the young woman held
this manner. She used from time to time to take occasion at night to fall out
with her husband, wherefore the quarrel h^nging still, she went to bed murmuring
and lowering, where when her husband came, they held their peace til the
morning. Upon which occasion of not speaking one to an other, the wife
afterward when it was time, made the maid fair and softly to come and lie
with her husband, and she merrily went into an other chamber to take delight
with her lover. These are the fruits that jealousy brings forth. Wherefore
Ariosto said very well.

Che dolce pin, che piu ginconda stato,
Saria di qual d'an amoroso core?
Che viuer piu felice, and piu beato,
Che ritrouarsi in seruitu a' amore?
Se l'huom non fusse semper sti^olato,
Da quel sospetto rye, da quel timare,
Da quel furor, da quellae frenosia,
Da quella rabbia, detta gelosia?
That is, What better state what more ^blent with bliss
Shall be, than his, whose heart in love is wrapped?
What life more happy, and more blessed is,
Than to be found in bond of love intrapt?
If man were not still pricked and led amiss.
With that mistrust, with that fond fear of his,
With that fury, with that doting frenzy,
With that wild woodnesse, termed ielosie.


A singular example of continency.
XEnocrates the scholar of Plato, was a young man of marvelous contine^cie, in
so much that when Phrina a very fair harlotte had made her boast, and laid a
wager that she was able to allure him to lie with her, he was brought to her
bed, but in no wise for any provocation or art of love, which she pleasantly
used, she could move him to yield unto her flickering enticements. Wherefore
these young men that had laid the wager with her asked her for their gotten
money, but she readily answered them, saying, that she had spoken of a man, and
not of an Image.

That love has no law, and makes one thing seem for an other.
MAster Jews Alamanni was in the company of honest young men, devising
together of love, and one Peter of Gagliano said, that he greatly marvelled to
see sometimes such diverse likings in love, and that it seemed to him
impossible, that one should be in love with a foul woman, an other with an
old woman, this man with a cortesan common to every man, and that man even
with one that he hates. To whom Alamanno turning himself, courteously said:
Chi vuol dar leg all'amoroso nodo,
Non sa ben qual si sia la sua natura,
L'un d'una cosa, and to dell'altra godo,
Chi lo spirto ama, and Chi solla figura,
Chi deletta la vista, chi l'udire,
Chi s'foga ogni desir solo in seruire.
that is, Who so appoynteth laws unto the loving ^inor,
What is his nature he well knows not:
One likes this, and I an other think most fit,
This man the shape, and that man loves the wit.
Some man great pleasure takes to see, and some to hear,
Some man to serve does set his whole desire.
And Ariosto says: Quel che l'huom vede,
Amor gli fa inuisibile,
Et l'inuisibil fa veder' Amore.
that is, That thing which man does see, love to him makes unseen,
And the unseen, love makes to be seen.


A marvelous stoutnesse of a man's mind, accompanied with pity toward his
country.
WHen Lucius Scilla had ouercom by force of arms the City of Pren^ste he gave
leave and commission to the Soldiers that they should destroy it, and kill
all the Citizens saving his Host, meaning with this good turn to show
himself thankful unto him, for many courtesies received of him at other times
in his lodging. But that valiant Citizen hering of this commission, went forth
incontinently out of his house disguised and preasing in among other of his
countrymen, said, that he had rather die, than owe his life to the destroyer of
his country.

Counsels of great Captains, to save themselves, and to overcome their ennimies.
KIng Antigonus retiring from his enemies which then were stronger than he
was, said to him that peradventure blamed him for fleeing away, that he fled
not, but that he went thither where his profit and commodity lay. The same
king being asked in what sort a man might vanquishe his ennimies, answered,
with strength and wisdom, and if the Lions skin be not enough, take the Wolfes
too. Erasmus attributes this last saying also to Lysander Captain of the
Lacedaemonians.

That Princes ought to displace the crafty and wicked instruments of justice.
ALphonsus King of Arragon, having intelligence, that a french Physician, who
was a Sophister and very subtle, but of a most greedy mind, leaving of
Physic became an advocate, and with his Sophistical points encombred the
whole Court, made an Edicte (oh most just King) that all the causes which the
french advocate took in hand should be accoumpted false and unjust.

Philosophical observations in mankind.
AS often said Diogenes, as in man's life I think of the governors of
countries, Philosophers, Physicians, and other like persons, me seems truly
that there is no living creature wyser than man. Contrariwise, when I behold
the interpretoures of Fortune, the Prognosticatours of Stars, the Diuinoures
of heavenly things, and the like generation, me thinks that no creature which
bears life, is more foolish than he.

That wise men are thankful to God for benefits received.
COsimo of the Medici Duke of Florence, he, the which for his wisdom was
surnamed the wise, did spend (as it is well known and found in stories) upon
buylding of Churches, Monasteries and Hospitalles, not only in his country,
but also throughout many other parts of Europe, above four hundredth thousand
Ducates, besides other great and small alms deeds, which he did daily to
marry maids, to make Nuns, and for other works which were thought holy.
Wherefore every man marvelled at so great liberality, and so great Religion.
That most wise gentleman was went sometime to say to his dearest friends, that
he was never able to spend and give so much for Gods sake, as he found owing
him in his books of account.

That the vyell framed mind endures all trouble and displeasure.
FAuorinus the Philosopher said, that even as the body well disposed endures
cold, heat, and other griefs, so the mind well framed endures displeasure,
thought and adversity.

To what manner perturbations or vices of man, the three furies of hell are
correspondent.
THe Poets write, that the infernal furies daughters of Acheron and the
night, the which do vex man's mind, are three, to wit, Alecto, Tisiphone,
and Megera: they lyken Alecto to unquietness, because she desires pleasure:
they lyken Tisiphone to anger, because she seeks reuengement: and they lyken
Megera to pride, because she desires riches and soueraintie.

That the mind is the guide and the true life of man.
SAlust says, that the mind is the guide and gouernoure of man's life, and that
the fair face, the strong body, great riches, and other like things are
transitory, and endure but a while, but that the worthy deeds of the wit
and mind are divine and immortal. Wherefore: Viuitur ingenio, caetera mortis
erunt.
By wit we live, the rest to death belong.


In what things humanity does chiefly consist.
PLato said the courtesy and nobility of man consists chiefly in three
things, the first is in saluting people gently: the second in helping ones
neighbor in his business: and the third in bidding ones friends oftentimes to
a moderate feast.

That it is a very hard thing to know the nature of men.
PHilomenes the Philosopher said: when I consider that every kind of brute
beasts have one nature alone, as the Lions which are all strong and hardy: the
Hares which are all fearful and cowardly: the Foxes which are all crafty:
the Eagles valiant: the Doves simple: in so much that among a hundredth
thousand of these, or such like beasts, there is not found one that
swarueth out of kind, wherefore if the kind be known, the nature is by and
by known: I am sorry truly for the state of man, which have more natures than
there be persons, so that it is impossible to know them al, nay rather very
hard to know one of so many, without long time.

That death has no more regard of young men than of old.
WHen there were dead at Milan in short space, of diverse diseases certain
noble and courteous young men, Alciato made upon that occasion in the Italian
tongue these witty verses: Albergauano insieme Amore, and Morte.
Et la mattina desti,
Nel partirsi ambedue per dura sort,
Cangiar le strali, onde ferendo Amore,
Igiouani morien miseri, and mesti
Et la Morte impiagando a mezzo'l c^ore
Ivecchi ardeuau d'amoroso ardore,
O potente signore,
Et tu de corpi nostri empia Regina,
Ritoruateui l'armi acchioche mota
It vecchio and viua li giouanetto in giona.
that is Both death and love were lodged in one place,
And day did spring,
At parting both by cancred fortunes case,
They changed darts, wherefore love sore wounding
The heavy young men died full of mourning,
When death with darte, the fainting hearts did fry,
The old men liud in love, and did not dye,
O Lord mighty.
And if our bodies frail thou wicked Queen,
Return the weapons, that to di^e deaths teene
The old may yield, while young men merry been.


A notable description of art, in man's shape.
THe most famous master Daniel Barbaro, going about to transform the knowledge
of things into man's shape, did paint it out in this sort, little of frature,
the eyes of the color of the sky, the nose like an Eagle, the ears very
equal, the neck short, the breast large, and (as mother of all things) full
of teates, the shoulders big, the arms, the palms of the hands, and the
fingers long, al tokens (after Aristotle) of great understanding, capacity,
and study: and after in countenance, in going and in apparel, he made her
ready, nimble, and wakefull about every thing, but so severe, advised and
worthy, that uneath a man dares to look her full in the face.

That man's ambition cannot abide any fellow in rule.
WHen Alexander the great had overcome Darius in two great battayles,
Darius, knowing the valiantness of his enemy, offered him half his kingdom,
and one of his Daughters in marriage, with infinite treasure, if he would make
peace with him. Which offer Parmeno (the chiefest man about him)
understanding, said: If I were Alexander. I would do it: And I would do it
(answered Alexander) if I were Parmeno. So refusing the offer, he quickly
conquered ye country, and obtained the whole victory.

That the presence and svveete speech of the Prince is very profitable in
dangerous and troublous times.
WHen the Emperor Charles the fifte, in the year of our Lord a thousand fine
hundred and four, was entered into France through Campania with a huge army,
he marched onward apace: So lastely having taken Soisson, he thought good to go
toward the royal City of Paris. Wherefore the Parisians notwithstanding that
they knew that their King was with no less army at hand, did not only
murmur and repine, but the people also made many signs of mutiny and
rebellion. Wherefore king Frauncis went forthwith in his own person to Paris,
where setting al things in very good order for the surety and safeguard of the
people, and seeing them for all thus in great fear, used to them among other,
these notable words, saying: I cannot keep you, men of Paris, from fear, but
I will surely keep you from hurt, assuring you that I had rather to dye
valiantly than to live vilely in forsaking you.

That it belongs to every man but especially to Princes to keep faith and
promise.
THe same king Fraunces was wont sometimes to say, that when faith should fail
in all other me^, yet it should remain among Princes, because their power is
such, as they cannot be constrained, neither by judgments, nor by laws. And
the wise king Alphonsus of Aragon, said, that the word of a Prince, ought to be
so much worth, as the oath of private men. Ariosto meaning no less of private
men, than of Princes, wrote wisely and generally upon the keeping of faith and
promise after this sort.

Faith undefiled thou ought aie to have,
To one alone as to a thousand given,
So in a wood, and in a secret cave,
Far of from cities, tounes, and men's fight hidden,
As at the bar before the judges g^^ue,
In court of record, and witnesses written
Without oath, or other sign more express,
That once is enough, which thou didste promesis.
That wise men live in such wise that they fear not forged crimes.
WHen it was told Plato, that some spoke amiss of him, he answered I pass
not, for my living is such that they shall not be believed. And Aristotle
said of one that had spoken amiss of him: I give him leave to correct me
even in my absence. And of late years the Emperor Charles the fifte token it
was reported unto him, that some did backbite him, said, let them talk, for
me^ will accoumpte them fools.

That women do rather obey sense than reason.
WHen the Emperor Sigismunde was dead, a curiouse kinsman of his exhor^ed his
wife to remain a widdowe, and follow the turtle: showing her at large, how
that bird (when her make is dead) lives chaste ever after. But the woman
smyling, answered him: Since that you counsel me to follow an unreasonable
bird, why do not you rather set before me the dove or the sparrowe, which
have a more pleasant nature for women?

That men ought to do good even to the dead.
SYmonides the Philosopher said, that men ought to do good eue^ to the dead,
recompting that he going a journey found a dead man laid out to be devoured of
wild beasts and birds, wherefore taking pity, caused him forthwith to be
buried. And when he was minded the next day to take shipping, there appeared
to him being a sleep in the night, the soul of that dead man, which warned
him, that he should not enter into that appointed ship: saying that the same
should perrishe without doubt. Wherefore he told in the morning this dream to
his fellows, willing them in no wise to enter that ship, and to stay for an
other passage: but they laughing him to scorn, left him, and embarked
themselves in her. So it fell out that not long after, such a great tempest
rose, that the ship was drowned, and his companions fainting did all perish.

That the life of private men is more pleasant and quiet than that of Princes.
THe Emperor Maximiane and Diocletiane being weary of rule, the one and the
other willingly resigned their Empire, this man to Nicomedia, and that man to
Milanu^ notwithstanding Maximiane afterward repenting himself, and having
intelligence that Maxentius his son was chosen Emperor, came to Rome, with
desire and hope (which at the end was vain) to take eftsoons rule in hand, and
to this effect he procured and lay instantly upon Diocietiane. But Diocletiane
answered him thus: oh brother, if you saw the fair coleworts and goodly
onions that I have planted and sown with my own hand, certes you would
never think more upon rule.

With what gentleness and mildness valiant Princes avoid the misreports
of their subjects against them.
WHen King Antigonus had brought his army to winter in barraine and deserte
places, his soldiers wanted many things necessary, wherefore some presumpteous
fellows, not knowing that he was thereby, blamed him, and spoke very ill of
him. But he hearing them, like a mylde and gentle prince as he was, came out of
his te^t, and said: Oh, if you will speak amiss of the king, go further off,
for if you felt the pain I do, you could not abide it.

That the remembrance of our short life does much abate man's loftiness of
mind.
XErxes king of Persia, gooing a warfar^ against the Greeks, and seeing all
Hellesponte full of his ships and men of war, cried with a loud voice, I
am a happy man. A little while after, changing his countenance, he began to
weep: wherefore his uncle Artabanus seeing so great a change, asked him the
cause: To whom Xerxes altogether grieved, pitifully answered in this manner: I
do lament because I call to mind the great misery and shortness of man's
life, considering that in less than a hundredth years we shall without doubt
all be dead and rotten.

He that knovveth much, speaks little.
DEmosthenes seeing in a company a prating fellow, said unto him: if thou were
wise enough thou would speak less: and adding moreover this sentence, he
that is wise does little speak and thinks much.

That sincere friendship is known in adversity.
VAlerius Maximus says, that the sincere faith of a friend is known in
adversity, in the which all that gentleness and curtesye, which is showed
to a man, proceeds of found and constant good will. The friendlye deeds
that are showed in prosperity (says he) may proceed of flattery, at the
least they are suspected to tend rather to get than to give. And therefore that
worthy Cicero said, that to know true friends from feigned, he used to measure
his fortune with theirs.

That a wise manne obeys necessity.
DEmades a wise and sage Senatoure, when the Athe^^ens for the respect they
had to their religion, would not give divine honors to Alexander the great as
he through his vayn glory procure^, said: take heed my countrymen, that
whilst you keep Heaven, you lose not the Earth, meaning hereby, that if they
did not by reason of their superstition satisfy the desire of Alexander, they
should displease him, and being displeased, would bring the city to
destruction.

In what manner profitably and with praise one may be conversant among men.
EPictetijs said, that in being conversant with men, one ought to observe this
rule: if thy fellow be better learned than thou, hear and obey him: if he be
thy equal, agree to him: if he be thy inferioure, persuade him modestly.

That the great riches of the Parents does commonly let the children from the
greating of virtue.
SIldome times (said Plato) this rule will fail, that when the fathers have
too much goods, the sons have no virtue no virtue at al: because between case
and superfluous riches vices and not virtue are wont to be nourished.

That the modesty of Princes greatly shyneth abroad in their prosperity.
WHen the Emperor Charles the fithe, had discomfited and put to flyghte the
mighty league of the Alma^^^, he did also finally discomfite the.xxiiij. day
of April, in the year of our Lord. 1547: near to the famous river of Albis,
the valiant Duke John Frederick of Saxony and took him prisoner, with many of
his confederates, which great difficulty when he had overcome, he modestly
used these words, saying: I may not say as Julius Caesar. veni, ^^^^vi^^ but I
will say, vene, vi^^, and Dominus De^ vicis.

The number, form, and nature of the Graces.
THe ancient Greeks, did imagine that there were three Graces. Aglaia,
Thalia, and Ephrosine; and printed them naked, to show that benefits or good
turns, ought to be pure and simple, without deceyte or hope of greater
profit. They counterfeyted them young, because the remembrance of a benefit
ought to be fresh, and not too ware old: they seemed to laugh, because one
ought ioyefullye to give, and do good to his neighbor: They were painted
three, saying, that one reached forth, the other received, and the third
restored: Two turned their faces toward us, and one her face from us,
signifying hereby that for one benefit yt is received, we ought to render two.
They joined them hand in hand, showing that love ought to be indisseluble, and
that one good turn should repay an other, and so to make perpetual
friendship.

That readiness of aunsvvering is much auailable.
ESope going at the commandment of his Master to see if the bath were in a
readynesse, met with the head officer of the town, to whom asking him whether
he went, Esope answered, I know not, and the Potestate supposing that he was
despised of a slave, commanded that he should be carried to prison. Wherefore
Esope turned to him and said: Oh good master Mayor, behold how well to the
purpose I answered you: for I go to prison, and knew not that I should go
thither. The Potestate maruelling at so great a readiness, caused him to be
released.

That Venerie hurts old men, and does no good to young men.
SEneca said, that a man when he is paste forty years old, and is upon the
prick of fifty, must remember that Venus signifies youth, and Saturn old
age, Stars after the Astronomers very contrary one to another. Wherefore he
says, that Saturnists, to wit, old men should shun Venus for that she does
not only hurt them but young also: and let the^ think for a surety, yt she
helps him more which is to be borne; than him that is borne: wittily adding
hereunto that herbs when they have cast their seed, wax dry.

Why humane laws are like to Spydes vvebs.
THe Philosopher Anacharsis wisely compared men's laws to Spyders webs, saying:
That even as they hold fast the lesser flies and worms, and give place to
the greatest, so the laws do bend the poor and weke, but the rich and
mighty, they let pass. Some attribute this conceit to Solon.

A very good example, how to use victory in conquered countries.
CRoesus being sore wounded in battle, and the prisoner of Cyrus, said, that
in time of peace, the sons bury the fathers: and in time of war that
fathers burye the sons. Afterward when he saw that the soldiers of Cyrus
sacked the country, he asked them what they did, to whom Cyrus answered,
they sack this thy City, and these thy riches: Consider king (added Croesus
moreover) that they sack not mine, because all is thine. Wherefore Cyrus being
moved with these words, did forthwith forbid the soldiers to sack.

That vvome^ thorough the sufferaunce of their husbands, bear a great stroke
in stares.
THemistocles his son argued pleasauntly in this manner, saying: that which
I will, my mother will that which my mother will, Themistocles will: that which
Themistocles will, the Atheniens will. Ergo that which I will, all the people of
Athens will.

That flattery sometimes costeth the flatterers dear.
When Marcus Antonius Triumuir was entered into Athens, all the Citizens having
first prepared exceeding honors for him, went afterward to meet him. So
they going about to flatter him, said unto him, that they had in their City
the Goddess Minerua, which wanted a husband, and that they desired to give
her him to wife, who was the God Bacchus. Now Marcus Antonius espying so great
a flattery, and being therewith displeased, that he might give them that reward
which they deserved said unto them: I am content, and do accept her for my
wife, but I will have a thousand tallentes for her dowry, as it is most meet
for so great a marriage.

A wise and most profitable admonition.
AVlus Gellius wisely admonished certain of his friends, in this manner,
saying: Weygh and consider well with your selves, I beseech you, that if by
way of labor you do any honest thing, that labor departs from you, but
the thing well done, as long as you live tarieth with you. Contrariwise, if by
way of pleasure, you shall do any dishoneste thing, that pleasure vanquisheth
away, and the filthynesse of the thing always remains with you. Alamanno to
the like purpose speaks thus: Regni, i falsi honor, le gemme, and l'oro,
Cui solo il mondo vagulando creed,
L'alte fatiche, il nostro human lauoro,
Che son del tempo delorose prede,
Nascon d'affanni, and suggonfi in poche hoar,
Solo il ben nostro oprar g^amai non muere.
that is False honor gold pearl, rule and fertile soil,
To which alone the waltring werlde believes,
The travail great, and eke our humane toil.
Which are of time the doleful prays, of grieves
Arise, and in a while do fade away,
But our good Works alone will not decay.


That virtue and not money makes a man alive.
TImotheus affirms, that money is the sinews of all things, nay rather the
blood and soul of men, saying moreover that he which has no money lives
dead among the living, albeit this ought not to be said of money, but of
virtue, without possession of which, a man doutlesse is dead although he live.

That he which has any notable fault, ought to take great heed that he
provoke none that may reprove him.
WHen one Philip a greedy person, and Caculus a witty fellow strove
together, they fell a chyding one with an other, so that Philip waxing very
angry, said: Why barkest thou dog? To whom Catulus sodeinly and bytingly
answered: because I see a thief.

That false vvitnesses do hardly stand in the hands of advised demaunders.
WHen Crassus defended Piso in a very weighty cause, one Silo with his false
witness was a great hinderaunce to Pi^o: wherefore Crastus to the end to
disprove him and dally with him, said: And it may be Silo, that he, of whom
thou have heard this, speak it upon displeasure: Silo agreed it was so. And
Crallus following his purpose, said: It may also be, that thou dyddest not
well understand him, and to this also Silo seemed to consent: so that Crastus
said moreover: And it may be that thou heardest not well that which thou
saydst thou have heard. Herevppon there arose an universal laughter, that the
false witness stood altogether confounded and out of the way, to the example
of others his like.

How profitable and precious friendship is.
THat most wise Socrates said, that there is no possession more precious than
a friend, nor from whence a man may get more profit or pleasure: and
therefore marvelled that men setting so much ambition and covetousness aside,
did not continually endeavor themselves to win friendeship. Hereupon
Aristotle being demanded what a friend was, answered: One soul in two
bodies.

That advisedly and not rashely we ought to be resolved touching matters of
weight.
WHen a voice and rumoure was spread that Alexander the great was dead, the
rulers of Athens waxed very hot, and would follow the people in taking
weapons to set themselves at liberty. But Phocion a most wise man, not finding
in these news any hold to be taken, reproved them wisely, saying: run not
mad my countrymen, stay and look for other news: for if Alexander be dead
to day, build upon this, that he will be dead to morrow also.

That man ought still to be myndefull that he is subject to all the strokes of
fortune.
IT is a certain common comfort, and as Cicero says, that ought always to
be had in memory, to remember, that we are men, come into the world under
this law, to be subject to all the strokes of fortune, and therefore ought not
to refuse to live under that state and condition, that we are borne, neither
lightly to move our selves with those misfortunes which by counsel cannot be
anoyded. But rather calling to mind yt chances happened to other, in ye mean
season ought to consider, that there is no new thing chanced unto us. And
master Jews Alamaum to the like purpose says: Troppo a lingua mortal si
disconuiene,
Di soaerchio dannar qua gui fra voi,
Danno, o disonor, che di la su n'e date,
Perch colu^, che'l fa sol vede il fine.
Non siamo qui ciechi, and non miriam tanto alto,
Soffrier n'e forza, and tollerar in pace.
that is, In no wise mortal tongs it does behoue,
Among us hear beneth with rige to rende,
Hurt, or dishonor, which comes from above,
For whom the son does light, he sees the end,
Let us not here be blind and look so hye,
We suffer must, and bide all patiently.


Fit remedies against love, and in what state they be which are in love.
CRates the Thebane being asked what was the meetest and surest remedy against
leave, wittily answered, and said, hunger: and if this be not sufficient time:
and also if this be not enough, hanging: meaning that if love be not worn out
with hunger, nor time, it will be destroyed by no means but by death. And Cato
the elder (after Erasmus, other attribute it to Plato) said that all they
which cast themselves headlong into love, live in the body of an other, and
are as it were dead in their own.

That it is a virtuous deed and worthy commendation, not to reveal an others
secret, even as it is a wise man's part seldom to communicate his secrets to
any m n.
THe virtue of concealing a secret, is as hard a thing to do, as that which
is hardest. Wherefore Aristotle being asked what thing seemed to him hardest,
he answered, to conceal a secret. Plato said, that a man can not be wise
except he can keep close a secret: and added moreover, that it may be
known how much secretnesse does please God, considering that his own
majesty makes no man privy to his. Wherefore we know not that which shall
be to morrow, or that which shall be within an hour. And Jesus the son of
Syrach says: Who so discovers secrets, leeseth his credit, and finds no
friend after his will. And Solomon in his Proverbs does say: That it is
sin to speak ouermuche, and to discover secrets, and he is wysest that can
bridle his tongue. For he that speaks much (says he) causes many errors.
And to this purpose I will show a strange case which happened at Rome, Fuluius
told his wife a great secret, the which Octauiane the Emperor had made him
privy of. And when the thing was disclosed through the woman's vanity, the
Emperor did sharply reprove Fuluius for lightness: So he being desperate,
was determined to murder him self: but first he lamented to his wife, who
wondering at him, answered him in this manner: Certes, my Fuluius, thou haste
no cause to be sorrowful for any thing that I have done, seeing that in all the
time that I have lived with thee, thou hadste not known my lightness, or if
thou haste known it, thou did not mistruste it: But now although that
the fault be thine, I do intend notwithstanding to be the first that shall
suffer punishment: And so incontinently striking her self with a knife which
she had in her hand, killed her self: And by and by after, her miserable
husband did even the like.

The not knowing how to keep a secret, caused this most grievous misorder.
Wherefore the Poet Ovid nobly says: It is a virtue great, the tongue
to rule, and things conceal:
And it is again a grievous fault,
things secret to reveal.


That the duty of a wise man is to muse before hand upon that which is to
come, and afterward constantly to endure every accident.
ARistotle said, that it is a wise man's part to forethinke and give his mind
to that which may happen to a man: And that it comes of great wisdom to
foresee that no mischief may betide thee: but that it comes of no less
courage constantly to endure that which chau^ceth unto thee, and to dissemble
many things. And Boiardo with his wonted elegancie says: Se miseri mortal,
suffer prudenti
In pensare, aspettare, antiuedere
J vari casi, and li praui accidenti
Che in questa vita possono accadere,
Sarebben sempre mat lieti, and contenti:
Et non harebbon tanto Dispiacere
Quando fortuna auuersa glisaetta,
All'improuiso, and quando men s' aspettae.
that is, If wretched mortal man were still prudent
To think forecast, and see on every side,
The diverse chances, and each accident,
That in this life may daily men betide,
They should be ever merry and content,
And should also displeasure all abide,
When Fortune fell her arrowe does direct,
To them vnware^s, when nothing they suspect.


That Vserers and false accusers are vvilde beasts, that wander in the civil
life.
THeocritus (and after Erasmus, Diogenes the Cinicke) being asked which were
the cruellest beasts in the world, said, in the mountayns and woods, the
Lions and Bears: in Cities and Towns, Usurers and unjust accusers.

What great unquietness is in man.
Saint Basil says, that men are wicked and unthankful, never content with
that they have, always seeking for that they have not, sad and sorrowful
for not obtaining, the slave his liberty: the unnoble man, nobility: the
noble, riches: the rich, Lordship: the Lord a Kingdom: the King a Monarchy,
and the Empire of all the whole world.

That the joy of this world does not long endure.
WHen Domenico da Cigoli was gone to Rome, he had news within few days after
that his wife was dead, wherefore he being exceeding joyful, became
forthwith a Priest, and obtained the cure of his parish: but after he came
home, the first person that he saw was his wife.

That wisdom, valiantness of courage, and other virtues, are the sure and
strong ankers of man's life.
PPythagoras the Philosopher said, that we ought to choose the best life, and
save our selves from the blastes of Fortune, as the galley is safe from the
winds of the sea, and that the riches in this mortal life are weak ankers,
glory weak, and the strong body likewise weak: so offices, honors, and all
such things, says he, are weak, and without stabilitie, and that the sure
and strong ankers, are wisdom, valiantness of courage, fortitude, and
virtue, the which he affirms, cannot be destroyed with any tempest: al other
things he accou^teth follies, dreams and winds.

That poverty does not give anoye, but man's insatiable greediness.
EPictetus the Philosopher said, that poverty does not cause disquietnesse,
but man's (...) and that riches does not deliver us from fear, but reason: and
therefore (added he moreover) if thou shalt use reason thou shalt not covet
superfluous riches, nor blame tolerable poverty.

That inexpert and ignorant men are vvorthily laughed to scorn.
BArnardo a Gentleman of Venice, passing through Padua, lodged in an Inn, and
when he had well supped, he went away without paying any money. Whereupon
the Host asked him payment, and the Gentleman waxed very angry and said, what
payment askeste thou? is not Padua ours? yea sir, answered the Host, but the
substance is ours.

That husbands ought to bear much with their vviues by reason of children.
ALcibiades asked Socra^es why he suffered so many quarrels, and so many
brawles which his wife made continually with him at home? Why doste thou
suffer (answered Socrates) so much keckling and annoy, which thy hens make
at home: because they, said Alcibiades, lay me Eggs, and hatch me chickens:
and my wife (said Socrates) does bear me Children.

That the erroures caused of love, if they be not criminal, are to be excused
and pardoned.
PIsistratus the Tiranne of Athens showed upon a time a great token of
humanity: because that a certain young man being in love with a daughter of
his, and meeting her in the streate, could not refrain but kissed her openly:
Whereupon the mother being in a great fury incensed and prayed Pisistratus to
put him to death. But he smiling answered: If we put him to death that loves
us, what shall we do to him that hates us?

How much Prognostications and foretellings proceeding of judicial
Astrology, are to be scorned, is declared by this Prognostication of Pasquine
of Rome.
THis next year the blind shall see little or nothing: the deaf shall not
hear: the Summer shall be hot and dry: there shall be much Sun: it shall
rain sometime, other while it shall thunder, and lighten, and also we shall
have tempest: the spring shall be cold and moist, there shall be great wynds,
it shall rain much, and more in the night than in the day. There shall be
great war between birders and birds: and greater between Fyshers and Fishes.
The water of ryuers shall run foorthwarde, and not go back, and the greater
shall fall into the Sea. Many Oxen, Sheep, Hogs, Hearts, and innumerable
Pulleyn shall dye: Death shall not make so great slaughter among Wolves, Asses,
Horses, and Mules. This same year old age by reason of years past, shall be
incurable: there shall be many needle persons, many sick, and some shall dye
before they be old. There shall be a diverse change of worldly matters, it shall
be dangerous to sail on the west and north sea, chiefly when there is tempest.
The King and other Princes shall have more than their part, notwithstanding
they shall not be content. The people shall have sometime good, and sometime
naughty, and other while mean fortune. The rich shall be in better case than
the poor, and the whole ordinarily shall be better than the sick. Eating and
drinking shall be very necessary: Gold shall be more set by than Silver,
and Lead shall be at a reasonable pryee. The Plague and other diseases shall
be in some places through the resolution of Saturn: in other places by reason
of the aspect of Mars there shall ensue mortality, and murders. There shall be
many young men in love by reason of Venus. It shall be good to eat Capons,
Partriges, and Quails, and to drink the best wines shall be best. The Moon
shall be full in March, or in April, when she shall be opposite to the Sun:
but as she comes to the head o^ tail of the Dragon, she shall be darkened
until she go out from the shaddowe of the earth. There shall be great
brightness about the sphere of the Sun, there shall be great told in the
uttermost Zones, and upon high Mountains. There shall be great heat and
dryness under the Equinoctial. About the Tuscane and Ionicke Sea, there shall
be great plenty of moisture, and more also shall be about the Oceane Sea. So
many Stars shall be seen in the sky in the clear night, that no man, nor
woman shall be able to number them.

That the vice of anger is most hurtful.
ARistotle says, that anger is a perturbation of a cruel, violent and
dishonest mind, the cause of strife, the companion of calamity, the loss of
honor, the spoil of riches, and the original of destruction. And adds
moreover, that as the smoke which shadoweth the eyes, lets one to see that
which a man has before his feet, so anger darkneth reason in the head, and
that goodness which the mind with the wit shall easly obtain, being obscured
through anger, it can not in any wise obtain. Chilo said, that one ought to
overcome anger above all things, for that she hurts more than any ennimie,
adding moreover, that it is more manhood to vanquish her than any ennimie.
Wherefore the divine Petrarcha to this purpose says.

Jra e brieue furor, and chi no'l frena
E furor luago, che'l suo possessore,
Spesso a vergogna, and tal'hur mena a morte.
Ire is fury short, and unto him a fury long.
Which lets her the bridle have, that now and then among,
The angry man to shame she brings, and sometimes unto death.
And Ariosto here upon says.

Quando vincer da l'impeto, and da la ira,
Si lascia la ragion, ne si defend,
Et che'l cieco furor si inuanzi, ira,
O mano, o lingua, che gli amici offend,
Se beu dipoi si piange, and fospira,
Non e per questo, che l'erro s'emende.
When reason by rage and ire is suffered
Vanquished to be, and is not defended,
And that the blind fury rules the top sail.
O hand, O tongue, that friends has offended,
And although afterward, thou weep and wayle,
Yet for all this, the fault is not mended.
That Princes commonly vvil have no admonition.
WHat a dangerous thing it is to admonish certain Princes of their vices,
shall be declared by the example following.

Upon a time Cambyses king of Scithiae and Persia asked Presaspius his
Secretary, what the Persians said of him: The Secretary answered, that they
greatly commended him, notwithstanding that he seemed to them to be ouermuche
given to wine. Wherewith Cambyses being cruelly angry, said: I will
Presaspius that we see whether they lie or tell truth: thou see there thy
Son at the gate, if I hitte him in the heart with this arrowe, it shall
appear without doubt that the Persians do lie: if I hit him not, they may be
believed. And he leusing the bow that he had in his hand, did strike the young
man in the breast, and the arrowe passed full through the myddle of his heart.
Which when that cruel Prince had seen, being very joyful, in jest said:
What say thou now Presaspius, do not thou think that these thy Persians
have made a lie? But tell me also I pray thee, who ever saw thou better than
I? To whom that poor man fore abashed, and now extremely doubting of himself,
answered: God is not able to make one better than you.

That through craft and vvarinesse a man is othervvhile delivered out of
danger.
A French man challenged a Geneuaise into the field, because he did bear his
recognisaunce in his shield. But the Geneuoise having readily bethought him of
a jest, said: And for what cause finally do thou call me hither to fight?
because I pretend (answered the French man) that this cognisaunce discendeth
from my ancestors, and that thou have usurped it.

The Geneuoise asked what his cognizance was: the French man answered that it
was an Ox head: then said the Geneuoise, we need not fight for this, because
that my arms is a Cowes head.

How man's life is encombred and full of trouble: and how pleasant and quiet.
ISocrates the Oratoure said, that our life entangled with fortune is like to
a great violent floude, to wit, troublous, myrie, hard to pass over, swift,
roaring, during but for a while: Contrariwise the life given to virtue (says
he) is like to a noble fountain, whose water is clear, pure and untroubled,
meet to be drunk, sweet, to folks agreeable, apt for nourishment,
fruitful, and void of all corruption and naughtiness.

That the sight of friends does cheer up them that are in heaviness, as the
sight of the Physicians the diseased.
PHilomenes the Philosopher said that as the diseased seeing the Physician
come, be cheared up and comforted, so they that are in heaviness seeing their
friend come, recover courage, and take comfort, but that the friend is much
more for the sadness of his neighbor than the Physician is for sickness: and
therefore adds moreover, that men in adversity ought to have recourse of
their friends. And Ausonius worthily confirms it, saying.

Tristia cuncta exuperans, aut animo, aut amico.
In sadness all things overcome with courage or thy friend.
That covetousness blinds men.
HErmon was to covetous (as Lucilius testifies) that when he dreamed that he
had spent certain money, he strangled himself through exceeding sorrow.
Dimarchus Phidon was like wise so covetous, that being desperate for a certain
loss received, he would not hang himself, for spending of three half pence
to buy himself a halter, seeking death better cheap. And Hermocrates was
through extreme avarice accompanied with so great folly, that dying, left
himself heir of al his goods. Wherefore wisely says Bias that covetousness
is the Metropolis, that is, the mother city, or chief Sea of man's folly
and wickedness.

A wary answer, impertinent to the demand.
A Jew being asked, whether he would take up a thousand Ducates if he found
them on the Saboth day, answered: This is not the Saboth day, and the money
is not here.

That man's doings on the one side, are worthy of laughter, and on the other of
weeping.
HEraclitus and Democritus were two most famous Philosophers, the one
considering ye follies of me^ did ever laugh: the other considering their
miseries, did always weep. Whereupon one in the Greek tongue made this
Epigramme.

(...),
(...),
(...).
The which that great learned man Alciate, desirous to show that man's life
still waxed worse and worse, has plainly and pleasantly translated into his
Italian tongue, after this manner.

Piu dell'vsato Heraclito ti veggio
Pianger gli affanni dell'humana vita:
Perch ella se ne va di mal in peggio,
E la miseria homai fatta e infim^ae.
Te Democrito ancor piu rider veggio,
Che non soleui, la tua man in'additta,
Che le pazzie son maggiori, in tanto
Che non e pari, il riso, and meno il pianto.
that is, Thee Herachte I see more than thy wont is,
The troubles of this humane life bewail,
Because she goes from ill to worse amiss,
And endless now does misery not fail,
Thee Democrite also laugh I more to see,
Than thou art wont, thy hand does point to me,
That follies are far greater, in so much
That laughter fails, and eyes their tears do grutch.


That a wife to some is a very heavy burden.
WHen there was risen a great tempest on the Sea, the master of the ship
commanded all men to cast the heauiest things into the water: Wherefore a
married man incontinently cast in his wife, saying, that he had nothing more
heavy than she.

That with witty and ready aduisement, the fastness or nigardshippe of an
other is oftentimes overcome.
IN the time of Octauian the Emperor, there was at Rome a certain greek Poet,
which from time to time the morning that the Emperor went to his palace, met
him, and presented to him a trim Epigram in the greek tongue. But the Emperor
albeit he took it (as such lewd persons as he was, looked for) he gave him
nothing. But desirous upon a time to rest wc him, peradventure turned him
aside, and seeing him coming toward him to present him, he himself gave
him first an Epigram likewise made by him in Greek, and written with his own
hand. The Greek took it gladly, and began to read it, and reading it, he
showed with countenance, words and gesture, that it liked him very well. And
when he had read it, he put his hand to his purse, and drawing nearer to
Octauian, gave him a great many halfepence, saying: Caesar, take this which I
give you, not according to your calling, but according to my ability, for if I
had more, more I would give you. Whereupon every man fell a laughing, and the
Emperor laughing more than the rest, caused one to give him forthwith a
hundredth thousand Serstertia, which amounts to 5. hundredth pound sterling.

That neither force nor eloquence is strong enough against impossibility and
poverty.
WHen Themistocles was sent out of his country to the Island of Andros to
gather up money, he entering into the counsel, declared the cause of his
coming, but finding a scarsitie, said: Ye men of Andros, I bring you two
Goddesses, force, and persuasion, take now which you list. To whom the men of
Andros readily answered, saying: and we Themistocles have two Goddesses,
poverty, and impossibility, take which you please.

That the mind of man is unquiet until that he turn thither from whence he
came.
SOcrates (as it has been already many times declared) a man so divine, said,
that even the mind is man, and that the body is nothing else but the
instrument of the mind, or the mansion place, or rather to speak better, the
sepulcher, from whence when he departs, then finally he is in his own power
and felicity. And Plato to this purpose said: that the mind of man is so
unquiet and insatiable, because he being sent from God, is not satisfied nor at
quiet, before he return thither from whence he came.

That a man ought to content himself with that which God has given him,
without seeking any further.
PHauorinus the Philosopher said, that even as a man being bydden by his
friend to a feast, takes of that which is set before him and is contented, so
ought we to take of that, and content our selves with that which God gives us.
For if it be not honest (says he) to ask of that friend Partriges, Lampreys,
or other wine tha^ yt which he presents to us: it is less justice to ask of
almighty God this or that thing more than that which he gives us, especially
of his majesty, which knows better what we need than we know our selves.

How many and what abuses there be that corrupt the world.
CIpriane says, that there are twelve abuses which corrupt the world: to
wit, a wise man without works, an old man without religion, a young man without
obedience, a blind man without alms, a poor manne proud, a woman without
honesty, a noble man without virtue, a Christian contentious, a Bishop
negligent, a King unjust, the commons without instruction, and the people
without laws.

Philosophical and true opinions concerning man's riches and substance.
DEmocritus being demanded, whom he thought rich, answered, he that has
little desire. And Socrates being asked touching the same, after the same sort
answered, he that is content with a little. Epictetus said, that he was rychest
which had so much that he is content: and added moreover, that it is better
live merrily with a little, than miserably with a great deal. Master Jews
Alamanni says, that a man ought to be content with a little and enough, with
good and ill, and with every thing, adding heereto these verses.

L'huom si deo contentare in ogni stato,
Che thy parda il contento, perde'l tutto:
Sia colmo un quant'ei vuol d'argento, and oro
Possegga quante son cittadi, and Regni,
Che se'l contento manca, ogn' altrae cosa,
Si dee poscia stimar sogni, ombre, fumi.
A man must be content in each degree,
For once contentment lost, then all is gone,
Although at will with coin he stored be,
Although al Realms and Cities he does own,
For if contentment fail, then each thing ought
Shadows vain dreams, and smoke of us be thought.
An argument vvorthie of consideration, touching the immortality of the soul.
ALphonsus king of Arag^n said, that this seemed to him the greatest argument
of euerlastingnesse of the soul, to wit, that the body in this our life (when
youth is past) does always diminish in strength and lustiness, having his
ends and limits. And that the mind contrariwise, the more it is charged with
years, the more it augmenteth and grows in understanding, virtue, and
wisdom.

What difference after wise men's judgment, is betvveene the learned and the
ignorant.
WHen Plato was asked what difference was between the learned and the
ignorant, he answered: As much as is between the Physician, and the diseased.
And Socrates being demanded touching the same, ( Erasmus attributes it to
Aristippus) answered, send the one and the other to people naked, and thou
shalt see Aristippus said, that the one differs so much from the other, as
a tame horse from one not tame. Aristotle speking more surely said: so great
difference is between a learned man and one that is ignorante, as is between
the living and the dead. And Horace expresses his opinion in this manner.

The man that has no learning lives in the dark,
And he may not compared be unto the learned,
Which sees more in one day than the other in an hundredth.
That even Philosophers sometimes do vex and tormente themselves for the
loss of their dear things.
EVphrates a Philosopher of Siria, when his wife was dead, who^ he loved
exceedinglye, said: Oh tyrannous Philosophy, thou commaundest us to love, and
if we lose the things beloved, thou forbiddest us to be sorry for them: what
should I then do now, in this miserable state?

A very good regiment for him that is whole, to maintain his health.
Cornelius Celsus an ancient and a most excellent physician says, that he
which is in health and naturally well disposed, ought not to bind himself to
any rule of physic, because he has no need of physicians, nor glisters.
This man (says he) ought diversely to use his life: now to go to the village,
now to the City, and oftentimes to walk in the feeldes, to sail on the Sea,
to go a hunting, sometime to rest, but most commonly to exercise the body,
because ^^uth enfeebleth it, and exercise strengthens it, the one gives long
old age, the other long youth: It helps (he adds hereto) sometime to use
bathes, other while cold water, to day to anoint himself, to morrow not pass
upon himself, and finally to refuse no meat nor drink, which the common
people does use.

That it is follye to look for more of things then nature does affourde them.
A Shepharde which had a flock of sheep, seeing that the wolf did daily take
and consume them, assembled together upon a day the whole flock, and with a
trim and long oration, he put them in comfort not to fear the wolves, for so
much as they were many in number, and for the most part had horns, which the
wolves have not: wherefore he would have them to be of good courage and with one
assent valiauntly to give aid one to another, and that he would not sail them
at any time. The sheep taking good heart at these word joined with such
effectual reasons, promised and swear, that they would no more fly from the
wolf. Notwithstanding a while after, when the rumor was raised, to the wolf,
to ye wolf, those poor beasts were surprised with so great fear, that the
words and the reasons of the shepherd were not able to hold them from flying
away. Whereupon he afterward sorrowing with them, one of ye wisest francklye
spoke: Whilst to make white the black thou do assay,
Thou sekest that dark night should become clear day.


That the fruit and safety of money, consists in occuping and not in keeping.
A Covetous man having sold all that he had and turned it into ready money,
buried it in a place, where he went daily to see it, in such wise, that a man
of the country watching, what he did, went thither in the night, and dug it
out, and carried it away. And when the miser another day came again to see his
treasure, he not finding it, was minded desperately to give himself to the
Devil. But a friend of his being at hand and understanding the cause, said
unto him, quiet thy self my fellow, for thou did not occupy this money at
all, so that thou maiste put stones in place thereof, and persuade with thy
self that it is gold: for these stones will stand thee in as good steed as
money: and added hereto these verses of Petrarcha.

Oh mente vaga al fin sempre digiuna:
A che tante pensieris vn'hora sgombra
Quel ch' en molti anni a pena si ragana.
that is.

Oh gre^dy mind still hungry to the end:
Whereto are so great cares? one hour does spoil,
That which long time has hardly won with toil.
That the counsayles of youth, are rash and unadvised, and of age, considered
and perfect.
WHEN Paulus Emilius was general Captain in Greece for the Romans, against
king Perseus, he had with him Scipio, being a very young man, but famous for his
great beginnings of virtue. The which Scipio, when upon some occasion he
thought the time convenient to give battle to the enemy said: Do thou not
see Emilius? to whom ye old and expert captain, perceiving some damage that
might arise thereby, which the unskillful young man knew not of, said:
Nasica, when I was of thy years, I was so minded as thou art now, and when
thou shalt come to my years, thou shalt be of that mind, which I am now of.

That the state of vvorldly things is very full of change, and therefore that
it is meet for us to prepare to endure both fortunes.
THE same Emilius, when he had overcome and taken prisoner the foresaid
Perseus, and saw him fall prostrate to his feet, weeping, and over cowardlye
yelding himself, said unto him, alas for me, stand up, for thou shamest my
victory: I thought that I had overcome some great king, but now I find that
I have subdued a cowardly woman: doutlesse thou art worthy of greater
misfortune. And turning to his men of war, he said to them: behold there an
example most notable of worldly things, to you young men chiefly I speak, to
the end that you may learn, not to puff your selves over much with pride in
prosperity, neither to trust happy fortune to much, forasmuch as he is dead
in the morning which is borne in the evening. And he is a man in deed that in
prosperity is not proud, and in adversity is not impatient.

A Philosophical opinion touching the judging of friends causes.
BIas the Philosopher says, that he was never willing to be judge between his
friends but between his enemies. Because even as (says he) it is to be feared
that one of thy friends shall become thine enemy, so is it to be hoped that
one of thine enemies shall be made thy friend.

That none can live in this world without trouble.
SOcrates being asked of a friend of his, how man's life may be passed
without trouble, answered: by no means: for it is not possible (said he) to
dwell in Cities, castles, and houses without trouble.

That love enters the body by the eyes, and overcomes both Gods and men.
ARaspa being warned of Cirus, yt he should not be conuersaunte with women,
saying, that through his eyes love by little would enter into him, answered: that
if he did always take heed of him, he should never be overcome. But when he
was not long after fallen into the flames of love, and for fear and shame
durst not come in the presence of his Lord, Cirus sent for him (as for one who^
he loved) and smiling said: Araspa, I know that thou art greatly afeard of
me, and peradventure more ashamed, but be of good cheer, for I marvel not at
thy error, knowing well that even Gods themselves have been deceived many
times, and overcome by love.

That women sometimes do worthy deeds.
IN the war between the Emperor Curradus the third, surnamed Ghibellinus
and Guelfus Duke of Berne, of whom in time paste the parts taking of the
Ghibellines and the Guelfins took name, there cha^unced a deed of women (as
Paulus Emilius the Historigrapher witnesses) no less worthy than pleasant.
And this it was, that when the Emperor had overcome by force Monake, the
head City of Berne, and appointed for much hatred conceived; all the men to
be cut in pieces, notwithstanding, he favorably granted the women, that they
should depart safe, with all that they could carry upon their backs.
Whereupon those valiaunte women, furthered with exceeding great love and true
affection, took counsel and strength to carrye with them the men for their
burden. With which worthy act the Emperor not only accounted himself
deluded, but it pleased him so much, that through their love, he received
afterward the Duke his aduersarye into favor also.

That valiaunte and virtuous men will not be corrupted.
PHocion of Athens, a very good Citizen, when Alexander the great had sent him
a great sum of money, to win him unto him, asked the messanger what he
brought him, and for what cause Alexander had sent money rather to him than to
other citizens. Because he thinks you (answered he) honester and better than
all the residue: Let me, said Phocion, be still such a one as he thinks
me now to be, and let him not go about to corrupt me with money. So he
refused that money of the king, knowing it to be full of craft and deceyte for
his country.

That men although they be old and miserable, desire for all that to live.
A Poor old manne carried from the wood a bundle of sticks, and being weary
of that miserable life, fell down to the ground, and as desperate called for
death: who forthwith appearing, asked him what he would have: To whom the
oldeman seeing her so horrible, by and by repented him, and said, I pray thee
help me to lay up this bundle upon my shoulders.

An example vvorthie of remembrance, of love toward ones country.
WHEN there was in Rome an exceeding great dearth of corn, Pompey the great,
was declared purueyoure: but in effect, as lord of the sea and land, he went
to Sicilia, to Affricke, and Sardinia, and gathering together with a great
borrow, great plenty of corn, made all the haste he could to return to
Rome with the first. But the weather being contrary, and a tempeste
appearing, the Mariners utterly refused to go to sea with so great danger.
Wherefore Pompey first taking shipping, caused the sails to be hoyssed up, and
spread, saying: Necessity constrayneth us to sail, but no necessity
constrayneth us to live.

That gifts please God and men.
QVintus Fabius Maximus, having intelliligence, that one Marsus, his souldior,
a very worthy and skillful man in the art of war, was secretly in practice
to consent to his enemies, caused him to be called unto him, and without show
of knowing any thing, or of having any suspicion of him, was sorry with
himself, he never asked any thing of him, saying: Why ask thou not? will
thou always hold me for thy detter? Afterward, he giving him a very fair and
courageous horse and money, and showing him many courtesies in the war, bound
him unto him, and made him most faithful: Wherefore Ouide truly said: Munera
(creed mihi) placant hominesque deosque that is, Both Gods and men (believe me)
gifts do please.

That he which has chief authority under a Prince, and is suddenly
advanced to honor, most commonly is subject to envy.
WHen the lord Cromwell, a man of great wisdom, was in greatest prosperity,
and exercised his authority (as some say) very arrogantly and proudely,
chiefly against the nobles: there was one of them, who to show him, that he
ought not to make himself equal with them, and that he came in the tempeste of
envy, and therefore should perish, caused upon a night these witty Verses of
Alciate, to be fastened to his door.

Crebbe la zuccata tanta altezza ch'ella,
Aun' altissimo Pin passo le cima
E mentre abbraccia in questa part, en questae,
Irami suoi superba oltre ogni stima,
Jl pino ride, and a lei cosi fauella:
Breue e la gloria tua, perch non prima,
Verra il verno di neui, vt ghiaccio cinto,
Ch'ogni vigor in te sara estinto.
The Gourde did grow to such a heyght, that she
Did of a lofty Pyne the top surpass,
And whylest she beyond all measure proud,
Did twinde her twigs on this side and on that,
The Pine did laugh, and to her thus began say,
Short is thy glory, for no sooner shall,
The winter come, with frost and snow yfraight,
But all thy strength in thee shall be extinct.
A meet answer for spiteful speech.
WHen a man of most wicked life cast Diogenes in the teeth, that he had been
in times past a forger of false money, he answered, saying: I know that the
time has been, when I was such a one as thou art now: but such a one as I
am now, thou will never be.

That the arrogancy of some presumptuous persons is oftentimes scorned by the
promptness of an other.
Master Frauncis Pescioni, and a certain Greek discoursed together of diverse
things, and in process of talk, they fell in disputation, and in disputing
they pricked one an other, so that the Greek arrogantly said: With whom
speak you think you, know you not that I am a Greek? and that out of Greece
came all virtues? Inferryng that of the Greeks in time past, other nations had
taken them. But Pescione who considered the present state of that province,
answered wittily, saying: you say truth that al virtues came out of Greece,
for it is not seen there remains any one at this day.

That fathers ought to make account of their children, according to their
deserts, not otherwise.
THe Philosopher Aristippus, when he was reproved of some of his friends,
because he had refused and cast off one that was his own natural son, said
unto them: What? know you not also that sweat and lyce are engendered of us,
and notwithstanding, as things filthy and unprofitable, they are abhorred and
cast away? So ought we to do with children, when they deserve it, as mine for
his wickedness does greatly deserve. And Marcus Antonius the Emperor and
Philosopher, when he was asked at the point of death, of the standers by, to
whom he would commend his son, said: First to God almighty, and afterward to
you, if he be worthy. The same Emperor when he saw at that present time his
friends and servants weep, said: And why weep you, and are not rather
sorrowful for death common as well to you, and to all miserable men, as to me.

VVomens counsel sometimes is much vvorth.
WHen certain conspirators of Forli, had slain Earl Hierome their prince,
taken prisoners his sons, and the Countess Catherine his wife, lawful
inheretrix of the state, they took and held the City with force. But
forasmuch as the Castle was kept for the Prince, and the Captain not minded
to yield it, they thought that without it, they had nothing at all prevailed:
whereupon the worthy Countess quickly taking in hand a most noble exployt,
promised, that if they would let her enter in, she would cause if forthwith
to be given over, leaving for the performance of her promise, her sons for
hostages. Then after they were agreed, the woman went into the Castle, and came
by and by to the walls, reproving the conspiratoures with most sharp words
for the death of her husband, and threatening them with all kinds of
punishment. Wherefore they taking her sons and a knyfe in hand, made as
though they would kill them in her presence, if she kept not promise with
them. But the courageous Countess, without changing her countenance,
immediately taking up her clothes before, with fierce look, said unto them: And
do not you think that you play the fools, because I have fourmes to make
other? so that they late espying their fault, left behind them those her
sons, and in have as it seemed best to them, sled out of the city.

That covetousness is a thing monstrous and pestiferous.
BOiardo when he saw a neighbor of his a very rich man, brought thorough
extreme covetousness to endure al pain, and to entreat more than miserably
his noble family, and finally passing al measure, to be brought to eat but
one meal a day, and the same naught, cried out with these words: Auaritia
crudel, poi che conuiene,
Ch'io ti laceri, and sgridi tutia via:
Dimeni onde ha meritata tante pene,
L'anima, che t'e data in signoria?
Perch: sei tu nimica d'ogni been?
Perch guasti l'humana compagnia?
Anzi la compagnia pur natural,
Perch sei tu radice d'ogni male.
that is, Fell avarice, since that it does behoue,
That I thee rent, and still at thee cryt out:
Tell me wherefore the Soul deserved has,
So much pain, which is vassal to thy reign?
Why art thou foe of every good thing?
Why doste thou mar the company of man?
Nay rather the company natural,
Wherefore art thou the root of every ill?


And Dante describing this plague says: Et ha natura si maluagia, and ria,
Che may non empie la bramosa voglio,
Et doppo l'pasto ha piu fame, che prima.
that is And has a nature so wicked and so naught,
That she does never fill her greedy desire,
And after meat has more hunger than before.


That it is a foul and damnable thing, to be loved with dishonest and
vvanton love.
A Fair young man, but ill mannered, iniuried Aristotle, saying to him among
other things: If I were hated of my countrymen as thou art, I would hang me
by the neck. To whom Aristotle answered: And I would hang me by the neck, if
I were loved as thou art: meaning, that he for his wanton beauty, and not for
other his merits, was loved, or rather dishonestly desired.

Of how many kinds, and of what qualities dreams are.
Dreams (after Macrobius) are of five kinds, three true, and two false, the
true he terms a dream, a vision, and an Oracle: The false, Insomnium, and
Phantasma. A dream is, when we dream the truth, but is obscure, so that it
needs an interpretoure, as when he that was in prison with Joseph, dreamed
that he pressed out the wine of three Grapes into Pharaos cup, and Joseph
interpreted it, that he within three days should be delivered, and
afterward should become the Kings cupbearer, even as it fell out. And
Policrates the tyrant of Samia, dreamed, that Jupiter washed him, and that
Phoebus anointed him. Wherefore not long after Orontes, Darius his captain,
taking him prisoner, caused him to be crucified, and remained so long upon the
cross, til Jupiter, to wit, the air, did rain upon him, and washed him, and
Phoebus, that is to wit, the sun, melted him, and fried out the grease of his
body, whereby he was anointed. An oracle is, when in our sleep one seems to
speak to us, and that he tells falls out true. A vision is, when in our
sleep it seems us to see something, which is afterward true, as we have
seen. Insomnium, is when we dream false things, and proceeds of too much,
or to little meat, or else of thoughts, or of sickness. Phantasma is a false
imagination, whereof man is the author in effect, and cause, the sister of
Insomniu^.

That hope does sometime deceive more than dreaming.
AMilcar Captayn of the Carthaginensians, when he had laid siege to Syracusis,
dreamed upon a night, that he supped the next day in the City, and hereupon
awaking, took so great hope, as though the victory had been promised him from
above: for he as soon as the day appeared, prepared to give the assault. But
when in setting the soldiers in order, there arose a dissension and grievous
commotion between the Carthaginenses, and the Scicilians, they within taking
occasion issued out, and setting upon the scattered camp, among other took
him prisoner, and having him in sure hold, they carried him into the city. So
Amilcar was more deceived with the hope, than with the dream.

How much wise and pleasant words do prevail with great men.
LEon of Bizance, hearer of Plato, and a very famous Sophist, went to meet
king Philip of Macedonia, who with a great host came against his country, and
showing himself before him, said: Tell king (I pray you) for what cause come
you to assault our city? Because I am in love with her (answered Philip
boording) and come to obtain her. To whom Leon readily answered again, and
said: Consider this, most victorious king, that lovers go not to deal with
love with instruments of war, but with instruments of music. This witty
and pleasant saying so much liked Philip, that he withdrewe himself from that
enterprise, and so leaving Bizance untouched, went further of.

In what degree Aristotle puts feigned friendship.
ARistotle blaming greatly dissimulation and counterfaiting, says, that he
which makes as though he were a friend, and is not in deed, does worse than
he which forgeth false money: because in taking a piece of false money for
good, one may have small loss, but in taking a feigned friend for a true, a man
may receive exceeding great damage.

A true and trim sentence.
CAstruccio of Luce, he which was so famous and notable a Captayn, when upon a
night one of his gentlemen was at his house, where many women were bidden too
make merry, he dauncyng and reuelling more than it was thought agreeable to
his qualityes, was warned thereof by a dear friend of his. To whom Castruccio
readily said: Hold thy peace, for he which is accounted wise in the day,
shall never be accounted a fool in the night.

What thing Fortune is, and how she tourneth about her wheel,
CHristopher Landine says, that fortune is an influence which proceeds from
the revolution of the heavens, and that she as they, does continually turn
round about her wheel: Because that riches (says he) causes pride: pride,
impacience: impatience, war: war, poverty: poverty, humility: humility,
patience: patience, peace: peace riches. Dant described fortune with lerning
and great elegancie in this wise, saying: Colui, lo cui sauer tutto trascende,
Fece li cieli, and die lor chi conauce,
Si ch'ogni part ad ogni part splende.
Distribuendo vgualmente la luce
Similmente a li splendour mondani,
Ordino general ministra and Duce,
Chi permutasse a tempo li ben vani,
Di gente ingente, and d'uno in altro sangue
Oltre la defension de'senni humani:
Perch'una part impera, and l'altra langue.
Sequendo lo giudicio di costei,
Che e occulto, com' in herbal'Angue:
Vostro sauer non hae contrastata a lei,
Ella prouede, giudica, and persegue,
Suo Regno, come il loro gli altri Dei,
Le sue permutation non hanno triegue:
Nccessita fa esser veloce.
Si spesso vien chi vincenda consegue.
Quest' e colui, che e tanto posto in croce,
Pur de color che le dourian dar lode,
Dandole biasmo atterno, and mala voce.
Ma ella s'e beata, and cio non ode:
Tra l'alire prime creature lieta,
Volue sua sfera, and beata si good.
that is, He that above all wisdom far ascendes,
The heavens made, and gave to them their guide,
So that each part to other brightness sendes.
Sundring alyke the light to every side.
He likewise also unto the worlds light,
Makes a minister and a chief captain,
To turn at times the vain wealth of each wight.
From blood to blood, from realm to realm again,
Beyond the reach of all men's wit and skill:
For one part rules, and the other down does pass
According to her certain doom and will,
That lurketh as an adder in the grass,
Your wisdom can in no wise her remove,
She does foresee, give sentence, and pursue
Her reign, as do theirs the other powers above:
Her sudden changes have no truces true:
Necessity does cause her to be swifte.
So quick she comes, which does by course ensue,
This is she that upon the cross they lift
So much, which ought with praises her pursue,
Geeuing her blame each where, and misreporte,
But she is blessed and does not hear this:
Merry among the other chiefest sort,
She turns her sphere, and there abides in bliss.


A courteous and marvelous behauioure of a young Prince.
CHarles the ninth, now king of France, began very soon to give manifest
tokens of his virtue and liberality: because that among other things in these
days at the beginning of the new year, he asked money to give New years
guiftes to them of his house: whereupon the Treasourer gave him a thousand
crowns. To whom the King, being angry, and then not eleven years old, said,
that they were to few, and that he should give him more. But the great
Chauncelloure, who by chance was there present, admonished him, saying: Sir,
consider that they are enough, for you be at this day, thorough the great
dettes which you are in, a poor king. Then Charles looking him full in the
face scornefully, laughed aloude: and turning afterward inco^tinently to the
king of Navarre, and other Princes, which were there about, took off his
cappe, and holding it in his hand, went courteously to every one, saying: Give
the poor king somewhat for Gods sake.

A noble advertisement to women, for their children.
John Lodouike Viues says, that the mother when she takes her son in her
arms, kissing him, is wont to say thus: God give thee more riches than Crassus
or Croesus had: more honor than had Pompey or Caesar: more felicity than had
Augustus or Alexander. But she should say, I pray God that thou may be good,
just, continent, a despyser of Fortune, a follower of Saint Paul, more
upright than Cato, better learned than Plato or Aristotle, more eloquent than
Demosthenes or Tullie.

Erasmus his judgment of Luther.
DVke Frederike of Saxony, called Erasmus of Roterodame to him at Coleyn, in
that parliament which Charles the fyfth held after his Coronation, and
besought him freendly to tell him without fear, whether Luther erred in those
controversies, of which chiefly he had reasoned. Then Erasmus plainly said,
that Luther was of a good opinion. The prince asked him further among other
things, saying: Master Erasmus, wherein has that my silly Monk offended,
because all be so spyteful against him, and do so persecute him? Erasmus
answered: O most gentle Prince, he has committed two very great sins, he
has taken away the Crown from the Pope and bishops, and the belly from the
Monks.

A very hot and hasty maynteyner of the Gospel.
POlyphemus, Erasmus his servant (for so he was called) was wont to dispute
earnestly with others, touching the controversies of the Gospel, and to
maintain the true doctrine. At the last, when a certain troublous fellow, did
contend with him, whom he could not overcome with arguments, he struck him
with the book of the new Testament, which he held in his hand. Erasmus
beholding them, merrily said: This seems a wonder to me, that the Gospel
should thus be defended with the Gospel.

An example meet to be remembered of all men in the agony of death.
WHen Duke Frederike was in the agony of death, he commanded many comfortable
sentences to be written for him upon a table in great letters: which he
oftentimes did read: and with these he strengthened himself. If one had put
hereto the picture of the triumph of Christ, he had done well, and I believe
that it should have been a pleasure to him. So godly and deuoutely he dyed,
feeling great griefs of the stone. He being asked whether he had any other
pain, answered, I have a quiet heart: but in my flesh I have exceeding great
pain which I suffer for Christ's sake.

The godly departing of Velcurio out of this life.
Master Velcurio a great learned man of late time, when he lay sick, so
much that he dyed also of that disease, and other Masters and Doctors
coming unto him, did comfort him, suddenly he brake out into these words?
Pater est amator, Filius redemptor, Spiritus sanctus consolator, quomodo itaque
tristitia affici possim? that is, God the Father is my lover, God the son my
redeemer, and God the holy ghost my comforter, how then can I be sorrowful?

A comfort against the temptations of the devil.
WHen at Friburge in Misma, a certain very Godly and Reverend old man lay
sick of a grievous disease, and drew near his end, upon a time when he was
left alone, the Devil came attired like a bishop, and exceedingly vexed the
old man, being then in the agony of death, going about to constrain him by
force, to tell him all the sins which in all his life he had committed. For his
intent was, having paper and incke, to write them all. But when the godly old
man had a long time mightily resisted him with the holy scripture, and was not
persuaded, but still the Devil vehemently urged that narration, at length the
good old man said: For as much therefore, as thou will have me to tell thee mine
offenses one after an other: write first and begin in this manner: The seed
of the woman shall break ye Serpents head. etc. The devil hearing this, cast
down the paper and incke upon the ground, and leaving behind him a great
stink, fled away. And the godly old man not long after died quietly in a good
confession.

That fortune is common and mutable, now favoring one man, then an other and
therefore in prosperity being puffed up with pride, we ought not to forget
adversity.
WHen Frauncis the French King was kept prisoner by ye Emperor Charles the
fifth, and saw written upon a wall the Emperors mark or posie, PLUS VLTRA,
that is, more beyond, or further: he wrote by it, Hodie mihi, cras tibi, that
is, to day for me, to morrow for thee. Which when the Emperor saw, he wrote
underneath, Fateor me esse hominem, yt is, I confess that I am a man.

That every man ought to follow his own vocation.
MArtine Durer an excellent painter (when Maximilian the Emperor had tricked
out a certain image, which he would have him to paint, and the cole at
sometimes had broken) painted the same afterward more easly and readily. The^
Maximilian asked of Durer how it came to pass, yt his cole brake not. Durer
smiling answered: Most merciful Emperor, I would not that your imperial
majesty could painte so cunningly as I: as who should say, I have exercised my
self in this thing, and this is my vocation: your majesty has waightier
affairs, and an other vocation, according to ye common proverb: Aliud est
sceptru^, aliud plectru^: that is, ye scepteris one thing, and the harp an
other: plectrum is properly an instrument wherewith men played on the harp or
dulcimers, for hurting of their fingers: with the former example this may
agree. Leontinus the bishop said to Constantine the Emperor desirous to
reason many things of Religion, (...): that is, Emperor thou being ordained
for one thing, do an other.

Of the well bringing up of Children.
THere is more regard to be had of the well bringing up of children, than of
any riches. They which do otherwise, seem to me very like to them which
provide shoes, and pass not for the feet, whereas they are invented for the
saving of them. Wherefore that aunciente Crates, climbyng upon the highest
part of the city, wisely thought good to exclame: Whither, whither run ye my
country men? is it meet that you should thus be chieflye busied in gettyng
of riches, and not to be careful, and pass upon them, for whom they are
gotten? Believe me, the parents cannot leave their children a better
inheritance, than if they should be well brought up, and trained in virtue
even from their youth: this patrimonye abides with them for ever, neither can
it be destroyed by the storms of fortune.

As a horse untamed although good by nature is not apt for those commodities,
which are required of him: so thou can not get ye fruit of virtue, of a man
unlearned, although he be witty. The like said Durer: A man unlearned is as it
were a lookyng glass not polished.

What labors are greatest and pleasantest.
AChilles being demanded of Ajax, which were the greatest labors that he had
sustained? answered: them which he took for his friends. And when he
proceeded to ask which were the pleasantest labors that he had sustained?
Achilles answered again, the same, signifying that he which is noble in
deed, burns with a certain great desire to help his friend.

Four things required in feasts.
BAchilides says, yt there are four things required in a feast. 1. a
measurable preparation of meat and drink. 2. pleasant communication. 3. true
good will of the feasters. 4. good wine wherewith old men are chiefly
delighted. And an other says, that one ought not to drink above two draughts
at a feast for healthes sake.

That Christians being taken prisoners by Christians, ought to be mercifully
entreated.
THe Emperor Charles the fifth, when the king of France was taken, and he
Lord over him, meeting him, embraced him friendly, saying: Mon frer, en' aye
peur, car tes affairs se port bien, that is. Brother mine, be of good cheer,
for all shall be well: and he delte brotherly with him.

VVatchfulnesse, and careful diligence becomes a Magistrate.
HOmer in the second book of his Iliades, has two notable verses meet to be
remembered, not only of Princes, but of all other Magistrates, and be these.

(...),
(...).
Which verses Frederick Duke of Saxony thought worthy to be written with his
own hand, and to have them in his chamber, being by him translated into Latin,
with these words: Non decet principe^ viru^ dormire tota^ noctem,
Cui populi gubernacula commissa sunt, and a cuius cura pendent ingentia rerum
momenta.
that is, A Prince for many that prouydes, ought not to sleep all night:
Who charge has of the people, and on whom great cares do light.


The original of the Electourship.
THe original of the Electorship of ye princes of Germany, took beginning of
the Persians. For as to their king were princes joined, so to the Emperors of
Germany, the Electours or Choosers are joined, which do make up the head
counsel for the Roman Empire. If we will consider aright, to the Persian
king, were joined the Ephori: For in their hands lay the chiefest power, to
choose, take, and put down the king. So it is the chiefest power and
authority of the Electours, which oftentimes have removed out of the Empire
beasts and tyrants. This state of Electours has defended Germany, and has
borne rule and kept quietness these five hundredth years.

The tokens of a well framed common wealth.
WHen king Ferdinando was at Norinberge, he asked of the chief Aldermen of the
city, how they governed so great a multitude? they answered. Most sovereign
King, with fair words, and cruel punishments. It is a very wise answer
of a witty man. For so ought Empires to be framed, the governors to answer
all men gently, but in punishing to use severity.

A description of three chief vocations in this life.
IN the Court Basile this verse is found written in golden letters.

Tu supplex ora, tu protege, tuque labora. that is, Pray thou upon thy knees,
defend thou, and labor thou.

In this verse three chief vocations of this life are set forth. The
Ecclesiastical state, the politic state, and the state of the subjects.

The picture of a good magistrate among the auncientes.
THe Emperors of Germany, among the auncientes were painted after this sort,
holding in one hand a book, and in the other a sword. Whereby antiquity
signified, that Emperors ought to be furnished with the skill of laws and
weapons. For the sword without law is tirannie. This picture was thus set
forth for the benefit of young Emperors and rulers, that they might be
admonished of the chiefest parts of government.

The modest aunsvvere of Charles the fifth touching his praises.
WHen the Emperor Charles ye fifth was very honorably received into Paris by
the french King, and with so great a triumph as never in any place was made
him: afterward one of the kings counsailours pronounced before him a long and
very grave oration, wherein he made rehersall of many virtues and noble acts of
the Emperor: to all these things he answered briefly and very modestly, that
he lyked the oration, because he had put him in mind, what manner of man he
ought to be.

Three things necessary for every Magistrate.
WHen Augustus sent Germanicus into Asia, he wyshed him three things: the
virtue of Alexander, the good will of men that Pompey had: thyrdly he added: I
wish thee my fortune: signifying that the exploites and victories won by him,
were governed by God.

The order of Charles the fifth his counsel.
THe Emperor Charles the fifth, called not above four or five to counsel,
every of which he commanded to tell his opinion. Afterward he considered
which were the best opinions, and reasoned of every one of them, and he did not
forthwith conclude, but deferred till an other time: saying, hereafter we will
speak more of this matter.

That soon pricketh which will be a thorn.
IT is written of the Lacedaemonians, that they put to death the kings son
being a boy, when they saw him pull out little birds eyes. For hereby the
Lacedaemonians judged that he would be tyrannous by nature: and if he should
rule, that he would be cruel to his countrymen and subjects.

A brief sum of the nevve and old testament.
Moses in the beginning speaks of the essence or being of God, secondly of
the creation, thirdly of the making of man, and of the promise set forth, by
the which man was restored and began again to build the Church. Afterward
there follow excellent promises. Furthermore in Exodus the law is set out,
which is the everlasting word of God, requiring obedience, and condemning the
disobedient. In the books of the kings examples of obedience and disobedience
are set forth: David is received, afterward the promise is renewed: finally,
the prophets make the same more manifest and plain. In the new testament, all
the articles of christian doctrine are expessely declared.

What things breed all mischief.
THese five things chiefly bring the common wealth far out of frame, as one
affirmed, to weete: A false judge in the consistory, a deceiptful merchant in
the market, a covetous Priest in the Church, a fair whore in the stews, and
flattery in Princes Courts.

Who are notable fools.
A Faithful lover of maids, a fair gamster, and a merciful soldier, are
said to be too foolish.

What household is unprofitable.
THis family of all other is said to be most unprofitable, and unpleasant: a
hen without eggs, a sow without pigges, a cow without milk, a daughter
that wandreth abroad in the night, a son a gamster, a wife privily spending
her husbands goods, and a maid servant with child.

Whosoever wants money is nothing set by.
MOney can bring all things to pass, and without money the good estimation of
a man is nothing worth. For except one have money, neither nobility, nor
knowledge, or any virtue is auailable. Pallade saying is not much unlike
this: Gold opens all things and the gates of hell. A certain man said
unwisely: Although my father were a hangman, and my mother a common harlot, yet
if I have money, I am well liked of and honored. Wherefore it is said moreover
in a proverb: Much wisdom is lost in ye poor man's purse, that is: poor men
are despised in whom oftentimes is much wisdom, because poverty is not
regarded, neither now a days is exercised in exployting of things: and except
one be rich, he is never thought wise and of understanding, neither is used in
weighty matters, which require wisdom. Whereunto Iuuenall alludeth in his
seventh Satire: Rara in tenui facundia panno, that is,
A poor man's speech but seldom pleasant is.


That three things displease both God and men.
A Poor man proud, a rich man a liar, and an old man a lover.

Four things do corrupt all judgments.
Fat gifts, Hatred, Favor, and fear.

Four things cannot be kept close.
Love, the cough, fire, and sorrow.

Four things kill a man before his time.
A Fair wife, an unquiet household, unmeasurable meat and drink, and a
corrupt air.

Four deeds of a Tyranne.
THe property of a Tyranne is, to destroy the good, to hate the poor, to
advance the wicked, and to abolishe virtue.

Four sorts of men get friends.
THE liberal, the gentle, the mighty, or rich, and they that are easy to
be spoken unto.

That a man is not to be judged by his face.
A Man ought not to be judged by his face, for we cannot know a man only by
outward things and by the face, because we be ignorant what lies hidden in his
mind: for many hiding their wickedness, do faynedly show in face great
honesty. The very which Iuuenal in his second Satyr says: Fronti nulla
fides, that is, Trust not the face.

That we ought to take heed of flatterers as of poison.
ALphonsus said, that flatterers are not unlike Wolves: for even as Wolves by
tickling and clawing are wont to devour Asses: so flatterers use their
flatterye and lies, to the destruction of Princes.

Of Usurers.
Saint Bernard affirmed, that only by this means usury might be exercised
without sin, if money were lent them, which could not restore the principal.

Of Hunting.
HVnting, as Albert the Emperor said, is a manly exercise, and dancing a
woman's exercise, and that he could be without any other pleasure saving Hunting.

Two things necessary for him that will live quietly in matrimony.
ANthony Panormita a very pleasant man being asked what things be thought
most necessary to the leadyng of ones life pleasantlye and merrily in marriage,
taking an argument of the manyfolde and great troubles which happened in the
married life, answered, that two things only were needeful, the husband to be
deaf, and the wife blind, least that she should see very many things which
were vntemperately done of her husband, and least he should hear his wife
continually chatting at home.

Policies of War.
IT is very much used in Jtaly, that the best Captains have many volumes of
policies and wise counsels of war, as well of their auncientes as of them of
latter time. The French men are said to have used in time paste this policy
against the Emperors souldioures. They sent before carters laden with Silks,
and other clothes, which the Emperors soldiers fearing nothing, greedily
laid hands upon. In the mean season the Frenchmen invaded and took them
suddenly unawares with their host of horsemen, whilst they striued among
themselves for the pray.

Cymon a most wise and valiant Captain was endued with so great a modesty,
that when he brought with him out of ^onia a Poet, which had set forth his
praises over large, he was nothing delighted therewith, but took it very
grieuouslye. For he said, that of nothing yt ever he did, he sought any
praise, but only of one stratageme, or policy. And this was such a one as he
used toward the Lacedaemonians his country men, without the offense or hurt of
any. For when he had ouercom the Persians in a great conflict, and had brought
many prisoners, and a huge pray from that battle, all which together were
to be divided by him among his countrymen, Cymon being not ignorant of the
Lacedaemonians covetousness, commanded that all the Gold and Silver should be
set on one side, and the bodies of the Captives clad in vile apparel should be
placed on the other, and gave afterward the choice to the Lacedaemonians. But
they being deceived through covetousness, greedily chose that side, wherein the
Gold and Silver was placed, and moreover gave Cymon thanks for so liberal a
division and sufferance of choice. But Cymon got no less pray together with
praise. For there were among the Captives many most noble and rich men,
which when he suffered to ransom themselves, gathered also with thanks a
great sum of money, by their ransom and deliverance, and much greater than
the Lacedaemonians. Furthermore, I believe, that through this deliverance of the
Captives, he won so great favor among the ennimyes, that this was the
chiefest cause that Asia afterward fell so much to him. So Cymon by this
trim polycie, provided for his own profit, and got double thanks of the
Lacedaemonians for his liberality, and of the captives for his clemency.

When the Lantgraue had taken a certain Dukes Secretarye, the Duke objected to
him, that it was not lawful to take Ambassadors. The Lantgraue contrarywyse
had an exception, because he had found an example in Liuie, where the Romans
took on the way the Athenian Ambassadors, and it was judged to be well
done. The like example is in Herodotus, where the Athenians took the
Ambassadors of the Lacedaemonians going to the king of Persia to make league,
and by request to obtain help against them, and by and by they slew them.

That virtue can do more than crueltye, and that men's minds are more turned
with clemencye, than with outrage and fierceness.
ALphonsus king of Neaples, living in the time of our auncesters, was one of
the wisest kings that ever reigned: he was very well learned, and did great
things with great admiration: he was expelled and banished, and returned
eftsoons into his kingdom. When he beseiged Caieta the Caietans sent out of
the City a great number of old men, women, boys and girls, that the
residewe might a longer time have (during the siege) corn, and other things
necessary. Then certain counselors advised the king to command, that this
miserable multitude, or at least wise some part of it might be slain in the
sight of the city, which the inhabitants beholding, might the sooner yield.
And he that wrote the history says: God forgive me, the same counsel I gave
the King too.

Then the king being astonished, stood musing, and at length after long silence,
brake out into these words: The whole kingdom of Neaples, is not somuche worth
to me, that I should violently invade this miserable company: and he gave
forthwith a most severe commandment, that all should be distributed safe
into the towns and places near adjoining.

When the inhabitants of the city saw this from the walls and towers, the
matter being known, they immediately yielded, being moved by the virtue and
clemency of the king, in the victory welneere woonne. Scipio said notably:
that he had lieffer save one of his countrymen, than vanquishe a whole legion
of his enemies.

Certain Italian Proverbs and sentences, done into English, by I. Sanf.
A.
A Buon hora in pescaria, e tardi in Beccaria.

Betyme in the Fish shambles, and late in the Butcherie.

A buon intenditore mezze parola basta.

To a good understander half a word is enough.

A caualli magri, vanno le mosche.

The Flies go to lean horses.

A chi l'ha va been, par sauio.

He that has the world at will, seems wise.

Al amico cura il fico, and

Al nimico il persico.

Provide a Fig for thy friend, and a peache for thy enemy.

Allegrezzo di cuore fa bella pelladure di viso.

The merynesse of the heart, causes a fair color in the face.

All nozze, and alla morte, si conoscono gli amici e parenti.

At marriages and burials, friends and kinsfolk be known.

Al nial mortal, ne medice ne medicina val.

A deadelye disease, neither Physician nor Physike can ease.

Amor di putana, e vin de fiasco,

Da mattina buono, da sera guasto.

The love of a harlot, and wine of a flagon or bottle, is good in the morning,
and naught in the evening.

Asino ponto, bisogna che trotti.

An ass pricked must needs trot.

Asperta luoco, e tempo a far vendetta,

Che non fece may ben infretta.

Awayte time and place to be revenged,

For it is never well done in haste.

A ssai ben balla, a chi fortana s^ona.

He daunceth well enough, to whom Fortune pipeth.

Assai gnadagna, chi fortuna perde.

He gayneth enough whom fortune loses.

Aue morai non fa mele.

A dead Be makes no honey.

A un a vno, si fanno gli fusi.

By one and one the spyndles are made.

B.
Belle parole, e cattino fatti,

Ingannone i saui, and i matti.

Fair words and wicked deeds, deceive wise men and fools.

Ben faremo, ben diremo,

Mal va la barca, senza remo.

Do we well, speak we well,

Ill goes the Barcke without oars.

Bandiera vecchia, honor di capitano.

An old band, is the honor of a captain.

C.
Cane che baia, non vuol nuocer,

A barking Dog will do no hurt.

Can vecchio, non baia indanno.

An old dog barketh not in vain.

Caual corrente, sepultura aperta.

A running horse, an open burying.

Cera, tela, e fustiano,

Bella bottega e poco guadagno,

Wax, linen cloth, and Fustaine,

A fair shop, and little gain.

Chi compara caro, e toglie a credenza,

Consum' il corpo, e perde la semenza.

He that buyeth dear, and takes upon credit, consumes the body, and
loses the seed.

Chi di paglia fuoca fa, molto fimo and altri non ha. He that makes a fire of
straw, has store of smoke, and nothing else.

Chi duo lepori cazzia, vno perde and l'altro lascia.

He that hunteth two Hares, loses one, and leaves the other.

Chi e in diffetto, e in sospetto.

He that is in poverty, is in suspicion.

Chi ha buona lancia, la proui nel muro.

He that has a good spoar, proves him against the wall.

Chi ha tempo, non aspetti tempo.

He that has time, looks not for time.

Chi non fa, non falla,

Chi falla, s'amenda.

He that does nothing, does not amiss.

He that does amiss, is amended.

Chi fa male, ^dia il lume.

He that does ill, hates the light.

Chi non ha cuori, habbi gambe.

He that has no heart, has legs.

Ch^ non ha moglie, spesso la batte,

He that has no wife, beats her often.

Chi non figliuoli, ben gli pas^e,

He that has no children does bring them up well.

Chi non ha seruito, non fa commandare.

He that has not served, knows not how to command.

Chi non nauiga, non sa che sia timore di Dio.

He that has not ben on the sea, knows not what the fear of God is.

Chi non puo batter il cauallo, batta la silla.

He that can not beat the Horse, beats the sadd^e.

Chi non robba, non fa robe,

He that does not rob, makes not a roabe, or a gown.

Chi nuoce altrui, nuoce se stesso.

He that hurts an other, hurts him self.

Chi serve al communo, seru' a nessuno.

He that serves the Common wealth, serves none.

Chi serve il puttane, il tempo perde.

He that serves harlots, loses his time.

Chi tardi arriua, mal allogia.

He that comes late, has ill lodging.

Chi ti vede di giorno, non ti cerchera di notte.

He that sees thee in the day, will not seek thee in the night.

Chi turto vuol, di rabbia muore.

He that will have all, dies of madness.

Chi va dormir con i cani, si leua con i pulici.

He that goes to bed with Dogs, aryseth with fleas.

Chi va dormir senza cena,

Tutta la notte si demena.

He that goes to bed without his supper, is out of quiet all the night.

Chi va and ritorna, fa buon viaggio.

He that goes and comes, makes a good voyage.

Chi viue in Corte, muore a pagliaro.

He that lives in Court, dies upon a pallet of straw.

Chi vuol dir mal a altrui,

Prima si pensa di lui.

He that speaks ill of an other,

Let him first think of himself.

Corbi con corbi non cauano may gli occhij.

One crow never pulls out an others eyes.

D.
Dal ditto a fatto, sie un gran tratto.

From word to deed is a great space.

Del ocha mangiane pocha.

Eat little of a Goose.

Di senno, e piena ogni testa.

Every head is full of wit.

Duro con duro, non fece may buon muro.

Hard with hard never made good wall.

Dolce parole rompe l'ira.

Fair speech breaks anger.

E bella cosa pigliar duo^ columbi, con vna faua.

It is a goodly thing to take two pigeons with one bean.

El ben guadagner, fa il bell spender.

Fair gayning, makes fair spending.

El bisogne ch'el sauio porti il matto in spalle.

The wise man had need to carry the fool upon his shoulders.

El der mal d'altrui, e il quinto elemento.

To speak ill of an other, is the fifth element.

El fine fa el tutto.

The end does all.

El mal vien per libre, e va vie per vncie.

Mischief comes by pounds, and goes by ounces away.

El nauiger e il piu grosso, and il piu sot il mestier che si fa.

Mariners craft is the grossest, and the subtilest handycraft that is.

El pasciuio, non cred'al digiuno.

He whose belly is full, believes not him that is fasting.

El per sico vuol el vino, il fico l'acqua.

The Peache will have wine, the Fygge water.

El pesce grande, mangia il piccolo.

The great fish eats the little.

El pesce guasta l'acqua, e la carne la concia.

Fyshe marreth the water, and flesh amendeth it.

Et primo Capitolo di matti, e tener si sauio.

The first Chapter of Fools, is to be helds or accounted wise.

El promette mari e monti.

He promises seas and mountains,

El prometter, e la vigilia del dare,

Promising is the vigile of giving.

El se met ananti, come fanno gli Asini,

He puts himself foreward as Asses do.

El siperchio, rompe il comperchio.

Superfluity, or that which is more than is enough, breaks the cover.

El sparagno, e il primo guadagno.

Sparing, is the first gayning.

El vino al sauore, il pane al color.

Wine by the sauoure, bread by the color.

Experientia e qualche volta periculosa.

Experience is sometimes dangerous.

F.
Faceto me indouino, and io ti faro riccho.

Make me a Diuinoure, and I will make thee rich.

Far ben non e inganno, buttar via il suo, non e guadagno.

To do well is no deceit, to put away his own, is no gain.

Febraro curto, peggior di tutti.

Short February is worst of all.

Frati osseruanti sparagno il suo, e mangino quello d'altrui.

Friars obseruantes spare their own, and eat other men's.

G.
^atto guantato non piglia sorzi.

^^gloued catte can catch no myse.

^^and amore, grand dolor.

Great love, great grief.

Grand'^ grossa mi facia Dio, che biancha e rossa me faro io.

God make me great and big, for white and read I will make my self.

Gran na^^ gran pensier^.

Great ship, great thoughts.

Guarda ch'el non vistraccio, cioe, ch'el, non vi tenga par forza.

Take heed that he rent you not, that is, that he hold you not by force.

Guardateui d'acato, e da vina dolce, cioe, de la cholera d'un huomo pacifico.

Take you heed of vinegar, and sweet wine, that is, of the anger of a quiet
man.

Huomo condannato, mezzo degolato.

A new condemned is half beheaded.

Huomo da confin, oue ladro, oue Assasin.

A borderer is a thief or murderer.

Huomo peloso, oue matto oue venturoso.

A hearie man is foolish or venturous.

Huomo Rosso, e femina barbata, tree miglia de lontan la saluta.

Greet a red man and a bearded woman three miles off.

J.
J dinari fanno correr i caualli.

Money makes the horse to go.

I dinari, sono il verbo principale in questa casa.

Money is the principal word in this house.

I dinari stan sempre con la baretta in mano, per puor cambio.

Money stands always with cap in hand to take exchange.

J matti fanno le feste, and i saui le godeno.

Fools make feasts, and wise men enjoy them.

Impiastro grosso and vnguento sottile.

A gross plaster, and a subtle anoyntement.

In Cypro, di tree cose e buon mercata, di salo, succharo, e puttane,

In Cypres is a good market of three things: of salt, sugar, and whoores.

Jn vna notte nasce vn-fungo.

A musheron grows in one night.

L'ira placata, non rifa l'offese.

Anger appeased, does not amend the hurts.

J Todeschi hanno l'ingegno nelle mani,

Dutchemen be wise in their hands,

Il fine, fa tutti equali.

The end makes all equal.

Il secreto e laudabile.

Secrecy is prayseworthie.

^l secreto si deue celare.

A secret ought to be concealed.

L.
L'acqua fa male, il vino fa cantare.

Water makes one ill, wine makes one sing.

L'acqua va al mare.

The water goes to the sea.

La coda condanna molta volte la volpe a la morte per esser troppo lunga.

The tail condemns many times the Fox to die, for being ouer-long.

L'innocentia porta seco sua defensiene.

Innocence brings with her, her own defense.

La mala compania e quella che mena gli huomini alla forca.

Evil company is that which brings men to the gallows.

La mala herba cresce presto, e non si per de may.

The evil herb soon grows, and is never destroyed.

La morte di Loui, e sanit a delle pegore,

The death of the Wolves is the safety of the beasts.

Le notte e madre di pensieri,

The night is the mother of thoughts.

La peggior carne che sia, e quella del huomo,

Man's flesh is the worst that is.

La porta di retro, guasta la casa.

The posterne door destroys the house.

La robba non e, a chi la fa, may chi la good.

The gown is not his that makes it, but his that enjoys it.

La speranza, e t'ultima cose del huomo,

Hope is the last thing that man has to flee unto.

Le buone parole ongino, le cattiue pungino.

Good words do annointe, the shrewde do prick.

Le bugie hanno corte le gambe.

Lies have short legs. To this the German proverb is like,

Leugen hat ein kranck beyn, that is,

A lie has one lame leg.

Le lettere sono de i studiosi,

Le richezze, di solliciti.

Jl mondo, di presontuosi,

Il Paradiso, di douoti.

Learning belongs to students,

Riches, to the careful,

The world to the presumptuous,

Paradise to the devout.

Lingua bardella e, che per fretta fauella.

The tongue is a liar, that speaks in have.

L'occhio del Patron, ingrassa il cauallo.

The owners eye, does fat the horse.

Lombardia e il guardino del mendo.

Lombardie is the gardin of the world.

M.
Mal anno e moglie, non manco may.

An ill year and a wife does never fail.

Matte per natura e sauio per scrittura.

A fool by nature, and wise in wrighting.

Medico pietoso, fa la plaga verminosa.

A pitiful physician makes a deadly wound.

Meglio e dar la lania, che la pecora.

It is better to give the wool than the sheep,

Meglio e esser confessore, che Martyr.

It is better to be a Confessoure, than a Martyr.

Meglio e un magro accordo, ch'vna grassa sentenza.

A lean agreement is better than a fat sentence.

Mett' il matto sul banco, o gioca di piede o di canto.

Set a fool upon the benche, and he will play with his feel, or sing.

Mi bisogna fare come quelli che vedino la ruina su la testa, e pur s'adiutano
delle mani.

I had need do like them, which see the ruin over their head, and yet
healpe themselves with their hands.

Muro bianco, carta di matto.

A white wall is fools paper.

N.
Ni amor, ni signoria, vuol compagnia.

Neither love nor sovereignty will have company.

Ni dae frate, ne da suor, speri may d'aiutor,

Never hope to receive any thing of Friars or Nuns.

Nessuno da, quel che non ha.

None gives that which he has not.

Ni occhij in lettera, ni man in tasca a'altrui,

Neither the eye in the letter, nor the hand in the purse of an other.

Null been, senz a pene.

No good thing is without pain.

Null tacer fu may scritto,

No silence was ever written.

Non e virtu che pouerta non guasti.

There is no virtue which poverty destroys not.

Non sparger tanto del tuo con le mani, che tu ne vagi cercando con i piedi.

Spread not abroad so much of thine own with the hands, that thou go not to
seek it with thy feet.

Non vien ingannato, qui ha quel in che si fida.

He is not deceived which has that wherein he may trust.

Nozzee Magistrato, sono del cielo destinato.

Marriage and Office, are appointed from above.

O.
Oglio, ferro, sale, mercantia regale.

Oil, Iron, and Salt, is a royal merchandise.

Ogni dieci anno, l'uno ha bisogni de l'altro.

Every ten years, one has need of an other.

Odi fra gl'amici, e soccorso dalli strani.

Hatred among friends, is the succoure of strangers.

Ogni di vene la sera.

Every day the night comes.

Ogni ozello non conosce il buon grana.

Every bird knows not good grain.

Ogni tristo cano mena la coda.

Every naughty dog hangs the tail.

Ogniuno per se, and il diauolo per tutti,

Every man for him self, and the Devil for all.

O di ricomminciato peggio che prima,

Hatred begone eftsoon is worse than before.

P
Patisco il male, sperande 'il been.

I suffer the ill, hoping for the good.

Pesa giusto; e vendi caro.

Make just weight, and sell dear.

Piu per delcezza che per forza.

More by fair means than by foul.

Poco Senno basta, a chi fortuna suona.

A little wit is enough for him to whom fortune pipes.

Pu^ti e matti indouinano.

Children and fools tell truth.

Q.
Qualis vita finis ita.

Qual vita tal fine.

Such as the life is, such is the end.

Qua^do lagatta non e in casa i sorzi ballano.

When the Catte is not at home, the Myce dance.

Quando l'ha ben tonato, e forza che pioui.

When it has well thundered, it must needs rain.

R.
Radigo, non fa pagamento.

Delay makes no payment.

Ramo curto, vindemi a longo.

A short bow, a long grape time, or store of grapes.

^agione deu'essere in consiglio.

^eason ought to be in counsel.

^^co rotto, non tene me^o.

A broken bag can hold no mill, mill of milium is a small grain.

Sauio per lettera e matio per volgar.

Wise in learning, and a fool in speaking.

Se vuoi venir meco, porta teco.

If thou will come with me, bring with thee.

Si danno been gli officij, ma non si dona discretione.

Offices may well be given, but not discretion.

Soffri il ^ale, et astetti il been.

Suffer the ill, and look for the good.

Sono huomin^ al mondo, the voglione l'ouo e la gallina.

There are men in the world that would have the egg and the hen.

Sopra Dio non e Signore,

Sopra il nero, non e color: Ni

Sopra il sale si troua sapore.

Above God there is no Lord,

Above black there is no color: And

Above salt there is found no savor.

Speranza conforta l'huomo.

Hope comfort man.

T.
Taglia la coda al Cane, resta semper cane.

Cut off a dogs tail, he will be a dog still.

Tal biasma altrus, chi se stesso condanna.

Such a one blames an other, that condemns himself.

Tresta quelle Musa, che non sa trouar scusa.

Naught is that muse that finds no excuse.

Triste quelle caso, oue le galline cantano, and il gallo tace.

Naught are those houses, where the hen crow and the cock hold his peace.

Tristo colui chi da essempio ad altrus.

Naught is he that gives an example to an other.

Trotto a' asino, e fuoco di paglia, poco dura.

The trot of an ass, and a fire of straw endures but a while.

Troppo sperar inganna.

Too much hope deceyueth.

Tu la poi slongare, ma non scampare,

Thou may prolong her, but not escape her.

Tutti tirano l'acqua al sus molino.

All draw water to their own mill.

Tyriaca vecchia, e confittione nuona.

Old triacle, and a new confection.

V.
^egliar a la Luna, e dermir al sole, no^ fa ni profit ni honor.

(...) watch in the night and sleep in the day, ^auseth neither profit nor
honor.

Vengo di casa: cio e, ni guadagno ni perdo.

I come from home, that is, I neither win nor loose.

Venetia, chi non ti vide, non ti pretio.

Venice, he that does not see thee, does not esteem thee.

Vesti caldo, mangia poce, beui assai, e vinerai.

Cloth thee warm, eat a little, drink enough, and thou shall live.

Vi manca cosa, che habbi.

You want the thing you have.

Viua chi vence. He lives that overcomes.

Viui con viui, e morti con morti.

The living with the living, and the dead with the dead.

Vna man laua l'altra, e tutte due lauan' il viso.

One hand washes an other, and both wash the face.

Volunta fa mercato, e dinari pagano.

Will buyeth, and money pays.

A pleasant answer of Virgill.
IT is written that Augustus was once in doubt, whether he were the son of
Octauius or not. When he hoped that he might learn this of Virgill, he asked
him being sent for and come, whether he knew who was his father, and how
great power he had to make men happy? Whom Virgill aunswering, said: I know
that thou art Augustus Caesar, and have almost equal power with ye immortal
Gods, that you may make happy whom you list. Then Caesar said, I am of that
mind, that if thou tell me true, I may make thee happy and blessed. I would to
god said Maro I could tell you the truth of those things which you ask me.
Then Augustus said: some think that I am Octauians son, other say that I
have an other man to my father. Then Maro smiling said: If you bid me to speak
freely as I think, I will soon tell it you. Caesar affirmed with an oath that
he would not take in ill part whatsoever he said, nay rather that he should have
gifts not ^o be misliked for his answer. Now Au^stus looked what Virgill
would say, when said: As far as I can conjecture, you are ^kers son.
Augustus was astonished, and ^ght with himself how that might be. The^ Virgill
said, hear me why I coniecturs so. When of late I had spoken some things which
could not be understood but of ye best learned, you (Prince of the world) did
command once or twice ye bread should be given me for a reward, which truly
was the part of a Baker, or of one that had a baker to his father. The merry
jest liked the Emperor exceeding well, who answered him again, that hereafter
he should not be rewarded of a baker but of a noble and valiant king: and after
that he made exceeding much of Maro.

A merry rest of vinum Theologicum that is, wine of the divines.
THey of Paris for a common jest do call that Vinum Theologicum which is
strongest and not alayed with water. A certain man being asked how this
proverb came up, answered merrily, that the lawyers had Prebendes, deanryes,
and Archdeaconries, and that ye divines had nothing left besides benefits. But
because it is written of the pastors or curates: ye eat the sins of the
people: to the digestion of such hard meat (said he) there needed very
strong wine. And that hereof grew the proverb.

FINIS.
OMNIA TEMPVS HABENT printer's device of Henry Bynneman (McKerrow 149)

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight riders streate, at
the sign of the Mermayde. ANNO. 1573.

And are to be sold at his shop at the Northwest door of Poules Church.


