IGNIS FATVVS.

OR, THE ELF-FIRE OF PVRGATORIE.

Wherein Bellarmine is confuted by Arguments both out of the Old and New
Testament, and by his own Proofs out of Scriptures and Fathers.

Also an Annexe to this Treatise of Purgatory, concerning the distinction of
Sin in Mortal and Venial.

By M. WILLIAM GVILD, Minister at KING-EDVVARD.

LONDON, Printed by AUGUSTINE MATTHEW'S, and are to be sold at Britains
Burse. 1625.

TO THE TRVELY Noble, Right Honorable, and Religious, JOHN, Earl of
Laderdail, Lord Thirlestane, etc. one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Counsel, etc. and to his most Religious Countess and Lady.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THat inueterate-en^mie of Gods glory and man's good, has never ceased from the
beginning to intermi^e in the Lords field, his pes^^ent popple amongst the good
seed, setting a work the Mystery of iniquity, even then, when the Mystery
of man's redemption was begun to be published, and by force or fraud, either as
a red Dragon, or as a counterfeite of the Lamb, with implacable malice (but
limit^ed power) he has ever assaulted the Church both in head and members:

Sometimes provoking to sin (as Balak (...) did the people in Ahabs time, as
in sins o^ opinion, contra verum.

This later is of two sorts either heretical against the (...) against the
Body. (...) The two preceding were old heresies who long ago has received
their just condemnation: the later carry the (...) of their gross guiltiness,
and clear conviction, specially such as are against the Priesthood of Christ,
consisting in full satisfaction, until sole inter(...) sufferings with Christ's
all-sufficient oblation: making that glorious work to be as a Linsey-wolsey
garment, and man to share in the glory of that, in the grace whereof he has
only (...).

By which impious assertion, and illicit conjunction, Christ is degraded, his
blood vilified, his merit maimed, his cross curtailed, his death debased, and
his sufferings stained, by those who of godliness have made gain, but not
made their gain to be godliness: turning Gods Temple again into a den of
thieves, and therein making Merchandise, not of Doves, but of Souls (as is
fore-prophesied of them; Revel. 18.13.
) and have raised again the tables of Money Changers, which Christ once
overthrew. As no more plainly their own Mantuan affirms, Mant. de colam temp.
saying, Omnia venalia, Romae: then their own Pope Pius confirms, Aeneas
Syluius ad 1. pereg. Ep. 66.
saying, Nil absque argent^ Romana curia donat. Nam peccatorum venia and
Spiritus dona venduntur.

And indeed though these Subterranean Vulcans, and fire-worke men build upon
straw, stubble, 2 Cor. 3.
and hay, their light assertion, without any more solid foundation, then the
groundless conceit of a brainesicke head, and covetous heart can afford: yet
they draw in from the seduced simple, most solid substance of gold, silver, and
large revenewes by a strange sort of Alchymie, Manus porrigentes indultrices,
solum manus porrigentibus adiutrices, but No penny, no Pater noster, being
better seen (as is truly said) in the Golden number of actual reset, nor in
the Dominicall letter of sacred and holy Writ.

Neither without cause does these Locusts that came from the bottomless pit
smell of fire; or is it a wonder, that these that came out of the smoke of a
great furnace, do yet speak to poor souls of a fiery furnace; neither can
any justly admire, that they torment the conscience, whose power given them, is
as the power of Scorpions, not to kill outright, by simply damning souls, (for
so they should get no profit nor prey) but to torment them with the sure
expecting of a Purgatory fire, out of which there is no release, but by the
Suffrages, and Soul masses, and so like Benjamin, they raven as a Wolf* and
as the name of the Prophets son was, they become speedy robbers, and swift
to the prey, never resting cruelly to sting; and like Jobs miserable
comforters* to propine to the dying soul in the greatest agony* and thirst for
cooling comfort, such a bitter potion as Christ got on the Cross* while the
Lions teeth by some booty be baited.

The zeal then which we all owe to Gods glory, and love which we owe to our
fellow members, (as yet perhaps vncome out of Babell) has moved me at this
time to take some pains in this argument to party the seducers, and pity the
seduced, and by the sword of the Spirit, and Lamp of the Word to convince the
one, and conduct the other into the path of truth, if they may be cured.

Which pains, ^ight Honorable, with no less affectionate heart, then an
officious hand, I offer to your view, and dedicate to your Name, beseeching God
that in all honor it may flourish, your soul by grace, and your estate with
prosperity; and that those singular gifts wherewith your God has endued you,
may still receive a happy growth, for your better acquitall in that eminent
station, wherein his wise dispensation has set you, that his Name may be
glorified, his Church comforted, your Country benefited, your posterity
blessed, and your own self eternally may be saved in that great day.

Your Honors in all humble and hearty duty, W. GVILD.

To the READER.
COURTEOUS READER,
COnsidering the grossness of this unwarrantable, cruel, and covetous
conceit of Purgatory: so that many who in other points rests yet in Babell,
yet in this confesses the vanity of this prop of Bethauen. And perceiving
notwithstanding, how peremptory the Adversary is, not only against all
opposers to this their fatning Kitchen, by their thundering Sentence; but also
against all those who gives not full assent unto it, by their condemnatory
Decree, adiudging all such to Hells fire for ever. So that Bellarmine spares
not (as usurping Gods chair) determinatly to afflirme, Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c.
15.
that it is such an article of faith, adeo vt qui non credit Purgatorium esse,
ad illud nunquam sit peruenturus, sed in Gehenna sempiterno incendio sit
cruciandus.

I thought my pains should not be bestowed, nor my Pen employed amiss, if
according to my penury, I should contribute somewhat herein to the Lords
Treasury, that they who stand in the old way of truth, may be strengthened,
and these who are any one footstep come out of Babell, may be helped forward;
and if it were no more but as Augustine says, Aug. li. de trin. c. 3. and
cont. Mend. c. 6.
that heretics may understand, that there are not only one or two, but many
in the camps of orthodox Catholics, who dare with open face meet them.

As they then who coupled an Ox and an Ass together, against that command of
God to the Jews, and sow their field with diverse seeds: or as the children of
those of the Captivity, spoke partly in the Jewish Language, and partly in the
Language of Ammon and Ashdoa: Even so, how that false Prophet, who has
borrowed likewise the semblance of the Lambs horns, calling him his Vicar
(that under that he might the more craftily vent the speech of the Dragons
tongue, whose mouth he is, and whose privilege he claims Math. 4.9.
.) How he (I say) has unequally yoked, monstrously mixed, unjustly coupled,
and impiously matched, that matchless, free, full, and perfect satisfaction of
Christ's, with humane satisfactions in an imaginary fire, which Avarice has
hatched, Ignorance fosters, and Cruelty with fire and faggot maintains: Lo
here, Courteous and charitable Reader, presented to thy view.

As David then came against Goliath, armed with the Name of the Lord, when that
Giant stood between the two Hosts, and was a terror to the Army of Israel:
So for consternation likewise of this Monster, which they situate likewise
between the place of the damned and glorified, to the terror of simple
souls, armed with that Armor, which experimentally has ever given victory
both in the head and members, (and wherewith therefore we are bidden be girt
continually) Ephesians. 6.
even with that Sling and Sword of the Spirit, do we chiefly mean to come
against this grand Error of Popery, the very Diana of Rome, that by the very
presence of the Ark of God set up, that Idol Dagon may fall to the ground.

Next, that Goliahs head after his overthrow, may be cut off with his own
Sword: Arguments God willing of their own great Warrior Bellarmines, (though
adduced by him for another purpose, whether taken from Fathers or Reason) shall
be clearly drawn forth, as Saul's Sword, or Hamans Halter, to kill and
strangle themselves.

And last, their proofs for Purgatory, especially such as they vpbraid us
with, out of wrested and wronged Scripture, we shall faithfully, God willing,
relate, as they are set down in their foresaid Champion, (whom cheefely I
oppugn) and punctually shall answer: so that they shall be seen to be like
short stubble, that was gathered upon necessity by those under Pharaohs
bondage, who otherwise could not get long straw to themselves.

And to instance the same here in one particular: what will they not bring to
proone Purgatory? when Bellarmine brings for it, Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c. 14.
Hebr. 10.27. and says, that that place is a notable proof of Purgatory;
which speaks of a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries; and wherein the clear words, and consent
of all antiquity does show, that Gods adversaries are spoken of, and not his
friends, who shall be devoured, and not purged, and whom fearful damnation,
and consuming wrath abides; which is not the lot nor expectation of the godly,
neither here nor hence: but theirs of whom the Apostle speaks clearly of; to
wit, who treads the Son of God under foot, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing, and done despite to the Spirit of Grace. So that such
clear places speaking of the wicked, and of hell, he will impudently bring to
speak of the godly, and of Purgatory.

Accept then (courteous Reader) with a charitable hand, what with a humble one
I present, and prove not a censorious Waspe, but a hony-gathering Be; and that
God and common Savior of ours, who gave approbation to the widows mite, and
will not suffer unrequited a cup of cold water given in his Name, give thee a
like mind, and bless the perusal of this, and of all other helps to thy
edification.

Thine in the Lord, W. GVILD.

OF PVRGATORY. The Romish Assertion.
THe Papists describe their Purgatory to be a prison next to hell, Bell.
lib. 1. de Purg. c. 1. Et lib 2. c. 6.9. and 10.
where the souls of the faithful that are defiled with venial sins, and
have not satisfied here the divine. Justice fully for mortal sins, are
purged by a temporary fire, as hot as that in hell, and very long; Bell. lib.
1. de Indul. c. 9.
witness Bellarmines express words, saying; Constat plurimas annas in
Purgatorio, (...) Iudicij, id est, per multas annorum centiuias esse
cruciandas. Ibidem.
Yea, Non videtur negandum (says he) posse aliquos nos fidei penitentiae
agendae per spatium aliquot millium annorum.

Our Assertion.
We deny any such Purgatory, affirming that Christ is our only and perfect
purger by his Blood. And that the word ( Purging) is metaphorically taken from
the washing of corporal uncleanness, to signify the cleansing of the Soul
from sin, which is called the uncleanness thereof. Zech. 13.1. So that, as
an unclean spot is said to be purged when it is taken away; even so are
sins when they are remitted. John 1.29. 1 John 1.7.9.

Also, because Christ calls our sins Metaphorically ( Debts;) therefore
such also is the word ( Satisfaction,) God the Father being the Creditor, we
the Debtors, and Christ the Cautioner; who having fully satisfied our debt for
us, has thereby freely freed us at his Fathers hands from it; and therefore is
called our payment and ransom. 1 Timothy 2.6. Math. 20.28.

In these four points then consists all our difference.
1. We say, that Christ ( by himself) has fully satisfied for us. Heb. 1.3.

They join man's own satisfaction for himself in Purgatory also.

2. We say, that it is Christ ( only) that purges us by his blood, 1 Ioh.
1.9.

They join a fire that does so also.

3. We say, that his blood purges us from ( all our sins) 1 Ioh. 1.7.

They say, from mortal only.

4. We say, that he perfectly purges us ((...)) Heb. 7.25.

They say, That he purges the guilt only, and takes away the eternal
punishment; but as for the temporal, we must satisfy for it our selves.

Arguments against Purgatory, and to prove our Assertion.
1. Out of the Old Testament.
Ezekiel. 18.22. If the wicked return, I will not remember all his iniquities:
that is, I shall forget them all; as not to hold guiltless, is to hold
guilty. Hence we argue:

That which God forgets, as if it had never been; for that he punishes no
ways by any satisfactory punishment, which is clear, 1 King. 17.18. where
punishment is made only the sequel of remembrance.

But he forgets all the sins of the converted sinner, Ezekiel 18.22.

Ergo, for them he punishes him no wise by any satisfactory punishment.

Bell. lib. 1. de Purg. c. 12. Bell. lib 4. de Pan. c. 13.
And whereas Bellarmine by not (to remember) would mean, not to punish
eternally only: we answer him with his own rule; non nostrum est
restringere, quod Deus amplum esse voluit: It is not lawful to man to make a
restriction of that by a circumstance of time, which is so comfortably
promised, and freely by God.

Isai. 57.1. The righteous is taken away from the evil to come; he shall
enter into peace. Whence we reason:

If the righteous be taken away from a less evil on earth in mercy, that
they may neither see nor feel the common calamity, then they are not
particularly themselves put to suffer a greater in Purgatory; and there to
enter, not into peace, but torment, to satisfy Justice.

But they are taken away from a less evil, that they see it not, in mercy.

Ergo, much more from the feeling of a greater themselves, in Justice.

Ecclesiastes 12.7. Then shall dust return to the Hence we argue:

The soul that returns or ascends to God that gave it, after bodily
departure, descends not to the fire of Purgatory except they would make to go
to, Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. c. 13.
and go from Go^ and Satan, (whom they say torments the Soul in Purgatory)
heaven and hell to be all one.

But the souls of the godly return to God that gave them, and are received by
him; as Act. 7.59.

Ergo, they go not to the fire of Purgatory.

Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man whose transgression Hence we reason:

He whose sin is forgiven, the same is covered (says David;) and what is
covered, is not seen; and what is not seen, is not imputed; and what is not
imputed, cannot by any satisfactory punishment be punished. Lomb. l. 4. Sent.
did. 18.
Therefore says Lombard (as Bellarmine grants) Deum tunc tegere peccata,
quando ad poenam non reseruat. And to take away the evasion of meaning only
the eternal punishment, Therefore (says Chrysostom) where there is grace,
Chrysostom. in 4. ad Romans Hom. 8.
there is forgiveness; and where there is forgiveness, there is no punishment at
all. And Augustine on this Psalm says, Si texit peccata, noluit aduertere; si
noluit aduertere, noluit punire; noluit ne vel agnoscere, maluit ignoscere.

Now to subsume. But so it is, that the sins of the godly are forgiven,
covered, unseen, and not imputed, as says the Psalmist.

Ergo, they are not by any satisfactorie work or suffering punished.
Punishment being ever the work of Justice, and making the party punished,
wretched; and pardon being ever the work of mercy, and making the party
pardoned, blessed: and so being incompatible.

Psalm. 51.7. Purge me, and I shall be whiter then snow. Whence we argue:

If to purge away sin, and to remit, be all one, as is evident, 1 John 1.19.
and that none can remit sin but God only, Mark. 2.7. therefore it follows,
that God only purges sin; and consequently no other thing can do so.

And again; If where God purges, there remain not the least spot, but the
party purged is perfectly made clean, yea whiter then the snow: then venial
sins, and temporal punishments remain not to be purged by any other
Purgatory.

But where God purges, there abides not the least spot, but the party purged
is perfectly made clean, as says the Psalmist, as likewise Isa. 1.18.

Ergo, venial sins, and temporal punishments remain not to be purged by
any other Purgatory. And for this cause says Tertullian, Exempto reatu,
remittitur and poena.

Isa. 53.4, 5. He has borne our griefs, the chastisment Hence we reason:

If Christ bare our sins no otherwise then by bearing the punishment due for
them, and bare the punishment to discharge us of the same, (nam si tulit,
abstulit;) then the same, nor no part thereof as satisfactory to Gods justice,
remains to be borne by us for our sins.

But Christ bare our sins, but by bearing the punishment due for them, and that
to discharge us of the same; Aug. Ser. 27. de verbis Domini.
and therefore says Augustine, Suscipiendo poenam and non culpam, and culpam
deleuit and poenam.

Ergo, the same, nor no part thereof remains to be borne by us, as a
satisfactory punishment.

Leuit. 1.3.4.5.6. Chap. Expiations and sacrifices

But neither was there any sacrifices or service appointed for any that were
unclean in Purgatory, (and such sacrifices also that were for sin, were for
the guilt thereof.) Neither amongst all the points and privileges of the high
Priests office, find we that he had power by indulgence to deliver any soul
from Purgatory.

Ergo, it follows, that no such place nor punishment after this life was.

Ecclesiasticus 3.6. Which our adversaries hold as The souls of the righteous
are in the hands of God, there shall no torment touch them: and if no torment,
therefore not that of Purgatory.

Arguments against Purgatory, and to prove our Assertion out of the New
Testament.
John 1.7. The blood of Christ purges us from all our sins. Whence we argue:

If Christ's blood purges us from all our sins, and that these only are the
spots which make our Souls unclean, as the Scripture shows us. It follows
then, that if Christ's blood purges us from them all, that therefore no venial
sins, nor uncleanness whatsoever remain to be purged: so that there is no
other Purgatory at all. Nam Purgatorium est semper alicuius rei purgandae
Purgatorium.

To this same sense agrees that of the Apostle, Heb. 9 14. That if the blood
of beasts sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, much more shall the blood
of Christ purge the conscience from dead works.

Hebr. 1.3 When he had by himself purged our sins, he sat down. Whence
we argue:

If this belongs to Christ's office to purge our sins by himself, and that
this Priestly office of Christ's is incommunicable, (as Heb. 7.24. is evident)
seeing as the Apostle says elsewhere, Col. 1.19.
in himself all fullness dwells, and he has trod the winepresse alone.

Then it follows, That none other can by themselves expiate any sort of
sins, nor as Bellarmine blasphemously avowes, Bell. lib. 1. de Indul. c. 4.
that any can be their own redeemer in part.

But the first is true, as is proved by the Apostle.

Therefore the second is likewise infallible.

To the same purpose is that not^ble speech of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 2.6.
saying, He has given himself to be a ransom for us; and therefore, not
that we should be a ransom for our selves in any degree.

Heb. 10.14. By one offering he has perfected for that is, as Heb. 7.25. he
has perfectly saved them. Whence we reason:

If Christ has perfectly saved his Elect, then he has saved them as well from
the guilt of venial, as mortal sins; and as well from the temporal, as the
eternal punishment; and so left no supplement to be made to his satisfaction,
by their suffering in Purgatory.

But he has perfectly saved them, as the Apostle proves.

Ergo, he has left no sin, nor no punishment untaken away; and so no
supplement to be made to his satisfaction, by their own sufferings in
Purgatory.

To this same purpose is it that the Apostle says, That it pleased the Father,
Col. 1.19.
that in him all fullness should dwell, for reconciling all thing in heaven and
earth unto himself: John 1.16.
And of his fullness do we all receive (says John.) And by him (and not by
our selves) even by the blood of his Cross (and not by our sufferings) are all
things reconciled, says the Apostle. Wherefore there is no other name whereby
we may be saved, Acts 4.12.
(says S Peter) but by the Name of Jesus; whether in part or whole, from
venial or mortal sins, temporal or eternal punishment. For according to
Bellarmines preceding rule, Bell lib. 4. de Poenit. c. 13.
Non nostrum est restringere quod Deus amplum esse voluit.

Romans 6.23. Salvation is a free gift: therefore we pay not for it, neither by
our selves, nor other creatures, in part nor whole, here nor hence: therefore
notably says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8.
By grace ye are saved, by faith, and not of your selves, it is the gift of
God, then not by works, least any man should boast: and so to conclude by the
like reason, then neither also by sufferings (as Romans 8.18.) least any man
should boast; and consequently, not by Purgatory.

Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of the godly, that are
justified (says the Apostle) or who shall condemn, seeing Christ has dyed
for them. Whence we argue:

If nothing can be laid to the godlies charge, that are reconciled or
justified, and that there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ (as
verse 1.) because Christ's death has taken away all, then there remains not
any guilt of whatsoever sin, or condemnation to any temporal fire after this
life, differing only from hells fire, not in acrimony of pain, but only in
length of indurance.

But the Hypothesis is true, and proved by the Apostle.

Ergo, so is also the sequel that follows thereon.

Romans 5.1. Being justified, we have peace with God. Whence we infer:

If the godly who depart, being justified, have peace with God through Christ,
then they are not by God adjudged to a fiery torment with the damned, differing
only in indurance: for these two are contraries to be agreed and at peace,
and yet be cast in such a painful prison, as Math. 5.25. is most evident.

But the godly who depart being justified, have peace with God through Christ,
as is said.

Ergo, they are not cast in such a fiery prison, to satisfy for themselves.

Revel. 14.13. Blessed are they who dye in the Hence we reason:

If all these who die not only for the Lord, as well as in him (as Martyrs)
but they also who only die in the Lord, (as all the godly do who live in him)
if they enjoy present blessedness after death, consisting of rest and
remuneration, then presently after death they are not sent to restless
torment, and a long time delayed of their happiness and reward, Bell. l. 1. de
Purg. c. 12.
even till the last day, (as Bellarmine would have the sense of the word amodo.

But all those who die in the Lord, are pronounced presently blessed, and
straightway they rest and are rewarded.

Ergo, they are not delaied of their blessed estate, nor sent to any restless
torment in Purgatory.

To the same purpose is that which is said, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have finished my
course (says Paul) and from henceforth is laid up for me a Crown, which
the Lord shall give me in that day, and not only for me, but to all that
love the coming of Christ.

2. Corinthians. 5.1. If our earthly habitation be In which place we must first
consider the meaning of this eternal habitation in the Heavens, even by our
Adversaries exposition, that our Argument may be the stronger.

Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 3.
Bellarmine says, That thereby the Fathers either mean the immortal body,
which we shall have at the last day; or else eternal life, and the present
vision of God after death: and of these he says, Sine dubio verior est haec
posterior expositio; and he gives his reason, because the Apostle speaks in the
present time after the bodies dissolution, saying, Habemus, we have, which if
he had spoken of the immortal body after the resurrection, and not of eternal
life presently after death, he could not have said habe^^^ sed habebimus.

Therefore he says, Apostoli ergo argumentio est optima, nimirum ista si vita
haec mortalis perit habemus statim aliam long meliorem in coelo: ergo bonum
est cito mori in hoc mundo, vt cito vinamus in coelo. Whence with Bellarmine we
conclude, If after the dissolution of the godly, they in the very present
thereafter have statim, or incontinently, and possess eternal life in the
heavens; then after their dissolution, they are not a long time delayed thereof
and sent to torment in Purgatory.

But by our adversaries exposition and concession, after dissolution the godly
presently have, and instantly possess eternal life in the Heavens.

Ergo, they are not delayed thereof, nor sent to the torment of Purgatory.

To the same purpose is that speech of the Apostle, Philip. 1.23. 2 Timothy 4.7.
I desire to be dissolved, joining, and to be with Christ.

Coloss. 1.20. For it pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things to
himself, whether they be on earth, or in heaven. Whence we argue:

If the Apostle speaking of the Church, expressly comprehends the same in
these two only, to wit, that part which is on earth, and that which is in
heaven, or militant and triumphant, in via, and in patria: then he knew no
third part, such as the Romanists put in their division, and make to be in
torment, and laboring in Purgatory.

But the Apostle comprehends the whole Church in these two parts only; to wit,
that which is on earth, and that which is in heaven.

Ergo, he knew no such tripartition, as the triple crowned Pope, and the
Papists make; and consequently, that there is no such place, nor any part of
the Church therein.

As also, to back this Argument with our Adversaries testimony of the ancient
Churches belief. Bell. lib. 3. de Eccles. c. 9.
Bellarmine relates, While it was vpbraided to the ancient Catholics by the
Donatists, that they made two Churches, one consisting of good and evil on
earth, and another of good only in the heavens. The Catholics answered, That
they made not two Churches, but distinguished the two times only of the
Church. Whence we infer:

If the ancient Catholics had then believed Purgatory, and made any such
tripartition, as the new Roman Catholics do, then the Donatists had
vpbraided them not only with making two Churches, but with making three: and
the Orthodox Catholics had answered them, that they made not three Churches,
but distinguished the three times of the Church.

But this they did not. Ergo, the ancient Catholics believed no such thing.

Galatians. 6.8. He that sows to the Spirit, So Job 7.2. 2 Timothy 4.7. Revel.
14.13. Out of all which places thus we reason:

If in Scripture there be a twofold time only of sowing on earth, and reaping
in heaven; of working in this life, and reward in the next; of fighting here,
and triumph hereafter; of finishing our course at death, and thenceforth
getting the Crown of life; and of laboring now, and immediately resting after
our departure: then surely there is no mid time nor place for the godly to
fear or expect.

But there is a twofold time only as is said, and as Scripture proves.

Ergo, there is no mid time of torment, nor mid place of Purgatory.

The truth of which Argument most clearly does that Parable Math. 20.1.
illustrate; where straightway at the end of the day, the Laborers receive
their hyre. Now Purgatory can be no part of the labor; for that is in the
Vineyard: nor no part of the day; for in the last hour thereof some are
called, and hired, (such as none are in Purgatory) nor no part of the hyre,
which is desired in the amplest measure, and given of bounty for well doing:
Job 7.2.
and so Purgatory is not of all.

John 9.4. The night comes (says Christ) when no man can work. Whence we
argue:

If none can work, or do that after this life, which is required of them in
it, for attaining to their salvation; then none can satisfy for their sins in
Purgatory.

But the supposition is true.

Therefore the sequel.

2 Corinthians. 4.17, 18. For our light affliction for a Hence we reason:

If temporal sufferings go not beyond the limits of this life to the godly,
and that these things that are temporal and seen, are included within the
bounds thereof; that which is thereafter and unseen, being ever called
eternal, whether the same be joy or pain; then surely it will follow, that
the godly after this life endure no temporal pains in Purgatory, the same
being unseen, and going beyond the limits of this life.

But the Hypothesis is true, and therefore the Sequel.

Now, because on the distinction of Poena and culpa, (as the maine pillar
whereon Dagons house stood) Purgatory relies; let us pull this down, that all
this fiery fabric may fall into ashes.

Mark 11.25. As we are commanded to forgive

But we are commanded to forgive others from our heart fully, without retaining
the least grudge, or meanest purpose of the smallest revenge, as Math. 18.35.
is evident.

Ergo, according to Christ's promise, so will God himself forgive us in like
manner, else it should follow, which is blasphemously absurd, that God would
have man more good and merciful then himself, and by his example should teach
men, (that are too prone to vice of themselves) hollow-hearted, and fraudulent
reconciliations.

Col. 2.13. God has freely forgiven all our trespasses. Whence we reason:

That which God has freely pardoned, for that which he can no wise punish:
seeing to pardon and to punish one and the same thing, are always
inco^patible; neither is any man justly punished, but for his fault; which by
free pardon being taken away as the cause, any satisfactory punishment must
cease as the effect; except they would make God double unjust, both in
punishing where no fault is, as also by taking twice payment for one debt; from
Christ and from us.

But so it is, that God has freely pardoned all our trespasses whatsoever*
(whether they call them venial or mortal;) and as he is soueraignly
merciful, so is he likewise just. Ergo, for these he can no wise
satisfactorily punish.

Math. 6.12. Our sins there are called Debts, which we desire to be remitted.
Whence out of this and the former place we argue:

If our sins be our debts, and that all our sins are freely remitted;
therefore all our debts are freely discharged, and consequently all their
payment, or satisfaction of them; and it were altogether against very sense to
affirm the contrary, that the whole debt should be discharged, but not the
whole payment, and contrary to Math. 18.27. where debt, payment, and punishment
are all quit together.

But our sins are our debts, and they are all freely remitted.

Ergo, all the payment of them, or satisfaction whatsoever.

As this error fights with that Petition of the Math. 6. as also with that
Article of our faith, Col. 2.13. whereby we believe not our own satisfaction
for our sins, but Gods free remission of our sins: so is it against that
part of the Decalogue, Exodus 20.6.
where God shows, that he will show mercy upon the thousand generation of them
that love him: and therefore much more will he not scantle his mercy to
themselves, in remitting the guilt of their sins, but retaining their
temporal punishment.

John 10.18. All satisfaction for sin to the justice Psalm. 110.4.
as all other things whatsoever we do to (...) in his service; which if it be
otherwise, he ac^^pts it not.

But the satisfaction that is in Purgatory to the Justice of God, is not
voluntary: (for none but would choose rather to go straightway to heaven;) as
also ineuitably they going there, God satisfies rather himself by punishing
them, then they satisfy God by suffering.

Therefore the pains of Purgatory are either no satisfaction at all to God of
ours, or else no ways acceptable to him.

Besides that, all satisfaction is meritorious (else the creditor were not
bound to give a discharge upon satisfaction to the debtor.)

But the Souls merits not in Purgatory, as Bellarmine proves, Lib* 2. de Purg.
c. 2.

Ergo, they satisfy not there.

Galat. 5.22. and Psalm. 23.4. The fruits of the which specially kiths in the
godlies death; and their courage there in is, that although they walk through
the valley of death, they fear no ill*

That doctrine then that takes away these happy fruits, and that comfortable
courage, and on the contrary fills the soul with such panicke terrors, and
torments the conscience with the apprehension of so long lying, (even hundreds
of years) in so fell a fire; where to avoid a far gentler fire here but one
hours burning, a man would give all that he had, That doctrine (I say) is to
be abhorred, and damnable: and not without cause these Locusts that are the
broachers thereof, are said to have stings to torment, and lions teeth to
devour their prey.

But so it is that the doctrine of Purgatory does all the former.

Ergo, the same is to be abhorred and damnable.

In Scripture we have sundry Examples of Lazarus carried straightwayes by
Angels into Abraham's bosom, where he was comforted; and consequently Abraham
also himself before Christ's death behooued to be in the same place of comfort.
And this Example Bellarmine himself against the Greek Church affirms
peremptorily to be (...) Parable, Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 6.
but a true Story.

So to the converted Thief, that same night Paradise is promised, which before
Bellarmine prove (as he alleges) to have been extraordinary: he must prove
the going of souls to Purgatory first to be ordinary. As also upon one
extraordinary. Example, no common Article of Faith could be grounded, as
Bellarmine does on this, saying, De fide est mox a morte impios descendere ad
aeterna supplicia, vt patet, Luc. 16. de diuite, and iustos ad aeterna gaudia,
vt patet Lucae 23. de Latrone, Hodie eris mecum in Paradiso.

So Simeon desired to depart in peace, and Paul to be dissolved, which neither
the one had desired, if his departure had been to enter him in so fierce a
fire, nor the other, if his dissolution had not been straightway to join him
to Christ. Neither does he say, that at the finishing of his course, or ending
of his fight, a crown only is laid up for him, which should be given him in
that day (to wit, of his departure, as verse 6.) but likewise, that in the very
like manner it abode all them that love the Lord Jesus.

Now to close up our Arguments out of their own distinction of Culpa and
Poena, thus we

If Purgatory purge away ought, either it purges the fault or the punishment.

But it purges not away the fault or guilt of mortal sins, (by the Papists
own confession) nor the eternal punishment of them, both being before
remitted. Neither purges it away the temporal punishment; because out of the
definition of purging, which is taking away, (as John 1.29. is evident) the
same is not taken away, but on the contrary is inflicted, non aufertur enim,
sed infertur.

Therefore of mortal sins it purges nothing; and so in that respect it
cannot be called Purgatory.

And as for venial sins, which Bellarmine says, Quoad culpam and poenam
intrant Purgatorium, we prove thus, that it purges them not away.

No transient actions can enter into Purgatory, to be burnt up, or purged
away, which are Bellarmines own words, Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c. 5.
saying, Ignis Purgatory que verus and realis est non potest opera combur ^r^,
quae sunt actiones transeuntes, and iam transierunt.

But to subsume, Venial sins are transient actions, which none can deny.

Therefore they enter no wise into Purgatory, to be burnt up, or purged away;
and consequently, seeing neither mortal nor venial sins, guilt nor
punishment is purged away from the Soul in Purgatory, there is no such thing
at all* Nam Purgatorium (as is said) est semper alicuius rei purganda
Purgatorium.

As also, that is not remitted* which wholly is punished (says Bellarmine,
Bell. lib. 1. de Purg. c. 14.
) Remissio enim sonat condonationem.

But, the Scripture and Fathers expressly teach (says he) that light or
venial sins are remitted after this life. Ibidem.


Therefore (say we) they are not totally punished, nor enter into Purgatory,
quoad culpam and poenam, (as he said before;) nor are they punished at all,
seeing their temporal punishment is their total punishment.

Arguments against Purgatory, and for our Assertion out of Bellarmin, and our
Adversaries themselves.
1. Their Confession, and arguments of their own Doctors for us.
Bellarmine says, Bell. lib. 2. de indul. cap. 7. Ibidem. cap. 5.
Fatemur Christum pro nobis, And again, Christ passions (says he) omnem
culpam originalem and actualem, lethalem and venialem, and omnem poenam tam
sempiternam quam temporariam expiare valent, idque totum per se, etiam si
nullae admiscerentur passiones sanctorum. Whence it follows: 1 That the
satisfaction of men for them selves are superfluous at least, and that he who
relyes only on Christ's satisfaction, relyes on that which for salvation is
always all-sufficient. 2 That to exact that punishment of man, which Christ
has already satisfied to his Fathers justice, is to make God unjust, by taking
two payments for one debt, as also in not accepting Christ satisfaction for as
much as it is worth to the Godly, being of value to free them, as well from
Purgatory ( which is the less) as from Hell ( which is the greater). 3 To say,
that Christ's satisfaction serves to make our satisfaction acceptable, is
against common sense, as who would say that a cautioner had paid the debt,
thereby to enable the principal debtor being vnresponsall, to pay it over
again to the Creditor: and much more absurd is it to say, that this second
payment is a grace, as after a free and full pardon of all punishment
whatsoever, it should be a favor done to a malefactor to be cast so long in
prison, and cruelly whipped.


Dignitas satisfactionis (says Bellarmine) mensuram accipit a dignitate
persona satisfacientis, Bell. lib. 1. de Indul. c. 2.
quemadmodum grauitas offensionis a dignitate personae laesae. Now between
finite man, who is the offender, and the infinite God, who is offended, there
is no equality of comparison or correspondence: therefore neither of the
finite satisfaction of the one, to the infinite Justice of the other, for which
cause it behooued him to be of an infinite nature, who was our Redeemer.

Durand and Mair^^es: Bell. lib. 1. de Indul. c. 4.
) therefore it is altogether needless to join to Christ's satisfaction (say
they) any satisfaction of the sufferings of men, which without being so joined
to Christ's, wants not their own fruits, nor are in vain (being endured here)
both in respect of the sufferers their own reformation and conformity with
Christ wrought, and the confirmation of the godly, and good example to others
that redounds thereby.

Bellarmine) then it would not be absurd for them to be called Redeemers of
themselves in a part. Ibidem.
But it is absurd for them to be called redeemers of themselves, because
Christ is the sole and only Redeemer of mankind, of whom says the Apostle,
Who is made unto us righteousness and redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30.

Therefore by the sufferings of the godly, sins cannot be expiate; neither
venial nor other in regard of punishment or otherwise.

To this argument of their own Doctors, Bellarmine no wise answers, but
blasphemously affirming, That it is no absurdity to say, that we are our own
redeemers in a part, seeing the Council of Trent has decreed no less. Sess.
14. Cap. 8. Can. 13.

2. Scriptures adduced by Bellarmine, to prove, that the Saints presently enjoy
the vision of God, making directly for us against Purgatory.
Ecclus. 11.26. It is an easy thing to the Lord in (without longer delay) to
reward a man according to his ways; and consequently to give glory to the
godly: Et illud facile est Domino, Bell. lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 3.
non significat (says Bellarmine) posset si vellet, sed reddit Deus and facile
reddit vnicuique secundum opera sua in die obitus, aloquisi posset, and non
redderet frustra nos hoc argumento hortaretur sapiens.

Also, he brings that saying of Paul, 2 Cor. 5.1. Ibidem.
we have an eternal habitation in the heavens; and so the soul remains no
time without a house: but as soon as it goes out of the earthly, it presently
enters into the heavenly: and therefore Bellarmine says, Ibidem.
Apostoli argumentatio optima est, nimirum ista, Si vita haec mortalis perit,
habemus statim aliam long meliorem in coelo, speaking so of all the godly
indifferently.

Ibidem.
To the same purpose is that which he adduceth out of the 8. verse, where the
Apostle sets down, that this is the estate of the godly soul departing,
without acknowledging any mid place or condition, that when it is absent from
the body by corporal death, it is straightway present with the Lord in life
everlasting.

Bellarmine likewise in his first Book of the Beatitude of the Saints, Bellar.
lib. 1. de Sanct. c. 4.
to show the conformity that is between Christ and his members in their
estate immediately after death, brings in, That as he was not after death
immediately blessed in his body (which rested three days in the grave till
his resurrection,) but that in his soul notwithstanding he was immediately
blessed, and in Paradise, (according to his own speech to the Thief on the
cross, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.) Therefore likewise, the
Saints (to be conformed with Christ, says he) while they rest in their graves
according to their bodies, yet according to their souls they are happy and
blessed in Paradise. Which conformity then we see will clearly euince, that
there is no going to Purgatory; but that as Christ's soul immediately after
death went unto Paradise, and was blessed there; so does the souls of the
godly that are Christ's members go thither immediately after death, and are
blessed likewise, (else if immediately they went any where else, in place of a
conformity there should be a disconformitie:) and as his body abode in the
grave till his resurrection, notwithstanding of the present beatification of
his soul after death: So that their bodies shall in like manner abide in the
grave till their resurrection, notwithstanding of the present beatification of
their souls likewise after death.

3. Fathers adduced by Bellarmine himself, to prove that the Saints presently
inioye the vision of God, and making expressly for us against the dotage of
Purgatory.
And first Dyonisius Areopagita.
Dyonisius Areopagita says thus, the Saints in their death know surely that,
that wholly they shall attain rest, and a full conformity with Christ, when
they come to the end of this present life; in clearly beholding the way to
immortality hard at hand, they praise the Lords bounty, and with a heavenly
mirth rejoice: speaking so of all the Godly in common. Whereupon Belarmine does
will us to remarke this: Nota (says he) dicere Dyonisium animas Sanctorum
statim a morte hominis consequi immortalitatem: which they could not do, nor
so exceedingly rejoice in death, if ^ vicino, or hard at hand, they saw the
tormenting fire of Purgatory, rather then a glorious rest to abide them.

Justin Martyr says thus: But after the departure of the soul from the body,
Bell. ibidem. Justin. quosi. 75
statim, or instantly, there is made a distinction between the good and the
evil: for they are carried to the places, that they are worthy of, the souls
of the godly by the Angels being carried to Paradise, where the company and
sight of the Angels, and Archangels is, as also the sight of Christ our
Savior, according to these words, while we are absent from the body, we are
present with the Lord, but the souls of the wicked are carried into Hell.

Cyprian says (excluding no godly soul) O what dignity and security is it in
a moment to close thy eyes, Bell. l* 1. de. Sanct. c. 5. Cyprian de exhor.
Mart. cap. vlt.
whereby men in the world are seen: and to open them instantly, that God and
Christ may be seen. Oh what great happiness is it to be suddenly pulled from
the earth that thou may presently be placed in heaven.

Augustine says thus, Aug. med. c. 22. et l. 20. de ciuit. dei c. 15.
(speaking of all the godly) O happy soul who, how soon it is loosed from the
body* being set at liberty, presently goes to heaven and is secure and at rest.

And again he says, surely the good that are faithful since that time that
they are redeemed by that price, which Christ by his blood-shedde powered forth,
do no wise know any infernal place after death.

Prosper says thus, Prosp. l. 1. de. vita. contemp. c. 1.
because according to the speech of Scripture, the whole life of man is a
temptation upon earth, then is the temptation ended, when the fight is ended;
and then is the fight ended, when to the same secure victory succeeds, at the
very end of this life: that so all the Soldiers of Christ, who even to the end
of this their present life, by divine aid have valiantly resisted their
enemies: having ended their painful pilgrimage, may presently thenceforth
reign happy in their native Country.

Anselmus thus speaks, the Preachers of the Ansel. in. 2. ad. Cor.
after that they have departed out of the body; they are no wise delayed of the
present possession of their Heavenly Country: but instantly as they depart
from the flesh, whereunto the soul was formerly tied, so soon are they made
to rest in the heavenly seat.

4. Reasons adduced by Bellarmine, to prove the Saints present fruition of joy,
and making directly for us, against Purgatory.
God (says he) is no readier, or more inclinde to Bell. l. 1. de. Sanct. c. 6.
then he is to reward: wherefore it follows, that if the wicked be presently
cast in torment, as we see the example of the rich Glutton teaches us, that by
a like equity that the godly instantly after death, likewise receive their
own reward.

As Basilius notes (says he) before Christ's coming, Bell. Ibidem.
but since that time, the same is celebrated with mirth, and why so? but
because to die then it was a misery* but now death is the beginning of
happiness, which surely it could not be (say we) if the soul went to a
tormenting fire in Purgatory, but a greater misery, then when the soul went
before (as they say) to a painelesse Limbo.

Leuit. 19.13. Thou shall not retain the wages of the hireling beside thee all
night till the morning therefore lest God should seem less just or pitiful
at the very end of the day of his life, Bell ibidem.
much more will he give glory to the godly, according to that Parable, Mat. 20.
and consequently (say we) he will not delay them of that reward, not only one
night, but many hundreds of years (as the Papists hold) tormenting their
souls in Purgatory.

Bellarmines Arguments for Purgatory answered.
1. Out of the Old Testament.
Maccab. 12.45. It was a holy and good thought (says the Author) to pray for
the dead, Bell. l. 1. de Purg. c. 3.
that they might be absolved from their sins. Whence it follows (says
Bellarmine) that the dead after this life may be absolved, and may have sins
to satisfy for; whereof before their death they were not absolved. And this is
done in Purgatory.

1. Our general reply to all such Arguments brought out of Apocripha is,
Answer.
that no disputation can be, but out of principles mutually by both parties
received: such as these Books are not by us as Canonical. And therefore it
is, that we argue not with a Jew out of the New Testament.

2. Our reason of rejecting them as not Canonical, is (beside the consent of
the Primitive Church with us, confessed by Bellarmine, and testified by Jerome)
the proof which we have out of Canonical Scripture, and out of themselves:
For all Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.16.
says Paul, is by immediate and by divine inspiration: But these Books, as the
Author confesses, c. 2.23.26.28.
are not so, but a mediate abridgement of another man's Books done with great
pains, which the Papists themselves hold not as Canonical; and therefore so
neither can their compend be.

3. The sin of these men was mortal, Josh. 7.
(as is evident Deuteronomy. 13.7.) the eternal punishment and guilt whereof comes
not to be satisfied for in Purgatory, (as the Papists affirm:) and as for
the temporal, they had suffered for that already, (as v. 40. is clear) being
slain for their sin: even as Bellarmine says, Bell. lib. 1. de Purg. c. 12.
That the thiefes violent death on the Cross, was justly his full temporal
satisfaction; and so these men had nothing to suffer or satisfy in Purgatory.

Neither, says the Text, that it was to deliver them from any temporal
punishment that then they were in; but having a regard to the resurrection, to
absolve them from the sin it self, which they had committed, that as
Bellarmine himself says, it might not be imputed unto them in that day of
the resurrection of all flesh.

To all the subsequent places adduced out of the old Testament, Bell. l. 1. de
Purg. c. 3.
Bellarmines own confession suffices as an answer, Quod solum probabiliter
suade^^, but do no wise necessarily enforce, as by a short touch of them we
shall here show.

Tobit. 4.17. Power out thy bread upon the burial of the just* beside that the
Book is not Canonical, it imports no ways Purgatory, seeing the Primitive
Christians, (as witnesses Augustine) on the days of the remembrance of the
Martyrs, Aug. Confess. lib. 6. c. 2. and contra Faust. l. 2. c. 21.
had their Loue-feasts, and Distributions upon the burial places of the
Martyrs; and yet this they did not to deliver them out of Purgatory, seeing
they grant that the Martyrs go not thither.

David's mourning, and the men of Iabesh Gilead, 1 Samuel last 31. 2 Samuel 1.12.
for Saul and Jonathan, etc. it was not to deliver Saul out of Purgatory, who
dyed desperately, but as the Text shows, that Israel for their sins was
fallen before their enemies* as Joshua for the like cause mourned. Josh. 7.7.

Psalm. 38.1. by correction in Gods wrath Purgatory cannot be meant, because
the Papists grant, that the party is reconciled before he go thither: as
also, In ira corripi, (says Bellarmine) secundum Augustinum est, (...) pun^r^
post hanc vitam, ad correctionem tamen and emendationem, which cannot
be^-in-Purgatory neither. Bell. lib. 2. de indul. cap. 13.
For the same Bellarmine confesses, saying, Nemo negare potest poenam
Purgatorij non spectare ad fructum noua vitae.

As for Psalm. 66.12. The two preceding verses 1 Pet. 1.7. and 4.12.
that by fire is meant the trial of the godly; and by water is meant
affliction, when the Psalmist says, We went through fire and water. And fire
here is before water: but so is not Purgatory (which they mean by fire) before
Baptism, (which they mean by water.)

As for Isai. 44. which place (says Bellarmine) Augustine expounds of
Purgatory, Augustine in Aug. l. 20. de Ciuit. Dei. c. 25
says, that the meaning of Isai. is that same with that of Malac. 3.3. which
Bellarmine lib. 1. de Purg. c. 1. expressly expounds to be Tribulationes hujus
vitae.

Besides that, the purging spoken of by the Prophet, is said to be by washing
as well as burning, and in the midst of Jerusalem; but not under the earth.

As for Isai. 9.18. The Text speaks of devouring,

As for Micha. 7.9. Gods indignation cannot be said to be borne in Purgatory,
because (as is

As for Zechar. 9.11. Math. 21.5. shows, Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. l. 18. ^. 35.
is meant our spiritual captivity: and as Augustine expounds it, Humanae
miseria sicca est profunditas. Neither is our delivery therefrom by our own
suffering; but it is said to be by the blood of the Covenant. Nor yet follow^s
from the privation of water, the position of fire.

Bellarmines Arguments for Purgatory answered.
Out of the New Testament.
Math. 12.32. There is a sin which shall not be forgiven neither in this
world, nor in that to come.

Ergo, this implies, that some sins are forgiven in the world to come, which
is in Purgatory.

Answer.
This Text speaks only of remission of sins, which cannot be meant of
Purgatory, where there is no remission of sins, but punition for sins.
Neither does the world to come signify in Scripture* Purgatory, or any
temporal estate of man, but only the last day, and his eternal estate: as
Mark. 10*30. is clear; ^o Luke 10.35. Ephesians. 1.21.
where it is said, that he that forsakes ought here for Christ's sake, he
shall receive an hundred fold in this time, and life eternal in the world to
come*

Mark 3.29. Luke 12.10.
Next* the Evangelists Mark* and Luke as posterio^, in one clear, word she
(...), that (...) that disjunctiue speed of (...) no forgiveness at all is
meant; or that that sin shall never be forgiven*

Besides that, it is against the rules of right ^e^soning, (as Bellarmine is
forced to grant that of a negative, an affirmation should follow, chiefly the
one being particular, and the other general.

1 Cor. 3.15. If any man's work burn he shall suffer loss, but himself shall
be saved; yet so as

1. Bellarmine grants this place to be allegorical, Answer.
difficill, and variously expounded both by Popes and Fathers, (from whom
notwithstanding he professes himself to dissent) and consequently the same is
not argumentatiue.

2. In the exposition of all the proceeding parts of the Text Bellarmine
consents with us, till he come to the last words, ( but himself shall be
saved, yet as by fire) yielding that the fire which proves the work is not
meant of Purgatory; but Metaphorically to be taken: but the fire whereby the
person of the worker shall be saved, is properly to be taken (says he) and is
that of Purgatory. But first, Bellarmines own explication of the similitude,
in the beginning of the fifth Chapter, testifies that in all the tenure of that
whole metaphorical speech, it is but one fire that is meant, and no more
sorts. And this is so usual in Scripture, that (except in Sacramental forms
of speech) one and the same word, in one current of a Metaphorical speech is
never diversely taken: and therefore that instance of Bellarmines, 2 Cor. 5.21.
is impertinent; both the whole tenure of speech, (as is said,) not being
metaphorical, and it being known evidently, that (according to the Hebrew
phrase) how often Christ is called sin, (as he is there) is understood, that he
was a sacrifice for sin: besides that, the direct opposition clears that
the word (sin) in both places of that speech, cannot be of one signification.

Next, it is absurd, the whole discourse being Metaphorical (as Bellarmine
grants) to take the word (fire) to be only proper. But it is most absurd to
take it only Metaphorically there, when no note of similitude is perfixed
thereto (as in the second place:) and to take it properly only there, where
expreslie in the contrary, the spirit of God does put upon it a special note
of similitude ((...)) to prevent any such fallacy, (as he does in the last
place).

Neither is that instance of Bellarmines unto this valid to the contrary; where
out of John 1.14. he would prove that (...), is not ever a note of militude,
which we grant: but that (...), is not ever a note of similitude, he shall
never prove.

Cor. 15.29. What shall they do then that are baptized for the dead, if the
dead rise not? Where, by baptizing is meant afflicting (says Bellarmine) which
none needed to do for the dead, Bell. l. 1. de. purg. C. 6.
by mourning and fasting etc. if they were not in Purgatory.

Answer.
1. This is a most difficile place (as Bellarmine grants) and variously
expounded by the Ancients, (all whose expositions he reject:) and therefore
no ground of Faith can be proved thereby.

2. Admitting that to be baptized is to be afflicted, yet this is not actiuely
to afflict themselves, but passiuely (as the word bears) to be afflicted by
others: and although it were actually to afflict themselves by mourning and
fasting for the dead; yet this will not import that therefore they are in
Purgatory: for the faithful mourned for Stephen, who being a Martyr, is not
thought (by the Papists own confession) that therefore he was in Purgatory.

To be baptized then for the dead (or rather for dead) is o to be afflicted for
the belief and profession of Christ's resurrection, and the hope of the godlies
resurrection through him (whereof the Apostle speaks); so as both in others
account, and their own resolution likewise, they were esteemed as dead men
through the fierceness of persecution, then in ieopardie every hour, as the
Apostle says, and dying daily.

Or else the Apostles scope being to prove the resurrection, he imployeth
baptism to this his purpose, which then was by plunging the whole body in
water, in token that the baptized were to die, and be buried to sin: and out of
which, their coming up again did represent, both the duty to rise to
holiness here, and the hope of a joyful resurrection hereafter. Which
mortification of sin, and being baptized for dead thereto, by denying carnal
pleasures to live in them, were needless for any man to practice, but to live
like an epicure, if there were not a resurrection to a better life hereafter.

So that, whether we consider our promise at baptism, to die to sin, or the
representation that is in it of dead men thereto, or the efficacy thereof
flowing from Christ's death to mortify sin in us, Romans 6.6.
or the hazard of Christians then amongst their enemies, for the profession of
Christian Baptism, as the Apostle shows, the sense is ever sound, vnrested,
and orthodoxe.

Mat. 3.11. He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost (to wit, here, says
Bellarmine) and with fire, that is in Purgatory hereafter.

Answer. Bell. lib. 1. de purg. ca. 5. Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. c. 13.
1. If by fire Purgatory were meant, then it would follow that all whom Christ
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost here, should go to Purgatory hereafter: which
Bellarmine himself denies.

Next, Christ is only said to be the baptizer with fire here; but by diverse
revelations (says Bellarmine) it has been shown, that souls in Purgatory
are baptized or afflicted with Devils. But what truly is meant by fire,
Chrysostom on this place declares, saying, Comemoratione ignis adiuncta rursus
ipsius vehemens gratia et incoprehensibile signauit donum.

Mat. 5.26. Verily thou shall not come out thence, till thou pay the uttermost
farthing. Bell. lib. 1 de purg. ca. 7.
Purgatory then is this prison, wherein men must satisfy for their venial
sins.

Answer.
1. This place is only properly to be taken, as Theophylact, Chrysostom, Tolet
upon Luke, and your own Ferus on this place witness. Christ therein
persuading unto brotherly reconciliation, if it were but for eschewing of
temporal incommodities.

Bell. l. 1. de. Purg. ca. 7.
2. Giving that it were allegorical; yet Augustine who expounds it so, makes
the prison to be Hell (as Bellarmine grants) the payment eternal punishment:
and, donec, to signify no certain time, but never; as Psalm. 110.1. 1 Cor.
15.25. is evident.

Again, unreconciled persons with their adversary, are cast into this prison;
but the godly are reconciled with God before they depart hence (say the Papists
themselves) therefore it cannot be they, that go to this prison.

And last of all, by paying the utmost farthing, is meant (as our usual phrase
of speech witnesses) the full sum without the least want: and so it is not
to be understood exclusive of the greatest part, but inclusiue of the least
portion, and whereby man so, should be made perfectly to be his own Savior.

Matthew 5.21. Out of this place (says Bellarmine) Augustine gathers, Bell.
lib. 1. de purg. ca. 8.
that there are three sorts of sins, and three sorts of punishments after
this life: lighter sins having lighter punishment, which says Bellarmine is
the temporal, that souls sustain in Purgatory, compared here to the
council.

1. That there are diverse degrees of sin, Answer.
and diverse degrees of punishment after this life, we willingly grant with
Augustine: but that the godly sustain any such in Purgatory, this place will
never prove. Neither from alligories can be drawn any such enforcing
arguments; or from words denotating only Courts of Judicial Decrees here, to
prove places of execution or punishment hereafter; even as who would prove
Golgotha, by Gabbatha.

Next, if it be rightly concluded by Bellarmine, that punishments after this
life, are here spoken of decreted in foro poli, because Gehenna is mentioned:
then by a like reason it will follow, that punishments inflicted only in this
life are by the other (whereby he means Purgatory) spoken of decreed in foro
soli, because such Iudicatories are only in this life* and so that Gehenna is
the only punishment that is after the same.

And last, if Bellarmines exposition and argument out of this place were good,
it would follow that wrath and evil speeches were but venial sins, (for
such are said only to deserve the counsel) which he expounded to be
Purgatory, and yet the Apostles James and John, Iam. 3.6. 1 Ioh. 3.14.
show that such deserve eternal death: and so both of them are belied by the
Cardinal.

Luk* 16.9* Make you friends of the Mammon of of iniquity* that when ye fail
they may receive you into everlasting habitations, and this is by their prayers
(says Bellarmine) delivering them out of Purgatory.

Answer.
This place is most clear against them, showing that at the charitable
Christians departure, their souls are straight way received into Heaven
without going to any Purgatory: and therefore there is one word of the
deliverance out of the but one only of the receiving into the other.

Luke 23.24. disiring of Christ an entry into his heavenly kingdom, but no
egresse out of a hellish Purgatory.

Act. 2.24. Whom God raised having loosed the dolours of Hell* that is,
delivered souls out of Purgatory.

Answer.
1. The words are the dolours of death, and not of Hell, by which, what is
meant, is clear out of Psalm. 18.4.5. calling the dolours of death, the snares
of death: and by the dolours of the grave, meaning the same* and by both,
understanding so the captiuating of death, and the detayning power of the
Grave; wherein our Savior by his burial, as Deaths prisoner was enclosed; and
both which powers by his resurrection he overcame: as by his triumph Hose. 13.
is evident: and as Bellarmine grants, Lib. 4. de Christo. cap. 8. and that with
Chrysostom and Oecumenius is meant thereby, either that by Christ resurrection
God loosed the dolours of death, that was pained in holding him so long in the
grave; or else that by his resurrection he destroyed death and all the stinging
dolours thereof which accompanied the same. And so he makes him do that by the
raising up of his body there, which by the discense of his soul he would have
him to do here.

Next, if by such words Purgatory were meant, then it would follow that Christ
should have suffered in Purgatory; seeing (as is evident) Peter speaks of the
dolours which his humane nature suffered, and his divine loosed. And therefore
it was himself that was loosed from them, (as Sampson from his cords at first)
because it was impossible that he (says the Apostle and not others in
Purgatory) should be holden by them.

And to use retortion of this place against themselves, if they mean Purgatory
by these dolours, as Bellarmine does, the same is quite undone; because Christ
is said not to have loosed any souls out of these dolours, but the dolours
themselves: whereof it will follow, either that there is no Purgatory left at
all, or else such a one as is quite dolourlesse and without pain.

Philip 2.10. At the Name of Jesus, every knee Which last sort, seeing it is
not the devils, nor the damned that give voluntary obedience, it must be the
souls in Purgatory.

Answer. Bell. l. 1. de. Sanct. c. 6. Isai. 45.23.
1. Bellarmine himself answers for us, and shows that this speech borrowed
from Isai. is expounded by the Apostle, Romans 10.14. of Christ coming to judge
all men, before whom all the wicked, sore against their wills, shall compeare,
and yield subjection, whereof the bowing of the knee among men is a sign.

Neither by bowing of the knee could be meant a voluntary subjection* for this
reason, because then it would follow, that all the wicked, even in this life,
gave voluntary subjection to Christ; because it is said, That every knee on
earth shall bow.

Pet. 3.20. Bellarmine proves Limbus patrum thereby* Bell. l. 1. de Christ. c.
13. Revel. 20.7. Jude 1.6.
Therefore it cannot be adduced likewise to prove Purgatory: neither does the
word Prison in Scripture signify but only the hell of the damned, when it
speaks of the imprisoning of Spirits. And therefore it is the wicked and
disobedient that are said to be there; (and so neither the Fathers not the
godly whom Christ is not said to have delivered the (...); but to whom he is
said to have preached by that Spirit, whereby he was quickened, which was not
therefore his Soul, but by his divine Spirit in the days of Noah, while they
had time then to repent by the means of preaching, and not after this life
when there is no conversion. And for which exposition we have not only the
clearness of the Text, but Augustine also plainly with us, Aug. Epist. 99. ad
Euodium.
and after him Beda, as (...) grants.

John 11.43. and Luke 8.55. The soul of Lazarus* Mary's brother returned; and
so did the souls of Iairus daughter, and the widows son, whom Christ
raised. Now this was not from hell, they being godly; nor from heaven, for so
injury should have been done to them: Therefore says Bellarmine, Bell. lib.
2. de Purg. c. ^.
Mortui quos exitarunt Christus, and Apostoli creduntur fuisse in Purgatorio.

Besides that, Answer. Deuteronomy. 29.29.
the secret things belong only to God, and the things revealed only to us,
there could be no injury here done to the creature, whose private good must
ever give place to the manifestation of Gods glory, whereto it was created.

But more peremptorily let Bellarmine in that same Chapter answer this saying;
Se igitur aliqui sancti redierunt ad corpus, non fuerunt beati, sed Deus
praevidens eorum excitationem distulit eorum beatificationem, and interim
detinuit eos in optimo aliquo loco; such as is no ways a tormenting Purgatory.

Yea, to show how desperate their cause is, and Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. c. 14.
in wresting most clear parts of Scripture to prove this fiery furnace of
theirs: Let us see that place, Ex quo (says Bellarmine) insigne habetur
argumentum pro Pugatorio.

Hebr. 10.27. For whom remains (says the Apostle) a certain fearful
looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the
adversaries: speaking there no ways of the godly that are friends, as
Bellarmine would have it, that for their sins after Baptism, must be
temporally punished in a purging fire: but of the Lords adversaries; as the
clear Text shows, which the fiery indignation of God shall utterly devour;
and of the fearful judgment, and final damnation of those, who by wilful
apostasy from the known truth (as verse. 25* 26. is evident) do tread the
Son of God under foot, and count the blood of the Covenant an unholy thing,
and does despise the Spirit of grace; which none of the godly ever either did,
or does.

Bellarmine brings in examples of Scripture, Bell. lib. 1. de purg. ca. 11.
whereby he intends to prove, that the guilt of sin being remitted, the
temporal punishment remains to be satisfied for; and wherein because many are
remiss in this life; therefore a Purgatory is appointed hereafter.

2 Samuel 12. Numb. 12.
The first examples are of David and Miriam, both pardoned, and yet temporally
punished: but he should prove that these punishments were payments and
satisfactions to Gods Justice, and redemptions of themselves, (as Bellarmine
calls them) where in the contrary, the Scripture clearly affirms, Hebr. 12.7.
that God by such corrections deals not as a Judge with malefactors, to
satisfy Justice, but as a father with his sons, to manifest his mercy; doing
it not for any payment to himself, but for profit to them, and not to free
them from any Purgatory hereafter, but to make them pertakers of his holiness
here.

Neither auailes it Bellarmine, that the cause of David's correction is set
down to be his sin begun* for we confess, that the sins of the godly
are the efficient causes of these corrections that God lays upon them. But all
our Controversy is of the final cause, which we say is for example to others
his children, and their own amendment that are chastised, and which they say
is, for satisfaction to his Justice, and redemption of the sufferer himself.

The next instance that he brings, Genesis 2.17. Romans 5.17. Romans 6.23.
is of death, Bellarmine himself confesses the former not to be, and so most
clearly answers for us, saying, That Indulgences take not away Poenas
naturales, Bell. lib. 2. de Indul. c. 1.
and communes, sed illam quae infligitur in foro poenitentiario, haec enim est
per quam Domino satisfacimus, and cui succedit nisi Domino satisfiat in
praesenti purgatorii poena. So that these other natural and common calamities
are the fruits of sin, but not satisfactions for sin.

Again, Bellarmine more plainly as yet answers for us, Bell. lib. 2. de
Indul. c. 4.
saying, Mortis debitum non erat solum vt moreremur, sed vt in morte perpetuo
maneremus. And this debt by his satisfaction, Christ has so freed us thereof,
that death altering its nature to the godly, is now but a safe passage to life;
of a curse, made a full cure, and blessing, ending our fight, leading us to our
crown, bringing us to our country, to the sight of God, company of Angels,
society of Saints, and conjunction with Christ: and therefore so expected with
joy, and desired with longing, which no punishment could be.

Bellar. lib. 4. de poenit. c. 2.
Besides, that hereby he contradicts himself, saying, that in baptism the
whole guilt and the whole punishment of sin is remitted: and yet suddenly
after baptism many Infants die. To say therefore that the death of these is a
satisfactory punishment* when nothing is to be satisfied for vnremitted fully,
is an absurd contradiction.

Exodus 32. of those that were killed for worshipping the golden Calfe. Numb. 14.
of those that murmured against the Lord. 1 King. 13. of the Prophet slain by
the Lion: and 1 Cor. 11. the death of those that unworthily communicate.

Answer.
We answer, that these first that were slain, were manifest Idolaters, of whose
repentance or remission we read not: but of the just deserved temporal
punishment here, and what such merit hereafter, 1 Cor. 6.9.

Heb. 3.4. 2 These. 2.12. 1 Tit. 1.15.
Next, the others that murmured, are called by the Apostle hard-hearted,
misbeleeuing, wicked, and disobedient: and who (as clearly appears Heb.
4.2.3.) were also excluded out of the heavenly rest; that which God remitted,
being according to Moses desire only their full deletion, as God had threatened,
and their posterities.

To the other two examples we answer, that all that they prove, we grant; to
wit, that disobedience and sin, is the efficient cause of temporal
punishments: but such punishments of the godly, are not payments to God, and
redemptions of themselves. So our difference is of the final cause, which is
either for example to others to be aware, or amendment of themselves: or as
Augustine says, cited by Bellarmine, vel ad demonstrationem debitae miseriae,
vel emendationem labilis vitae, vel ad exercitationem necessariae patientiae.

Neither read we of the Prophets repentance, nor remission, nor of the
reconcilement of these unworthy receivers, against whom that are such, the
Apostle threatens the receiving of their damnation.

Last of all, when enforced by truth, Bellarmine Bell. lib. 1. de purg. ca. 14.
meritu^ Christi sufficere ad omne^ culpam et poenam tollendam, he comes to
this shift, that it must be applied by Purgatory: and all be it that in
baptism it take away all; yet he says blasphemously, quod deus tantum semel
utitur ea liberalitate, et postea contrahit nonnihil manum, and will have us to
satisfy for our selves: and that for the temporal punishment, quod vna tantum
si actualis satisfactio, et ea sit nostra.

Whereunto we answer, that we grant, that Christ's merit is not auailable to
any without application; but the means are set down expressly in the word:
Ephesians. 3.17. Romans 10.17. Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 10.16.
to wit, faith by the Word and Sacraments: and by which means, whenever it
is applied, it loses none of its full virtue: nor as they blasphemously
affirm, does the Lord but once only use such liberality, to accept it for as
much as it is worth toward the godly: (like the Pope, who never but once at
his Coronation, scatters his copper money amongst the people) but Faith applies
it ever, and he accepts it ever, according to the full virtue and value
thereof: as being sufficient to free the godly as well from the temporal
satisfactorie punishment, which is the less; as from the eternal, which is
the more.

Besides, likewise that the means of applying a thing should be active, and
not a passion or torment, so neither should these means be contrary to the
benefit which we enjoy by them; as who to see should cloose his eye lids,
applying Gods mercy by the execution of his Justice, pardon by punishment,
discharge of debt by payment; and applying the grace of Christ, by a means
derogating from his grace, which is altogether impious and absurd.



Bell. l. 1. de. purg. c. 9. Aug. l. 21. de ciuit. dei. c. 27. Bell. lib. 1. de
Sanct. c. 2. Lactan. l. 7. cap. 11.
1. Because this did proceed of an error that sundry of the Fathers did hold,
and the whole Greek Church as yet, (whom Bellarmine refutes) that the souls
of the Godly remained till the resurrection in certain hid receptacles,
without seeing God.

2. Their own Canon of the Mass prays for the souls of the faithful which
do sleep in the slumber of peace, for so are the words* Memento domin^
animarum famulorum famularumque tuarum quae nos pracesserunt in sign fidei et
dormiunt in somno pacis. And yet these souls so long since departed, cannot be
said now to be in the fire of Purgatory; for none could sleep peaceable or
found in so easelesse a bed: except they make laboring and rest, sleep and
waking, peace and torment, to be all one.

3. Cyprian testifies, Cyp. l. 3. epist. 6. et l. 5. epist. 4. Bell. lib. 2. de
Purg. ca. 1. et ibid. ca. 18.
that they offered for the Apostles and Martyrs, whom yet they thought not to
be in Purgatory: and in the ancient Missalls, Bellarmine grants, that on the
day of Pope Leo the 8. canonized Saint, the Church said, Annue quaesumus
domine, vt animae B. Leonis haec prosit oblatio, and yet this prayer for his
soul imported not (by their own confession) that it was in Purgatory.

4. Likewise they prayed for the dead for declaration of their love to them,
Aug. confess. l. 9. ca. 13. Aug. l. de ciui. dei. cap. 16. Bell. l. 1. de purg.
cap. 10. Aug. lib. 21. de ciuit. dei. cap. 26.27. Enchirid. c. 69. Aug. c. 1.
secundi Sermon. de consol. super mortuos. et. l. 5. hypognost
and not doubting that the souls notwithstanding were in bliss already, and
in that joy which they prayed for unto them: as Augustines words for his mother
Monica, plainly manifests: et credo domine quod feceris, quod te rogo, sed
voluntaria oris mei approba domine. And whereas the same Augustine would seem
more plainly to make for Purgatory: in other places again, he either calls
it in doubt if any such thing be, as Bellarmine grants, and says, posse
dubitari, et periculosissimum esse definire; or else expressly he says, that
except Hell and Heaven, he knows no third place.

5. Last of all, Bell. l. 2 de purg. cap. 1.
themselves say Mass for children dying soon after baptism, who have not
committed any actual sin, and to whom the whole punishment of original is
remitted, and so consequently, can not be in Purgatory.

AN ANNEXE TO this Treatise of Purgatory, concerning the Distinction of Sin
into Mortal and Venial, which is the maine Pillar of this Pyrotechnie, and
being pulled down, makes the whole Fabric to fall.
IF we consider aright what Sin is of its own nature, as Saint John describes
it; 1 John 3.4.
to wit, that all sin whatsoever is a transgression of the Law: or if we
consider, what is the proper wages of sin, of whatsoever sort it be, as
Saint Paul cleares it, Romans 6.23.
to wit, death: or if we consider what is only able to expiate, and does purge
us from all sin, (name it as they will,) to wit* Christ's blood and death
only: Galat. 3.10.
Then surely any such distinction of sin into Mortal and Venial by nature,
Hebr. 9.22.
will quite evanish, 1 John 1.7.
and sin of it own nature will be acknowledged to be mortal solely; and
to say Peccatum, and yet Veniale simply, and not Mortale properly, will be
(...) to be vertuall contradiction; and we know that there is no composition
of merely opposites, nor construction of mutual destructiues.

Yea, out of their own mouth to condemn them, how is sin vniuer^ally
distinguished by themselves into Venial and Mortal, if the Venial be not
sin, and that properly: and if it be sin, (or (...)) then of necessity it
must be as is said, Galat. 3.10.
(...), as says Saint John; and the wages thereof; as the Law threatens, is
Gods curse; Romans 6.23.
or as Saint Paul pronounces, doom is death.

So that every sin is as a Viper: and there is no Viper, Acts 28.
if we respect the mere nature of the best of them, but she kills whom
she biteth* yet if one shall light on the hand of Paul, she is shaken off
into the fire without any harming* but not the less is she to be feared, and
accounted deadly of her own nature, although the Apostle be safe.

Wherefore the distinction of sin into ^ortall and Venial, arises (...) sed
personis. From whence it follows, That all sins are damnable in all men, but
not to all men; all deserving, but not all receiving damnation: for to the
reprobate no sin is finally venial, and to the elect no sin is finally
mortal. Notwithstanding that there is one sin, which is simply, and
universally mortal, because it is not only punishable, but ever punished with
eternal death, and is that sin against the Holy Ghost; but is no ways
incident to the elect.

Therefore I call sin mortal two ways. First, by explication and generally;
and to say a mortal sin, is to show the nature of all sin. Secondly, by
way of distinction and specially; and so to say a mortal sin, is to design
that sin against the Holy Ghost in particular: and which sin Impenitencie
does follow necessitate ineuitabili, as an inseparable consequent, where in all
other sins it is rather contingent: for as no sin can be forgiven without
repentance; so this sin excludes possibility of repentance: Hebr. 6.4.
and therefore is irremissible, and is called Mortal in an eminent degree, and
never becomes venial; not because God in his absolute power cannot forgive it,
but because in his just will he has decreed never to forgive it, the party
so sinning being ever obdured by his own unjust action, and Gods just
desertion.

And this is that which is spoken, Matthew 12.31. and which Christ's beloved
Disciple understands, 1 John 5.16.
saying, There is a sin to death, and a sin not unto death: distinguishing
so, not between some sins mortal in nature, and some sins venial by
nature: But between one sin simply mortal in nature, and in necessary
effect unto all; and all other sins simply mortal in nature also, but not in
necessary effect unto all: and therefore possibly and by repentance venial
through grace unto the elect. Whereas the same sins are justly through want
of repentance retained, and be comes finally mortal to the obdured reprobate.

Bell. lib. 1. de purg. ca. 11.
Neither is it to any purpose which Bellarmine alleges out of James 1.15. that
because concupiscence brings forth sin; and sin consummate brings forth
death* therefore that concupiscence it self should not bring forth death, or
be a mortal sin, but venial. Where in the contrary it is rather to be
reasoned, that Concupiscence being the evil Tree budding, or poisoned Spring
flowing, it is the cause of all that which proceeds therefrom; to wit, both
sin consummate, and death inflicted; as from the seed both stalk and each
ear comes.

And in the very regenerate, where no consent is thereto, as it is called sin
properly, and a rebellion against the Law of God, Romans 7.20, 23. so the fruit
and merit thereof is affirmed to be death, verse. 24* and Romans 8.2. and
consequently it is of nature mortal.

Neither is it forbidden in the Law with that restriction of giving consent
thereto; but simply it is said, Thou shall not covet: and therefore to lust or
covet, although it proceed no further, (as Christ himself expounds that
Precept) is a breach of the Law, Math. 5.
and consequently merits death, and the curse* Neither may we (according to
Bellarmines own rule) restrain that which God has set down more amply.
Bell. lib. 4. de Poenit. c. 13.


And as for that out of a 1 Corinthians. ^. where venial sin is desweined (says
Bellarmine) Ex leuitate materiae, we may justly say, it is leuis probatio: and
whereas through wanting more solid stuff, for proouing their distinction, they
have their recourse then to stubble; they may fitly be compared to that
thralled people in the Egyptian bondage, who wanting long straw, were forced to
gather short stubble to themselves, to make up their ^aske, which they could
not accomplish: and for building such stuff, not upon the foundation, but
rather thereby euerting the foundation, they may fear a fearful and
consuming fire at last.

But heereunto we will only give them but their own answers, and fully pay
them with their own coin.

Bellarmine then testifies, Bell. l. 1. de purg. c. 5.
that because by the Builders in that place, is understood Doctors: therefore
by the work must be understood doctrine; and consequently by Hay and Stubble,
(says he) is understood curious and unprofitable doctrine.

Next he says, That by the fire that burns this combustible and light
stuff, Purgatory (wherein Venial sins enter) cannot be meant, because it
purges not the work, but altogether consumes the work. This likewise is but
Metaphorically then so called fire: but that of Purgatory is real; Et ignis
Purgatoriae qui ver^^ and realis est, (says Bellarmine) non potest opera
comburero, quae sunt actiones transeuntes, and jam transierunt.

And whereas the Ancients seem to point at this Distinction, making mention of
Mortal sins any judicious Reader will find, that thereby they understand
Peccata vastantia conscientiam, or such great and gross^ sins, as usually
exclude penitential grace from the presumptuous Actour, by which only our
sins become venial.

Likewise seeing every sin (name it as ye will, if ye grant it once to be
sin,) is mediately at least committed against an infinite object, who
consequently requires justly an infinite punishment: It follows necessarily
that the same is mortal, although it were but as idle word; Bell. lib. 1. de
Purg. c. 11.
which Bellarmine says, were a foolish thing in man to break friendship for
such light offenses, and can not be understood in God how it can deserve
eternal punishment, although in the contrary Christ has said* that even of
such account shall be given at the day of Judgment; at which time only
eternal punishment shall be inflicted, and not a temporal, such as they
allot to venial sins.

Wherefore it was requisite, that as our Savior should have our nature, that
in it sin might he punished justly: so this nature was to subsist in an
infinite person, that by it sin might be conquered fully.

But when (...) himself is to be punished by God, according to the merit of
his unpardoned offense, the Lord not having means to satisfy his Justice on
an infinite person, to make proportion between his Justice, and man's sin
some way, he chooses an infinite time* because the person punished, is no
ways match with the party offended: therefore this punishment is truly called
Passion, but not Satisfaction* whereas the infiniteness of Christ's Nature in
person, made his Passion to be a sufficient Satisfaction.

From whence it follows that nothing can be done by man, either actiuely or
passiuely in this life, nor after the same; that can be reputed a condign
satisfaction to God for any one sin whatsoever committed by us; the guilt and
whole punishment whereof is perfectly abrogated by Christ: the first being
imputed to him, and the second inflicted upon him: that so all who are engraft
in him, may be freed from both; the merit of his blood, and fire of his spirit,
and not any other Purgatory effectuating that to us.

Not, that by this overthrow of that distinction of sin into mortal and
venial, The inequality of sin, or degrees thereof.
(which at last among the Papists becomes also venall) that we deny an
inequality to be in sins, and so consequently in their due punishments.

For first, we hold sins to be unequal in respect of the object against,
which we sin; and so a sin against God is a greater sin, then a sin against
man; and a sin against the first Table, is greater then a sin against the
second Table; being compared in equal and parallel acts. Otherwise if we
compare a sin in the least part of a Commandment in the first Table, with a
sin in the greatest part of a Commandment in the Second Table, the latter is
more heinous then the first.

Likewise, as a sin against God is greater then a sin against man, for the
essential diversity of the object; so the sin against one man may be
greater then a sin against another, for the accidental diversity of the
object; as in eminency of place against a King, or propinquitie of blood, and
bond of nature against a Parent: for although all men naturally considered are
alike and the same, yet ciuilly and politickly they are not.

Secondly, in respect of the matter wherein we sin, there is an inequality:
so Murder is a greater sin then Theft, because life is more precious then
goods. Likewise if we compare sins in the same matter, one may be greater then
another, according to the extent or quantitatiue measure: as to kill three, is
a greater offense then to kill one; and to steal 100. pounds, is a greater
theft then 10.

Thirdly, in respect of the manner how we offend, there is an inequality of
sinning, and so a sin of malice is greater then a sin of infirmity: so is
that of knowledge, greater then that of ignorance. As likewise sins that
consist only in immanent action or thought of the mind, are less then these
that come to transient action being accomplished by the body; every further
addition making the sin more intense in degree.

The inequality of punishment, or degrees thereof.
And as sins are unequal; so are their punishments; God in his distributive
justice, allotting several portions of pain to the several proportions of
sin.

The privative punishment, or poena damni, in time and degree is alike to all;
Depart from me etc.

The posi^iue or poe^a sensus, is partly from an inward cause, which is the
gnawing worm of conscience, whose life is perpetuated in death; or from an
outward cause, which is such exquisite means whereby at last the whole man is
afflicted, decreed by God in his wisdom, executed by his power, to
demonstrate his justice, and is ordinarily called the fire of Hell.

And as the outward pain of fire primarily inflicted on the body, does work
effectually to afflict the soul; so does the inward pain of the worm which
is in the soul, work effectually to afflict the body: that as they were
brethren in evil, and participated in sin, so they may be coupled likewise,
and partake in torment.

And as the soul has one estate in her self at death independent upon the
body by her separation from it, and another in the body upon her reuniting with
it at the resurrection: so in the first she suffers outward pain
immediately, and in the second by the body mediately.

In all which, the punishment of all is equal in time, because in respect of
duration, there is neither more nor less in that which is eternal, but the
punishment is unequal in degree, Gods justice having a relative respect to
man's sin.

And so although we deny that any sins are venial by nature, yet we affirm
some to be less then others, and in a less measure punished: and so the
unjust slander of our Adversaries, affirming that we make all sins, and
consequently all punishments equal, may easily hence appear.

FINIS.

