A treatise of Moral Phylosophie, contaynyng the sayings of the wise.

Gathered and Englyshed by Wylm^ Baldwyn.

To the right honorable the Lord Edward Beauchampe, Earl of Hartforde, W.
Baldwyn wyssheth increase of virtue, honor and learning.
When I had finished this tretise (right honorable lord) I thought it mete
according to the good and accustomed usage of writers, to dedicate it unto some
woorthye person, whose thankful receyuyng and allowyng thereof, might cause it
to be the better accepted of other. And forso much as it was not of value to
be given to any ancient Counsayler which are all therein sufficientlye seen
already, I judged it most convenient to be given to sum that were younger:
Among whom for so much as your learning, and virtuous towardnes, was
greatly commended of diverse and sundry credible persons, I doubted not but
that your good disposicion naturally taken of your virtuous parents, would
take in worth the gift of this simple treatise, which although it answer not
fully unto your estate, yet disagreeth it not much with your age, which with
your good report and virtuous disposicion, has emboldened me to dedicate it
unto you rather than to any other: humbly besechyng you to pardon mine
audacitie herein, and to take in good part the simplenes of my gift. In
which so doing, ye shall not only ensue the steps of your honorable father,
whom God for his excellent and manyfolde virtues, joined with very gentylnes,
has called to the high office protector of this realm under over soueraygne
Lord the kings Royal majesty: but shall also cause other the more gladly to
desire it, to the great encoragyng of me and other like, which for the
commodity of our countreye, would gladly help forward all honest and
virtuous studyes: Among whom although I am the least both in age, learning
and wit, yet is my good will not much behind the formoste.

And because that your lordshyp may the better know how to use this treatise,
and all other of moral Phylosophie, I have in my prologe to the Reader showed
the right use thereof: wysshyng that all which shall read the Book, should
first note the Prologe: that Phylosophye may have her lawful praise, the holy
scriptures, their due service and reverence, and God his honor, worship, and
glory: Who keep your lordship, with your honorable Parents, in health, and
felicity. Amen.

The Prologue to the Reader.
When Pericles had gathered an army, making expedition toward the battle
of Peloponesus, when his navy was ready rygged, and at the point to launche
forth, suddenly there chanced so great a darkness through an Eclips of the
Sun, that the day was as dark as if it had been night, in so much that the
stars appeared: at which so sudden and prodigious a wonder the Pylote being
amassed and affrayed, as were also diverse of the souldyers, refused to sail any
farther. Which when Pericles perceived, whether it were in contempt of
Astronomye, or to encorage his astonished souldyers, be took his cloak and
blinded there with, the Maryners eyes: and at the last uncovering them again,
he asked him if he thought it any wonder because his eyes had be covered a
while, and yet were never the worse therefore. And when the Pylote answered that
it was not: No more is it (said Pericles) although the Moon shadowyng the
Su^ne, take away his light for a season. And so contemning a good admonicion
sent as than by god, he sailed forward, to the destruction of his souldyers,
besides the great detriment of all the whole land of Brecia.

In like manner there be many now a days, which as Pericles despised
Astronomye, despise all other sciences: deuysyng proper toys (as he did) to
dasshe them out of countenance, tunnyng headlyng through Ignorance, into
contempt of all good learning: Not only inuentyng tryfelyng toyed, but also
wrestyng the holy scriptures which they understand not to serve for their
pyuish purpose. For if it chance them to be improued with any of the good
sayings of the ancient philosophers, which so plainly impugneth their vices,
that they be unable by good reason to refell it, tha^ on goes the brazen face,
and a cloak must be sought out of Scripture either to do deface all
Phylosophye, or else to blind men's eyes withal: But if they understood the
Scriptures, or if arrogancy would let them learn to understand them as they
be truly meaned, than should they, confessyng their lewd and wylful
blyndnes, be ashamed of their many vices, and cease to disprayse that, that is
greatly to be commended.

For although (Good Reader) that Philosophye is not to be compared with the
most holy scriptures, yet is it not utterly to be despised: which (if men
will credyt the holy doctors) may be proved by the judgment of S. Augustine,
which in his book De doctrina Christiana. cap. xl exhorts us to the reading
thereof, saying If they which be called Philosophers, specially of Plato his
sect, have spoken ought that is true, and appertinent to our faith, we ought
not only not to fear it, but also to challenge it as (...) own, from them
which are no right owners thereof. For like as the Egyptians had not only
Idols and great burdens which the Israelites did hate and fly, but also
vessels ornaments, and goodly Jewels of gold and silver, which the
Israelytes departing from Egypt, under the color of borowyng, stole priuilye
from them, not of their own mind, but by the commandment of God, to turn
that to a better use which the Egyptians abused: So in the doctrine of the
Bentyles are not only contained supersticious and feigned rites, with great
burdens of vain labor, all which we Christians followyng Christ out from
among the unbelieving gentiles, should utterly detest and avoid: but also much
good learning, mete for to serve the truth, with some most profitable
precepts of good manners, wherein are folide some truth, how to worship the
eternal and only God. etc.

These be the words, judgment, and council of that most holy Doctor
concerning Philosophy, the which if many had well remembered. which under the
title of philosophical science, have with Sophistry, corrupted the true sense
of holy scripture, neither should there have been such contencion as now
raygneth every where, neither faultles philosophye have been so much despised.
Yet think not (Loving Reader) that I allow philosophy to be Scriptures
Interpretour, but rather would have it as an handmayden to persuade such
things as Scripture does command. In which kind when it is used, than
may all the praises be veryfyed therupou, with which the ancient philosophers
have magnifyed it.

Emonge whom Demosthenes the most famous Oratoure among the Greciens,
calls it, namely the moral part, An inuencion and gift of God. After whom
Licero the most excellent and eloquent Orator among the Romans, calls it
the gyde of life, and the expulser of vice.

These and many more like co^mendacions have been thereto attributed, which
auaunce it excedyngly, neither disagreyng with the holy Scriptures. Wherefore
every christen man ought diligently to apply it, namely the moral part:
which God wrote first in the hearts of men, and afterward wyllyng to have
every man to know it, he wrote it in the tables of stone which he gave to
Moses, promisinge by him a reward for such things, which before were
observed for virtues sake.

So that Moral philosophye may well be called that part of gods law, which
gives commandment of outward behauyour: Which differs from the gospel,
in as much as the gospel promyseth remission of sins, reconciling to god,
and the gift of the holy ghost, and of eternal life, for Christ's sake, which
promise is reveled to us from above, not able to be comprehended by reason,
according to the saying of S. John. The sun which is in his fathers bosom
has showed it to us. And as for philosophy is nothing else but the obseruyng
and eschuyng of such things as reason judges to be good and bad in the
mutual conversation of life, to which god has promised a reward, and
thretened a punishment: so that the gospel is comprehended only by faith, and
philosophy is judged by reason.

Reason only was the cause why all the phylosofers have so extolled philosophy
which considered that nothiuge was so requisite and behouefull for man's
life, as to live together well and louyngly. For like as life can not be
mayntayned without meat and drink and other like good gifts of Nature: no
more could it continue long without laws and manners: the lack whereof, saint
John in his Epistle argues to be the lack of godliness, saying: If we love
not our neighbor whom we see, how can we say we love God whom we see
not? Which text being well pondered, makes as much for the commendacion of
Moral philosophy as any of saint Paul's do to the dispraise thereof. Wherefore
I humblye beseech the (most gentle Reader) to take in good part this simple
philosopycal treatise, and so to use it as saint Augustine has taught us,
taking the good, and leauyng the bad, neither reuerencyng it as the gospel,
neither yet despysing it as a thing of no value.

And since the hollye Scriptures are now come to light, and Christians have
professed to follow and fulfill the same, having also innumerable blessings
and rewards promised of God, for our so doing: let us be ashamed that a
drop or sparkle of reason should do more in the Heathen Infidles (as we call
them,) than ^ll the promyses of God among us, whi^he take upon us the name of
Christians: and let us so end euour our selves every man in his vocation, to
use such moral ^ertues, and virtuous behauyours one to wards an other, that
our love and charity used toward our brotherne, may testify our faith and
love toward god.

To whom be all praise honor, and gloyye, for ever and ever. Amen.
Love, and Live. Ne quid nimis.
Of the beginning of Philosophy. Cap. i.
SOme perhaps, seeing we entende to speak of a kind of Philosophye, will move
this question more curious than necessary: where and how Philosophye began,
and who the enuenters thereof, and in what nation. Of which since there is so
great diversity among writers, some attrybutyng it to one, and some to
another, as the Tracians to Orpheus, the Grecians to Linus the Lybians to
Atlas, the Pheniciens to Ochus, the Perciens to their Magos, ye Assiriens to
their Chaldees, the Indians to their Gymnosophistes, of which Buddas was
chief, and the Italians to Pythagoras, the French men to their Druides,
bryngyng each one of them brobable reasons, to confirm herein their opinions:
It shall be hard for a man of our time (in which many wrytinges are lost, or at
lest hyd) fully herein to satisfye their question. Nevertheless for so much as
God him self (as witnesses our most holy scriptures) is the author and
beginning of wisdom, ye wisdom it self, which is called of the
Philosophers Sophia, therefore I suppose that god, which always loved most
the Hebrews, taught it them first, if ye ask to whom, I think (as also
testifies Josephus) to his servant Abraham, who being i^ Assiria, taught it
both to the Caldees and to the Egiptians. The sons of Seth were also studious
in astronomye which is a part of Philosophy, as appeared by the Pyllers,
wherein after Noes fludde (which they by their graunde father Abraham had
knowledge of) their science was found by them engraued: and after the flud was
by Noe, and his children taught to other nations, of which I grant that he
which every country calls the first finder, has been in the same country
better than the rest: as among the Egyptians Mercurius trismegistus or Hermes,
whose works both divine and Philosophical, excede far all other that
thereof have entreted. Nevertheless ye Gretians (which have been always
destrous of glory) challenge to the^ selves the invention thereof, and have
therein taken great pains, naming it first Sophia, and such as therein were
skilled Sophistes or wysardes, which so continued until Pythagoras time,
which being much wyser than many other before him, considering that there was
no wisdom but of god, and that God him self was alone wise, he called him
self a Philosopher, a lover of wisdom, and his science Philosophye. There
were besides these Sophistes, an other kind called Sapientes or Sages, as was
Thales, Solon, Periander, Cleobolus, Chilon, Bias and Pittachus, and thus there
were in all three sects, that is to say, wysardes which were called
Sophistes, and sages which were called sapientes, and lovers of wisdom which
were called Philosophers, all whose science, was Philosophye, as we may call it
natural wisdom. Of which the kind called Ionica began in Anaximander, and
ended in Theophrastus, And the other kind called Italica. began in Pythagoras,
and ended in the Epicure.

Of the parts of Philosophy. Cap. ii
Philosophy is sorted into.iii. parts, Physic, Ethicke, and Dialectyke. The
office of physic is, to discern and Judge of the world, and of such
things as are therein: It is the part of Ethicke, to trete of life and manners,
and it is the duty of Dialectike, that is Logic, to make resons to prove and
improve both physic and also Ethicke, which is moral Philosophye. Now as
for Physic, althoghe it altogyther be not from our purpose, for why it
co^serueth ye body in health, without which moral wisdom avails little,
yet because it is more than we may accomplish, shall be omitted, and such as
therein have delight, (which all ought to have, that that love their bodily
health) may read Galene, Hypocrates, Aristotle, and other such, which thereof
entrete plentifully, absolutely, and perfectly. Logycke also, because our
matter is so plain, that experience daily proves it, shall not greatly need
for our purpose, which desire rather to be plain and well understood, than
either with logic or rethoricke, to dispute and garnysh our matter. But
moral Philosophye, which is the knowledge of precepts of al honest manners,
which reason acknowledges to belong and appertain to man's nature (as ye thing
in which we differ from other beasts) and also is necessary for the comely
governance of man's life, shall here be spoken of: not reasoned to the trial,
but simply and rudely declared: yet so, that such as therein delight, although
not fully satisfied, shall not be utterly deceived of their purpose.

Of the beginning of moral Philosophye. Cap. iii.
Necessity as I judge (and that not without cause) was the first fynder out
of moral Philosophye, and Experience, which is a good teacher, was the first
master thereof, and taught such as gave diligence to mark and considre
things, to teach and instruct other therein: and because Socrates in a manner
despisyng the other two kinds of Philosophy, added this as the third, and
taught it more tha^ any of the rest, therefore (because men must be the
begynners of men's matters) I assente with Laertius, to call him the first
beginner thereof. For although even among the Atheniences, the Sages, as Thales
and Solon, both spoke and wrote of like matter before him, yet because he so
ernestly embraced it, and equally placed it with the other twain, he deserves
well the glory of the first beginner thereof: and although he wrote it not in
books (for which as him thought he had a lawefull excuse, or rather a good
cause) yet his disciple Plato has written such things of his teaching, as
few so fully wrote of before: which was as it is euydent, many years before
Jesus the son of Sirache, whose work we for the purity of the doctrine
therein contained, reverence and honor: which as he him self calls it, is a
book of moral wisdom, thought full of divinity, as are also many of Platoes
works, as witnesses Saint Augustine. And therefore because Socrates was before
Jesus Sirache, I refer the invention, I should say the beginning thereof,
unto him. As for Salomons works are more divine than moral, and therefore I
rather worship in him the divinity, than ascribe the beginning of moral
Philosophy, wishing al men and exhortyng them both to learn and to follow,
those so divine and holy works, uttered by him in his book of proverbs.

Of the kinds of teaching of moral Philososophye. Cap. iiii.
ALL that have written of moral Philosophye, have for ye most part taught it,
either by precepts, counsel, and laws, orels by proverbs, parables, and
semblables. For which cause it may well be divided into. iii. kinds, of
which the first is by councelles, laws, and precepts, of which Licurgus,
Solon, Isocrates, Cato, and other more, have written much. Councellyng and
admonishinge men to virtue by precepts, and by their laws fraying the^ from
vice.

The second kind of teaching, is by Proverbs and Adages: which kind, of
Philosophers most commonly is used, in which they show ye contrarieties of
things, ferryng always the best, declaring thereby both the profits of virtue,
and the inconuenie^ces of vices, yt we considering both, may embrace the
good, and eschew the evil.

The third kind is by Parables, Examples and Se^blables. Wherein by esye and
familier truths, harder things and more out of use are declared, that by ye
one the other may be better perceived and borne in mind: which way our
savior Christ him self, when he taught ye gross Iues, any divine thing, most
commonly used.

Parrables, semblables and examples, (though differing in sumwhat) draw al to
one kind. The which kind Esopus most of all used, alludyng and bryngyng
unreasonable things, to teach and instruct men, in grave and wayghtye
matters.

The order of this book. Cap. v.
OF these.iii. kinds of moral Pholosophye last rehearsed, consists this
work, every kind by it self sundred into a book, that it may the better be
understand of all that shall read the same, the matter of all which three, is
gathered out of the works of the most pure and ancient Philosophers, and
specially of these foloyng.

Mercurius trismegistus Hermes.
Pythagoras Italicus.
Thales Milesius.
Solon Salaminus.
Chilo Lacedemoniencis.
Bias Prienneus.
Periander of Corinth.
Anacharcis the Scithian.
Etius Myson Cheneus.
Cpimenides Cretensis.
Anaxagoras Eubulinus.
Phericides the Sirian.
Socrates of Athens.
Xenophon of Athens.
Aristippus of Athens.
Plato Atheniencis diuinus.
Isocrates.
Xenocrates of Calcedonie.
Archelaus.
Aristoteles Stagirites.
Diogenes,
Plutarche.
Seneca.
And for so much as the good life of a man, is cause of his better estimation,
the lives of all these before named, shall be first showed in a book by
themselves: wherein also, part of their wyttye answers are contained: which is
set forth only for this purpose, that we Christians ashamed of our selves,
in beholding the lives of these Heathen persons, may amend, and follow the
good doctrine that they have taught us.

In the second book which is called the book of precepts and counselles,
shall be declared what these men thought of god, of the soul, of ye world, of
death, of fre^dshyp, of counsel, of silence, of riches and of poverty, with
their witty sayings of, and concerning the same matters: After which their
good precepts orderly shall follow.

In the third book, which is the book of proverbs or pytthy sayings, shall
things be showed worthy of memory. In the end whereof shall follow some of
their principal sentences, drawn into meter, to the intent they may be the
eselyer learned, and better kept in mind.

In in forth book, called the book of parables or semblables, shall appear ye
great zeal yt the Phylisophers always have had, to teach by all manner
means that wit might ymagin, this so precious and nedeful a science, to all
kind of people. And if it shall chance that in any of these books, thorough
Ignorance or Negligence somewhat shall be misordered, or not to fully handled
as it should be, and as the matter requires: The excuse shall be yt in this
treatise no perfection is pretended, and only is set forth as a show, to make
men thereby desirouse, to have the perfection of ye thing, which it
represents. And like as a whetstone although it be dull it self, yet causes
instruments, to be more kene^: So by this blu^t treatise, such as are apt
there unto, shall be provoked to set forth better. This being in the mean while
used, as a preparation to others works which here upon may follow.

Now the order and intent of the book, being known, there is no danger but
that with judgment, the process may both be red, learned, and followed.

The lives and wittye answers of the Philophers, and first of Hermes. Cap. vi.
FOr as much as of all the philosophers, of whom we purpose to write,
Hermes, otherwise called Mercurius Trismegistus, is not only the most
excellent, but also the most ancient, therefore as he is most worthy, his life
shall be first declared: which because it is not wholly set forth, nor all
agreing in yt which is set forth, therefore geuyng credit to the most true
writers, it shall be set forth as they among them by pyeces have preserved it. Of
whom saint Augustine the worshypfull docter says.

Atlas the Astrologian, the brother of Promotheus the Physician, floryshed, and
was hyghly accepted, the same time, in which Moses was borne: which Atlas was
graundfather by the mother side, to Mercurius the elder, whose Nephewe was this
Mercurius Trismegistus, which in the Egiptian tou^ge is called Hermes. Howbeit
some which write of him, hold opinion that he was Enoch, which as they say,
signifies the same in Hebrew, that Hermes does in the Egiptian tongue. And so
make him in the seventh degree from Adam: reconyng after this sort. Adam begat
Sethe, the father of Enos, the father of Caynan, the father of Malalael, the
father of Matusale the father of Iareth, which is the father of Enoche. Which
opinion (although it be not to be utterly rejected) yet is not sufficient
without proof to be believed. For Enoche whom they take for Hermes, was before
Noes flud, in which all the works which were written, if they had at that
time any use of letters, were drowned: but ye works of this Hermes of whom we
entreat, are yet appearing in diverse languages, wherefore it should seem that
this was not he, except we should say that he graued it in the stone pyllers,
in which in time of the flud, Astronomye was preserved, which might well be,
and but that saint Augustine, and Pamphilus in his chronicle, and saynct Ierom
thereupon, appoint ye contrary, I could well believe. For Iamblicus and diverse
other, write much of Mercurius Pyllers. And Mercurius was of such same among
ye Egiptians, that they put forth all their works under his name. And the
Poets for his singular learning, make him a god, and call him the messenger of
Jupiter, whom they call ye god of heaven and gouerner of all. And it may be,
that the pyllers which the sons of Seth (of whose image he was) made, were
graven by him, which (as many write) are full of learni^g: out of which as
testifyeth Iamblicus, both Pythagoras and Plato with diverse other more, learned
Philosophy. But those pillars I take rather to be his.ii. goodlye books, which
may very well be called Pyllers, for why they bear both divinity, (if with
Lactancius I may so call it) and also Philosophy, which were peradventure
also graven in Sethes chyldrens pyllers, and therout drawn by some that has been since. Of which.ii. books the first called Pymander, is so full of
divinity, as may astonysh the wits of such as therein shall read: which
causes. S. Augustine, to doubt whether he spoke such things as he did by
knowledge of Astronomy, or else by revelation of spirits. How be it Lactantius
douteth not to count him among the Cibiles, and Prophets. The other book
called Asclepius being but small, conteyneth in it the hole su^me of natural
Philosophye, out of which I think no less, but that the Philosophers have
learned out their Science. Tully and Lactancius (not showing in what time)
say that there were five Mercuries, and that this is the fifth, whom the
Egipcians call Theuth, and the greciens Trismegistus, and that this is he
which slew Argus, and was ruler of the Egipcians, and gave them laws, and
instructed the^ in learning, and devised marks and shapes of letters after the
form of beasts, and trees. He was called Trismegistus, because he was the
chefest Philosopher, the chefest pressed, and the chefest king. He prophesied of
the regeneration, and believed the resurrection of ye body, and the immortality
of the soul, and gave his subjects warning to eschew sin, thretnyng them
with the judgment of god, wherein they should give acco^ptes of their wicked
deades. He taught them also to worship god with diverse kinds of ceremonies,
and taught them in all matters to make their prayers unto god, and instructed
the Ylandes in the knowledge of god. And when he had lived into a perfect old
age, he gave place to nature. His precepts, proverbs, and parables, shall be
spoken of in their places.

Of Pythagoras Cap. vii.
PYthagoras the Philosopher borne in Samia, was a rich merchant man's son,
called Demarratus, howbeit he was richer than his father, which was not able
with his merchandise to get so much, as he despised: which was both rich in
abstinence from couetise, and also in Wisdom, which is the very riches: of
which in his youth he was so desirous, that he went first to Egypt, and after
to Babylon, to learn Astronomye, and the beginning of the worlds creation:
which when he had learned, he returned i^to Crete, and Lacedemonia, to se
Lycurgus, and Mynoes laws. In which when he was perfect, he went unto
Ceuona, where was a people excedingly given to luxury, and all kind of vice,
among whom he so behaved him self, that he reformed them from their evil
manners, and in small time brought them to such sobrenes, that men would never
have thought it had been possible. For the wives, that were forsaken of their
husbands, and children cast of by their parents, he so instructed, that they
were received again. He caused the women also to set aside their gorgious
attyres, reaching them that chastity, was the chief ornament of honest women.
This Pythagoras (as says Boethius) was the inuenter of Musycke among the
Grecians, which he found out by the soundes of hammers, whereof he wrote a
book, which Boethius and Apuleyus, translated into Latin. Saint Augustyne in
his.viii. book de ciuitate dei, says yt Philosophy was so named by him,
which before was called Sophia. For when it was asked him what sciencer he
was, he answered a Philosopher, which is a desirer of wisdom: thinking it a
great arrogancy, to have called him self wise. Tullius says that Pythagoras
spoke so wisely, and so ornatly before Leontius a king, that he, wondryng at
his wit, and Eloquence, desired him to show what science he knew best, to
who^ he answered, that he knew no science: but was a Philosopher. At which,
for the newnes of the name the king astonyshed, asked him what was a
Philosopher, and what difference was between Philosophers and other men. To
whom Pythagoras said. Man's life seems to me, to be like a congregation of
people gathered to see a game, to which men resort for sondrye pourposes: some
by their own actiuitie to win the worship of the game, and other some for
lucre sake, to by or sell somewhat, and othersome myndyng neither to gainne nor
to profit, come only to behold and se what is done: And in like manner men
which are come unto this life, as out of an other life and nature, occupye
them selves with diligence, to get praise or profit, or regardyng neither,
apply their minds to search and to know the nature of things, which sort
last named, we call Philosophers, that is to say lovers of wisdom: Thus by
this goodly parable he vttred his mind, in the continuance whereof also, he
prayseth and proves his science to be best, sayi^g. Like as he which comes
to se the game only, is more liberalle, ye and more to be praised, than the
rest: so likewise he which in this life gives his mind to wisdom and
knowledge, ought more to be accepted than any of the rest. Saint Augustine
says that he was well skylled in Nicromancye, which may be very well, for in
that time it was much set by, and none thought wise, that therein was ignorant.
Ualerius says that his hearers worshipped him so much, yt they thought it a
great sin to forget ought which they heard of him, in disputyng any matter.

His words were so esteemed that it was a cause good and suffycient in any
matter, to say yt Pythagoras said so.

He was so good a Philosopher, as scarce any deserves to be his match. He
kept justice so much, that after his death, the authority of his name ruled
the people of Italic, which in time past was called Magna Grecia. He was so
sparyng and profitable, that some think he never did eat any daynty meats.
He taught many young men, whose aptnes he knew always by their countenance,
gesture and manners. And he with all his disciples, lived in common to gether,
as well in love, as in other manners. For he taught them, that true friendship
was, to make one heart and mind of a great many hearts and bodies. In so
much that Damon and Pithias which were of his sect, loved so to gether (as
says Ualerius Maximus) that when Dionisius the Tyrant would have killed the
one of them, which desiring license to go and dispose his goods before his
death, was granted his request, if he could get another in ye mean while
that would be his pledge, who if he came not again at ye time appointed, should
dye for him: his fellow not regardyng his life, so much as his true
frendeshyp: became his pledge. And the other being let go, came again at his
time appointed, to redeem his fellow from his death: which faythfulnes in
both the tyrant Dionisius scing, not only forgave them both, but also
desired that he might be the third of that fellowship, that had rather dye than
to fail in frendshyp. A notable example of most constant frendshyp, and of
good instruction therein. To one that asked him what he thought of women's
weeping, he said. There are in a woman's eyes, two kinds of tears: The one of
grefe, and the other of deceyte. To a covetous man he said: O role thy riches
are lost upon the, and are very pouertye, for why thou art neither the warmer,
better fed, nor richer for them. It was axed him if he desired to be rich, to
which he answered nay, saying: I despise to have those riches, which with
lyberalitie are wasted and lost, and with sparyng, do rust and rot. To one yt
was gaylye apparelled, and spoke uncomely things, he said: Either make thy
speech like unto thy garments, orels thy garments like unto thy language. It
chanced a fool in Pythagoras presence, to say that he had rather be conversant
among women, than among Philosophers, to which he said: yea, swyne had rather
lie rowtyng in dirt and in draffe, than in clear and fair water. Being asked
what new thing was in the world, he answered: nothing.

Being asked what was Phylosophye, he said: The meditation or remembrance of
death, labouryng daily to get the soul liberty in this prison of the body.

He was the first among the Grecians that held opinion that the soul was
immortal.

He kept scole in Italy, and lived in to a great age, and after that he was
dead, the people reverenced him so much, that they made a temple of his house,
and worshypped him as a god. He flourished in the time of Nabuchodonoser, king
of Babylon. His precepts, proverbs, and parables, shall follow in their
places.

Of Thales Milesius. Cap. viii.
THales (as says Herodotus, Democritus and Duris) had to his father a noble
man, called Examius, and to his mother Cleobulina, of the stock of Cadinus and
Age nor: and was borne (says Plato) under D^masius prince of Athens, and is
the first that ever was called a Sage, or wyseman.

He flourished at Milerum what time Oseas was judge i^ Israel, and Romulus
Emperor of Rome: what time Scnnacherib king of ye Chaldees, sent the Assirians
to inhabit Iurye, which after the cou^tyng of Eusebius, was the^. 4450. year
from the creation of the world.

This Thales was very well learned, both in Astronomye and Physic: and wrote
many goodly works, and was a citizen at Miletum, as Phalerius writes, and
was come of a noble lineage, who after he had dispatched his business belonging
to ye common weal, gave him self to the searchynge out of natural causes.
And surely he was a profitable counsayler to the common weal: For when as
Cresus demanded to have had his fellows, he would not grant to it, which
afterward wha^ Cyrus had gotten the victory, was cause of saving their city.
Heraclides says that he lived solitarilye, but some say he took a wife, and
had a child called Cidistus, and other say that he lived chaste all his life
long: and when it was asked him why he would not get children, he answered,
because he would not be bound to love them. When his mother cried on him
contynually to take a wife, he would say he was to young: and afterward when
his youth was past, and his mother still importunate, he would say it was out
of season, and to late.

He would say always he was bound to thank Fortune, but forthre causes
chefely: first because he had reason, and was not a beast: secondly because he
was a man, and not a woman: thyrdly because he was borne a Gretian and no
Barbarian. He said there was no difference between death and and life, and
being axed therefore why he dyed not, because (quod he) I should than make a
difference: when he was asked whether god know men's evil worckes. Ye (quod
he) and their thoughts to. To an aduowtrer that axed him whyther he might
swear that he was no aduouterer, he said. Pariury is not worse than aduoutry.
when he was asked what thing was hardest? He answered: A man to know him
self: and what was esiest? He said to admonyshe other, what was sweatest? For
a man (says he) to use that he has: what is god? That that lacks be ginnyng
and end. And when he was asked what was the most difficill and seldest seen
thing?

He answered an old Tyrant. A selde seen thing in dead, for god either
takes them away before they be old, orels in their old age changes their
hearts, being demanded how a man might best suffer adversity? To se (said
he) his enemies in worse plyght than him self. It was axed him how we might
live best and most righteously? to which he answered: to fly those things
our selves which we reprove in other. Being axed who was happy, he said: he
that has his bodyly health, is fortunate in riches, not of a vain mind but
learned. These are part of his wittye answers, his precepts, proverbs, and
semblables, shall be spoken of in their places. This Thales as witnesses
Appollidorus, lived lxx^^ii. years. Sosicrates says lxxxx. years, and that he
dyed in the lviii. Olimpiade, and floryshed in Cresus time, to whom he
promised, that he would cause the river Alm, to ru^ne backwardes against ye
streme. There were many more of this name as testifies Demetrius, Duris, and
Dionisius, but this Thales Milesius the sage, being old, and worn in age,
dyed of heat and thirst, whiles he beheld a triu^phe. Some say that as he
went forth of his house to behold the stars, he fell down sodaynlye into a
pit, and was therefore mocked of an old wife that he kept in his house with
this saying: O Thales how think thou to comprehend those things that are
in heaven, which can not se such things as are before thine eyes.

Of Solon Salaminus. Ca. ix.
Like as there is among writers great variaunce (as I said before) about the
first Philosopher, even so is there great contention which were the seven
sages: but as their variaunce makes doutfull which were the persons, so their
hole consent assures that there were such. And for because we entend, not so
much to show the persons and names, as their good doctrine, therefore it
shall be sufficient that a wise and approved Philosopher has said such
things as to the^ are attributed, yet as for good causes, I have allowed
Socrates for ye first moral Philosopher, after Lacrtius mind, ^o do I best
allow Lacrtius Judgment in this matter, which says yt these were they: Thales,
Solon, Periander, Cleobulus, Chilon, Bias, and Pittachus.

Of whom although Periander were a tyrant, yet because yt for his good
doctrine he has of the learned long time been allowed, therefore shall he
enjoy that, which they have given him.

Of Thales ye have heard already, after who^e Solon is next, which was the
son of Existides, and was borne in Salamina, and thereof was called Salaminus.
He gave many good laws, and did many worthy deades, worthy to be remembered:
Among which this is very notable. After that the Athemences and Megarences,
had made great war and great slaughter between them, to have had the
signory of his country Salamina, and were both sore weryed with wars, they
made a law at Athens that no man pain of his head, should speak or persuade
ought to challenge the Ylande, any more. Than Solon being troubled and
thoughfull for his country, fearyng least with holding his peace, he should do
small good to the common weal, and again if he should speak, it should be for
his hurt, suddenly feigned him self mad: thinkyng thereby, not only to
speak, but also to do such things as were forbidden. And disguisinge him
selfe^ he ran abroad among he hartles people, And there in the manner of a
crier he persuaded the people yt which was forbidden, and styrred up their
minds so much, that incontinent they began war to obtain the Yland, and so
at last they got it. He persuaded them also to challenge Chersonesu^ a city i^
Tracie, affirming that it was their right. And by this means so wan the
peoples love, that they gladly would have made him Ruler: but as says So
sicrates, he had a neighbor called Pisistratus which tyranously endeavored to
hurt him, which as soon as he knew, he armed him self and went into the
streate, and when he had called a great company about him, he discovered
Pisistratus treason, and not only that, but also that he was ready to amend
it, and that he would fight for his liberty, saying.

Ye men of Athenes, I am wyser then some, and valianter then other so^e. I am
wiser tha^ those yt mark not Pisistratus, and I am valianter than those,
which know him and dare not for fear show what he is: But the Senate that
took Pisistratus part, said he was mad, and when he saw he could have no
redress, he laid down his harneys before them, and said. O country I have
always help the both with word and dead: And then sailed into Cipres, and
there met with Cresus, who demau^ding of him whom he thought happy, he laid:
Thelus of Athens, and Byto, and such other, which all all me^ spoke of.
Another time wha^ Cresus had garnished him self rychelye, and was set in his
high trone: he asked him, if ever he had seen a more gorgious sight, ye (quod
he) both Capons, Fesantes, and Pecockes, for their goodly colors are natural.
From Cresus he went into Cilicia, and there builded a city, and after his own
name, called it Solos. He made many good laws for such as were warriers, if
any had got victory, he should have a great reward for his labor, and such
as were slain, had their wife and children found of the common purse ever
after. He made a law, yt no executour should dwell with any orphans mother, nor
that any should be executour to whom after ye heirs death his goods shall
belong. And that no ^yng or seal maker should keep ye print of any ^olde
seal. And that who so ever had put out a man's eye, shall lose both his own
for it. And yt whosoever took ought that was not his own, should dye for it.
And that if any gouerner were found dronken, to dye for it. And that no man
should give any dowry with his daughter: with many mo good laws. When he was
demanded why he made no law against soche as killed their father or mother?
He answered, because it is a desperate mischife. Being demanded how me^ might
best keep them from breakyng the law? he said: if such as have no wrong be
as sorry and and careful, as those that are wronged. He would say to rich
men: Abundance grows from riches, and disdain out of abundance. He wrote
many books, both of verses, laws, and other matters, besides many goodly
epistles. He flourished in the.xlvi. Olimpiade, and was prince of Athens
the.iii. year which was from the worlds creation.4605. years, he
lived.lxxx. years* and dyed in Cipres, commanding his s^ruauntes to ^ary his
bones to Salomina, and there being made in poulder, to sow them about the
city. Dioscorides writes that when he was asked why he wept for his sons
death, since it profited him nothing? He answered even for this cause I weep,
because I can profit him nothing. Thus much of his laws, and answers: the
rest of his sayings shall be spoken of, in their places.

Of Chylo Lacedemoniencis. Cap. x.
CHylo the son of Damagetus, was borne in Lacedemonia. He wrote many verses,
and held an opinion that man by reason, might comprehend the foreknowlege of
things to come, by the might and power of his manhood. There were in his time
(as says So^icrates and Pamphilia) diverse offices: of which one was most
noble, and the officers called Ephori, which were kings folowes: Wherefore his
brother being angry because he would not take that office, since he him self
had been in it before: O brother (quod he) I can suffer wrong, and so can not
thou. This man (as Herodotus writes in the first book of his histories) seeing
on a time Hipocrates sacrifice and vessels in Olimpo, to burn without help of
fire, counseled him, either to live chaste, or if he were married, to put away
his wife, and sley his children. Some say yt when Esop (which was in his
time) asked him what Jupiter did, he answered: he mekeneth the mighty and
exalts the lowelye: Being demanded wherein ye learned differed from the
ignerant, he answered: In their good hope. To him yt asked what was hard, he
said: to keep close secret counsel, to keep a man from ydlenes, and to
suffer wrong. He lived so well, that when he was old, he said that he never
in his life to his knowledge, had done any evil, save that on a time when he
should have been judge among his friends, and would do nothing contrary to the
law, he persuaded one to appele from him to some other judge, that thereby he
might both keep the law, and also his friend. The Greeks reioysed in him
much, because he prophesied of Citherea, an ylond of Laconia. For when he had
well advised, both the nature and situation thereof: would to god (quod he) that
either this ylond had never ben, orels that it had been drowned as soon as it
was seen: A worthy and prophet like saying. For Demaratus flyeng from
Lacedemonye, cou^sayled Xerxes to keep a navy of ships in that ylond. And
surely if he had periwaded him thereto, he should have got great riches by
Gretia. And afterward Niceas, (after he had warred at Peloponesus) overcame yt
place. And made it a refuge for the men of Athens, and afflicted sore the
Lacedemoniens. He was brefe in communication, in so much that brefe spakyng
was of his name, called Chilonia. He was old about the.li. Olimpiade. In
which time Esopus ye orator was in his flowers, which was in the year from
the worlds creation. 4624. he dyed at (...), says Heimippus, while he kissed
his son, that was crowned in Olimpia being overcome both (...) ^oye and also
with age. The rest of his sayings shall be spoken of in their places.

Of Byas Prienneus. Cap. xi.
BYas Prieneus, (as says Diogenes,) was borne in Priena. His fathers name was
Teutamius. Satirus (...) him the first of the seven sages. And many guess that
he was (...). Phanodicus writes that he redeemed many wenches of Messena,
which were captives and brought them up as his own daughters: and
afterward, giving them dowries, sent the^ home again to their countreye,
unto their friends. Not long after, certain fishers found a golden trestell,
on which was written, Sapienti, that is to say, this is for a wise man. Which
when the forenamed wenches fathers heard of, they said Byas was a wiseman,
and sent it him, but when he saw it, he said Apollo was a wiseman, and that
he sent it him. We find that when his country Priena was besiged of Aliattes,
he fed two mules for the nones, insomuche that they were exceeding fat, and
drove them forth into his enemies tents: which wha^ Aliattes saw, he was
amassed, thynkyng by the fatnes of them, that they had great plentye of all
things. And thinkyng to areyse the syege, he sent a messenger into the city,
to search the truth.

And when Byas perceived the kings intent, he made many great heaps of sand to
be covered with wheat, and showed them to the messenger: which when the king
knew, thinking that they had had great plenty of vitayles, made peace with
them, and sent commandment to Byas to come unto him, to which Byas answered:
I command the king to eat ony^ns and to weep. He wrote about.ii. m. verses.
Being asked what was difficill? he said: to take in good worth adversity
after prosperity. O natu^^e he sailed among wicked men, and when the ship was
sore shaken with great tempest, and those wicked men called upon god, peace
(quod he) that he se you not sailing from hence. To a wicked man that asked him
what was goodness, he gave no answer. And wha^ he asked why he answered him
not, he said: because thou inquire of that, which pertayneth not to the. He
would say yt he had rather be judge among his enemies than among his friends,
for of his enemies he should make one his friend but among his friends he
should make one his foe. Being asked in what deed a man reioysed most, he
answered: wha^ he gains. He was a good orator, and when he was very old, as
he pleaded a cause for one of his friends, after he had done his oration, being
weary and faint with speaking, he rested his head in his neces lap, which
was his daughters son: and when his adversary began afresh and had fynyshed,
and the judges had given their sentence on his side, whose part Byas took,
as soon as the judgment was ended, he was found dead in his nephews bosom,
which buried him worthily. And the citizens of Priena, dedicated a chapel to
him which is called Teutonium. He would say always the greater part are
evil. The rest of his sayenges shall be spoken of, in their places.

Of Periander. Cap. xii.
PEriander as says Heraclides, was borne in Corinth, his fathers name was
Cipcelus, he married a wife called Licydes, which was ye daughter of Procleus,
a tirant of Epidaur, and by her had two sons: the one called Cypselus, and
the other Lycophrone, of which ye younger was very wise, but thelder was a
fool. This Periander was well learned And wrote a book of.ii. M. verses,
nevertheless he was a Tirant, and excercised so much his tyranny that al men
did hate him: he was about the.xxxviii. Olimpiade in Solons time. And he
executed his Tyranny xl. years. Some say there were two Perianders, the one a
tyrant, ye other a Philosopher, which might well be: nevertheless this Tyrant
is he, whom Laertius reckneth for one of the seven sages, whose opinion I
allow not. For like as he for his evil doctrine disaloweth Orpheus to be a
Philosopher, so I for his evil living disalowe Periander, to be any of the
leven sages, although he have written many wise sayings. For as i^ Philosophy
nothing is less allowed than ignorance, so in wisdom nothing is more
abhorred than Tyranny, in which this Periander excelled, in so much that when
he was demanded why he continued in his tyrany? because it is dangerous (quod
he) for a man to yield him self either of his own accord, or else against his
will: Nevertheless he would say (as wicked Hanniball said of peace) that who
so would rain in suerty ought to endeavor them to have their subectes
obediente with love, and not with force. And pet he him self sought nothing
less. For one a time he being very angry, flong his wife being great with child
down a pair of stairs, and trod her under his feet, and so killed her. And
sent away his son Lycophorna, because he mourned for his mother, and drove
him unto Corcyra. And afterward when he him self was very old, he sent for
him again: that he might with his own hands play the tyrant with him: which
when the men of Corcira knew, they put him to death them selves, to deliver
him from his fathers tyranny. And when Periander heard that, ragyng in his
fury, he took all their children, and sent them to Aliattes a tirant to be
slain: but when ye ship wherein they were approached unto Samos, they vowyng
to Juno, were saved of the Samnites: which when Periander heard of, he
being.lxxx. year old, what with sorrow, and what with woodnes, died. This was
his life, which should not have been rehearsed, save that for his good
sayings, which shall be spoken of in their places. Neither would we that any
man should take example hereby, but rather should se how shameful it is for a
Christian, to have the like conditions.

Of Anacharsis. Cap. xiii.
ANacharsis the Scithian was ye son of Gnurus, brother to Caduidus king of
Scithia. But his mother was a Grecien. By reason whereof he was learned in both
the languages, and wrote much both of ye Scithians and Greciens laws, and
also of wars and marciall affairs. Sosicrates says that he was at Athens in
ye.xlvii. Olimpiad under the Prince Eucrates. And Hermippus says that he
went to Solons house, and when he was at his gate, that he bode one of the
house, to tell Solon that Anacharsis was without, and that he desired greatly
if he might, to be his gest, and have his acquayntaunce: when ye servant had
told Solon, he sent him word again that he made gestes of his own country
folks, which wha^ Anacharsis heard, he went in boldlye, and said. Now am I
in my country. And when Solon saw his wit and wisdom, he admytted him, not
only for a gest, but also for a pryncypall friend.

He had this one goodly saying, worthy to be noted. The vine brings
forth.iii. grapes, the firsste of pleasure, ye second of dronkennes, and the
third of sorrow. Being asked what should cause a man most to be sobre, he
said: to behold se, and remember the filthy bestlines of dronkardes. Being on
a time in a ship, after that he knew it was but.iiii. inches thick, he said
that they were nyghe death that sailed. Being asked what ship was most sure:
yt (quod he) that cummeth safe to the haven: when he was demanded whether
there were more dead then alive? he asked in which side he should count
mariners. Being vpbrayded of a man of Athens, because we was a Scithian: in
dead (quod he) my countreye is a reproach to me, but thou art a reproach to
thy cou^trye. To one that asked him if a wyseman might mary a wife? he said
what thynkest thou that I am? and when the other affirmed yt he was a wise man,
well (quod he) I have married a wife. When he was reproved of fearfulnes, he
said yt his fearfulnes caused him to abstain from sin. To a woman that
said he was foul and ylfauoured, he said: thou art so foul and filthy a
myrrour, that my bewty can not be seen in the. When it was axed him why wysemen
would ask counsel? he answered: for fear of mingling their wylles with their
wits. To a paynter that was be come a phisitio^, he said: The faults that
thou made before in thy works might sone be espied, but them that thou
make now, are hyd under the yearthe. For dead men's diseases are buried with
them.

Being asked what was both good and evil to a man, he answered: the tongue. He
would say that ye market was a place appointed for men to deceive in, and to
apply them selves to auaryce. To a young man yt was his gest, which slau^dered
him, he said: well young man if while thou art young, thou can not suffer
wine, when thou art old, thou must be content with water. He was the first
(as some think) yt invented the anchor. He was long time with Solon, and thence
returned into his own cou^treye, and there intendyng to change their laws,
and to have established ye Grecie^s laws, was slain of his brother with a
shaft, as he rode on huntyng: and when he felt his deaths wound, he said: I
have been preserved in Grecia, by wisdom and learning, but at home and in my
country, I perish through envy. Some write that he was slain, while he was
sacrifisyng after the manner of the Gretie^s. The rest of his sayings shall be
spoken of in their places.

Of Myson. Cap. xiiii.
OF this Miso^ is great variaunce among writers, and al through the doutiulnes
of Apollos answer: For when Anacharsis axed of Apollo who was wyser than he?
he answered: Ecius, Myson, Cheneus, but some say that Apollo said not Ecius
but Eteus: and so they ask what Eteus is. Parmenides says it is a village of
Laconia, in which Myson was borne. But Sosicrates says, that his father was
called Eteus, and his mother Cheneum. Euthyphron says that he was of Crete,
and that Heraclides Ponticus was his father, but Anaxilaus, says that he was
of Archadia: thus there is co^trouersy about him, in which I allow best
Sosicrates mind. But after that Apollo had given this answer, Anacharcides
being troubled there with, came unto Mison, in the Summer time, and found him
making a share for his plowe, and mockyng him therefore, said: Ywys Myson it
is no mete time to go to Plowe now: No (quod he) but is mete enough to prepare
and make it ready. He lived solitarylye, and when a man by chance met him
laughyng to him self, and axed him why he laughed so, since no man was present
there with him, he answered: Even therefore, do I laughe. He wrote many goodly
works, and dyed when he was lxxvii. year old. His goodly sayings shall be
spoken of i^ their places.

Of Epimenides. Cap. xv.
THeopompus says that Phestius was Epimenides father. Other say yt Dosiades
was, other some say Age^iarchus. He was borne in Crete i^ a street called
Gnosus. This Epimenides being on a time, sent of his father, into the
countreye, to fetch home a sheep, about nonetyde as he trauayled with the sheep
on his neeke, being weary, he went into a cave, and slepte.lvii. year. And
wha^ he waked, he sought for the sheep, and because he could not find him, he
went back again into the fyelde, and wha^ he saw that all things were
changed, being greatly astonished, he returned to ye town: and when he would
have entered into his own house, they asked who he was? and wha^ he saw his
younger brother, he was so old yt he knew him not: but at last after much
communication he told his brother all that had chanced him: which when it was
noysed abroad, every man took him for one high in gods favor. Wherefore on a
time, when as the Atheniences were plaged with the pestilence, and were
cou^sayled of Apollo to pourge their city, they sent for Niceas and him unto
Crete, who when he was cume to Athe^s, purged it in this manner. He took sheep
both white and black, and brought them into a shepecote, and suffered them to go
thence whyther they would: commaundyng them which followed them to sacrifice
them to god, in the place where they first lay down: which done the plage
ceased. The Atheniences delivered thus from destruction, gave him a great su^me
of money and also a ship to carry him again into Crete, but he forsaking their
money, only desired their friendship: and so departed. Alytle after that he was
come home he dyed, being.cxcvii. years old as says Phasgo, but as his
country folk say, he lived. 299. years. He wrote many works in prose and in
verse, of which somewhat shall be showed in their places. Some think yt he died
not at that age, but fell aslepe again until an other time.

Of Anaxagoras. Cap. xvi.
ANaxagoras was an excedyng well learned man, and came of a good stock: his
fathers name is Eubulus, he was very witty in Philosophy, And wrote much
thereof. He was of a noble courage and very lyberall: For why he gave away all
his patrimony. And when his friends reproved him therefore, and said that he
took no care for his goods: what need I (quod he) since ye take care therefore.
At last he went from them, and gave his mind altogether to the study of
Philosophye, regardyng neither the common weal nor yet his own profit:
insomuche that one asked him if he regarded not his country? to whom he
answered, yes: the chefest thing that I care for, is my country: poynting with
his finger, toward the heaven. He was in Xerxes time, And began to treat of
Philosophy at Athens (as says Ualerius) when he was but.xx. year old, and
tarried there.xxx. years. He said that the Sun was made of burning Iron, and
that there were mountains and vallayes in ye moon. Some said that he told
before of a stone yt fell from heaven in to the flud Egis. To one that asked
him if the mountains Lampsaceni should ever be part of the seca? yes (quod
he) if the time fail not. Being asked for what intent he was borne, he said:
to behold the heaven, the son, and moon. To a man yt was very pensive and
heavy, because he should die in a strange country, he said: be of good chere
friend, for the way that goes down to hell, is every where.

Sylenus writes that in prince Dimilus time, there fell a stone from heaven,
and that Anaxagoras therthrough held opinion that Heaven was made of stones,
and that but for the great compass of the buyldyng, it would suddenly fall.
Sotion says that he was accused for this and such like matters, and lost
much of his gooddes therefore, and was banisshed. But other write that
Thucidides accused him of treason, and he being absent, was therefore condemned,
at which time also his children dyed. And when it was told him how he was
condemned, and his children dead, as touching his condemnation, he said:
nature has given like sentence both of my condemners and me. And as touching
his children, he said: I know that I begot mortal creatures: nevertheless
afterward he was saved by Pericles, and departed from Athens un to Lampsacum,
and being.lxii. years old, dyed there. Being asked of ye city, if he would
have any thing done for him: he wylled that the same month in which he died,
the children of the town should yearly play: And that they should keep yt
custom for ever: which granted, they buried him honorably, and set up a
goodly Epitaphe upon his tumbe. His goodly sayings shall be spoken of in their
places.

Of Phericides. Cap. xvii.
PHericydes the sun of Badis (as says Alexander) was a Sirian borne, and
was an hearer of Pittachus. Theopompus affirms him to be the first that ever
wrote of nature, and of the goods among ye Gretians. Many marueyles are
written of him. For as he walked by the sea side at Samos, behowldyng a ship
saylyng swyftly with full sails, he prophesied yt wtin a little while, it
should be drouned: And as he said, it came to pass even in his own sight.
After yt he prophesied (as there was in deed) that the third after, there
should be an yearthquake. Not long after wha^ he was at Massena, in the game
place, he counsayled one Perilaus a stranger, to get him thence, and all his
householde, with as much speed as might be: whose counsel he not regardyng,
was taken not long after with the town, and all of his enemies. He would say
to the Lacedemonia^s, that neither gold nor silver ought to be worshipped and
yt Hercules in his sleep gave him that commandment, which Hercules also the
same time, commanded the Princes to obey Phericides: Some apply this to
Pythagoras. Hermippus says that when there was great war between the
Ephesians and Magnesians, he being desirous that ye Ephesians might win the
victory, asked one that passed by, of whence he was: whom confessing him self
to be an Ephesian, he commanded to draw him by the legs, and to lay him in
the Magnesian fyelde saying: desire the citizens that when they have got ye
victory, that they bury me (which am Phericides) in this same place: which
when the citizens knew, they were in good hope of victory. And the next day,
they overcame ye Magnesians in battle, and found Phericydes dead, and buried
him honorably. But some say that he flonge him self down headlyng from an
hill called Coriciam, and so to have died, and to be buried at Delos. Othersom
say, that he dyed, being consumed with lice. Aristoxenus says yt when
Pithagoras which came to visit him, demanded how he did, yt he puttyng his
finger out at the door, said: behold thy self, which answer afterward among
learned me^ became a by word. He wrote an epistle to Thales, wherein he
prophesied of his own death, saying yt he swarmed full of lyce, and that he
had a fyuer, and when any of his friends axed how he did, he showed them his
lowsye finger out thoroughe the door, and desired them that the next day after
they should come to his buryall.

Of Socrates. Cap. xviii.
SOcrates (as says Plato) the son of Sophroniscus, a Lapidarie, and his
mother Phenareta, a mydwyfe, was borne at Athens: a man of a wonderful wit,
and as some say, was an hearer of Anaxagoras and of Damon. But Duris says that
he was a servant, and that he graued in stone, and that the Gracie, three goodly
images, were of his caruyng, wherefore Tymo^ calls him a caruer of stones, and
a vain Greek Poet, and a subtle oratoure, For in his orations, he was sharp
and prompte, and was therefore forbidden to teach it, by 30. Tyrants, as
says Xenophon. But (as says Fauorinus,) he with his disciple Eschines,
opened the feeldes of the oratorye craft. He got money to find him self with all, by his handye work: from which Crito delivered him, because of his
wisdom, and became his scholar as Byzantius says. But after that Socrates
perceived yt there was no fruit in the speculation of natural Philosophye, and
that it was not greatly necessary to the outward manners of living, he
brought in ye kind called Ethicke that is moral Philosophye, and taught it
daily both in ye shoppes and streets, and exhorted the people chiefly to learn
those things, which should instruct the^ in manners, which were needful to
be used in their houses. He used sometime through vehemency of his
communication, to shake his hand, and styr his finger, yea and to pluck him
self by the hear also, and was therefore mocked of many, which he suffered
patiently. And was so pacient, that when one had spurned him he suffered him:
and being axed why he stroke not again? he asked if an ass had kycked him,
if he should kycke again. When Euripedes had given him a work of Heraclitus
to read, and asked him what he thought by it, he answered: such things as I
understand are very mystical, and so I think those be which I understand
not: But suerly they lack some Apollo to expou^de them. He took great care in
the exercise of his body, and he was of a comely behauyour, he was also a good
warryer, for when Xenophon was in the war fallen from his horse, he caught
him, and saved him. Another time when the Atheniences fled all away hastily,
he him self went leyserly alone, lokyng back oftentimes privily, and watchyng
to revenge him, if any man with his swearde durst venture to invade his fellows:
he warred also by sea, and wha^ he had valiau^tly fought and overcome his
enemies, he gave wyllyngly the victory to Alcibiades, whom (Aristippus says)
he loved greatly. He was of a constant mind, and of invincible reason, and
excedyng careful for the common weal, he was also thriftye and co^tynent.
When Alcibyades would have given him much lyme and sand to build him an
house, he said: if I lacked shoes, and thou would give me an hole hyde, to
make me a pair, should I not be mocked, if I took it? When he beheld many
times the multitude of things yt were sold, he would say, Good lord so many
things there be that I need not. He would say commonly that gold, sylke, and
purple, and other such things, were more meet to set forth tragedyes, than
necessary to be used. He lived so sparely and temperatly, yt many times when
there were plages in Athe^s, he only his self alone, was never sick.
Aristotle says that he had two wives, the first Xantippe, of whom he begat
Lamprocles: and the other Mirtone Aristides daughter, who^e he toke^ without any
dowrye, of whom he begatte Sophroniscus, and Menexenus. Satyrus and Hieronimus
Rhodius say, that he had both at ones. For the Atheniences being cousumed
with wars, and morayne of people, to augme^t ye city, decreed that every man
should have two wives: the one a citizen, and the other what he would, to beget
children of both: which Socrates did. He depysed greatly such as were proud
and high minded, and wranglers. He gloryed greatly in pore fare. And said yt
such were most like unto god, as lacked fewest things. He had a great gift
both in perswadyng and also in diswadyng. For he (as says Xenophon)
persuaded a young man which was Merciles and cruel, against his mother, to
reverence her: he diswaded also Platos brother, which was desirous to have come
into the common weal, and caused him to leave of, because he was rude and
ignorant in things. Being asked what was ye honor of young me^? he answered:
to attempt nothing to much. To him that asked him whether it were better to
marye or no? he said: which soever thou do, it shall repent the. He would
say that he wondered much at me^ which with great diligence, endeavored to
carue and make stones like men, and took so little head to them selves, that
they both seemed, and were like unto stones. He exhorted young men to behold
them selves often in a lokynge glass, to ye intent that if they were bewtifull
and well fourmed, they should do such things as becommed their shape: but and
if they were ylfauoured, that they should with learning and good manners hyde
their deformity, when he on a time had bydden many rich men to diner, and his
wife Xantippe was ashamed of the small preparaunce that he made, he said: be
content wife, for if our gestes be sober and honest men, they will not despise
this there, and again if they be ryotous and intemperate, we shall be sure
they shall not surfeit. He said some lived that they might care, but he did
eat, that he might live. Being on a time reuyled, and asked why he spoke
nothing? because (quod he) that which he speaks, pertayneth not to me. O that
men could now adays so take such matters. An other time when it was told
him yt one had spoke evil by him, he said: he has not learned as yet to say
well. When Alcibiades told him he could not suffer the frowardnes and
skoldynge of Xantippe, as he did: no (quod he) but a can, I am so used
therewith, caust not you at home suffer thy gaggeslyng gese? Yes (quod
Alcibiades,) for they lay me eggs, mary quod Socrates, and so does Xantippe
bring me forth children. On a time wha^ his wife in ye open street plucked his
cloak from of his back, and some of his acquai^tau^ce cou^sayled him to have
stroke her therefore, he said: ye syrs ye say well, that while we were
brawlyng and fyghtng together, every one of you might cry: now to it Socrates,
Eya well said Xantippe, the wittyest of the twain. He counseled yt men should
so go to their wives, as horsemen do to their fyerce horses, and with a prary
similitude, he colored his patience, saying: like as an horce being broken of
an horce keeper, suffers ever after any man to ride upon him, so I by use of
Xantippe can suffer all other folk. Finally he daily saying and doing such
things, was praised of Apollo to be the wysest man that lived: At which
diverse being displeased, and because that he proved sum which thought them
selves very wise men, to be very foles: they not content, conspired against
him, and accused him, saying. Socrates breaks ye laws of the city which
have been given of our elders, supposinge that there are no gods: and bryngyng
in other new spirits: (For Socrates held opinion that there was but one god,
which was without beginning and ending, which had made and governed, all
things, and that the soul of man was immortal, and that every man had.ii.
spirits assigned him by god, which he called demones, of which he said that
one showed him things to come, wherefore he despised their gods and would
not worship them) and against tyght and law he corrupts our youth:
wherefore let him dye. When this was put up against him. Lysias a Philosopher
wrote an Apology for him, which when he red, he said: Lysias the oration is
good and excellent, but surely it is nothing mete for me (for why it was more
judicial than should seem mete for a Philosopher) and when Lisias demanded of
him since it was good, why it was not mete for him, he said: Garments and
shoes may be both good and fair, and yet unfit for me. but while he was
judged it is said that Plato stood up in his defense, and could not be
suffered. And so he was condemned by.lxxx. judges, and cast into prison: For
whom the prince of Athens was very sorry, but the centence which the judges had
given upon him, which was yt he should drink poison, could not be revoked.
The king had a ship frayght with sacrafices which he offered to his ydols,
which than was abroad and he would never give any sentence upon any man's
death, before it came to Athens. Wherefore one of Socrates friends called
Inclites, counsayled him to give a certain sum of money to the kepers, to
let him escape away secretly, and so to go to Rome, but Socrates said he had
not so much: Tha^ said Inclytes, I and thy friends have so much, which we
will gladly give to save thy life, if thou will. To which Socrates answered:
I thank you and my friends but sith this city wherein I must suffer my
death, is the natural place of my birth, I had rather dye here than else where:
for if I dye here in my country without deseruyng, only because I reprove
their wickedness, and their worshipping of vain ydols, and would have them
worship the true god, if these men of mine own nation persecute me for saying
and maintaining truth, even so will stranngers wheresoever I become: for I will
never spare to say the truth, and surely strangers would have less mercy on
me than mine own countreye folks. Beying thus minded, he continued still in
prison, teaching his scholars which resorted to him, many things both of the
composition of elements, and also of the soul: but would write nothing, for
he said that wisdom ought to be written in men's hearts, and not in beasts
skynnes: nevertheless his disciple Plato wrote welny all yt he taught. A little
before he should be put to death, he desired that he might bath him self, and
say his orations, which he did, and called his wife and children, and gave
them good instruction: And when he went toward the place where he should
fynish his life, his wife went after him, cryinge: Alas my husband dies
gyltles: to whom he said, why woman would thou have me dye otherwise? and
sent her away. So when the cup of poison was delivered him to drink, his
friends began to weep, wherefore he blamed them, saying: I sent away the
women because they should not do as you do. Than Pollidotus proffered him a
precious garment to dye in, to whom he said: has not mine own cote served me
to live in? why than may it not as well serve me to dye in? And than after he
had commended his soul to god, he drank the confection, and as he was in
travail of death one of disciples said, O Socrates well of wisdom, yet teach
us sumwhat while thy speech lasts: to whom he answered: I can teach you
none otherwise now dying, tha^ I taught you in my life time. Thus finished he
his most godly life, being lxx. years old. His goodly sayings shall be spoken
of in their places.

Of Xenophon. Cap. xix.
XEnophon the son of Grillus was borne an Athens, he was shamefaste, and
exceeding bewtifull. It is said that Socrates met him in a narrow laue, and
would not let him pass till he had answered him to diverse questions: and when
he axed him, where men were made good and bad, at which he stayed, and could
not tell: Socrates said, cum with me, and learn. And so he did, until such
time as he went to Cyrus, whose favor he obtained and became in great
reputation with him, and wrote all his acts, he had a woman also called
Philesia which followed him: of whom he had two children. He had much trouble
in his life, and was banished, and fled from place to place, till he came to
Corinth: where he had an house. And when ye Atheniences, intended to succoure
the Lacedaemonians, he sent his two sons called Diodorus and Grillus to
Athens, to fight for the Lacedaemonians: from which battle Diodorus returned,
without doing any great feate: but Gryllus fyghtyng manfully among the
horsemen, dyed about Mantinia. And when Xenophon (which was doing sacrifice
with his crown on his head) heard that his son was ded, he put of his
crown, and when he afterward heard, that he dyed fyghtyng valiantly, he put
it on again, not so sorry for his death, as joyous for his valiantyse. He dyed
at the city Corinthum as says Demetrius being very old: a man both good and
valyant, expert in tydyng and huntyng, and greatly skilled in marciall
affairs, as appears by his works. He was also religious, and much
intentyue about sacrifice, and was a follower of Socrates. He wrote.xl. books
intytled every one by a sondrye name: and Tucidides works which by negligence
were lost, he brought to light. And was him self so pleasant in his style,
that he was called the muse of Athens. There were more of this name, of whom
this is the chief, whose good sayings and precepts hereafter shall be touched.

Of Aristippus. Cap. xx.
ARtistippus, (as says Elchines) came to Athens, to hear Socrates, whose
excelent wisdom was spoken of every where. But when Socrates was dead, he
flattered Dionisius, and became a courtier. He was a merye wytted fellow, and
could form him self mete to all times and places, in so much that Diogenes
called him the kings hounde. when he on a time had espied Dyogenes gatherynge
herbs, and making potage, he said: if thou Diogenes could flatter Dionise,
thou should not need to make wortes. To whom Dyogenes said: if thou also
could be content to eat and gather wortes, thou should not need to
flatter Dionise. When one made his boast that he had learned much, he said that
learning consisted not in the greatness but in the goodness. To one that made
great bragges of his swimming, he said: Art not you ashamed to boast of this
which every Dolphin can do? Being reproved because he hired a rethoricien to
plead his cause, he said: when I make a banquet I hyre a coke to. When his
servant which iourneyed with him, was tired with the wayght of the money
which he carried, he said: that which is to heavy cast out, and that which
thou can, carye. Byon says, that as he sailed, perceiving that he was in a
Pirates ship, he took his money and counted it, and than (as against his
will,) let it fall out of his hand into the sea, and mourned for it
outwardelye: but said inwardly to him self, it is better that this be lost of
me, that I be lost for this. Dionisius commanded that all his servants
should dance in purple robes, which Plato would not, saying: I will not put
on a woman's garment, but Aristippus did, and when he began to dau^ce, he
said: in dronken feasts, the sober offend not. It chanced that he sewed to
Dyonisius for a friend of his, and being denied, fell down before his fete,
and wha^ he was reproved therefore, he said: I am not in ye fault, but
Dionisius, which has ears in his fete. This and many like answers he gave,
which who so lists to read, may look in ye Apothegmes of Erasmus, where he
shall find enough: which because it appertains not greatly to our
purpose, we will omyt, and entrete of his good precepts and proverbs in the
places thereto appointed.

Of Plato. Cap. xxi.
PLato the son of Aristo^ and Periander, of Solo^s kindred, was borne at
Athens, in the year and day that Apollo was borne, as witnesses Appollodorus.
Which was in the.lxxxviii. Olimpiade, and dyed being.lxxx. and.4. years old.
It is said that wha^ he was borne, there came a swarm of bees, and hyued in
his mouth, which Socrates said to be a sign of his great eloquence. He was a
goodly man of person as says Alexander, and was therefore called Plato, which
some say was for his eloquence, and some for his great forhead. He excercysed
him self i^ his youth, in wrastli^g, and such like feats: and gave his mind
also to paynti^g, and to write Poesies, meters, and tragedyes. He had a small
voice and an eloquent tongue. Socrates dremed yt a swanne let fall an egg,
which hatched in his lap, and when it was fethered, it flue up on high, and
song exceadyng sweet songs: and the next day wha^ Platoes father brought him
to schole to Socrates, O (quod he) this is the swan that I dreamed of: and when
he had learned much, and should come before Dynonyse to a schole game, wherein
learned men should show their goodly meaters, and pyththy wrytynges, wherein
who that excelled had a great reward: when he had heard Socrates declare his,
Plato flong his own into ye fire, saying: O fire, Plato has need of thy
help. And when Socrates was dead, he went into Italye, to Phylolaum, which was
of Pythagoras sect. From thence he went into Egypt, to hear the priests and
the Prophets, where being sore sick, he was healed by one of the priests,
with sea water, by reason whereof, he said: The sea ebbeth and flows all
manner diseases: He said moreover that all the Egyptians were Physicians. He
determined also to go to ye Magicians, but by means of the wars that were in
Asia, he changed his purpose, and returned to Athens: where he abode, and
wrote many goodly works: and drew together Heraclitus, Pithagoras, and
Socrates, reasons. And in sensible things he preferred Heraclitus: and in
things that pertayned to intelligence, he took Pythagoras part: and in civil
matters and moral Philosophy, he esteemed most his master Socrates. And drue
these three parts of Philosophy i^ to one body. Satyrus says yt he gave an
hundred pound to Phylolau^, for.iii. of Pythagoras books. He sailed thryse
into Sicil to se the country: whereas Dionisius the tyrant Hermocrates son,
compelled him to talk with him, and when Plato in his communication, said
that a tyrant ought not to do that which was for his own profit, except he
excelled in virtue, the Tyrant being angry therwythall, said: Thy words
savor of old idle dottrels tales. And thine also (quod Plato) of a young
tyrant. For which this tyrant would have slain him, but was entreated
otherwise, and commanded him to be sold. And by chance there was one
Annicer, a Cyreniake, which gave thyrtye pound for him, and sent him to
Athens amongst his friends: which incontinent sent him his money again,
which he in no wise would receive, allegyng that other men were as worthy to
care for Plato as they. And when the tyrant heard how Plato had sped, and was
in his cou^trye again, he wrote unto him, prayi^g him not to speak or write
evil of him: to which request, Plato wrote again, that he had not so much
idle times as to remember him. Some say, yt when the captain Cabria which
was gyltye of death fled, that he (when none else of ye city durst) went with
him. And wha^ Crobylus a scoffer saw him enter into the castle with him, he
rayled on him, saying: thou go to healpe another, as though thou knew not
that we all redye owe the Socrates poison. To whom Plato said, when I warred
for my country, he suffered peril with me, wherefore now for friend shyps sake, I
will do as much for him. To one whom he reproved for playing at dyse, which
said thou chydest for a small matter, in deed (quod he) the thing is small,
but the customable use thereof, is no small thing. To one of his boys which had
displeased him, he said: if I were not angrye, I would trymme the. To one of
his servants which had done amiss, and excused him, saying it was my
desteny, I could do none otherwise, he said: excuse thy self no more tha^,
for it is thy destiny also to be punyshed. He dyed in the schools as some
say, being broken in the mids, and was buried in Athens. His notable
sentences shall be added in their places.

Of Xenocrates. Cap. xxii.
XEnocrates the son of Agathenor, being borne in Calcedonie, was Platos
scholar, eue^ from his youth. He was blunt wytted, and slow, insomuche that
Plato speaking of him and Arisstotle, would say that the one had need of ye
spur, and the other of the bridle. He was grave and earnest, and dry in his
communication. He was much in the schools, and if at any time he went in to
the town, boys and tolyshe people would cry after him for the nones, to
anger him. He was so chaste, that when men for the nones had hired an harlot to
meddle with him, which lying with him many nyghtes could not obtain her
purpose, she said he was an image and no man. When his fellows would cast
into his bed Layis, (which at yt time was the fairest strumpet in Athens) when
she would entyse him with her most whoryshe conditions, he would cut his own
members, because she should not overcome him. Being sent with other Ambassadors
to Philip, when all the other take rewards, and banqueted with him, he would
not: In so much, that when Philip many times would talk with him, he refused:
For which cause Philip admytted him not for an Ambassador. And when he with
the rest of his fellows was returned to Athens, they said that he went with them
in vain. And when (according to the laws) he should therefore pay a forfayt,
he counsayled ye rulers to take good head to ye common weal, saying yt Philip
with gifts had corrupted all the other Ambassadors, but could not make him
grant, by any manner means: which (they hearing) esteemed him more thou ever
they did before. Being sent an other time to Antipater, to redeem the prisoners
which he had taken in battle, Antipater desired him to dyne with him, which
he denying said: I come not to dyne and banquet, nor to take pleasure with the,
but to redeem my fellows from the sorrows which they suffer with the: and when
Antipater heard the wisdom, and saw the constant mind of the man, gently
entertaynynge him, delivered his prisoners. Wha^ Dionisius in his presence
said to Plato, some body shall take from the thy head, he said: yt shall
they not except they take away mine first. He lived holylye and wrote
excedyng many goodly works: and dyed being.lxxxii. years old. His goodlye
counselles shall be spoken of in their places.

Of Archelaus. Cap. xxiii.
ARchelaus ye son of Seuthus (as says Appollodorus) was a good Philosopher
and very studyous in Platos works. He was first an hearer of Antilochus, a
Mathematycke, and afterward of Theophrastus. He was a very wyttye fellow, and
of a prompt spirit, and grave in communication, and much excercised in
writing, and gave his mind to poetrye. He delyted so much in Homer, that
every night before he slept, he would read somewhat. He learned geometry of
Hipponicus, and was thereto so dull, and yet so well learned in ye craft, that
he would say that geometry fell into his mouth as he gaped. Hearing men
singynge meaters that he had made, ylfauouredly, he kicked them on the sides,
saying: ye break mine, and I will break poures. Being called to a sick man
perceyuyng that he was sick for thought and lack of riches, he conveyed under
his pyllowe a sack full of money, which he fyndyng, was so ioyouse that he
recovered strayt ways. When he was bid to solute a ryddle at a banquet, he
said that ye chefest point of wisdom was, to know to what purpose the time
was meatest. To him that asked him why many scholars of every sect became
Epicures, but none of the Epicures became of other sects, he said: because yt
cocks were made of men, but never men of cocks, or as some say capons be
made of cocks, but never cocks of capons. Being reproved because he
challenged not a young man, whom he had right to, he excused him pretely,
saying: It is not possible, to draw soft chese with an hoke. Being asked
what man was most in trowble, thought, and care, he said. He that desires
most to be at quiet, and rest: being asked whether it were better to marye a
fair woman or a foul, he answered: if thou mary a foul one, thou shalt have
gryefe with her, but and if thou take a fair one, she shall make the cuckolde.
He called old age the haven of all tribulations. He said it was a great
evil, not be able to suffer evil. To an enuyous man which was very
sorrowful, he said: I know not well, whether euel have chanced to the, or
good to an other: signifying thereby, that enuyous me^ are as sorrowful for
others prosperity, as for their own adversity. As he sailed among thieves, by
chance they met with ships of true folk, which the thieves espyinge, said:
we may chance to dye if we be known: and so may I (quod he) if we be not
known. These and such like answers he gave, and dyed at Athens when he was.
80. year old, being overcome with to much wine. And was reputed more among the
Atheniences, than any other of the Philosophers. His piththy proverbs shall be
spoken of here after.

Of Aristotle. Cap. xxiiii.
ARistotle, the son of Nychomache, a stagerite, was well-beloved of Amintha
King of Macedonie, both for his learning, and also for his wisdom. He was
Platos disciple, and passed far all the rest of his fellows, he had a small
voice, small legs, and small ryes, he would go rychely appareled with rings
and chains, mynionly rounded and shaven. He had a son called Nichomache by
an whore. He was so well learned, yt Phylip King of Macedonie sent for him to
teach his son Alexa^dre, who because he reproved him to much, caused him to
dye. But Appollodorus says that he came to Athens again, and kept the
schools there; and dyed when he was lxiii. year old. He was an excellent good
Physician, and wrote thereof many goodly works. He used to wash him self in a
basen of hot oil: and used to carry a bladder full of whote oil at his
stomach. He used also when he slept, to hold a ball of brass in his hand,
with a pan under his bed side, that when it fell it might walte him. Being
asked what vauntage a man might get by lying, he answered: to be vnbeleued when
he tells truth. Many times when he enueyed against ye Atheniences, he would
say yt they had found out both fruits and laws, but knew how to use
neither of them. He would say that ye rotes of lyberall sciences were bitter,
but the fruits very sweet. It was told him that one rayled on him, to which
he answered: when I am away let him beat me to. Being asked how much the
learned differed from the ignorant, he answered: As much the quick dyffer
from the dead. He would say yt learning in prosperity, was a garnishing: and
in adversity, a refuge. To one that boasted that he was a Citizen of a noble
city, he said: bost not of that, but se that thou be worthy, to be of such a
noble city. Being asked what was friendship, he said: one soul dwelling in
many bodies Being asked what he had got by Philosophy, he said: I can do that
vnbydden, which some can scarce do, compelled by the law. Being rayled on to
his face, and not regardyng, and the rayler askyng him whyther he had touched
him or no? he said: Good lord, I minded ye not yet. Being reproved because he
gave wages to one that was scarce honest, he said: I give it to the man and
not to his manners. Thus and such like he spoke, and wrote many goodly books,
of which we have (thought not the one half) yet so much as in our age is
thought sufficient for one man to have known and written, out of which his
most pith thy proverbs for our purpose shall be be added in place most
convenient.

Of diogenes. Cap. xxv.
DIogenes as says Diocles, was borne in a town called Cinope, his father
being called Icecius Mensar, who being imprisoned for counterfetyng their
coin, Dyogenes which was of counsel with him, fled: and came to Athens,
where he met with Antithenes: whom unwilling to receive him (for why he never
would teach any) he overcame with his perseueraunce. And when his master on a
time took up a staff to beat him, he put under his head, saying: stryke, for
thy staff is not able to drive me away, so long as thou can teach me ought.
He lived simply as one that was out of his country, and comforted him self
much with beholding the little mouse, which neither desired chaumbre, nor
feared the dark, nor was desirous more of one meat than of an other: whose
nature as nygh as he could, he followed. He ware a double cloak, and made him a
bag, wherein he wrapped him when he slept, and put therein his meat, and used
one place for all purposes: both to eat, to sleep, and to talk in. When he
was diseased he went with a staff, which afterward he carried with him
always not only in the city, but also in all other places. He wrote to one
to make him a cell, which because he tarried long for, he took a barrel or a
tun and made that his house. When he had any grave matter, he would call the
people to hear him, which when they regarded not, he would sing pleasantly:
to which when many resorted, he would say: to hear folyshnes ye run a pace,
but to hear any wayghty matter ye scarce put forth your foot. He wo^dered at
Gra^marians which could show of other folks lewdnes, and neclected their
own. He reproved Musicians, because they took great care that their
instruments should agree, and their own manners agreed not. He rebuked the
Mathematikes which beheld the son, ye moon, and the stars, and neclected
the business that lay before their fete. He taunted the orators because they
studied to speak that was just, and followed not the same in their living. He
dispraysed the people, which while they sacrificed, and gave thanks for their
health, would make great bankets, which was against their health: he wondered
that servants could stand and se men eat, and snatched not away their
meat. Being mocked because he anointed his fete with odours, and not his
head, he said: the savor goth from the head up into the air, but from the
fete up to the nose. Being asked what time a man should dyne, he said: a rich
man when he will, and a poor man when he may, when one had given him a blow
upon ye ear, he said: I wist well I had left somewhat uncovered. To young
laddes yt stood about him saying: we will beware folish question, he gave none
answer, being asked why he held his peace, he said: Silence is the answer of
folish questions. Innumerable such pretty answers and tau^tes he used, which
who so lists to here shall find in the Apothegmes of Erasmus, which is no
less fynely handled in the English than in the latin, beside yt it is also
more plain and parfect. This Diogenes lived. 90. years, and died being byt of
a dog some write, other say that he styfled him self, with long holding of
his breathe: After whose death there was great strife among his scholars, who
should have his body to bury, nevertheless the strife was appeased by the
elders, and they buried him by the gate that leads to Isthmus, and made him a
fair tumbe, and set a pillar with a dog thereupon, and set thereto a goodly
Epitaphie. His good precepts, and proverbs shall follow in their places.

Of Antisthenes. Cap. xxvi.
ANtisthenes the son of Antisthenes, was borne at Athens: And was disciple to
Gorgias the orator, of whom he learned to plead: and from him he went to
Socrates, of whom he learned wisdom, and moral Philosophy. To a young man
that would be his scholar, which asked what he neded to his learning, he
answered: a new book, and a new wit. When it was told him that Plato spoke
evil of him, he said: It is kyngly to be evil spoken of, when a man does
well. He would say that it were better for a man in his necessity, to fall
among ravens, than among flattereres: for ravens will eat none but dead
folk, but flatterers will eat men being alive. He would say yt Cities must
needs decay, where good me^ were not known from the bad. Being praised of
evil men, he said: I fear me that I have done some evil. He would say that
it was a great oversight, since they purged their wheat from darnell, and
their wars of cowardly soldiers, that they purged not their common weal from
enuyous people. Being asked of a man what was best to learn, he said: to
unlearn the evil that thou have learned. He always took Plato for proud,
disdaynous, and high minded: in somuche that when he met him at a tryumphe,
whereas there were many goodly and coragious neyghyng horses, he said: o Plato
thou would have made a goodly horse. He wrote many goodly books and spoke
many proper and piththy sentences, which shall be spoken of hereafter. He died
of a disease wha^ he was very old. If is said that when he was sick,
Diogenes came to visit him, having a blade by his side, and when he said, who
shall rid me from my disease: Diogenes showing him his sweard, said: this same
shall, to which Antisthenes said, I spoke of my grefe, and not of my life.
There were mo of this name, but he lies buried at Athens.

Of Isocrates. Cap. xxvii.
ISocrates was a Grecian borne, and came of a good kindred and was in his youth
well brought up in all kinds of good manners, and when he came to age and
discretion, he was an hearer of Gorgias the orator, whose disciple he
continued, until such time as he was well learned, both in natural and also
in moral Philosophy. As some say he was in ye time of Ahasuerus ye king, and
was of such fame for his learning, namely for moral Philosophy, that he seemed
to many rather a god than a man: He lived vertuouslye, with such faythfulnes
in friendship, and continence of his body, and with such piththines in his
counsel, as very few has been like him since. He wrote many goodly books in
his youth, which he followed in his age: of which his good cou^sayles to
Demonicu^, testyfye his wit and his learning in moral Philosophy, beside other
which he wrote of natural Philosophy. He lived long time for (as Ualerius
Maximus says) wha^ he was.xciiii. years old, he set forth a^ excellent book,
full of ye spirit. In all his works he praised virtue as head fountain of all
manner riches, and exhorted al me^ thereunto. To one that axed him if he would be
a king? he answered that he would not: And being asked wherefore: he said: If
I judge rightfully, I can not eschew ye hatred of many me^: and again if I
judge wrongfully, I ca^ not eschew ye pain of eternal da^nacio^: wherefore I
had rather live porely assured of ye bliss of heaven, tha^ in doubt thereof,
possessing all worldly riches. Being asked how a man might kept him self from
anger? he answered: In remembering yt god looks always upon him. In his time
men delyted much in black hear, wherefore one of his neighbors died his head
black: and when one asked him why his neybour did so? he featly tauntyng his
neighbors folyshnes, answered: because no man should axe counsel, nor learn
any wisdom of him.

What would he say now trow we, if he saw these wives, yt not only color
their hear, but also paynt their faces? He used oftentimes i^ his prayers, to
desire god to keep and save him from the danger of his friends, rather than
from his enemies: and being demanded of one that heard him, why he prayed so,
he said: as for mine enemy I can beware of, for why I trust him not: so can I
not of my friend, because I trust him. Being asked what a man ought not to do,
although it were just and true, he answered: to praise him self. He lived.cii.
years, and dyed for very age, and was buried honorablye. The rest of his
sayings, shall be spoken of hereafter.

Of Plutarche. Cap. xxviii.
PLutarche ye Philosopher, was a man of a wondrefull wit, well brought up in
his youth, well instructed in manners, and well furnyshed in all kinds of
learning: which growing up as well i^ virtue, and learni^g as in body and
years, was chosen, and that worthily, to be the instructor of ye Emperor
Traiane, whom he so well instructed, that his glory thereby was greatly
augmented, as it is said in Policrato, the fifth book. He was faithful in his
sayings, and eloquent in his words, and very diligent and ware in his manners,
of a chaste life and good conversation. He gave his mind much to instruct and
teach other, and wrote many books, of which one intytled the education of
youth, which we have in the English tongue, (drawn therinto by the excellent
and famous knight Sir Thomas Eliote, whose good zeal and love both to further
good learning, and to profyt his country, appears as well thereby, as by
other many works, which he has payned him self, to bring i^to our language)
shows well his good affection yt he had to ye commonweal. He wrote an other
book, called ye institution of Traiane, In which he sets out the office of
a Prince, and what he ought to be, so excellently, as no man can amend it. He
wrote al so an other book, entitled Archigrammatum, wherein he teaches rulers
and officers how to govern them selves, with diverse other things: among which
the letter that he wrote to Traiane what time he was created Emperor, is
worthy to be remembered, in the end whereof he says thus. Thou shalt rule al
things even as thou would, if thou go not from thy self: and if thou
dispose all thy works to virtue, all things shall prosper with the: And as
touching ye governance of thy common weal, I have taught the therein already,
which if you shalt follow me thy master Plutarche, as an example of good
living: but if you do otherwise, tha^ shall this my lettre be my wytnes, yt I
gave the neither counsel neither any example thereunto. Wha^ he was aged, he
dyed, and was buried honorably, his goodly proverbs, adages, parables, and
semblables shall follow i^ their places.

Of Seneca. Cap. xxix.
SEneca the Philosopher, an excellent well learned man, was borne in Corduba,
and thereof called Cordubences. He was disciple to Stratus the stoycke, and was
Lucane the Poets countreyman. He floryshed at Rome, in the time of the
Emperor and Tyrant Nero, whom he taught in his youth i^ learning and manners,
which afterward was cause of his death. In the time of this Seneca, Peter
and Paul came to Rome and preched there. And when many of Nero ye Emperors
house gathered together to hear Paul, Seneca among the test, was so familier
with him, and delighted so much to hear the divine science, and wisdom, which
he saw in him, yt it grieved him to be separate at any time from his
communication: insomuche than when he might not talk with him mouth to mouth,
he used communicatio^ by letters often sent between them. He read also the
wrytynges and doctrines of Paul, before the Emperor Nero, and got him the
love and favor of every body: Insomuch that ye Senate wondered much at
Paul. This Seneca was a man of a very chaste life, and so good, that saint
Iherom numbreth him in his bederowe of Saints, provoked thereto by his
Epistles, which are entytled Seneca to Paul, and Paul to Seneca. After he
lived in to a mean age, he was slain of Nero the tyrant, two years before
Peter and Paul suffered their glorious martyrdom. For Nero on a day
beholding him, and calling to mind, how he when he was his master, did beat
him, he conceived hatred against him, and being desirous to revenge him self,
and to put him to death, gave him license to chose what kind of death he
would, wherefore Seneca, seeing that his tyranny could not be appeysed, and
supposyng that to dye in a bayne, was ye easyest kind of death, desired to be
let blood in the veins of his arms, and so dyed: which death as some think
was forshewed in his name Seneca, that is to say se necans, which signifies
in English, a kyller of him self. He wrote in his life time many goodly
books, out of which shall be pyked some of ye most piththy sentences, both of
precepts and counsayles, and also of Proverbs, Adages, Parables and
Semblables, which in their places hereafter shall follow. And because the
lives of these before written are sufficient for our purpose, and because we
be desirous to be as short as we might be, here will we finish the first
book: desiring all men that the same shall read, to follow the good virtues
that therein are contained.

The end of the first Book.
In this first book of Philosophers lives
Wherein their answers are partly contained,
A man may learn, as chance thereto him dryues
To shape an answer. Or if he be constrained
To wrath or anger, or other passions like,
Here shall he see how like lusts were refrayned
Of Hethen men, who thought it shame to strike
When good occasion oftymes the^ thereto payned.
The second book intytled, of precepts and counsayles.
Of the profit of moral Philosophy. Cap. i.
IT is not unknown to any, which have any knowledge at al, how profitable,
necessary, and needful it is for me^, to have ye knowledge of moral Philosophy
(In which whosoever is ignorant, is worse than a brute beast) and therefore it
might here have well ben omytted. Yet nevertheless to satisfye yt desires of
some, and to stop the mouths of other some, which peradventure, would be glad
(according to the proverb,) to seek a knot in a rishe, and again to help and
encourage other, whom either ignorance or negligence holds back: it seems
necessary, though not all, yet at ye least to show some of ye innumerable
commodities, that there unto be joined. Wherein omittyng, the discommodities,
which for lack thereof daily augment and grow, as malice, hatred, envy,
pride, lack of love, deceytes, robberies, theftes, murders, bluddy battayles,
seditions, decay of cities, decay of commonweals, spoiling of realines, and
utter desolation of people and kingdoms, what can be a greater commodity than
for every man peaceably, to possess his own: which peaceable agreement since
it can none other ways be got, nor when it is got be preserved, but by love,
which only springs of agremente in manners, and moral virtues, what thing
ought men more to embrace? Again if we consider the divinity of our souls,
which god has created to his own lykenes, and ye rewards thereto due, for
the manners which it has used in this life, what wordly thing shall be able to
be compared therewith? Again if we consider how needful it is, as the only
help that god has given us to supply that which nature has left imperfect,
than shall we know what a Iuell it is. For where as Nature brings forth all
other creatures able to help them selves, clothing them and giving them fode
without taking any pain or labor therefore: only man is borne naked,
destitute of power to help him self, ye (as says Pliny) not one borne to
his own use, neither is any man able to live him self alone. For if he had all the wul in the world, yet if it were not carded, spunne, dressed, and brought
into clothe, it would not defend him from the cold: Again if he had all the
grain, that spryngeth on the earth, yet if it were vngrounde, and vnbaked, it
would be unmeet meare: which since they be diverse men's offices one man alone
can not do. And since therefore it is so, that no man can live alone, but must
of necessity both help and be helped of other, what can be better than good
manners, that make every man glad and wyllyng to do one for an other: that
joins us together in love and frendshyp, and helps us in all kind of
necessities? Surely nothing. Wherefore who so wills to be rich, let him
learn manners, which teach how to get, and to retain friends, which are the
very riches. Whosoever desires honor, let him study virtuous manners, which is
the only thing in man worthy to be honored. Finally what soever any man would
attain, let him learn mortal wisdom, without which no thing that is good
may be obtained. Which, that it might the more esylyer be learned (according
to our promise in the first book) we purpose in this following to set forth ye
precepts and counsayles, of those Philosophers, whose lives we showed in our
former book: Iustantly desyryng all men not only to read, but also to follow
the same. And although saint Paul have bid you beware that no man deceive you
with Philosophye, he meant not moral, as many learned clerks writing upon the
same, plainly do testyfye. Which council all me^ to follow it, namely so
much, as agrees with ye commandments of god. Repugnant to the which ye
shall find little in this book: and because ye may the better understand what
the Philosophers have thought of god, here shall be set to gyther such sentences
as they have spoken of him and of his power, and after of the soul, and so
forth, according to our promise in ye first book, from the readyng whereof, s^th
the commodities are innumerable, I will keep you no longer.

Of God, of his power, and of his works. Cap. ii.
Hermes THat is God which lacks beginning and ending, which God being made
of none, has by his own power created all things.

God knows and sees both the deades and also the thoughts of al men,
from whose knowledge nothing may be hyd.

Socrat. God estemeth greatly virtuous people, though in this world they be
little set by.

God the author of goodness, has created all good things.

Plato. God is careful for all, as well small as great.

The most glorious and mighty beginner is god, which in the beginning created
the world.

God is the principal and chief good, above all Nature, whom all creatures
honor and look for.

Aristot. It should seem that god cares not for wicked people.

No man may escape the just judgment of god.

Herme^ God will reward every man according to his works.

Socrat. No man can be just without the fear of god.

The remembrance of god, keeps men from evil.

^ermes. If thou wylt know god, enforce thy self not to know wicked people.

Rejoice and thank god as well in adversity as in prosperity.

Pytha* It is a right honorable and blessed thing to serve god, and sanctifye
his saints.

The worship of god consists not in words, but in deades.

Worship god with a clean heart, pray unto him, and he will advance you.

Hermes. When ye will fast purge your souls from fylth, and abstain from
sin: For God is better pleased therewith than with abstayning from meats.

He that is not contented with the small gifts that god gives him, is
unworthy to have any better.

Though god exalt the in this world, be not proud, nor dispyse any man
therefore, nor think not thy self better than an other: but remember how that
god by creation, has made all men like.

Plato. God has not in this world a more conuenable, and mete place, than in
a clean and pure soul.

It is better to be a poor man beleuyng in god, than to be rich putting
doubts in him.

God loves them that be disobedient to their bodily lusts.

Herme^* Prayer is the chefest thing that man may present god with all.

Socra^^^ If thou would obtain any thing of god, frame thy works according
to his will.

Swear not by god for any lucre, although thy cause be lust.

Xenoph^^ Pray to god at the beginning of thy works, that thou may bring
them to a good conclusion.

Be not to careful for worldly riches, for GOD has provided for each man
sufficient.

Pyth^^* Enforce thyselfe to know god, and to fear him.

Desire nothing of god, save what is profitable, for be will grant nothing
unjustly asked.

God hates the prayers and sacrifices of wicked people.

Socra^^* A good man is the similitude of God.

It is the duty of a wyseman to be careful in such things as pertayne unto
god.

Put your trust in god, and he will advance you.

For as much as all men, although they be great sinners, receive daily great
benefittes of god: Therefore are we all bound to thank him for his grace, and
to ask him forgeuenes for our sins and trespasses.

^ocrat. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom.

By the fear of god we attain healpe of the holy ghost, which shall open to
us the gates of salvation, wherinto our souls shall enter with them that have
deserved everlasting life.

^^rmes. He that fears god as he ought, shall never fall into the paththes
that lead me^ unto yuell.

^^thag. The time, and richesse are best bestowed, that are employed about the
seruy^e of god.

It is wisdom to love god, for he that loves god, does that which god
loves: which who so does, shall be sure to be beloved of god.

^ristot. Science is had by diligence, but discrecion and wisdom comes from
god.

Commyt all thy causes to god without any exception.

Plato. He is wise that disposes his tongue to speak of god: and he that
knows him not, is maste fool of all.

^ocrat. Speak ever of god, and he will always put good words in thy mouth.

He that loves god best, dreadeth him most.

Put thy trust in god, and pray unto him and he will keep the from a wicked
wife for which there is none other remedy.

If it chance the to come in a place where men talk of god, abide thou there:
for if thou be a fool, thou shalt become wise: and if thou be wise, thy
wisdom shall encreace.

Pyth^* Fear the vengeance of god as much as thou may, and that shall
keep the from sin, and when thou thynkest of his mercy, remember also his
ryghteousnes.

Thale^* Let thy words and thoughts be evermore of god, for to speak and
think of god surmounteth so much all other words and thoughts, as god him
self surmounteth all other creatures.

Sene^* To remember that god sees, and beholds us always, is a good
preseruatyue to keep us from all kind of sin.

The sum of all.
God is a substance for ever durable,
Eterne, omnipotent, merciful, and just.
Which gydeth al things in order conuenable,
A God in whom each man ought for to trust,
who for prayer geues grace, to mortify our lust.
In whose fear and love, all that shall here endure,
Shall after this life, of better life be sure.
Of the soul, and governance thereof. Cap. iii.
^^rmes. THe most excellent thing yt God has created in earth, is a man: And
ye rychest thing to him, is his soul, and reason: by which he keeps justice,
and eschueth sin.

The soul is an incorruptible substance, apt to receive either pain or
pleasure, both here and else where.

^^hago. When a reasonable soul forsakes his divine nature, and becomes
beast like, it dies: For although the substance of the soul be
incorruptible, yet lackyng the use of reason, it is reputed dead: for it loses
the intellectyue life.

Plato. By the justice of god the soul must needs be immortal, and therefore no
man ought to neeglect it: For though the body dye, yet the soul dies not.

^^ocrat. The souls of the good shall live into a better life, but ye evil
souls into a worse.

Plato. If death were the dissoluyng both of body and soul, then happy were
the wicked, which ryd of their body, should also be ryd of their soul and
wickedness: But for so much that it is evident that the soul is immortal,
there is left no comfort for the wicked to trust in.

The soul when it dies, caryeth nothing with it, but her virtue, and
learning, and has of it self none other help: wherefore all such as for the
multitude of their sins and mischeues are hopeles, and such as have
committed sacrilege, slawghters, with other such like wickedness, the justice
of god and their own deserts dampne unto everlasting death, from which they
shall never be delivered: but such as have lived more godly than other, being
by death delivered from the prison of the body, shall ascend up into a purer
life, and dwell in heaven euerlastynglye.

The immortality of the soul excludes all hope from the wicked, and
establishes the good in their goodness.

Socr^^* The soul that follows virtue shall see God.

Aristo^* As the beginning of our creation comes of god so it is mete that
after death our soul return to him again.

Boet^* The soul despyseth all worldly busynes, which being occupied about
heavenly matters, reioyseth to be delivered from these yearthly bonds.

Aristo^* The delytes of the soul are, to know her maker, to consider the
works of heaven, and to know her own estate, and being.

^^olon. A clean soul delyteth not in unclean things.

The soul knows al things, wherefore he yt knows his soul, knows all
things: and he that knows not his soul, knows nothing.

Little teaching suffiseth the good soul but to the evil much teaching
avails not.

Plato. Wine vnmeasurably taken, is an enemy to the soul.

He that fyreth his mind wholly upon the world, loses his soul: but he yt
thinks upon his soul, hates the world.

The well disposed soul* loves to do well, but the evil desires to do harm.

^en^ea. The good soul graffeth goodness, whereof salvation is the fruit, but
the euel planteth vices, the fruit whereof is damnation.

The good soul is known, in that it gladlye receives truth: and the evil by
the delight that it has in lies.

The souls of the good be sorrowful for the works of the wicked.

^^hago. A good soul has neither to great toye nor to great sorrow, for it
rejoices in goodness, and it soroweth in wyckednes: by the means whereof when
it beholds al things, and sees the good and bad so myngled together, it can
neither rejoice greatly, nor be gryeued with ouermuche sorrow.

Plato. The soul is lost that delyteth in covetousness.

Who so desires the life of his soul, ought to mortify it with the body, and
give it trouble in this world.

Aristo^* The vanities of the world are an hinderaunce to the soul.

It is better for the souls sake to suffer death, than to lose the soul for
the love of this life.

Herm^* While the soul is in company with good people, it is in joy: but when
it is among the evil, it is in sorrow and heauynes.

He is in great danger that looks not to his soul.

Sickness is the prison of the body, and sorrow the prison of the soul.

Socr^* A wise man ought to look as carefully to his soul, as to his body.

Sene^* It is better to have a soul garnished with virtue, and knowledge, than
a body decked with gorgyous apparel.

Wisdom, virtue, and understanding, are the garnyshynges of the soul.

Pyth^* Order the self so, that thy soul may always be in good estate,
whatsoever becumme of thy body.

Dispose thy soul to all good and necessary things.

Plato* Evil men by their bodily strength resist their mysfortunes, but good
me^ by virtue of ye soul, suffer them patiently: which patience comes not by
might of arm, by strength of hand, nor by force of body, but by grace of the
soul, by which we resist couetise and other worldly pleasures, hopyng to be
rewarded therefore with eternal bliss.

^ristotle. Blessed is the soul that is not infected with the fylthynes of
this world.

Plato. Woe be to the sinful soul that has not power to return to her own
place, whose fylthy works of bodily pleasure, do hyndre her from the blysfull
state, and keeps her down from the presence of god.

The sum of all.
Of all the good creatures of gods creatyng,
Most pure and precious, is the soul of man.
A perfect substance, at no time abatyng
Which with the body, the passions suffer can;
In virtue joyous, in vice both woe and wan.
Which after death shall receive the reward
Of works, which i^ life time, it most did regard.
Of the world, the love, and pleasures thereof. Cap. iiii.
Aristo^* THe world was created by the divine purueyaunce of god.

Plato. The goodness of god was cause of the worlds creation.

Herme* God created this world a place of pleasure, and reward: wherefore
such as in it suffer adversity, shall in an other be recompensed with
pleasure.

Senec* This world is a way full of hyd thistles, wherefore every man ought
to beware how he walks for pricking of him self.

Pytha* He is not wise, which knowing that he must depart from this world,
busyeth him self therein to make great buildings

This world is like a brennyng fire, whereof a little is good to warm a man,
but if he take to much, it will bren him all together.

Socra^* He that loves the world, has great travail, but he that hates it,
has rest.

He that loves the world shall not fail of one of these inconveniences or
both: that is, either to displease god, or else to be enuyed of myghtyer men
than him self.

This world is but a passage into the other, wherefore he that prepares him
things necessary for that passage, is sure from all perils.

^^rmes. This world is the delight of an hour, and sorrow of many days: but
the other world is great rest, and long joy.

He that seeks the pleasures of this world, follows a shadow: which when he
thinks he is surest of, vanishes and is nothing.

Seneca. Man has never perfect rest and joy in this world nor possesses
always his own wynnyng.

Socrat. The love of this world stops man's ears from hearing wisdom,
and blyndeth his eyes from seeing through it, also it causes a man to be
enuyed, and keeps him from doing any good.

This world gives to them that abide, an example, by them that depart.

He that trusts to this world is deceived: and he that is suspicious, is in
great sorrow.

Aristot He that delyteth in this world must needs fall into one of these two
griefs, either to lack that which he coueteth, or to lose that which he has
won with great pain.

^ythag. He that loves this world, is like unto one that enters into the
sea: for if he escape the peryls, men will say he is fortunate: but if he
perish, they will say he is wylfully deceived.

Senec^* Trust not the world, for it pays ever that it promyseth.

He that yealdeth him self to ye world ought to dispose him self to.iii.
things which he can not avoid. First to pouertye, for he shall never attain
to the riches that he desires: Secondly to suffer great pain and trouble:
Thyrdely to business without expedition.

The sum of all.
The world is a region diverse and variable,
Of God created in the beginning
To contain his creatures of kind innumerable.
Wherein each one should live by his winnyng.
Whose many pleasures are cause of great si^ning
Wherefore all that gladly, as vain do the^ hate,
Shall after this world, have permanent estate.
Of Death, not to be feared. Cap. v.
Herme^* Death is the dissolucion of the body.

Socra^* Death is not to be feared of them that be good.

Plato. Death is a thing that can not be eschued, wherefore it ought the less
to be feared.

None need to fear death, save those which have committed so much iniquity,
as after death deserves dampnation.

^^atha. Death ought rather to be desired, than despised: for it changes us
from this world of uncleanness and shame, to the pure world of worship: from
this transitorye life, to life everlasting: from the world of folly and
vanities, to the world of wisdom, reason, and truth: and from this world of
travail and pain, to ye world of rest and consolation.

^ristotle. Death is life to him that looks to have joy after it.

Socrat. A worshypful death is better than a miserable life.

Solon. He that lives well, shall dye well. Death is the rest of covetous
people.

Death of the evil, is the suretye of the good.

Plato. He which fears to have pains after death, ought in his life time,
to avoid the peril: which is his own wyckednes.

^socrat. Praise no man before death, for death is the discouerer of all his
works. Life judges indirectly of death.

Seneca. Death is the finisher of all tribulation and sorrow.

^ermes. Despise bodily death, and it shall be life to thy soul: follow
truth and thou shall be saved.

None fear to dye, save such as lack wit and reason.

Plato. For unrighteous and other mischeuous deades, the soul after death
is sore punyshed.

Aristo. Death is none other thing but the departing of the soul from the
body.

A wise man ought rather to rejoice, than to be sorye, for his death.

Bo^t^ Death dispiseth all riches and glory, and rolleth both rich and pore
folk together.

Senec* It is not death, but the remembrance thereof that makes us fearful.

Death is sweet to them that live in sorrow.

Wisdom makes men to despise death and ought therefore of al men to be
embraced, as the best remedy against the fear of death.

The sum of all.
Death the dissoluer of each mortal body,
Dryueth all again to their first matter dust.
Which while we live should put us in memory
Fro whence we came, and hence, to what we must.
Fearful to the evil, but joyful to the just,
Who after this life, through death transitory,
For deathles life joined with joy, do trust:
Whose life by death, is led to greater glory.
Of Frendshyp and friends. Cap. vi.
(...) Friendship is to be preferred before all worldly things, because there
is nothing more agreeable with Nature, nor that helps man more, either in
prosperity, or in adversity.

Frendshyp is nothing else but the agreement of divine and worldly things, with
good will and charity: and is the chyefest virtue (wisdom only excepted)
that god has given unto men.

(...) True and perfect frendshyp is, to make one heart and mind, of many
hearts and bodies.

Plato. Frendshyp ought to be engendered of egalnes, for where equality is not,
frendshyp may not long continue.

Frendshyp is a great furtheraunce to a ma^^es felicity, and without it no
wealth may be perfect.

(...) He that would endeavor to take away frendshyp from the fellowship of
man's life, should seem to take away the sun from the world.

^totle. The agreement of euel men in myschefe is not frendshyp: for frendshyp
is so pure of it self, that it will not be used in evil.

Soc^^^* Lykenes of manners engendre friendship.

Plat^* Good will is the begynner of friendship which by use causes friendship
to follow.

Iso^^* Distaunce of place seuereth not, neither hyndereth frendshyp, but it
may let the operation thereof.

Frendshyp is better than riches.

xenop^* There is neither frendshyp nor justice in them, among whom nothing is
common.

There is no man that would chose to live without friends, although he had
plenty of al other riches.

Socr^^* Every man is by nature friendly to every body.

Aristo^ It is the property of friends to live and love together.

They are no trusty friends that become friends for profyt or for pleasure.

The frendshyp that is between good and honest men, can not be broke nor
altered.

Plato* Frendshyp is the lover of love.

Such as become friends for richesse, profyt, or pleasures sake, as soon as
these fail, cease to be friendly.

Isocr^* A man ought be the same to his friend that he would be to him self:
for a friend is him self in an other person.

Plato* There can not be frendshyp between a servant and his master, in as
much as their estates be unequal: but for as much as they be both men, there
may: because that in manhood they be both equal.

(...). An evil man is neither his own friend nor yet any other man's.

Aristot. Friends in adversity are a refuge, and in prosperity a pleasure and
delight, to communicate our pleasures withal.

^ermes. Among friends all things be common. If thou desire to be thought a
friend, do thou the works, that belong to a friend.

Cicero A true friend is more to be esteemed tha^ kynsfolke.

He is a very friend, that lyghtlye forgets his friends offense.

One special friend, is better than many common friends.

Seneca. He is a good friend that does his friend good, and a mighty friend that
defend to his friend from harm.

There is no greater riches, than the agreement of good men's minds.

^ythag. If thy friend misordre him self toward the, break not of friendship
therefore immediatlye, but rather assaye by all means to refourme him: so
shalt thou not only retain thine old friend, but shalt also double his
frendshyp.

If thou desire that thy friends love may always continue, be courteous and
gentle toward him, both in speech and also in manners: forbear him in his
anger, reprove him gentlye in his error, and comfort him in his adversity.

Isocra^* Be as myndeful of thine absent friends, as of them that be present.

Do good to thy friends that they may be the frendlyer, and to thine enemies,
that they may be thy friends.

Be not rash in taking of a friend, and when thou have taken him, cast him not
of again.

Aristo^* Admytte none thy friend, except thou know first, how he has
behaved him self with his other friends before: For look how he has sarued
them, and so will he serve the.

Peria^* Be slow to fall in frendshyp, but wha^ thou art in, continue.

Prove not thy friend with damage, nor use thou him unproven: This may you
do, if when thou have no need, you feign thy self to be neadye, in which if he
help the, thou art never the worse, but if he refuse, then know thou by
faynyng, how for to trust him.

Plato. Get frendshyp of them, that follow truth.

Prove thy friend with adversity, and with fellowship in danger.

Seneca* So use thy friend, as if he afterward should be thine enemy.

Scornful men are dangerous friends.

^ermes. Whosoever loves good manners perseuereth in frendshyp.

(...) The injury of a friend is more grievous than the injury of an enemy.

Soc^^^* Better is an open enemy, that a frendlye foe.

(...) It is a sweet pleasure for a man to help and be helped of his friends.

^ristot. Frendshyp is the chefest good thing in a city.

Kingdoms are preserved and mayntayned by friends and frendshyp.

(...) Consulte and determine all things with thy friend, but with thy self
first.

He does amysse that seeks a friend in the marker, and allows him at a
banker or (...) a feast.

It is more pleasant to make a friend, than to have a friend.

There be many that lack no friends, and yet lack frendshyp.

A wise man although he be content and satisfied with him self, yet will he
have friends, because he will not be destitute of so great a virtue.

What can be more pleasant than a man to have a friend, with whom he may be
bold to talk any thing as boldelye as with him self.

Bear witness rather against friendship than against truth.

Care not what richesse thou lose, for the wynnyng of true friends.

The sum of all.
Frendshyp, which is the agreement of minds
In truth and love, is the chyefest virtue
Of moral virtues, yt in the world man fyndes.
Wherefore in the world to live who so minds,
Ought frendshyp to get, and got to ensue,
By love, (not by lucre, yt true friendship blyndes.)
Rayt with an heart, where rancor never grue.
Which knot estates equality so byndes,
That to dissolve, in vain may Fortune sue,
Though malice help, which.ii. al glory gryndes.
So strong is frendshyp, as no stormy wyndes
Have might to move, nor fear force to subdue
Where al these points be settled in their kinds.
Of counsel and counsaylours. Cap. vii.
Aristot* Counsel is an hollye thing.

Plato. There cannot be in man a more divine thing than to ask counsel, how
for to order him self.

Socra. Counsel is the kaye of certayntie.

Isocra* Be secret in counsel, and take heed what ye speak before your
enemies.

He that gives good counsel to an other, begins to profyt him self.

Wrath and hastines are very evil cou^saylours.

Isocra. If thou would know a man's counsel in any matter, and would
not him to know thine intent, talk as if thy matter were an other man's, so
shalt thou know his judgment therein, and he never the wyser of that thou
entendest.

Sen^ca. When thou wylt take counsel in any matter, mark well thy
counsaylours, bow they order their own busynes: for if they be evil
councellers toward them selves, they will be worse toward other men.

Take no council of him that has his heart all set upon the world, for his
advise shall be after his plesaunce.

^enoph. Good council is the end and beginning of every work.

He is discrete that keeps his own counsel, and he is unwise that
discovers it.

(...) Make not an angrye man, nor a drunkarde, of thy counsel, nor any that
is in subjection to a woman: for it is not possible yt they should keep close
thy secrets.

Aristot. He that keeps secret that which he is required, does well: but he
that keeps secret that which is not required, is to be trusted.

If thou thy self can not keep thine own counsel, much less will other
to whom thou show it.

Socrat. A wise man ought to take council, for fear of myring his will with
his wit.

Wrath and hastynes, are very evil counsaylours.

The sum of all.
Counsel is a thing so needful and hollye,
That without it, no work may prosper well.
Wherefore it behoues him ye hates his follye,
Naught to begin, without he take council.
Which whosoever uses, shall never him repent
Of time or travail that he therein has spent.
Of richesse and poverty. Cap. viii.
Plato. SUffisaunce is better in richesse, than abundance.

Pythag* He is not rich, yt enjoys not his own gooddes.

Aristot. Virtue is greater richesse, than either silver or gold.

Hermes Labor for the riches, that after death profyt the soul.

Plato. Wisdom is the treasure of the wit, where with every man ought to enriche
him.

A covetous man can not be rich.

To delight in riches, is a dangerous vice.

Poverty with suertye, is better than richesse with fear.

Socra. The profit of silence is less than the profit of speech, and the
harm of speech is more than the harm of silence.

^^hago. A fool is known by his speech, and a wise man by silence.

^iogen. There is great virtue in a man's ears. He that blabbeth much,
declares him self to have small knowledge.

He that will not keep silence, is to be blamed: and he that speaks not till
he be hydden, is to be praised.

It is better to hear, than to speak.

Either talk of virtue thy self, or give ear to them that will talk thereof.

Hermes. Multiply silence, so shall thou avoid many peryls.

Silence is the answer of folyshe questions.

Of al good things, the greatest quantity is the best, save of words.

Thalee. We ought to bear double as much as we speak, and therefore has
Nature given us two ears, and but one tongue.

Socrat. A man has power over his words til they be spoken, but after they be
uttered they have power over him.

A man ought to consider before, what he will speak, and to utter nothing that
may repent him afterward.

Pythag. He that speaks little, harkeneth and learneth at the speech of other:
but when he speaks, other learn of him.

Plato. Words without good effect, is like a great water that droundeth the
people, and does it self no profyt.

The fylthe of worldelye wisdom is known by much speech.

Seneca. He knows not how to speak, that knows not how to hold his
peace.

It is better to speak well, than to keep silence: and it is better to keep
silence, tha^ to speak evil.

Socrat. To talk of God is the best communication: and to think upon him is
the best silence.

The sum of all.
Both speech and silence are excelent virtues.
Used in time and place convenient.
Of which the best, and easyest to abuse
Is speech, for which men often times repent.
So do they not because they be sylent.
Yet be not dumme, nor give thy long the lease.
But speak thou well, or hear, and hold thy peace.
Of Kings, rulers, and governors, how they should rule their subjects.
Cap. x.
Aristotle. Kings, rulers, and gouernoures, should first rule them selves, and
than their subjects.

Plato. He is unmeet to rule other, yt can not rule his self.

None ought to rule, except he first have learned to obey.

Dronkenens, hauynes and couetise, are to be abhorred of all men, but specially
of prince and rulers.

Hermes. If a king be negligent in serchyng the works of his enemies, and the
hearts and wylles of his subjects, he shall not long be in suretye in his
realm.

The strength of a king, is the frendshyp and love of his people.

^ithago. The subjects are to their king, as the wind is to a fire: for the
stronger that ye wind is, the greater is the fire.

The king that follows truth, and rules according to justice, shall raygne
quietlye: but he that does the contrary, seeks an other to raygne for him.

Plato. When couetyse is bound to the king, the realm is in prosperity: but
when the king is bound to couetyse, the realm is in an evil taking.

Aristo. A kings good word is better than a great gift of an other man.

Hermes. The most secret counsel of a king, is his conscience: and his
virtuous deades are his chefest treasures.

Aristotle* It is not so great an honor for a king to conquer, as for to
govern them well, whom he has conquered.

If a king be merciful, his estate shall prosper, and his wisdom shall help
him in his need: if he be just, his subjects shall rejoice in him, and his
reygne shall prosper, and his estate continue.

Socrat. A king ought not to trust him greatly that is covetous, which sets
his mind wholly to get great richesse, nor him that is a flatterer, nor any to
whom he has done wrong, nor in him that is at truce with his enemies.

Plutare* A king ought to refrain the company of vicious persons, for the
evil which they do in his company, is reputed his.

If becomes a king to take good head to his counsaylours, who follow his
iustes and which entende the common weal, yt he may know whom for to trust.

Solon. It appertains to princes, to see that their children be well brought
up, infourmed in wisdom, and instruct in manners, that they may be able after
them, to rule and govern their kingdoms.

Hermes. Ye kings remember first your king, the governor of al: and as ye
would be honored of your subjects, so honor ye him

Use no familiarity with any vicyous person. Trust none with your secrets,
before ye have proved them. Sleep no more than shall suffyse the sustentation
of your bodies. Love ryghteousnes and truth. Embrace wisdom. Feed
measurablye. Reward your trusty friends. Favor your communaltie, considering
that by it, your realms are mayntayned. Love learned me^ that the ignorant
may thereby, be encoraged to learning. Defend the true and just, and punysh
the evil doers, that other monyshed thereby, may flyethe like vices. Cut of the
stealers hands.

Hang up thieves and robbers, that the high ways may be the surer.

Burn the Sodomytes. Stone the aduouterers. Beware of liars and flatterers,
and punysh them. Suffer not the swearers to escape vnponyshed.

Uisit your prisoners, and deliver the vngyltye.

Punyshe immediately such as have deserved it.

Follow not your own wylles, but be ruled by counsel: so shall you give
your selves rest, and labor unto other.

Be not to suspicious, for that shall both disquyet your selves, and also cause
men to draw from you.

Aristo. It is a great chastysement to the people, to have a ryghteous prince:
and it is a great corruption unto them to have a corrupt and vicyous ruler.

Plutare* A king ought to be of a good courage, to be courteous, fre, and
lyberall, to refrain his wrath where he ought, and show it where it needs:
to keep him from couetise, to execute true justice: and to follow the
virtuous examples to his good predicessours: and if it chance that ye strength
of his body fail, yet ought he to keep the strength of his courage.

The sum of all.
A king which in earth, is even the same
That god is in heaven (of kings king eterne,)
Should first fear god, and busily him frame
Him self to rule, and than his realm govern,
By law, by love, by justice and by right.
Cherishyng the good, and punishyng the stubberne
The lengthenyng of his raygne, and doubling of his might.
The precepts of the wise. Cap. xi.
Solon. Worship God.
Reverence thy father and mother.
Help thy friends.
Hate no man.
Maintain truth.
Sweat not.
Obey the laws.
Think that which is just.
Moderate thine anger. Praise virtue.
Persecute the evil with extreme hatred.
Thales. Honor thy king. Try thy friends.
Be the self same, that thou pretendest.
Abstain from vice. Love peace.
Desire honor and glory, for virtue.
Take heed to thy life, and be circumspect.
Deserve praise of every body.
Cast whysperers and tale bearers, out of thy company.
Take in good worth what so ever chances.
^^obu^. Be not high minded. Judge iustlye.
Be careful for thy householde.
Read over good books. Do good to good people. Refrain from foul language.
Bring up in learning thy children that thou love best.
Be not suspicious nor gelouse.
Uanquish thy parents with sufferaunce.
Remember them which have done the good, and forget not their benefittes.
Despise nor thine underlings.
Desire not other men's gooddes.
Run not headlyng in to doubtful matters.
Keep thy friends gooddes as safe as thou would thine own.
Do not that to an other, which thou thy self hate.
Thretten no body, for it is womanlyke.
Be redyer to go to thy friend in time of his misery, than in his prosperity.
Chilon. Know thy self. Bear no man malice.
Use temperaunce. Fly fylthy things.
Get thy goods justly. Lose no time.
Use wisdom. Please the most.
Be well manered. Suspecte nothing.
Hate sclaunder. Be not importunate.
Let not thy tongue run before thy wit*
Prove not that which thou may not atchyue.
Love as if thou would hate, and hate as if thou would love shortly after.
Per^a^d^* Please every body. Hate vyolence.
Be always one to thy friend, as well in adversity, as in prosperity.
Perform whatsoever thou promisest.
Keep close thy misfortune, least thine enemy rejoice at it.
Stycke to the truth. Abstain from vice.
Do that which is ryghtfull and just.
Give place to thy betters, and to thine elders.
Abstain from swearyng. Follow virtue.
Moderate thy lusts and affections.
Praise honest things. Hate debate.
Be merciful to the penitent.
Instruct thy children. Requyte benefits.
Enhaunt wysemens company.
Esteem greatly good men. Fly rebuke.
Hear that which to the belongs.
Be enuyous to no man. Answer aptlye.
Do nothing that may repent the.
Honor them that have deserved honor.
Be fair speched. Fear the officers.
Maintain concord. Flatter not.
When thou do amysse, take better counsel.
Trust not to the time. Hope well.
Be seruisable to every body.
Take good head to thy self.
Reverence thine elders with obedience.
Fight, and dye for thy countreye.
Mourn not for every thing, for that will shorten thy life.
Get a wytty woman to thy wife, and she shall bring the forth wise children.
Live and hope, as if thou should dye immediatlye.
Spare as though thou were immortal.
Hate pride and vain glory.
Smell not in welthe. Seal up secrets.
Tarry always for a conuentent tym.
Give liberally for thy profyt.
Do no man wrong. Avoid gryefe.
Mock not the dead. Use thy friends.
Give blameles counsel, and comfort thy friends.
Byas. Behold thy self often in a lokyng glass, and if thou appear
bewtyfull, do such things as become thy bewetye: but if thou seem foul, than
perform with good manners, the bewtye that thy face lacks.

Talk none evil of God, but search diligently to know what he is.

Hear much, but speak little.
First understand, and than speak.
Praise not the unworthy, because of his richesse.
Get up persuasion, and not by vyolence.
Get the sobrenes in thy youth, and wisdom in thine age.

Pittach* Tell not abroad what thou entendest to do, for if thou speed not,
thou shalt be mocked.

Pay thy dettes. Reuyle not thy friend:
Rule thy wife. Be not slowthefull.
If thy fellows hurt them small things suffer it, and be as bold with them.
Take not thine enemy for thy friend, nor thy friend for thine enemy.
Be not judge between thy friends.
Strive not with thy father and mother, although thou say the truth.
Rejoice not at any man's misfortune.
Let thy mind rule thy tongue.
Be obedient to the law. Hear gladlye.
Attempt nothing above thy strength.
Be not hasty to speak, nor slow to hear.
Wyshe not the thing, which thou may not obtain.
Above and before all things worship
God. Reverence thine elders.
Refrain thy lust. Break up hatred:
^ermes. Be obedient unto thy king, and worship those that be in authority
under him.

Love God and truth, so shall thou save thy soul.

Envy not though an evil man prosper, for surely his end shall not be good.

Be satisfied with little, for it will increase and multiplye.

Trust not to the time, for it deceyueth sodaynlye them that trust thereto.

Upbrayde no man with his misery. Mary thy match.

Take good aduysement ere thou begin ought, but when thou have begone, dispatch
it quyckely.

^ythag. Before thou go from home, deuyse with thy self what thou wylt do
abroad, and when thou art come home again, remember what thou have done
abroad.

Socra^* Neither flatter, nor chyde thy wife before strangers.

Be not proud in prosperity, neither despair in adversity.

In prosperity be ware, and in adversity hope for better fortune.

Learn by other men's vices, how fylthy thine own are.

Moderate thy lusts, thy tongue, and thy belly.

Do not that thy self, which thou dispraysest in an other.

Covet not to ware rich through deceyte.

Aristip* Look what thank thou rendrest to thy parents, and look for the like
again of thy children.

Rule not, except thou have first learned to obey.

Yealde unto reason. Fly evil company.
Sclaunder not them that he dead.
Prepare the such richesse, as when the ship is broken, may swymme, and
skape with their master.

Plato* Learn such things while thou art a child, as may profytte the
when thou art a man.

Endeavor thy self to do so well, that other may envy the therefore.

Spend not to outragyouslye, nor be to ^ygardysh: so shalt thou neither be
nedy, nor in bondage to thy riches.

(...). Be pacient in tribulation, and give no man cause to speak evil of the.

Look well to the saulfegarde of thine own body.

Socra. Know thy self, so shall no flatterer begylde the.

Be virtuous and lyberall, so shall thou either stop the sclaunderers mouth,
orels the ears of them that shall hear him.

^^oph. Meddle not with that, with which thou have naught to do.

Neither suffer thy hands to work, nor thy tongue to speak, nor thine ears
to hear, that which is evil.

^^hago. Sleep not before thou have considered how thou have bestowed the day
past: If thou have well done, thank god: if otherwise, repent, and ask him
forgeuenes.

Desire God at the beginning of thy works, that thou may by his help,
bring them to a good conclusion.

^ristot. Walk not in the way of hatred.

Do not what thou would, but what thou should.

Praise not a man except he be praise worthy.

If thou wylt correct any man, do it rather with gentleness, then with violent
extremity.

Use measure in all things.

Socra^^ When thou talkest with a stranger, be not to full of communication,
till thou know whether he be better learned than thou: and if thou be better,
speak than the boldlyer, else be quiet, and learn of him.

Give thy wife no power over the, for if thou suffer her to day, to tread
upon thy foot, she will to morrow tread upon thy head. Fyxe thy will to do
justice, and swear not.

Ar^stip^ Haunt not to much thy friends houses, for that engenders no great
love: nor be to long from thence, for that engenders hate, but use a mean in
all things.

Socra^^ Trouble not thy self with worldelye carefulnes, but resemble the
birds of the air, which in the morning seek their food, but only for the
day.

Doubt them whom thou know, and trust not them whom thou know not.
Wander not by night, nor in the dark.

Labor not to enfourme him, that is without reason, for so shalt thou make
him thine enemy.

Plat^ Use not woman's company, except necessity compel the.

Esteem him as much that teaches the one word of wisdom, as if he gave the
gold.

Swear not for any manner of advantage.

Seneca. Affirm nothing before thou know the truth.

Begin nothing before thou know owe for ^o fynysh it.

Be not hastye, angrye, nor wrathful, for they be the conditions of a fool.

Refrain from vice, for virtue is a precious garment.

Socrat Beware of the baytes of a wanton woman, which are laid out to catch
men, for they are a great hynderaunce to him that desires wisdom.

^^oph. Measure thy patthes, and go the right way, so shall thou go safely.

Refrain from couetyse, and thine estate shall prosper.

Use justice, and thou shalt be both beloved, and also feared.

If thou will disprayse him whom thou hate, show not that thou art his
enemy.

^^rmes. Take heed to the meat that a gelou^ woman gives the.

Let neither thy bewtye, thy youth, nor thy health deceive the.

^^istot. Break not the laws that are made for the wealth of thy country.

Apply thy mind to virtue, and thou shalt be saved.

Praise nothing that is not commendable: nor disprayse ought that is praise
worthy.

Plato. Travail not much to win that which will lightly perysh.

Ensue the virtues of thy good auncesters.

Senec^ Array thy self with justice, and clothe the with chastity, so shall
thou be happy, and thy works prosper.

Enforce the to get both wisdom and science: by which thou may direct
both thy soul and body.

Pyth^ Endeavor thy self so to keep the law that god may be pleased with the.

Covet not thy friends riches, least thou he despised and hated therefore.

Reprove not a man in his wrath, for than thou may not rule him.

Herm^^ Rejoice not at an other man's mysfortune, but take heed by him, that
ye like chance not the.

Stablysh thy wit both on thy right hand, and on the left, and thou shalt
be free.

Socr^^ Give to the good, and he will requyte it: but give to the evil
disposed, and he will ask more.

Iso^^ Be not slack to recompense them that have done for the.

Think first, than speak, and last of all fulfill.

Accustom not thy self to be sodaynlye moved, for it will turn to thy
displeasure.

Pythag. If thou entend to do any good, tarry not till to morrow, for thou
know not what may chance the this night.

Aristot. If thou feel thy self more true to thy king than many other, and
have also less wages of him than they, yet complain not, for thine will
continue, and ^o will not theyrs.

^^ogen. If any man envy the or say evil by the set not thereby, and thou shall
dysappoynt him of his purpose.

Forget not to give thanks to the^ that instruct the in learning, nor
challenge to thy self the praise of other men's inueacions.

Socrat. Love all men, and be subject to al laws but obey god more than men.

Plato. If thou wylt be counted valiant, let neither chance nor grefe
overcome the.

Give good ear to the aged, for he can teach the of thy life to come.

Fly lecherous lusts, as thou would a furyous lord.

Attempt not two things at ones, for the one will hinder the other.

^ristot. Let no covetous man have any rule over the, nor yield thy self
subject to couetyse: for the covetous manne will defraude the of thy gooddes,
and covetousness will defrawde the of thy self.

Receive not the gifts that an evil disposed man does proffer the.

Plato. Be sober and chaste among young folk that they may learn of the, and
among old, that thou may learn of them.

Senec^ Order thy wife as thou would thy kynsfolke.

Plato. Apply thy self so now in virtue, that in time to come, thou may
therefore be praised.

Think that the weakest of thine enemies is stronger than thy self.

Be not ashamed to do justice, for all that is done without it, is tyranny.

Fortifye thy soul with good works, and fly from couetyse.

If thou entend not to do good, yet at the lest refrain from doing evil.

Arist^^ Give not thy self much to pleasure and ease, for if thou use thy
self thereto, thou shall not be able to sustain the adversity that may
afterward chance unto the.

Endeavor thy self in thy youth to learn although it be paynful, for it is
less pain for a man to learn in his youth, then in his age to be vncunnyng.

When thou art weary of study, sport thy self with readyng of good stories.

Covet not to have thy business hastily done, but rather desire that it may be
well done.

Rejoice without great laughter.

Aristot. Desire not to be wise in words, but in works, for wisdom of
speech wastes with the world, but works wrought by wisdom, encreace into
ye world to come.

If thou doubt in any thing, ask counsel of wysemen: and be not angrye,
although they reprove the.

Worship good men, so shall thou obtain the peoples favor.

P^ogen. Keep no company with him, that knows not him self.

Be not like the boulter, that casts out the flower, and keeps in the branne.

Commit^e not the governance of people, to a child, to a fool, to a covetous
man, nor to any hasty person, that is desirous of reuengeaunce.

Plato. If thou desire to be good, endeavor thy self to learn, to know, and
to follow truth: for he that is ignorant therein, and will not learn, can not
be good.

Aristot. Keep a measure in thy communicacion for if thou be to brefe, thou
shalt not be well understood: and if thou be to long, thou shall not be well
borne in mind.

To him that is to full of his questions, give thou none answer at all.

^ythag. Use examples, that such as thou teach, may understand the the
better.

Reason not with him that will deny the principal truths.

Aristot. Take good heed at the beginning, to what thou grauntest: For after
one inconvenience, an other follows.

If thou desire to have delight without sorrow, apply thy mind to study
wisdom.

Seneca Marry a young maid, that thou may teach her good manners.

Keep company with them, that may make the better.

Be bound unto wisdom, that thou may obtain the true liberty.

Love, if thou wylt be loved.

So live with men, as if god saw the. So talk with god, as if men heard the.

Fear follows hope, wherefore if thou will not fear, hope not*

Desire not to dwell nygh a rich man, for that shall make the covetous.

Eschew anger, though not for wysedomes sake, yet for thy bodyly healthes sake.

If thou desire to be quiet minded, thou must either be a poor man in dead, or
else like to a poor man.

Take not thought to live long, but to live well.

For so much as thou art not certain in what place death abides the, be thou
ready prepared in each place to mete him.

Praise a man for that, which may neither be given him, nor taken away from
him: which is not his fair house, nor his goodly garments, nor his great
householde, but his wit and perfect reason.

Seneca Labor not for great number of books, but for the goodness of them.

Use thine ears more than thy tongue.

Desire nothing that thou would deny, if it were axed the.

What so ever thou wylt speak, before thou show it to an other, show it
secretly to thy self.

What so ever thou wylt have kept secret, show unto no body.

Search forth the cause of every deed.

Let not thy thoughts depart from the truth.

Promise with consyderation, and per form faithfully.

Praise little, but disprayse less.

Let not the authority of the speaker persuade the, nor regard thou his
person that speaks, but mark well what it is that is spoken.

Perform more fully, than thou have promised.

Such things as thou have, use thou as thine own, and keep them not as if
they were an other bodies.

Be gentle and loving to every body, flatter none, be familier with few, be
indifferent and equal toward every man, be slow to wrath, swyfte to mercy
and pity: be constant and pacient in adversity, and in prosperity, wa^e and
lowlye.

Seneca. Worship gentleness and hate cruelty.

Fly and eschew thine own vices, and be not curyous to search out other
me^nes.

Be not busye to vpbrayde men with their faults, for so shalt thou be hated
of every body.

Sumtyme among earnest things, use merry conceytes, but measurably.

Live with thine underlings as thou would thy betters should live with
the: and do to all men as thou would be done by.

Think not thy self to be that, which thou art not, nor desire to seem
greater than thou art in deed.

Think all things may be suffered save fylthynes and vice.

Eat rather for honger than for pleasure and delight.

Be apt to learn wisdom, and diligent to teach it.

Be merry without laughter.

Thou shalt be loved of god, if thou follow him in this point: In desire to
do good to all men, and to hurt no body.

Believe him not that says he loves truth, and follows it not.

Solon. Se that thy gifts be according to thine ability: for if they be to
byg. thou shall be thought a waster: and again if they be to small, thou shall
be thought a nygarde.

Let thy gifts be such as he to whom thou geuest them does delight in.

Seneca. Give no vain and unmeet gifts as armor to women, books to a
plowman, or nets to a student.

Give to the nedye, yet so that thou need not thy self,

Succor them that perish, yet not so, that thou thy self perysh thereby.

If thou bestow a benefit, keep it secret: but if thou receive any, publyshe
it abroad.

Speak not to him that will not hear, for else thou shall but vere him.

Give at the first axynge, for it is not freely given, that is often craved.

Boast not thy self of that, which is an other man's.

Blame not Nature, for she does for every man alyke.

If thou will praise any man, because he is a gentleman, praise his pare^tes
also. If thou praise him for his richesse, that appertains to Fortune. If
thou praise him for his strength, remember that sickness will make him weak. If
thou praise him for his swyftnes of body, remember that age will take it
away. If for his bewtye, it will sone vanyshe. But if thou will praise him for
manners and learning, than as much as appertains to a man, praise thou him:
for that is his own, which neither comes by heritage, neither alters with
Fortune, nor is changed by age, but is always one with him.

Fly the company of a lyat, but if thou must needs keep company with him,
beware that in any case thou believe him not.

Give part of thy goods to the neady, so shall god encreace them.

Socrat* Sow good woor^kes, and thou shalt reap the flowers of joy and
gladness.

Boast not of thy good deades, least thine evil be also laid to thy charge.

Company not with him, that knows not him self.

Be not ashamed to bear the truth, of whom so ever it be: for truth is so
noble of it self, that it makes them honorable that pronounce it.

If thou have not so much power, as to refrain thine ire, yet dissemble it,
and keep it secret, and so by little and little, forget it.

Pythag* Honor wisdom, and deny it not to them that would learn, and show
it unto them that disprayse it.

Sow not the sea fyeldes.

Isocrat. Give not so light credence to a man's words, nor laugh thou them to
scorn: for the one is the property of fool, and the other the condition of a
mad man.

Think not such things honest to be spoke of, that are fylthy (...).

Accustom not thy self to be heavy and sad, for if thou do, thou shall be
thought fyrce: yet be thoughtful, for that is a token of a prudent man.

So do all things, as if every manne should know them, yet keep them close
a while, and at length, discover them.

Learn diligently the goodness which is taught the: For it is as great shame
for a man not to learn the good doctrine that is taught him, as to refuse a
gift pro^ered him of his friend.

Let it not grieve the to take pain to go to learn of a cunnyng man. For it
were great shame for young men, not to travail a little by land to encreace
their knowledge, sith marchantes sail so far by sea, to augment their riches.

Be gentle in thy behauyour, and familier in communication: It belongs to
gentleness, to salute gladlye them that we mete: and to familiarity, to talk
with the^ gently and frendlye.

Behave thy self gentlye to every body, so shall thou make the good thy
friends: and keep the bad, from being thine enemies.

Use thy self to labor, by thine own accord, that if it chance the to be
compelled thereto, thou may away with it the better.

Perform thy promys, as iustlye as thou would pay thy det^es: for a man
ought to be more faithful than his oath.

For two causes if thou be constrained, thou may swear: as to discharge thy
self from any great offense, or to save thy friends from great danger. But
for money, thou shall not swear any oath: for if thou do, thou shall of some
be thought forsworn: and of othersome, to be desirous of money.

Think it as great a shame to be overcome with thy friends benefytes, as with
the iniurye of thine enemies.

Allow them for thy friends that be as joyous for thy prosperity, as they
seem sorrowful for thy misfortune: For there be many that lament a man's
misery, that would have envy to se him prosper.

Desire to be cleanlye, and not gorgyous in thine apparel.

If thou do good to the evil, it shall happen to the, as it does to the^ that
feed other men's dogs, which barcke as well at their feeder, as at an other
stranger.

^^thag. Do not such things thy self as thou would disprayse in an other.

Enforce thy self to refrain thy evil lusts, and follow the good, for the
good mortifyeth and destroys the evil.

^ocra. Speak ever of god, and god will always put good words in thy mouth.

Set thine own works always before thine eyes, but cast other men's
behind thy back.

Fyxe not thy mind upon worldly pleasure, nor trust to the world, for it
deceyueth all, that put their trust therein.

Be content with little, and covet not an other man's gooddes.

Be saber in thy living, and replenysh thine heart with wisdom.

Dread God, and keep thy self from vain glory.

Mock not an other man for his miserye, but take heed by him, how to avoid
the like misfortune.

Let no man persuade the by flattery to do any evil, nor to believe otherwise
of thy self, than thou art in deed.

^rmes. Receive patiently the words of correction, though they seem grievous.

Fear the vengeance of God, all that thou may, and consider the greatness of
his puyssaunce and might.

By ware of spies and talebearers.

Socrat. Tell nothing to him that will not believe the, nor demand any thing
which thou know before will not be granted.

Fear God above all things, for that is ryghtfull and profitable: and so
order thy self, that thy thoughts and words be always of him: for the
speaking and thynkyng of god surmounteth so much al other words and thoughts,
as god him self surmounteth al other creatures, and therefore men ought to
obey him, though they should be constrained to the contrary.

Make thy prayers perfect in the sight of god: for prayer is like a ship in the
sea, which if it be good, saves all therein, but if it be naught, suffers
them to perysh.

Plutar^ Pray not to god to give the sufficient, for that he will give to each
man vna^ed: but pray that thou may be content and satisfied with that
which he gives the.

Believe him not which tells the a lie by an other body: for he will in like
manner make a lie of the to an other man.

If thou desire to be beloved of every body, salute each man gladly, be
lyberall in gyuyng, and thankful in receyuyng.

Forget thine anger lyghtlye, and desire not to be revenged.

If thou desire to continue long with an other man, pain the to instruct him
well in good manners.

The conclusion.
THese are part of the precepts and counsayles of the heathen men, which taken
and used as they should be, are not unmeet for Christen men to follow. Of
which I could have made a greater book, but for so much as these few
contain the effect of all, and because also yt men will be sone weary of
tediouse matters, be they never so good, it seemed good for fear of bryuyng men
from it, before they saw it, to be as brefe as might be: wysshyng that these
few might be well accepted. To the which I have set no summaryes, because I
would that they should be read thoroughlye. And although they be so easy,
plain, and common, that every child can say the same, yet being so little
followed of men, which should know them best, I thought it no shame at all
to write them, which mind not in this book to teach men to speak, but to do
ye things which they can speak already.

Wherein peradventure some will muse why I have attributed so many sentences
to Socrates, which they perhaps know to have be written of other men: in
which doing I followed the proverb. Doubtefull things ought to be interpreted
to the best. And therefore such things as I have found written, without
certaynty of any certain author, I have ascrybed unto him, not only because
they be things meet for him to speak, but because they be written by some of
his scholars, which learned them of him. Among whom the most excellent,
sets forth such things in his masters name, that the authority of the
speaker, might cause the matter to be more regarded. I mean Plato, whose
example in this point I have followed, yet not so desirous to persuade with the
authority of the speaker, as with goodness of the thing, which he has spoken.

The which with all the rest, I would wyssh al men to learn, and follow.

The end of the second book.
The use of proverbs and adages. Cap. ^.
Like as a lover delyted in the goodly beauty of his love, can never be
satisfied in beholding her, neither can take any rest until he have by
praysyng, enflamed other to delight in the same, labouryng to the uttermost to
set forth his beloved: Even so the ^hylosophers rauyshed in the love of
wisdom, have not only labored to know it to the uttermost, but have also
devised by all manner means, to provoke and entice all men to delight in the
same: and because they considered men's minds to be variable, and diversely
delytyng, they devised to set out wisdom in sundry kinds of writing, that
every man might find wherein to delight, and so to be caught in his own
pleasure. Among which kinds of teaching although precepts and counsayles be
the most plain and easy, yet lack they the grace of delight, which in their
Proverbs they have supplied, and that so fynely and so wyttely, that they
both delight and persuade excedynglye, myxed with such piththynes in words
and sentence, as may minister occasion to muse and study, a cause to fire
them the better in memory: and like a plaster both corrosyue and incarnatiue,
tanting vices, and showing the remedies: being therwithall so brefe, that
without trouble they may be contained. As for an example this little proverb.

Wrath leads shame in a lease.

What might there be said to cause a man more to refayne his wrath? For every
man naturally hates shame, which since it is the follower and end of anger,
and thereto joined inseperablye, even as the shadow follows the body, what man
considering the end, will use him self thereto. And to make him ashamed, lo
here an other.

He that to his wrath and anger is thrall, Over his wit has no power at all.

Now what may make a man more ashamed of him self, than to be thought a very
fool? I suppose nothing.

Wherefore sith this kind is so wytty, and so pleasant, I have endeavored in
this book to gather together part of their proverbs, and have sundred them
into chapters, that they might the easylier be had and found out for all manner
pourposes. And such things as I thought most proper, I have drawn into
meter, and joined with them diverse other, by other men done already, to the
intent that such as delight in English meter, and can retain it in memory
better than prose, might find herin somewhat according to their desires: which
book and meters I submyt to the correction of fine wytted and well learned men,
desyring them herein to pardon mine ignorance, and to bear with my boldness
which thought it better though rudely to do sumwhat, than to be idle, and to
do nothing. For by ydlenes, no goodness may come: but al wyckednes has grown
there of according to the proverb.

Ydlenes is the cause of ignorance, and Ignorance the cause of error.

Where as by this my labor, though simple and rude, I may chance to stir
up sum by occasion herein given, to handle the matter as I would I could my
self. Ones I am sure, that by my labor can cu^me none evil, whereas good may
chance thereby diverse ways.

Yet to Momus, and his scorneful mayny, which I am sure will despise this,
before they know it, as it is their custom in all manner matters be they never
so good, I will object this saying of Horace.

If ye can do better, my fre^des set it forth: If not, use mine, and take it
well in worth.

Of wisdom, learning, and understanding. Cap. ii.
Aristot. Socrat. Understanding is a light which God powers into man's soul.

Wisdom is the knoweledge of divine things, and is the head of al other
sciences.

Wisdom is life, and ignorance is death: wherefore the wise man lives, for
why, he understands what he does: but the ignorant is dead, because he
does he knows not what.

Of all the gifts of god, wisdom is chefest. Wisdom orders the mind,
she directs the life, and rules the works thereof, teaching what ought
to be done, and what to be left undone, without which no man may be safe.

Wisdom teaches to do as well as to speak.

Plato. Of all the gifts of God, wisdom is most excellent, she gives
goodness to the good: and forgeueth the wicked their wyckednes.

To men of low degree, wisdom is an honor: and folyshnes is a shame to men
of high degree.

Wisdom garnysheth riches, and shadoweth poverty.

Wisdom is the defense of the soul, and the myrrour of reason, and therefore
blessed is he that trauayleth to get her, for she is the ground and rote of al
noble deades, by her we obtain the chyefe good, that is eternal felicity.

Seneca. Prudence is the gyde of all other good virtues.

Hermes* Of all the good gifts of God, wisdom is the purest: she gives
goodness to good people, and obtayneth for the wicked pardon for their
wyckednes: she makes the poor rich, and the rich, honorable: and such as
unfeignedly embrace her, she makes like to God.

Wisdom and Justice are honorable, both to god and man.

Intelligence is king both of heaven and yearthe.

Wisdom is the messenger of reason*

Pytha. Wisdom at the beginning seems a great wonder.

Wisdom is like a thing fallen into the water, which no man can find,
except he search it at the bottom.

Wisdom thoroughly learned will never be forgotten.

So^^^. Science is got by diligence, but discretion and wisdom comes of God.

In the company of wysemen is rest, but in the fellowship of fools is nothing
but labor.

A wyseman ought not to sorrow for his losses, but to be careful to keep the
rest of his goods.

A wise man is known by.ii. points. He will not lightly be angry for ye wrong
that is done him: neither is proud wha^ he is praised.

He that seeks wisdom the right way, fyndeth her: but many err because
they seek her not duly, and blame her without cause.

^socrat. A wise man is known by.iii. points. In making his enemies his
friends. In making the rude learned, and in refourmyng the evil disposed unto
goodness,

He is wise that acknowledges his ignorance, and he is ignorant that knows
not him self.

Seneca. There is none happy, but the wise man.

Wysemen for the truths sake, ought to contrary one an other, that by their
contencion ye truth may the better be known.

Plato. It is better to be wise and not to seem so, than to seem wise and not
to be so: yet men for the most part desire the contrary.

A wise man understands both the things that are above him, and those also
that are benethe him: he knows the things that are above him, by the
benefyttes which he receives thereby, and things beneth him, by the use and
profit that he has by them.

Herme^ Wisdom teaches man to know his creator.

Senec^ A perfect wise man mortifyeth his worldly desyers, by means whereof
he subdueth both his soul and body.

He that desires wisdom, desires the most high and divine estate.

He that fyndeth wisdom, fyndeth life both in this world, and in the world
to come.

It is not possible for him to be wise, that desires not to be good.

Aristo^ A young man can not be perfectly wise for wisdom requires experience,
which for lack of time, young men may not have.

A wyseman ought to repute his error great, and his goodness small.

^eneca The wyseman, and not the rich is void of misery.

He shall be wise that enhaunteth wise men's company.

It is not uncomely for wysedomes sake for a man to be in subjection, to whom
soever it be.

A wise man is known by silence, and a fool by much babblyng.

Learning makes young men sober, it comfort old men, it is richesse to the
pore, and it garnisheth the rich.

It is a shame for a wise man to say, I thought not so much.

Pytha. Much bablyng is sign of small knowledge.

Knowledge is better in youth than in age.

A wise man caryeth all his gooddes with him.

The best kind of learning is to unlearn our euyls.

No man may refrain from doing amysse: but a wise man by one peril, will
avoid an other.

Plato. Wisdom in the heart of a fool, is like a flying thing, that can not
long continue in one place.

A man of perfect wisdom, can not dye, and a man of good understanding can
not be poor.

Learning is studyes sister.

Wisdom is a tree which springs in the heart, and bears fruit in the
tongue.

Without study of wisdom the mind is sick.

Early rising and much watching, are profitable to keep a man in health, and
to increase his wisdom.

A man without science, is like a realm without a king.

Aristo^ Science separate from Justice and virtue, is not wisdom but
subteltie.

Nothing becomes a wyseman so much as temperaunce.

He that is worshypped for wisdom is angrye with them that despise it.

Socra^ Of all things the least quantity is easyest to be borne, save of
knowledge and science, of which the more that a man has, the better he may
bear it.

A wyseman knows what ignorance is, because he him self before time has been ignorant: but the ignorant was never wise* and therefore he knows not
what wisdom is.

The true lovers of wisdom shall se god.

Sen^^ Power and might is in young men, but wisdom and prudence is in the aged.

Of Justice, Laws, cities, and governance. Cap. iii.
Plato. EXcept wysemen be made governors, or governors be made wysemen,
mankind shall never have quiet test nor virtue be able to defend her self.

The city is well ordered, where ambicious men desire to have no offices.

Cities are well governed, when the wicked be punyshed.

All that is done by justice, is well done: but all that is done other wise, is
evil.

^^istotle A city to obtain prosperity needs not so much abundance of
goods, as virtue.

^^ermes. Law is the fynder and tryer out of truth.

Through ydlenes, negligence, and to much trust in Fortune, not only men but
cities and kingdoms are utterly lost and destroyed.

Plato. Justice is a measure which God has ordained on the yearthe, to defend
the feeble from the mighty, and the true from the untrue, and to root out the
wicked from among the good.

Pytha^ Wisdom is leache of the law, and money the disease, and when the
leache can not cure him self, how should he cure other.

Law and wisdom are two laudable things: for the one conserueth virtue and
the other good conditions.

Senec^ An evil law, and the love of a shrewe are like unto the shadow of a
cloud, which vanysheth away, as soon as it is seen.

Law is the queen of immortality.

Socra^ Laws ought to be made for no man's pleasure.

Those Rulers sin exceadynglye that give other license to sin.

Cities must needs perysh, when the common laws are of none effect.

A good common weal brings up good men.

Aristot^ There can not be in a city a more horrible thing than sedicion.

He that is obedient to the law, obeys god.

Where law and order is, all things prosper well.

Plato. A law maker ought to be godly learned and wise, and such one as has
been subject to others laws.

Plato. God is the causer that laws be made.

Brybry used in a city, engenders evil manners, by means whereof, bothe^
faith and frendshyp are little set by.

That city is safe, whose dignities are well bestowed.

None delyteth in justice, but the just man: none loves wisdom, but the
wise man: nor none but the true friend deliteth in frendshyp.

Pythag. Without justice no realm may prosper.

He that makes his realm subject to the law, shall reygne, and he that
makes the law subject to his Realm, may hap to reygue a while: But he that
casts the law forth from his Realm, casts forth him self.

God is a law to sober men.

Happy is that city, that has a wyseman to govern it.

^ristotle. It is better for a city to be governed by a good man, than by a
good law.

A good city should care more for virtue, than for people.

Without justice no City may be long inhabyted.

Be that polityckelye entendeth to the common weal, may well be called just,
but he that intends only to his own profyt, is a vicious person.

Of power, honor, virtue, and strength. Cap. iiii.
Aristotl^* Only virtue at tayneth the everlasting blessedness.

He is not to be counted strong that can not away with labor.

It is a sign of a noble and mighty cowrage, to set little by great and
mighty things.

Seneca* Virtue is shut up from no man, but is redye for all that desire her,
she receives all men gladly, she calls all men, both servants, kings,
and banished men, she requires neither house nor substance, but is contented
with the naked man.

Plato. They that be perfectlye wise despise worldly honor.

Where riches are honored, good men are despised.

He that honoreth rich men despises wisdom.

He that to his noble lynage adds virtue and good condicione, is to be
praised.

Plato. Honor is the fruit of virtue and truth, and for the truth a man shall
be worshypped.

He is worthy to be honored that wylleth good to every man.

The just man rests in suertye.

He that vanquysheth his lusts, is a great conqueror.

Diogen. Nobility, honor, and riches, are the clokes of maliciousnes.

Socrat. Plato. Pleasure perysheth lightly, but honor is immortal.

Virtue alone perfourmeth the everlasting felicity.

Immortal honor is better than transitory richesse.

It is a shame for a man to desire honor because of his noble progenitors, and
not to deserve it through his own virtue.

The glory of the ancestors, is a goodly treasure to their children.

Seneca. He is the very valiant, which neither rejoices much, nor soroweth
out of measure.

Honor ought to be given to virtue, and not to richesse.

^ermes It is better to suffer shame for virtuous dealyng, than to win honor
for vicious living.

^ythag. ^o use virtue is perfect blessedness.

Of liberality, patience, use, and diligence. Cap. v.
Socra. Aristotle. He that is liberal, can not live amysse: he that speaks
truth can not be ashamed of that he speaks: The lowlye man can not be hated,
and he yt diligently atte^deth to his busynes, can never repent him, but
brings his works to a good conclusion.

Seneca. He is liberal, yt delyteth more in good renoune than in money.

He that is pacient and sober, shall never repent him.

Plato. That which keeps a man from shame is better than riches gotten thereby.

He that does not for his friends wha^ he may, shall in his most need of them
be forsaken.

He is perfectly pacient which in his fury can subdue his own affections.

Socrat. Patience, and good belefe in god, makes a man victorious.

Diligence dispatcheth al things.

Diligence and carefulnes is the kaye of certayntie.

Plato. That which a man has accustomed long time seems pleasant, although
in deed it be paynfull.

There is nothing so good to make an horse fat, as the eye of his master:
nether is there ought better to make land fertyle, than the steps of the
owner: that is to say, the masters diligence.

It is as difficulte to break a custom long used, as to change or alter
Nature.

Aristot. Custom is as it were an other nature.

Of knowledge, ignorance, and error. Cap. vi.
Socrat. INtelligence is king both of heaven and also of earth.

Plato. Great is the hurt that has chanced by ignorance.

Ignorance is a mad^es of the soul, which while it labors to attain to
truth is confounded in the knowledge of it self.

Aristo. It is not possible for one man to know all things, yet should each
man labor to know as much as he might.

An opinion without learning can not be good.

He that erreth before that he know the truth, ought the souer to be forgeuen.

Error at the end is known to be evil* and truth thereby is known much
the better.

It is great shame for an old man to be ignorant.

There can not be in a Ruler, a worser thing than ignorance.

Plato. The ignorant in their bankettes use minstralsie to chere them, but the
learned with their voices delight one an other.

He that is ignorant in the truth, and led about with opinions, must needs
err.

To learn better, is a good punishment for ignorance.

Socrat. There is none so ignorant, as he that trusts most to his own wit:
none so uncertain, as he that most trusts fortune, nor any so much out of
quiet, as he yt is cumbred with an unruly brawling shrew.

Through lack of wit, spri^geth much harm: and by means of ignorance, much
good is left undone.

A false opinion does great harm. The boldenes of the ignorant, engenders
all yuels.

Socrat. It is a shame to be ignorant in that which every man ought to know.

Pythag. It is better to be ignorant in vile things, than to know them.

Plato. Idleness engenders ignorance, and ignorance engenders error.

Of money and covetousness. Cap. vii.
Seneca. AN auaricious old manne is like a mo^ster.

He that overcomes his covetousness is valianter than he, that overcomes an
enemy: and he is the mightyest conqueror that vanquyssheth his own will.

Pithago. Couetise can not be satisfied with abundance: for the more that a
man has, the more still he desires.

Ambicious men have ungracious wits.

Plato. He that hourdeth up his money, takes pains for other folk.

Dishonor is the end of covetousness, but the end of liberality, is worship.

He that is a nygarde to him self, must needs be nygardysh unto other.

Diogen. Servants serve their bodily masters, but evil man serve their
covetous lusts.

It is better to have a man without money, than money without a man.

Hermes* A covetous man can not learn truth

Plato. It is no marvel though he be good which is not covetous, but it
were a wonder to see a covetous man good.

A man may sooner yield to avarice, than to reason: for couetise has
accompanied him even from his chyldehode, but reason cummeth not before he have
perfect age.

Aristo. It is better for a man to love his fellows, than to love money.

Money is the cause of sedicion and evil will.

To delight in money, is a dangerous pleasaunce.

Couetousenes takes away the name of gentleness, the which liberality
purchases.

A merry man can not lightly be angrye, A liberal man may not well be enuyous.
And as for the covetous man, may never be satisfied with riches.

Of the tongue, of fair speech, and of flattery. Cap. viii.
Byas. Fair and flatteryng speech is an honnyed snare.

Hermes A right commendable thing both in heaven and yearthe, is a true tongue.

Socra. There is not a worse thing, than a deceytfull and lying tongue.

Fair speech in presence, with good report in absence, and manners in
fellowship obtain great frendshyp.

Chilon. An evil tongue is sharper than any swearde.

Diogen. If thou speak what thou wylt, thou shalt hear that thou would
not.

^ithago. The ^ong is the bewrayer of the heart.

Death delyuereth a man from al enemies save the tongue.

He is wise and discrete that can refrain hye tongue.

Plato. Flattery is a present friend, but an absent enemy.

Seneca. It is a point of flatterye to praise a man to his face.

Socra. The tongue of a fool is the kaye of his counsel, which in a wyseman
wisdom has in keeping.

The tongue of a wise man is in his heart, but the heart of a fool is in his
tongue.

Plato. Hastines of speech, causes men to err.

Of truth, of Faith, of error and lying. Cap. ix.
Hermes Truth is the gyde of all goodness.

Aristot. Faith shyneth in danger.

Honor is the fruit of virtue and truth, and for the truth a man shall be
worshypped.

Socrat* He that uses truth, has more and myghtyer servants than a king.

Seneca. There is no difference between a great teller of tidings, and a liar.

Plato. There is no goodness in a liar.

It is lawefull for a governor for the mayntenaunce of his estate, and
safeguard of his subjects, to lie: but not for a subject to lie in any cause.

Socra. A faithful man is better than gold.

Lying is a sycknes of the soul, which can not be cured, but by shame or
reason.

He ought not to lie that takes upon him to teach other.

Plato. Truth is the messinger of god, which every man ought to worship for
the love of her master.

Of small errors not let at the beginning, spryng great and mighty mischyfes

Of bryngyng up and manners, of disposicions and instruction. Cap. x.
Plato A Gentle heart by the own accord, is given to goodness.

Plutarth. Noble wits corrupt u^ the bryngyng up prove more unhappy than
other, that be more simple.

The wyctes which in age will be eccellen^* may be known in youth by their
honest delytes.

Socra. He is to be commended which to his good bryngyng up, joins virtue,
wysed me, and learning.

Instruction in a fool, increases more follye.

Plato. Good disposicions can neither be given, bought nor sold, yea if they
might no man would bye them: but the evil are daily bought and sold.

Aristot. Manners are more requisite in a child than playing upon instruments,
or any other kind of vain pleasantnes.

Those parents are to be blamed, that are very careful to heap up riches,
and take no care for the good bryngyng up of their children.

Hermes. It becomes a man from his youth to be shamefaste in fylthy things,
and to be studious in that which is honest.

Sobernes in youth, seems to fools to be mere folyshnes.

Socrat. Good bryngyng up makes a man well disposed.

He is perfect which to his good bringyng up, joins other virtues.

Good bryngyng up is the head of good manners.

Seneca. It is not possible for him to be sober, that is wealthyly brought up
in ryortyng and pleasures.

Of Love, lust, and lecherye. Cap. xi.
Pytha. COnstaunt Love is a principal virtue.

Plato. Without Love, no virtue can be perfect.

There are twoe kinds of love: the one Natural, and the other Heavenly.

The good lover loves his soul better than his body.

The evil lover loves his body, and not his soul.

Socra. This love of a fool, is more noisome than pleasant.

Love can not be myngled with fear. Love is the busynes of loyterers.

Seneca. He that lacks love, ought not to be regarded.

Repentance is the end of fylthy love.

There is nothing so darcke, but that love espyeth.

Love leaves no danger unattempted.

Plato. To much self love is cause of al evil. Lust is a lordlye and
disobedient thing,

Of all things the newest is the ^est, save of love and frendshyp: which the
elder that it waxes, is ever the better.

Aristotl^* Dishonor, shame, yuel end and damnacion, wait upon lecherye, and
all other like vices.

Seneca. Lykenes of manners, makes love steadfast and parfecte.

It is not possible to do any thing well without love.

It is not possible for that servant to be diligent, that loves not his
master.

Of Sorrow, gladness, fear and boldenes, Cap. xii.
Socrat. IT is a point of madness, to be sorye, or to rejoice vnmeasurablye.

Aristip. He ought to fear many, whom many do fear.

Pythag. Great grefe continues not long.

Contynuall fear suffers not a man to be happy.

Aristotle. Sorrow is a gryfe for things that be done and past.

Fear is a doubt for things for to come. Fear of him self accuses the
gyltye.

By sorrow and thought the heart is turmented.

Of sorrow comes dreams and fantasies.

Of thought comes watchyng, and bleared eyes.

Hermes. Syckenes is the prison of the body, but sorrow the prison of the soul.

Myrthe is the end of sorrow.

Seneca. Shamefastnes in a child, is a token of wit, but in a man of folyshnes.

Suretye puts away sorrow, and fear hyndereth gladness.

Neither strength nor bygnesse, are of any value in a fearful body.

Of anger, wrath, envy, malice, and reuengeaunce. Cap. xiii.
Plato. PRiuye hatred is worse than open malice.

Wrath leads shame in a lease.

Chales. It is a great maruayle to se a wyseman angrye.

He is unhappy that continues in his malice, not thynkyng of the end.

Plato. Unhappy is the estate of malicious and e^uyous people.

The suspicious, the hastye, and the gelous man, live ever in sorrow.

Aristotl^* Shame of him self, is the end of in dignation.

He is not perfectlye good that hates his enemy: what is he then that hates
his friend.

Seneca* Debate, deceyte, contencion and envy, are the fruytes of evil
thoughts.

It is foolyshnes or rather madness for a man to be angrye for that, which can
not be amended: or to desire the thing which he may not obtain.

Aristip. Wrath and hastynes, are ver^e evil counsaylours.

Quyetnes is sure, but rashness is dangerous.

Envy and slander are.ii. brethren which go evermore together.

Seneca* Forgeuenes is a valiant kind of reuengeaunce.

He has great rest, that can refrain him self from anger.

Pythag* Envy has been, is, and shall be, the destruction of many.

What is there that envy has not defamed, or malice left undefiled? Truly no
good thing.

^ristotle. Anger is an heauynes and vexation of the mind desyryng to be
revenged.

Anger is the woorcker of enmitye, and hatred.

Humility, patience, and fair speech are the pacifyers of anger.

Plato. Time appeyseth anger.

Wrath comes of feebleness of courage, and lack of wit.

Women are sooner angry than men, the sick sooner than the healthye, and old
folk be souer moved than the yongue.

^hilon. He is enuyous that is sorye for goodmennes prosperity.

An enuyous man serves to none other purpose, but to speak evil, and
slander other.

^ermes. To the wrathful anger approaches.

Of liberty and bondage. Cap. xiiii.
Plato. HE is not fre that byndeth him self to an other.

He obeys many, that obeys his body.

^hales. Hope is a bondage, but mystrust a liberty.

The child is not bound to his parents of whom he learned nothing.

Aristot^^* He that has bound him self to follow his flesshlye delytes, is
more bound than any caytyfe.

Senec^* A bond man has but half a mind. To much liberty turns into
bondage.

A tyrant never tastes of true frendshyp, nor of perfect liberty.

Of women, wine, and dronkennes. Cap. xv.
Plato* DRonkennes makes a man unruly,

Dronkennes undoes him, that delyghteth therein.

Much wine and wisdom may not agree, for they be.ii. contraries.

Isocra^* Wine vnmeasurably taken, is an enemy to the soul.

Wrath and wine, drounde both the reason and senses.

Wrath makes man a beast, but dronkennes makes him worse.

Dronkennes ought to be eschued of al men, but chyefely of Rulers, watchemen,
and officers.

Dronkennes is an abominable vice in a teacher.

Plato. A dronkarde is unprofitable for any kind of good service

The husband can do to his wife no greater wrong, than to have to do with an
other woman.

A woman is a necessary euyill.

^risto. There can be no greater honor for an honest wife, than to have an
honest faithful husband, which cares for her, and for no woman else thynkyng
her more chaste and faithful, than any other.

Seneca. Neither gorgyous apparel, nor excellent beauty, nor plentye of gold
and riches become a woman so well as sobrenes, silence, faythfulnes and
chastity.

The best way for a man to keep his wife chaste, is not to be gelous, as many
fond fools suppose, but to be chaste him self, and faithful unto her.

Woman's company is an evil that can not be eschued.

^hilon. A fair whore is a sweet poison.

Women in myschefe are wysar than men.

^ocrat. Woman is more pitiful than manne, more enuyous than a serpent, more
malicious than a Tyrant, and more deceytful than the devil.

^^istotle. Woman's counsel is weak, and a chyldes vnparfect.

Woe be to that city where a womao hears rule.

Socra^* It is better to be in company with a serpent, than with a wicked
woman.

Gaye apparayled women stand forth as baytes to catch men that pass by: but
they take none save such as will be po^e, or else such as be ignorant fools,
which know them not.

There is no greater accumbraunce that may chance to a man, than ignorance
and woman.

There is nothing whotter than a lascivious women.

He is an ignorant fool, that is governed by women's counsel.

An ignorant man may be known by three points: he can not rule him self,
because he lacks reason: he can not resist his lusts, because he lacks
wit: neither can he do what he would, because he is in bondage to a woman.

Women by Nature, are borne malicious.

It is not possible for him to obtain wisdom and knowledge, that is in
bondage to a woman.

He that enhaunteth much woman's company, can not be strong: neither may he be
rich that delyteth much in wine.

Diverse sentences of sundry matters. Cap. xvi.
Plato. Eloquence is a goodlye gift, which in truth shyneth, but in false hode
corrupts.

^ermes. It is hard to find a meke wytty man.

Man is the measure of all things.

^ocrat. Holiness and ryghteousnes make men like unto God.

^eneca. Small exspences often used, consume great substance.

Excess either hurts, or profyteth nothing.

Every man loves advantage.

Rest must needs be pleasant, for it is the medicine of all diseases that are
in labor.

Nothing obtayneth Favor so much as diligent obedience.

Evil men for lucre, agree together.

^ermes He is to be despised of all, that cares for none but him self.

^ythag. Many things at the beginning are counted good, which at the end
are known to be evil.

Desire of riches wareth infinite.

A solitary man is a god or a beast.

Dioge^ It is better for a man to judge after law and learning, than after
his own mind and knowledge.

Diligent purueyaunce is great suertie. It is wisdom to work by science.

Plato. The multiplying of friends, is the aswagyng of cares.

It is better to diminysshe that which hurts, than to augment that which
helps.

Pitta^ None but a crafts man, can judge of a craft.

Excellent things ought to be done warelye.

It is kynglyke to be reproved for well doing.

The agreement of brethren is stronger than a wall.

To unlearn evil, is the best kind of learning.

Plato* A neady old man is a miserable thing

Aristo. Melody is good to pacifye the angrye, to comfort the sorrowful, and
to assuage all other passions.

Music is good to refresh the mind, and to pass forth the time, and is a
great help to good pronunciation: and therefore children ought to learn
musycke.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Socrat. OF all mysfortunes the most vphappy, is to have been fortunate.

^ythag. Nothing is to be counted good that may be taken away.

^eneca. It is as well a fault to trust no body, as to trust every body.

It skylleth not in what bed a sick man be laid, whether it be of gold, or
of wood: for wheresoever he be laid, his syckenes will be with him.

If it were as paynful a thing for men to praise honest things, as it is to do
them, than should they be as little praised, as be followed.

They live euylly that begin always to live, for as much as their many
beginnings do make their lives still imperfect.

He that is roted in his sin, will not be corrected.

A gift byndeth the receyuer, and leuseth the geuer.

When a man doubts in doubtful things, and is assured in them that be
euydent, it is a sign of good understanding.

Herme^ There are.vi. kinds of men that be never without vexacion. The first
is he that can not forgette his trouble. An enuyous man dwelling with folk
newly enriched He that dwells in the place and can not thryue, where as an
other thryued before him. A rich man decayed, and fallen in to pouertye. He
that would obtain that which he may not get The last is he that dwells
with a wise man and can learn nothing of him.

He that seeks enemies, seeks his own destruction.

Pithag* Repentance deserves pardon.

The best and greatest wynnyng is a true friend, and the greatest loss is the
loss of time.

Plato. Much runnynge makes great weariness.

If men in reasonyng desired as much the truth of the thing it self, as they
do the mayntenaunce of their own opinions, and glory of their wits, there
should not bread so much hatred as there does, nor half so many matters be
left of vnconcluded.

There can not be a more intolerable thing, than a fortunate fool.

The.xviii. Chapter.
Socrat. A Man of feeble courage, anoyeth him self lyghtlye with that which he
loves.

Pythag. To be overcome with affections, is an euydent token of folyshnes.

Seneca. He is not happy that has richesse, but he yt uses them.

^ermes. The wicked sumtyme seem to be happy.

It is better to suffer death, than by co^pulsion to do that is evil.

He that is enclyned to his own will, is nygh the wrath of god.

He that desires great charges, desires great troubles.

^^thago. The hearts of good people, are the castles of their secrets.

It is a great follye for a man to muse much on such things as do pass his
understanding.

Plato. To do well to him that hurts us, is the most acceptable thing in the
syghte of God, that a man may do.

Folly is the greatest enemy, that a man may have.

Socra. He that does good, is better than the good which he does: and he
that does evil, is worse than the evil that he does.

A man without science, is like a realm without a king.

Plato. An aswager of wrong ought greatly to be honored.

A good rich man, seeldome may be found.

Aristot. No man is happy, whiles that he lives.

He is an excellent warryoure that lacks neither wisdom nor good success.

There is but one way to goodness, but the ways to evil are innumerable.

The best place in war is the mids, for there be the strong and valiant,
which are in the mids between the hardy, and the cowardes.

There is no kind so evil, but that some good is found in.

Seneca. That which a man believes not, shall never fraye him.

He fyndeth fetters, that fyndeth benefyttes.

It is due to render deserved thanks.

They be worse that are latelye made rich, than they which have been rich a
great while.

Tyrants prayers are necessary.

The.xix. Chapter.
Socra. TO lack friends is a token of evil conditions.

It is a foolyshe madness to think that rich men be happy.

He is sufficientlye well learned yt knows how to do well, and he has power
enough, that can refrain from doing evil.

Pythag. He that demands but reason, is able to vanquysh his enemy.

Covetous men lack, the things that they have.

The shorter a thing is, the more it delyteth.

They that rob, and slander the dead, are like furyous dogs, which byte and
bark at stones.

^lutarch. It is the part of a good man, to forget dishonest things, which to
remember, is a point of evil.

That which is well done, is done wetyngly: but that which is euylly done, is
done ignorantly.

He is as much a thief that steals openly, as he that robs privily.

Socra^ A thing often spoken, troubles the hearer.

To see is but a small matter, but to forsee a thing, is hard to be done.

A man of good feelynge, is evermore discrete, so is it not of the other senses.

Aristot^ Hearing in a man is a great healp to knowledge.

Custom is as it were an other nature.

It is folyshnes to entend much unto dreams.

Fond and foolyshe dreams, deceive them that trust therein.

They be gross and foolysh phisicions which take any counsel at their
pacientes dreams.

When God will send dreams or visions, they chance to wysemen in the day
time.

Such as be borne deaffe and blind, have their inward powers the more
perfect.

He ought not to lie, which will teach other folk.

Diversity of opinions is the cause of much strife.

That thing is noble which comes of good kind.

He that douteth and maruayleth, seameth to be ignorant.

The.xx. Chapter.
Socra. HE which knows not how much he seeks does not know when to find
that which he lacks.

It is better to be ignorant in vile things than to know them.

The gooddes of the soul are the principal goods.

Pythag. A boaster is more to be despised than a liar.

It is hard for a liberal man to be rich.

It is better to suffer, than to do wrong.

He is worst of al, that is malicious against his friends.

Evil destroys it self.

The wrath and lust of lecherous people, alter their bodies, and make many
ru^ne stark mad.

^utarch. It is better for a man to amend him self by following the good
example of his predecessors, than to make his successors wax worse, by
following his vnthryftye vicious living.

To be much inquisityue of others offenses is a sign of an evil disposicion.

Nothing disprayseth a man so much as his own praysyng: specially when he
boasts of his good deades.

The most profitable thing for ye world is the death of evil people.

Aristo^ Men ought not be chosen by age and number of years, but by wisdom
and conditions: For he that has chyldysh conditions is a child, be he never
so old: and he that has manlyke conditions is a man, be he never so young.

Herme^ Three things are to be pityed, and the fowerth not to be suffered. A
good man in the hands of a shrewe. A wise man under the governance of a
fool. A lyberall man in subjection to a caytyfe. And a fool set in authority.

Plato To men occupied about divine things life seems a thing of no
reputacion.

Both sleep and labor are enmyes to learning.

There is no greater victory, than for a man to vanquysh him self.

There are many that will not fight, and yet be desirous for to see frayes.

He that neglects wife and children depryueth him self of immortality.

Prudence is the gyde of all other virtues.

The.xxi. Chapter.
Plato. IT is hard for a man having license to sin to keep him self
therfro.

^erms Sweet hope follows him that lives holyly and justly, nourishyng his
heart, and cheryshyng his old age, and comforting him in all his miseries.

In all works the beginning is the chyefest, and the end hardest to attain:

Seneca: He is not worthy to live, that takes no care to live well.

^ristip. He which is bewtyful, and speaks unseemly things, draws a
swearde of lead, out of an yuory skabarde.

^ocrat. Such things as are above us, pertayne not unto us.

Nobility, glory, and richesse, are the clokes of maliciousnes.

He that is mighty, is not by and by good, but he which is good, immediatlye
is mighty.

^hilon. Men should rather be drawn by the cares, than by the clokes: that is
by persuasion and not by vyolence.

It is lawful to be a friend, but no farther than to the altar: that is, we
ought not for our friends sake to tra^sgresse our religion.

A city can not prosper, when an ox is sold for less than a fysshe.

Seneca. He is worthy no wealth, that can suffer no woe.

Much babblynge is a sign of small knowledge.

Worldelye vanities, hyndre man's reason.

Hermes. He is a wiseman that does good to his friends: but he is more than a
man, that does good to his enemies.

Of euyls, the least is to be chosen.

Plato. Good respect and consideration to the end of things, preserves both
soul and body.

Seneca Every man is wise in that which he has learned.

He that helps the evil, hurts the good.

Men should live exceadyng quyetlye, if these two words mine and thine were
taken away.

Hope of reward, makes pain seem pleasant.

To be praised of evil men, is as evil as to be praised for evil doing.

The.xxii. Chapter. Of benefyttes, and of unthankfulnes.
Seneca. BEnefits ought to be as well borne in mind as received with the hand.

The remembrance of benefyttes ought never to ware old.

The will of the geuer, and not the value of the gift, is to be regarded.

He is worthy to be deceived which while he bestowed a benefit, thought of ye
receyuyng of an other.

A small thing given wyllynglye, is more acceptable than that which is
grudgyngly given, be it of never so great price

One gift well given, recouereth many losses.

A gift grudgyngly given of a nygard, is called a stony loaf: which although
it be bitter, is nedeful to be received of the hongrye.

He is unthankful which acknowlegeth not the good that is done him. He is
more unthankful that to his power acquiteth it not. But he is most unthankful
that forgets it utterly.

Socra To be unthankful is an uncomely thing.

There is no greater treasure, than discrecion and wit.

No greater poverty than ignorance.

No better fre^dshyp than good conditions.

No better gyde than good Fortune.

Dastines causes repentance.

Frowardnes causes hynderaunce.

Pride is cause of hatred, and slothe of disprayse.

It is better to hear than to speak much. and therefore Nature has given us
two ears, and but one tongue.

Experience is a good chastisement.

It is better to seek and not to find, than to find and not to profet.

All things may be changed save Nature, and all things eschued, except
death.

Wit without learning, is like a tree without fruit.

It is better to suffer great necessity, than to borow of him, whom a man may
not trust.

The end of syckenes is death, and the end of darkness, is light.

Change of the world is a good teacher.

Experience is a good correctour.

Socrat. The hastye manne is never without trouble.

There are three sorts of men woeful to be seen. A rich man fallen in to
poverty. A virtuous man dispraysed. And a wyseman scorned of the ignorant.

Seneca. He has riches sufficient, that needs neither to flatter nor to
borowe.

He does him self wrong, which obeys them whom he ought not.

Plato. Suffysaunce is the castle which keeps wysemen from all evil works.

Finis.
Pyththie meters of diverse matters.
Socrates. HE that to wrath and anger is thrall,
Over his wit has no power at all.
Hermes. Be merry and glad, honest, and virtuous,
For that suffyseth to anger the enuyous.
Pythagoras. The more that a man has of abundaunce,
So much the less has he of assurance.
Socrates. The friends whom profyt or lucre encreace,
When substance fails, therwithal will cease:
But fre^des that are coupled with heart, and with love,
Neither fear nor fortune nor force may remove.
Musonius. If that in virtue thou take any pain,
The pain departs, but virtues remain.
But if thou have pleasure to do that is ill,
The pleasure abateth, but ill taryeth still.
Solon. If that by destiny things be decreed,
To labor to shun them is pain lost in dead.
But if that the chance of things be unset.
It is folly to fear that we know we may let
Plato It is the part of him that is wise
Things to foresee, with diligent advise.
But when as things vnluckely do frame.
It becomes the valiant to suffer the same.
Hermes. If not for to speed, thou think it a pain.
Will not the thing that thou may not attain,
For thou and none other art cause of thy let,
If that which thou may not you travel to get.
Plato. To feign, to flatter, to gloss and to lie,
Require colors, and words fair and slye.
But the vttrauuce of truth is so simple and plain,
That it needs no study to forge or to feign.
Horace. To the auaricious is no suffisaunce.
For couetise increases as fast as his substance
Solon. He is neither rich, happy, nor wise,
That is a bondsman to his own avarice.
Pythagoras. To strycke another if that thou pretend.
Think if he stroke the, you would the defend.
Solon. To beasts much hurt happens because they ^e dumme,
But much more to men by means of speech has cumme.
Thales. Al enuyous hearts with the dead men depart.
But after death dureth the slaunderers darte.
Hermes. He that at ones instance, an other will defame.
Will also at an others to the last do the same.
For none are so dangerous and doutful to trust
As those that are redyest to obey every lust.
Plato. Since making of manners in company does lie,
Enhaunt the good, and the evil see thou fly.
But if to the evil thou needs wylt resort,
Return betymes, for fear thou come short.
Isocrates. Love between wise men by effect may fall.
But not between fools though folly be egal:
For wit goes by order, and may agree in one.
But folly lacks order, so that concord is none.
Theophrastus. For a man much better it is among raueners
To fall and be taken, than among flatterers.
For ravens but of flesh dead bodies do depryue*
But flatterers devour men while they be alive*
Socrates. He that of all men will be a correctour.
Shall of the most part wyn hate for his labor*
Dyogenes. Of slaundrers and flattrers take heed if ye wyl^
For nether tame nor wild best can byte us so y^
For of wyld beasts, slander is the worst byter
And of the tame, most byteth a flatterer.
Pythagoras. They that to talk of wisdom are bent
Not following the same. are like an instrument:
Whose pleasant sound the hearers does delight,
But it self not hearing, has thereby no profit.
Horace. As long as a tonne or vessel may last.
Of the first lycour, it keeps the taste.
And youth being seasoned in virtuous labor,
Will ever after thereof keep the savor.
Euripedes. Englyshed by Ascham.
What thing a man in render age has most i^ ure,
That same to death always to keep he shall be sure
Therefore in age who greatly lo^ges good fruit to mow,
In youth he must him self apply good seed to sow.
Pythagoras. Beware of thine enmy when he does manace,
And trust thou him not if fair seem his face:
For serpents never so deadly do stynge,
As when they byte without any hyssynge.
Hermes. Tresures which falsehod seems to augment,
Are euylly gotten, and worser are spent.
Wherefore to be rich who so does entende,
Ought truly to win, and dulye to spend.
Plutarche. Since the world unsteady does often ebb and flow,
It behooves a wyseman all times for to know:
And so for to sail while he has fair wether,
That the haven may keep him, when hold may no anchor.
Dyogenes. Of a chorlysh nature proceeds foul language.
But fair speech is token of a noble courage.
Anacharcis. A friend is not known but in necessity,
For in time of wealth each man seems friendly.
Socrates. Wisdom and science, which are pure by kind,
Should not be wryt in books, but in mind.
For wisdom in books, with the book will rot,
But writ in mind will never be forgot.
Seneca. For covetous people to dye it is best,
For the longer they live, the less is their rest:
For life them leads, their substance to double,
Where death the^ discharges of endless trouble.
Antisthenes. Men ought not weep for him ye giltles is slain,
But for the slayer which quycke does remain.
For to dye gyltles, is loss but of body,
But body and soul both, are lost of the gyltye.
Xenocrates. Of works begone when goodness may bred^
We should with all swyftnes, deuyse to proceed
But if by our works may grow any ill,
We should be as swyft to conquer our will.
Socrates. By ordryng the tongue is a trial most true.
To know if a man his lusts can subdue.
For he that ne rule can his tongue as him list,
Has much less power other lusts to resist.
Socrates. What ever it chance the of any to hear,
Thine eye not consenting, believe not thine ear.
For the ear is a subject full often led awrye.
But the eye is a judge that in nothing will lie.
Seneca. Boet^us. Wisdom and honor most commonly be found,
In them that in virtue and goodness abound:
And therefore are better than silver and gold,
Which the evil commonly most have in hold.
Horace. Stop the begynnynges, so shall thou be sure
All doubtful diseases to swage and to cure.
But if thou be careless and suffer them brast,
To late cummeth plaster, when al cure is past.
Xenophon. If that it chance the in war for to fight,
More than to wit, trust not to thy might.
For wit without strength much more does avail,
Than strength without wit, to conquer in battle
Aristotle. Both hatred, love, and their own profet,
Cause Judges often times the truth to forget.
Purdge all these vices therefore fro thy mind,
So shall right rule the, and thou the truth find.
Plato. Although for a while thy vice thou may hyde
Yet can thou not always keep it vnespyed:
For truth the true daughter of god and of time,
Has sworn to detect al sin vice and crime.
Aristotle. The having of richesse is not so commodious,
As the departing from them is grievous.
Plato. Happy is the realm, the which has a king,
Endued with wisdom, virtue and learning:
And much unhappy is the Realm and province
Where as these points do lack in their prince.
Plutarche. To what so ever the king does him frame,
His men for the most part, delight in the same:
Wherefore a good king should virtue ensue,
To give his subjects example of virtue.
Hermes. Better it is for a wife to be barrayne,
Than to bring forth a vile wicked carrayne.
Socrates. Alms distributed unto the indigent,
Is like a medicine given to the impotent:
But to the vnneady a man to make his dole,
Is like the ministering of playsters to the whole.
Pythagoras. Better it is for a man to be mute,
Than with the ignorant much to dispute.
And better it is to live solitarily,
Than to enhaunt much, evil company.
Diogenes. Try, and than trust after good assurance:
But trust not ere ye try, for fear of repentance.
Plato. That thing in realm is worthy renoune,
Which rayseth up right, and wrong beteth down.
Seneca. Goodness it self does good men declare,
For which many mo, the better do fare.
Socrates. Unhappy he is where so ever he come,
That has a wit, and will not learn wisdom.
The things that cause a quiet life
written by Marciall.
MY friend, the things that do attain
The happy life, be these I find.
The richesse left, not got with pain,
The fruytful ground, the quiet mind.
The equal friend, no grudge, no strife,
No charge of rule, nor governance.
Without disease the healthye life.
The householde of continuance.
The mean diet, no dayntye fare.
Wisdom joined with simplenes.
The might discharged of all care,
Where wine the wit may not oppress.
The faithful wife without debate.
Such sleeps as may begyle the night.
Content thy self with thine estate.
Neither wysh death, nor fear his might.
The last book Of Proverbs and Semblables.
Three books concluded according to our promise, it is requysite that the
fowerth follow, which being well considered, is no less profitable, either to
good instrustruction, or moral wisdom, than any of the rest. For where as the
other only command or show the thing simply, this kind by vehemency of
matter contained in other things, persuades the thing effectuallye, besides
much good learning of natural Philosophy, contained in the examples.

And suerlye the diligence of the Philosophers herein is greatly to be
commended, which has divised so goodly a way to allure all men to wisdom.

In which kind, sith Erasmus, one of the best learned in our time, has
already studied, and thereof compyled a book drawn (as he says him self) out
from the purest of the Philosophers, I have herein englysshed of his, such as
to me seemed most meet for this purpose, addyng them to other agreeable to
this matter: omyttyng the rest, not because they agree not her with, but
because they be so many, as will in english make a great volume: wyllyng such
as therein delight, to set forth the rest, and not to look for all things here,
in which nothing less tha^ perfection is pretended.

As for the profyt and use of Parables I think it nedeles for to declare,
seeing their own playnnesse declare them so plainly, as no man may do it
playnlyer: as for example.

Like as Humlocke is poison to man, so is wine poison to Humlocke. What
declaracion neadeth this now, to be better understood, except a man
phisicallye should show the properties of wine and Humlockes? Now as for the
use of this in persuasion, it may be thus applied.

Like as Humlocke is poison to man, and wine poison to Humlocke: So is Flattery
poison to friendship, and license in be flattered, poison unto flattery.

Lo here the exaumple that Erasmus uses, wherein is contained great council
great wit, and great learning. First it teaches that Humlocke is poison, and
mortal when it is myngled with wine, which being known, may the better be
avoided. Then cou^sayleth he to beware of flatterye, and in showing what makes
flattery deadly poison, he teaches a remedy how to avoid flattery: For if we
regard not a flatterer, nor give him license to flatter us, we shall never be
hurt up flatterye. Such like commodity shall a man take by Parables, or as I
call them, Semblables, which hereafter shall follow: the effect whereof, I have
not drawn into Summaries because they be so few, but have put them together,
as I found them, wysshyng them with all the rest, to be well accepted.

Hermes, Socrates, Plato.
Like as a Chyrurgyen payneth sore his pacientes bodies, with lancyng, cuttyng,
and sering putrefyed members: Even so does ye mind of man, afflict and vex
his unruly soul, that it might by such means be ryd from voluptuousnes.

He that being reproved, departs immediately, hatyng his counsaylour: does as
a sick man, which as soon as his Chirurg^en has cut his ulcer goes his way,
not tarying until his wound be dressed, and his gryefe assuaged.

Like as to a shrewde horse belongs a sharp bridle: so ought a shrewde wife
to be sharply handeled.

As plants measurably watered grow the better, but watered to much are browned
and dye: so the mind with moderate labor, is refresshed, but with overmuch is
utterly dulled.

As emptye vessels make the lowdest sound: so they that have least wit, are
the greatest babblers.

Like as a ship that has a sure anchor, may lie saufely in any place: right
so the mind that is ruled by perfect reason, is quiet every where.

As a small spotte or freckle in the face is a greater blemysh than a scarre,
or knot in the body: so a small fault in a prince seems worse than a greater
in a pryuate person.

As fire smoketh not much, that flameth at the first blowyng: so the glory
that shyneth at the first, is not greatly enuyed at, but that which is long
in gettyng, envy always preuenteth.

Like as a good Musicion, having any kaye or stryng of his instrument out of
tune, does not immediatlye cut it of, and cast it away, but either with
straynyng it higher, or slackenyng it down lower by little and little, causes
it to agree: so should rulers rather refourme tra^sgressours, than to cast
them away for every trespass.

Like as narrow mowthed vessels which are longest in fyllyng, keep their
lycour the better: so wits that are slow in taking, are best of all to
retain that they learn.

As a sparcle of fire, or the snuff of a candle negligently left in an house
may set an whole town on fire: so of priuye malice and discord, comes
open destruction of people.

As iron and brass is the bryghter for the wearyng: so the wit is the most
ready that is most occupied.

Like as they that taste poison, destroy them selves therewith: so he that
admytteth a friend before he know him, may hurt him self whiles that he
proves him.

Like as a Chamell has all colors save white: so has a flatterer al points
save honesty.

Like as one branch of a tree being set on fire, kyndeleth all the rest: so
one vicious fellow, destroys an hole company.

As a precious stone in a golden King, so shyneth an heart that is settled in
vertuousnesse.

Like as with water, Maulte is made sweet: even so a sorrowful heart is made
merry with wine.

As a sick man is cured of his disease by virtue of a medicine: so is an ill
man healed of his malice, by virtue of ye law.

Like as men chose good ground to labor and to sow: so should they chose
honest men to be their servants.

As the fortune of this world shall make the rejoice over thine enemies: even
so may it make thine enemies rejoice over the.

Like as wax is ready and plyaunt to receive any print or figure: so is a
young child apt to any kind of learning.

As a Physician can not cure his pacyent, except he know first the truth of
his disease: even so may a man gave no good counsel, except he know throwly
the effect of the matter.

Even as a good Gardyner is very diligent about his gardeyn, waterynge the good
and profitable herbs, and rootynge out the unprofitable weeds: so should a
king attend to his common weal, cheryshyng his good and true subjects, and
punyshyng such as are false, and unprofitable.

As the cuttyng of vynes and all other trees, is cause of better and more
plentyfull fruit: so the punishment of the bad causes the good to florysh.

Like as grene wood which is long in kyndelyng, is whotter than the dry when
it is fyered: so he that is seelde and long ere he be angrye, is harder to be
pacifyed, than he that is sone vexed.

Like as the bytternes of the Allow tree, takes away the swetnes of the
swetest honnye: so evil works destroy and take away the merit of the good.

Like as an arrowe that lyghteth on a stone glaunceth away, because the stone
lackyng softnes, yeldeth not to receive it: so the riches that fortune gives,
not gyded with diligence, and circumspection, vanysh away without profyt.

He that teaches good to an other, and follows it not him self: is like him
which lyghteth a candle to another, and goes him self darklyng.

Like as a vessel is known by ye sou^de whether it be whole or broken: so are
men proved by their speech, whether they be wise or foolysh.

Like as a fly which feeds upon corrupt things, despyseth the sweet, and
pure herbs: so wyckednes follows the wicked, dispraysing all goodness.

As rust consumes iron: so does envy the hearts of the enuyous.

As a shepeherde among his sheep: so ought a king to be among his subjects.

Like as a fyelde although it be fretile can bring forth no good fruit, except
it be first tylled: so the mind although it be apt of it self, can not
without learning bring forth any goodness.

As the plowgh rooteth out from the yearthe, all brambles and thystles: even
so wisdom rooteth out all vices from the mind.

Like as a crased ship by drynkyng in water, not only droundeth it self, but
all other that are in her: so a Ruler by vsyng viciousnes, destroys not him
self alone but al other besides that are under his governance.

As it becomes the people to be obedyent and subject to their lord and king:
so it behooves the king to entend diligently to the weal and governance of
his people, and rather procure their profyt, than his own pleasure. For as the
soul is joined with the body: so is a King united with his people.

Like as a small disease, except it be looked to in time, and remedyed, may be
the destruction of the whole body: so if Rulers be negligent, and look not to
small things whereupon greater do depend, and se them reformed in time, they
shall suffer the common weal to decay, not able to refourme it, when that they
would.

As the shadow follows the body: so praise follows virtue. And as the
shaddowe goes sumtymes before, and sumtymes behind, so does praise also to
virtue, but the later that it comes, the greater it is, and the more of
valor.

As in every Pomegranade there is some grain rotten: so is there no man but
has some evil condition.

As a man appears more in a mist, tha^ in clear weather: so appears his
vice more when he is angrye, than when he is at quiet.

As no Physician is reputed good that heals other, and can not heal him
self: so is he no good governor that commands other to avoid vices, and
will not leave them him self.

Like as the fire wastes ye fyerbrand: so does scornfulnes waste love between
friends.

As men for their bodily health, do abstain from evil meats: so ought they
to abstain from sin, for the salvation of their souls.

As health conserueth the body: even so wisdom conserueth the soul.

As a Captain is the directer of an hole host: so Reason joined with
knowledge, is the gyde of life.

Like as an hand is no part of a man except it can do the office of an hand:
so is wisdom no part of a wyseman, except it be occupied as it should be.

Like as a governor of a ship, is not chosen for his richesse, but for his
knowledge: so ought Rulers of Cities to be chosen for their wisdom and
learning, rather than for their dignity and richesse.

As a golden bridle* although it garnysh an horse, yet makes him never the
better: so although riches garnish a man, yet can they not make him good.

Like as age follows youth: even so death follows age.

As to the good, their goodness is a reward: so to the wicked, their
wyckednes is a punishment.

Like as gryefe is the disease of the body: so is malice a syckenesse of the
soul.

As a man in a dark cave may not see his own proper figure: so the soul
that is not clean and pure, can not perceive the true and parfecte goodness of
almyghtye God.

As the goodness of wysemen continuallye amendeth: so the malice of fools
evermore empayreth.

As God surmounteth all other creatures: so the remembrance of him,
surmounteth all other ymaginacions.

As liberality makes friends of enemies: so pride makes enemies of friends.

Like as Beas out of flowers, suck forth the swetest: so should men out of
sciences, learn that is best.

Like as no man can tell where a shoe wryngeth, save he that wears it: so no
man can know a woman's disposition, save he that has wedded her.

As they which can not suffer the light of a candle, can much worse abide the
bryghtnes of the Sun: so they that are trowbled with small tryfles, would be
more amassed in wayghtyer matters.

The spouse which forsakes her husband, because she is grieved with his
manners: is like him, which because a ^ea has stonge him, forsakes the honye.

He that fysheth with poison, catches fyssh, but ill and corrupted: and so
they that endeavor to get their husbands by decey^es and charms, may lightly
get them, but better vngotten.

Such wives as had rather have foolysh husbands whom they might rule, than
to be ruled by sobre wise men: are like to him which would rather lead a
blind man in an unknown way, than to follow one that can see, and knows
the way well.

Like as a block though it be decked with gold, pearls and gemmes, is not to
be regarded except it represent the shape of sumwhat: even so a wife be she
never so rich, yet if she be not obedient to her husband, she is nothing
worth.

Like as the savor of carrayne is noisome to them that smell it: so is the
talk of fools to wysemen that hear it.

Like as in a pair of tables, nothing may be well written, before the blottes
and blurres be wyped out: so virtue and noblenes can not be seen in a man,
except he first put away his vices.

Like as the eye can not atones se both above and benethe: no more may the wit
apply both vice and virtue together.

As Yuye in every place fyndeth sumwhat to cleave to, so love is never lightly
without a subject.

Aristotle, Plutarche, Seneca.
Like as Nources oftentimes while they be to curyous to rub of spots from
their children, rub away the skin and al: Even so diverse, whiles they go
about to redress small tryfles, commyt greater offenses.

He that casts away his kynsfolke, and makes him friends of strangers:
doethe as the man which would cast away his flesshy leg, and set on
another of wood.

Like as rain may not profytte the ^orne, that is sown upon dry stones: so
neither teaching nor study may profyt a fool to learn wisdom.

Like as the eye without light, can neither see it self, nor judge of any
thing else: so the soul that lacks wisdom, is brute and knows nothing.

As the towns wherein men labor, wax always rycher and rycher, and such
as are bent to ydlenes and pleasure, daily decay, and come to utter
desolacion: so the gooddes that be got by travail, study and diligence, and so
kept, shall continue and encreace, but that which is evil got, or suddenly
won, shall even as suddenly vanysh away again.

Like as the sick man which asks counsel, and is taught of the physician
is never the nerer of his health, except he take his medicine: so he that is
instruct in wisdom and virtue, and follows not the same, is never the
better therefore: but loses the health of his body, and blessedness of his
soul.

Like as it is a shame for a man which would hy^ the prycke, to mysse the
whole ^utte: even so is it a shame for him that desires honor, to fail of
honestye.

As fyrr and heat are inseparable: so are the har^es of faithful friends.

Like as a trumpeter sounds out his meaning by the voice of his trumpet: so
should a woman let her housbaude speak for her.

They which were wount to do sacryfyce unto Juno, the Boddesse of married
women, took always the galls out from the beasts which they sacrificed:
signifiyng thereby, that al anger and displesure ought to be far from married
folk.

Like as they which keep Eliphantes wear no light colored garments, nor
they which keep wild bulls, wear no purple, because such colors do make
them fyerce: so ought a wife to abstain from such things as she knows will
offend her husband.

Like as a membre vexed with the itche has always need of clawyng: so the
covetousness of the mind, can never be satisfied.

As a scarre gives us warnyng to beware of wou^des: so the remembrance of
euyls that are past, may cause us take the better heed.

As the complayntes of children may be sone appeysed: so small affections
vanysh lightly.

He that brings an infirmed body to a bayne, or to any voluptuousnes: is like
to him which brings a broken ship in to the ragyng seas.

He which gives riches or glory to a wicked man: gives wine to him yt has a
fyeuer.

They which go to a banquet only for the meats sake: are like them which go
only to fill a vessel.

Like as the body is an instrument of the soul: so is the soul an instrument
of God.

Servants when they sleep, fear not their masters, and they yt be bound
forget their letters, in sleep ulcers and sores leave smartyng: but
supersticion alone vexes a man when he sleapeth.

If they be miserable which have cruel masters although they may go from
them: how much are they more miserable that serve their vices as their
masters from whom they can not fly.

They which woorshyp God for fear least any evil should chance unto them:
are like them which hate Tyrants, and yet reverence them because they should
not hurt them.

Like as they judge worse of a man the which say that he is wrathful and
ungracious, than if they denied him to be alive: so they think not so evil of
god, which say there is no god at all, as the supersticious which say God is
froward and full of wrath and reuengeaunce:

Luke as they which bring up horses well, teach them first to follow the
bridle: so they that teach children, should first teach them to give ear to
yt which is spoken.

As we behold our selves in other folks eyes: so should we learn by other
me^nes report what does become us and what does not.

Like as they which give vnwyllinglye, seem to have but little them selves:
even so they which praise other folks sclenderlye, seem to desire to be
praised them selves.

Like as in meats, the holsomnesse is as much to be required as the
pleasantness: so in hearing and reading authors, we ought to desire as well
the goodness as the eloquence.

As a lookyng glass represents every thing that is set against it: even so
does a flatterer.

Like as the shadow follows a man continually, what so ever he do: even so a
flatterer what so ever a man does, applies him self to the same.

Like as a Physician cures a man secretlye, he not fealyng it: so should a
good friend help his friend preuely, when he knows not of it.

Like as the rule ought to be straight and just, by which other rules should be
tried: so ought a Governor which should govern other, to be good, virtuous,
honest and just him self.

As a vessel can not be known whether it be whole or broken except it have
licour in it: so can no man be thorowlye known what he is, before he be in
authority.

As darnell spryngeth up among good wheat, and ^^t^les among Roses: even so
Envy grows up among virtues.

Where as is no light, there is no shadow: and where as is no welthe, there is
no Envy.

They that are ready to take a tale out of an others mouth, are like unto them
which seeing one proffered to be kyssed, would houlde forth their lyppes to
take it from him.

Like as an hare both delyuereth, norysheth, and is with young all atones: so
an usurer before he have begyled one, deuyseth how to deceive an other, by
making a false bargayne.

Like as an horse after he has ones taken the bridle, must ever after bear
one or other: so he that is ones fallen in det, can lightly never after be
thoroughly quit there from.

As a wise maryner in calm weather prepares him self lokyng for a tempest:
Even so ought the mind when it is most at quiet, to doubt of some tribulacion.

Like as the famyshed for lack of other meat, are feign some time to eat
their own flesh: so many that are vayngloryous, are forced to praise them
selves because no man else will.

Like as a spot ought to be wyped out at the first, least with to long
tarying, it stayne through, and be the worse to be got out: so should
discention be remedyed at the first, that it grow not to hatred.

As the vessel can not be full which always shedeth out, and takes in
nothing: so the man can not be wise, that evermore talks, and never harkeneth.

Like as there is no tree but will wax barrayne and grow out of fashion if it
be not well attended: so is there no wit so good, but will wax evil, if it be
not well applied.

Like as there is no beast so wild, but that diligence may make tame: so
there is no wit so unruly, but that good bryngyng up may may make gentle.

Like as Phisicions with their bitter drugges, do myngle their sweet spyces,
that they might be the better received: so ought checkes to be myngled with
gentle admonicions.

Like as a dog deuowreth by and by what so ever he may catch, and gapeth
continuallye for more: so if it chance us to obtain any thing, we set little
by it, desirous always to obtain more.

Like as the books which are seldom times occupied, will cleave fast together:
even so the memory waxes hard, if it be not oftentimes renewed.

Like as the stroke which a man sees may be the better received and
defended: so the mischyefe which is known of before can do the less harm.

The poison which serpents continually keep without any harm, they sp^we out
to others destruction: but the malicious contrary wise hurt no man so much as
them selves.

Like as when the wine spourgeth, it breaks the vessel, and that which is
in the bottom cummeth up to the brymme: even so drunkenness discovers the
secrets of the heart.

Like as a cunnyng woorkman can fashyon an image of any kind of matter: so a
wyseman should take in good worth all kinds of Fortune.

Like as the Sun is alone both to poor and rich: so ought a Prince not to
have respect to the person, but to ye matter.

Like as an Adamaut by a secret, and hyd power draws Iron unto it: even so
wisdom by a secret mean, draws unto it the hearts of men.

Like as fire is an instrument without which few works can be fynyshed: so
with out Charity, nothing may be done well and honestly.

Like as clear glass can hyde nothing: so there be many that can keep secret
nor dissemble nothing.

As some poisons are so contrary by Nature, that the one cures the other: so
is it likewise of deceytes and vices.

After winter the spring time follows: but after age youth never comes
again.

As it is a great foolyshnes to leave the clear fountaynes and to fetch water
in puddles: so is it likewise to leave the Euangelyes, and to study the
dreams of men's ymagination.

Like as an Adamant draws by little and little the heavy iron, until at the
last it be joined with it: so virtue and wyse-ioyne men unto them.

As he which in a game place, runs swyftest, and continues still his pace,
obtayneth the crown for his labor: so all that diligently learn, and
earnestlye follow wisdom and virtue, shall be crowned with everlasting glory.

Faults escaped.
In the.xv. side of the Signature. A. the.iii. line, read. In the fowerth book.

In the.vii. side of the Signature. B. the v, line, read. Excused him properly.

In the first side of. Q. the last line, read, That thing in a realm, etc

Finis.
A table declaryng the contents of the whole book.
The first book.
THe first beginning of Philosophye. Cap. i. The parts of natural
Philosophye. Cap. ii. Of the beginning of moral Philosophy. Cap. iii. The
kinds of teaching Moral Philosophye. Cap. iiii. The order of the book. Cap. v
The life of Hermes, otherwise called Mercurius Trismegistus. Cap. vi. Of
Pythagoras. Cap. vii. Of Thales Milesius. Cap. viii. Of Solon, and which were
the.vii. that are called sages. Cap. ix. Of Chylon. Cap. x The life of Byas.
Cap. xi. Of Periander. Cap. xii. Of Anachacis. Cap. xiii. The life of Myson.
Cap. xiiii. Of Epimenides. Cap. xv. Of Anaxagoras. Cap. xvi. The life of
Phericides. Cap. xvii The life, answers, and Death of Socrates. Cap. xviii. Of
Xenophon. Cap. xix. Of Aristippus. Cap. xx The life of Plato. Cap. xxi. Of
Xenocrates. Cap. xxii. Of Archelaus. Cap. xxiii. The life of Aristotle. Cap.
xxiiii. Of Diogenes. Cap. xxv Of Ant^sthenes. Cap. xxvi Of Isocrates. Cap.
xxvii Of Plutarche. ^ap. xxviii. The life and death of Seneca. Cap. xxix. Finis.

The second book.
THe profyt and use of moral philosophye. Cap. i Of God, of his works, and of
his power. Cap. ii Of the soul, and governance thereof. Cap. iii. Of the
world, the lusts, and pleasures thereof. Cap. iiii. Of Death not to be
feared. Cap. v. Of frendshyp and friends. Cap. vi. Of counsel and
counsaylours. Cap. vii Of richesse and poverty. Cap. viii. Of Silence,
speech, and communication how to be used. Cap. ix. Of Kings rulers and
governors, how they should rule both them selves and their subjects. Cap. x
In the.xi. Chapter are contained the precepts and counsayles of good manners
for all pourposes, written of the Philosophers. Finis.

The contents of the third book.
THe use and profit of proverbs and adages. Cap. i. Of Wisdom, learning,
and understanding. Cap. ii. Of Justice, laws, Cities, and governance. Cap.
iii Of power, honor, virtue, and strength, how to be used. Cap. iiii. Of
Liberality, patience, use, custom, and diligence. Cap. v. Of knowledge,
ignorance, and error, and of folyshnes. Cap. vi. Of money and covetousness.
Cap. vii. Of the tongue, of fair speech, and of flatterye. Cap. viii. Of
truth, of Faith, of error, and of lyinge. Cap. ix. Of bryngyng up and
manners, of disposicions and good instruction. Cap. x. Of Love, lust and
lechery. Cap. xi Of Sorrow, gladness, fear, and boldness. Cap. xii. Of
anger, wrath, envy, malice, and reuengeaunce. Cap. xiii. Of liberty and
bondage. Cap. xiiii. Of women, wine, and dronkenes. Cap. xv The rest of the
Chapiters of this book contain many goodly sentences of diverse good and
profitable matters. Proper Meaters. Finis.

In the last book are contained Parables, very proper to be vse^* written by
these following.
Hermes. Plato. Plutarche. Socrates. Aristotle. Seneca.
Finis.
Imprinted at London, in Fleet street, at the sign of the Sun, over against
the Conduyte, by Edward Whitchurche, the.xx. day of January, in the year of
our Lord. 1547.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum, per Septennium.




