THE Demonstration OF ANTICHRIST.

BY EDMUND GVRNAY, Bach. Theol. P. of Harpley Norfolk.

LONDON, Printed by I.B. for James Boler, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO THE ALL-HOPEFVLL Charles, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, PRINCE of Wales, etc.
IT is the glory of all temporal power to maintain the glory of Christ, and
so consequently to confound Antichrist, When, therefore, the providence of God
sends temporal Princes into the world, such as can give any intelligence
toward the discovering this Antichrist, cannot be thought ouerhastie in
presenting the same unto them. Indeed, the intelligence which this little Book
can do in such kind of business must needs be thought little; notwithstanding,
it was a little pibble-stone that bored the Front of Goliath, when the valiant
men of Israel were afraid to encounter him. Also the littleness of it may be a
means to induce Gods little ones, the sooner to begin to turn the leaves
thereof as they shall begin to awake unto the daylight of understanding. Which
happy time of our Princes awaking, It resolving to wait; the Author shall in
the mean time beseech the Almighty to visit him daily with the light of His
countenance, and as his Abilities shall grow, to allure them into the most
pleasant paths of His most Royal^ service.

ECCE ANTICHRISTVM.
HE that professes himself the supreme head of the Church of Christ, and yet
forces men, upon pain of death, to blaspheme Christ, He is Antichrist.

Because it cannot be imagined how any power upon earth can more cunningly, and
out of a deeper mystery do Christ such universal mischief.

But the Pope of Rome does profess himself the Supreme head of the Church of
Christ, (and that is granted) and yet forces men upon pain of death, (both
temporal and eternal) to blaspheme Christ.

And this we thus prove:

He that forces men upon pain of death to grant, that there is no other
Christ but He whose perfect Body, Soul, and Deity has, for these 1600. years
last past, been ordinarily present amongst men under that particular form
which immediately before the speaking of a few words was the form of a
senseless creature, and in that form does enter into the mouths of living
creatures* he forces men to blaspheme Christ.

Because this position does blaspheme, The Manhood of Christ. The Godhead of
Christ. The Majesty of Christ. The Holiness of Christ. The Justice of Christ.
The Mercy of Christ. The Wisdom of Christ. The Power and Word of Christ.


First, it blasphemes the manhood

Secondly, it blasphemeth His

Thirdly, it blasphemeth his such an outward presence as the vilest and poorest
man living would be ashamed of, and even utterly abhor.





thing to be their Savior which in all outward appearance is but a morsel of
bread.

Seventhly, it blasphemeth His He send the co^forter in his bodily absence; For
the co^forter will not come unless He goes away; Ioh. 16.7. Yea (finally) daily
does e give us his flesh to eat in His bodily absence; For except we eat his
flesh, we have no life in us, (Ioh. 6.53.) But he that believes has
everlasting life (Ioh. 6.^7.) and therefore he that believes, does always (in
His most bodily absence) eat His Flesh. To conclude, What benefit, what Grace,
what comfort was ever heard of, or can be imagined, but may be imparted unto
men as well (not to say incomparably more easily, more sweetly, more credibly)
In His bodily absence, as in this supposed bodily presence, whereunto such
stupendous miracles must concur: namely (for a taste of them) these amongst
others: 1. That the perfect Body of a man must be couched and contrived into
the form of a bit of bread. 2. That the living body of one man must wholly
enter into the mouth of another. 3 That the same man shall be in infinite
places at once. 4. That the perfect Body of man shall ordinarily come down from
heaven, and yet the outward eyes of those which entertain Him shall not see it.
5. That these so uncouth wonders shall be wrought at the call of mortal men
(every Priest) unto the end of the world, etc. And is not this a blaspheming of
the wisdom of the Almighty to make him the de^isor of these so inglorious,
and (to say nothing of the quality of them) insuperfluous miracles.

Also we further add, that it blasphemeth his Power; because it makes it the
instrument of such operations as are dishonorable and repugnant unto His
Wisdom, His Majesty, His Justice, and even all His conditions and attributes;
whereas the power of God on the contrary does so infinitely apply it self to
the honor and glory of God, as that it does continually resist, confound and
destroy whatsoever does offer the least diminution unto it.



For what is his created Word, but the faculties of Sense and Reason? What
word, or what light had man in his innocence, to show him which was the middle
tree in the garden (which upon pain of death he was forbidden to taste of) but
his common Sense? And what other word or light have men now in the state of
recovery, to tell them which is a man, and which is a beast; which is a fish,
and which is a serpent; and to lay them out their particular taskes, portion*
and callings, but their common Sense? This therefore so immediately created and
sacred light, if it be made a notorious liar, (for what is it else if it
constantly affirms that to be a morsel of bread which indeed is the perfect
Body of a man?) Is not therein the Word of God blasphemed?

And as for his Revealed Word, both His Original Word (the Scriptures) and
also His derived Word (the Fathers) are not they also contradicted and
blasphemed by this position.

For first, concerning the Scripture, does not that every where tell us, That
our Savior was in every point like a man? That He had the face, limbs, and
properties of a man? That He did eat, drink, and speak like a man? Also do
not the Scriptures expressly say, That the Heavens must contain him till all
things be restored? Acts 3.20. And that He shall so descend from heaven; as
He first ascended up into heaven? Whereas by this position He has for these
1600. years continually descended bodily from heaven, not once in such a
manner descend, as He first ascended: Yea, the Scripture every where tells us
that now He is in the state of Glory; whereas this position contriues Him into
a more vile form than ever man had, and ties Him to a more base condition than
ever any man (or indeed any living creature) did undergo. For though they
seem to do Him great honor while they carry Him about (in those breaden
forms) in their pompous processions; yer when withal they profess that in
the end he is to be eaten under those breaden forms, all the honor they
bestow on him is no better honor unto him, then the guilding the Bulls horns
when he is led to be baited, is an honor unto the Bull. Finally, the Bread
which our Savior termed His Body, does not the Scripture every where call it
still bread notwithstanding, He took, brake, blessed, and gave Bread, say all
the Evangelists; sometime also saying as much of the cup as of the wine: Paul
also calling it bread, both in the blessing, and in the eating, and also after
the eating: and the Acts of the Apostles terming these Communions ( Chap.
2.42.) a continuance in breaking bread: and ( Chap. 20.7.) a coming together
to break bread: And all the Fathers for many hundred years together
immediately following the first Institution, when at any time they made mention
of it, as securely calling it bread, as if they never imagined that any would
ever make question thereof. And for proof hereof, we have thought good to
close up this point with a border of citation^ out of them; leaving the force
of their sayings to the applicati^^^ of the Reader for breuity sake. Circa An.
c. p 2.


Clemens Romanus (to cite them according to the times wherein they lived) says
thus of it; We offer unto thee our King and our God, this bread and this wine,
giving thee thanks: Council. Tom. 2.

Ignatius thus; An. c. 10^
There is one flesh of our Lord Jesus, and one Blood, one bread and one cup.
Epist. 2.

Iustine Martyr thus; 133.
When prayers are finished, Bread and Wine is offered: And elsewhere thus;
Christ has given the bread to the end we should remember that He was made a
body for such as should believe. In Dial. contra Tryphon. and Apolog. 2.

Irenaeus Martyr thus; An. 172.
As the Eucharist consisting of two natures, the earthly and the heavenly, so
our Bodies, etc.

An. 196.
Tertullian thus; Calling the bread His body, to the end you may understand
that He has given bread to be a figure of His body. Contra Marcion. 3.19.

Clemens Alexandrinus thus; The Wine signifies the Blood allegorically. Lib. de
paedagog. 10.6.

An. c. 207.
Origin thus; If you take this saying, [Except ye eat the flesh of the son of
man, etc.] according to the Letter, the Letter kills. Hom. 7. in Leuit. and
elsewhere thus; After we have given thanks, we eat the Loves presented. Contra
Celsun. 8.

An. 250.
Cyprian thus; Our Lord gave with His own hands bread and wine, which He
called His Body. De vnct. Chris. and elsewhere thus; This bread is converted
into our flesh and blood, and serves for our life. Epist. 2.

Eusebius Caesariensis thus; An. 308.
Christ and His Ministers do represent the mysteries of His Body and Blood by
bread and wine. De Demonst. Euangel. 5.3.

Athanasius thus; An. 327.
How few would his Body have sufficed that it should be meat for all the world.
In illud [quicunque etc.]

Concilium Nicenum thus; An. 329.
We must not basely [ humiliter] be intent upon the bread and the eup, but
lifting up our minds by faith, etc. Council. 1.

Macarius Egypt, thus; An 360.
In the Church bread and wine is offered being the figure of his flesh and
blood. Homil. 27.

Epiphanius thus; An. 379.
Christ speaking of a loaf which is round in figure, and cannot see, hear,
nor feel, says of it, This is my Body. In Anchor.

An. 384.
Ambrose thus; Thou saw the Sacraments upon the Altar, and wondredst at the
creature; yet is it a solemn and known creature: De Sacram. 4.3. And
elsewhere thus; In the Law was a shadow, in the Gospel an image, in Heaven the
truth. Lib. 10. ex offic. C. 48.

Gregory Nissen, thus; Whose has abundantly drunk of the Apostles springs,
has already received whole Christ. In vi^ Mos.

An. 385.
Chrysostom thus; If it be dangerous to transfer sanctified vessels unto
private uses, where in not the true Body of Christ but only a mystery of that
body is contained: how much les^ ought we to give the vessels of our own
bodies to the deuil^ which God has prepared for himself to inhabit. In Matthew.
5. Homil. 11. and elsewhere thus; It is counted worthy to be called the Lords
Body, though the nature of bread remains there still. Ad Caesar. Monach.
citat. a ^arijs Author. And again, thus; Wool when it is died, is called no
longer wool, but Purple or Scarlet, though the nature of wool still remains.
In Psalm. 22.

Gregory Nazianzen thus; An. 378.
We ^ow partake the Passover, though in a figure, yet much more clear than in
the old Law. De Pasch. Orat. 2.

Hierome thus; Christ is not corporally in the Church. In Prou, 1.^. and
elsewhere thus; Christ left bread and wine, as he that goes ^voyage leaves a
gage: In prim. ^d Corinth. 11. and again, thus; I take the Gospel to be the
body of Christ, and that more truly than the Sacrament. In Psalm. 147.

An. 394.
Austine thus; If we look to the visible signs, by which the Sacraments are
performed, who can be ignorant that they are corruptible. De Bapt. Lib. 3.
Cap. 10. And elsewhere thus; By reason of the resemblance betwixt the
Sacraments and the things, the Sacraments often times take the name of the
things. Epist. 23. And elsewhere thus; this is a perfect rule to understand
whether a speech be figurative, that whatsoever in Scripture cannot be
referred unto integrity o^ faith, or verity of manners, that resolve thy self
is figurative. D^ doctr. Chr. Lib. 3. Chap. 10. Where upon he inferres our
Savior speech, [of eating his flesh] to be figurative, because according to
the Letter, it is a sinful act; calling it a carnal sense to take figurative
speeches properly, and a miserable bondage of the soul.

Theodoret thus; An. 424.
He honored the signs which we see, with the name of His body, not changing
the nature, but casting grace upon nature. And elsewhere thus; The mystical
signs after sanctification do not depart from their nature, but remain in
their former substance, figure, and ^orme. Dial. 2.

Cyril thus; Our Sacrament a^oucheth not the eating of a man. Ad object. Theod.
And elsewhere thus; He gave pieces of bread to His Disciples. In 4. Io^n.

Gelasius thus; An. 490.
By the Sacraments we are made partakers of the heavenly nature and yet for all
that cease not the nature of bread and wine. Contra Eutichens.

An. 550.
Fulgentius thus; How did He go up to heaven but as he is very man, contained
in a place? Or how is He present with the faithful, but as He is very God
without all measure? Ad Thrasimach. Regul. 2.

An. 526.
Ephrem thus; Taking bread into His hands, He blessed it, and brake it for a
figure of His body. Contra Inquis. Divine. Nature.

Vigilius thus; To go to His Father, and from us; was to take from the world
that nature which he received of us. Contra Eutichens.

An. 550.
Concilium Constant. thus; Christ commanded the whole substance of bread,
chosen for His Image to be set on the table, lest if it resembled the shape of
a man, Idolatry might be committed. Extat in Council. Nicen. 2.

Procopius Gazeus thus; There is now given an Image, a Type, a Figure of His
body, receiving no more the bloody Sacrifices of the Law. Super Genesis 49.

Beda thus; He substituting the Sacrament of His Flesh in the figure of bread
and wine. In Luke 22. And elsewhere out of Austine thus; That which you see,
^is bread and wine, which your very eyes can tell you. In 1 Cor. 10.

Druthmarus thus; Wine makes glad, and increases blood; and therefore the
blood of Christ is aptly figured thereby. In Mat.

Rhabanus Maurus thus; The Sacrament is turned into the bodies nourishment.
Lib. 1. Chap. 13.

Paschasius thus; What find they which taste these things, beside bread and
wine, otherwise than by faith and hearing? De corp. and sang. Dom.

Bertramus thus; The signs, as touching the substance of the creatures, are
the same after consecration that they were before. De corp. and sang. Dom.

Bernard thus; What is it to eat His flesh, and drink His blood, but to
communicate with His passions, and to imitate His conversation. In Psalm. [qui
habitat etc.]

Bonauenture thus; The Sacraments are said to contain Gods Grace, not as a
vessel does water, but because they signif^ Gods Grace. In 4. Sentent. Dis^
1.9.3.

And his Text-man Lumbard thus; Christ offered Himself upon the Cross, and
his remembrance in the Sacrament. Lib. 4. did. 12.

The gloss upon the Common Law (a principal witness in this cause) thus; It
is His body improperly after a fashion, not in truth but in signification,
quoting Austine for it. Super Canon. Hoc est corpus meum. Decr. p. 3. did.
2.16.

Most true therefore our ground is, that whosoever inforceth men upon pain of
death, to grant that there is no other Christ but he which is ordinarily
present amongst men in the form of common bread, he forces men ^o blaspheme
Christ. All the na^ures, properties, and attributes of Christ being blasphemed
by ^uch assertion.

But the Pope of Rome does force men upon pain of death (both spiritual and
temporal) so to grant: Their Tridentine Council enforcing it upon pain of
spiritual death, in these words; viz. Whosoever shall deny that in the most
holy Sacrament of the Eucharist, is truly and really contained the Body and
Blood, together with the Soul and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
therefore whole Christ; but shall say that it is there only as in a sign, or
in a figure, or virtue, let him be accursed. Council. Trident. Sess 3. And one
of their Synod enioyning Berengari^ thus to say; With my mouth and with my
heart, I profes^ that the bread and the wine afte^ consecration, is not only a
Sacrament, but also the true body and blood of Jesus Christ, and sensually in
truth is handled and broken with the hands of the Priests, and torn ( atteri)
with the teeth of the faithful. Decret. p. 3. did. 2.16. Ego Berengarius, etc.

And as for temporal death which the gaine-sayer of this position did
thereupon undergo; what Nation under their authority has not records thereof
written in blood? Not to cite their secular laws, which condemn all,
heretics (amongst which, the resister of this position they count the chief)
ad poenam ignis: i.e. To be burnt to death, and to undergo all kind of
penalties beside, in their name, friends, fautors, posterity, goods and
fortunes that can be imagined. Summa Angelica. Litera here^icus.

Or if our English Admirers of Rome will believe nothing concerning the
Discipline of that Church, but so far forth as they can be assured thereof
within the bounds of England; they may have recourse to the six Articles
established in English Parliament* the first whereof enacteth thus*

Whosoever shall say, that in the Sacrament of the Altar under the form of
bread and wine (after the consecration thereof) there is not present, really,
the natural Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ; conceived of the
Virgin Mary; or that after the said consecration there remains any substance
of bread or wine, or any other substance but the substance of Christ, both God
and man, etc. then he shall be adjudged an heretic, and suffer death by
burning, and shall forfeit to the King, all his lands, tenements, etc. as in
case of hye reason. An. 31. Hen. 8.14.

For though this law was enacted when the Popes authority was suppressed, yet
did it take the beginning from the Church of Rome: and a little after, in the
reign of Queen Mary, was executed to the full, by virtue of the Romish
authority.

Our Demonstration therefore is most plain, and let heaven and earth be Judge
of it.

He that professes himself the Supreme head of the Church of Christ, and yet
forces men upon pain of death (both temporal and eternal) to blaspheme
Christ; he is Antichrist.

But the Pope of Rome so professes, and so inforceth.

Therefore En and ecce Antichristum.

FINIS.

