A DISpraise of the life of a Courtier, and a commendacion of the life of the
labouryng man.

M.DXLVIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.

Unto the right noble William Marquis of Northhamton, Earl of Essex and lord
Par, your assured loving fre^d Fraunces Briant knight, one of the kings most
honorable preuy Chamber, desires to you perpetual health and honor.
IT IS not long agone (my very synguler good lord) that I found you loking in
a little book called in the French language Mesprise de la court, et laloua^ge
de la vie rustique, which is to say in English, the Dispraise of the Court,
and the laud of the rustical life. And when I demanded of you what book it
was, after your accustomed gentleness, you were contented that I should for ye
time have it, and look on it, and I so doing: after that I had in part ouersene
it, I do ensure you I took great pleasure therein, and not without good reason,
forasmuch as the matter was not only pleasant and fruitful, but also full
in every where of old ancient stories and wise sayings of the noble and
notable Philosophers and clerks. And at our next metyng together, partly at
your request I promised to turn the same out of French into our maternall
tongue, which you right well accepted. And so at convenient laysure (as ye may
see) I have finished the same, praiyng your good lordship to take my pore labor
in gre, yt not only in such a trifle as this is, but in any thing else that I
may do you service and pleasure in, ye shall find me as most bounden, ever
pressed and ready as well for the great goodness showed unto me by your most wise
father during his days whom I took as a special patron: But further having
respect to your most noble sister, my most good and gracious lady the Queen, I
think me fortunate to employ my poor engyn to that yt to her highness or to
your good lordship should seem either acceptable or agreeable. This little book
then, let it come into light under your proteccion. And in such wise that if
that ye think I have erred in the translacion, not to impute it to be so
dooen for lack of good will and loving heart that I owe unto you, but for
lack of knowlage of the stories, which I do profess is hard for to understand
for one of no greatter litterature then I profess me to be. Thus almighty God
send you well to fare, and to prospere in honor more and more to ye comfort
of al your friends, and me, that to my power ye may assuredly number me among
that sort.

To the right reverend and worthy Prelate my lord Willyam de Prat bishop of
Cleremou^te, Antony Alaygre sends gretyng.
IT IS not many days past sithe^s I being retired for a time (my good lord)
into ye village, and there taking the commodity and pleasure of the fair
sweet fields, a certain friend of mine sent unto me a work in the Castilian
rong of the lord Antony of Gueuera bishop of Mondouent, and Chronicler of the
Emperor: in readyng whereof I found great pleasure and profit. The title of
the book is the Disprailyng of the Court, and the Praise of the life rusticall,
dedicate unto the king of Portingal in such sort, that the better to keep and
to hold the wise sentence and erudicions therein contained, I employed certain
hours after supper to translate the same into French, not thinkyng among mine
other simple works ever to put it abroad, but after that I had co^municat ye
same with some of my friends that have knowledge of the Spanishe tongue, to leave
it in a corner to make it meat for Rattes and Mise. Now for truth, the first
exempler was so evil divided, and the leaves so out of order that I gave charge
to ye Scriuener that was my nigh neighbor to copye them, and as who should say
to write it fair and in order, the which so evil went about it, a^^^ough by
ignorance he could not ensue ye original, yet for to get a little money he
sold where his pleasure was ye copies so vncumly set together that I was sorry
and repentant that ever I consumed the time to translate it, till at the last
moved by the persuasio^ of Annas Regyn Vicar general, and by Peter Cister your
advocate, by them twain my great friends, I thought it better to present to
the eyes of all men this evil translated, then to suffer longer those evil
exemplers so corrupted to my blame in ye hands of those that have no right
judgment, to know from whom the fault came: wherefore my good lord, under your
prudent favor and correccion I do adventure herein my name and fame according
to my knowledge, trustyng assuredly that your only name shall suffice to
vanquishe and set aside this slander, the which slander as enemy to learned
men, sease not to withdraw those that have good will and mind to study: I say
this that as me seems it is well worthy that work of the wise bishop of
Spain be presented to his semblable or superior in learning in France, or
rather above him in knowledge and virtuous manners. I will add to to this, that
the grave sentences and persuasion to virtuous life contained in this book
deserve to be offered to you that are accustomed to use the^ after such sort
ye every man have plain opinion of you that ye are sent of God to be protector
and patron of virtue, troubled and despised. Therefore (my singular good lord,
as one of ye chiefest of the best sort) I dedicate to you this my little
labor, not that I think it worthy to cum into your hands, but for to be a
perpetual witness that I do owe unto you my service with all reverence, to the
which most humbly I recommende me.

From your city of Cleremonte this first day of May. Anno. M.D.xlii.
A dispraise of the life of the Courtier, and a co^mendacion of the life of the
husbandman, composed in the Castilian toungue by the reverend father in God the
lord Antony of Gueuera bishop of Mondouent and Chronicler to the Emperor
Charles. And out of Castilian drawn into French by Antony Alaygre, and now
out of the French toungue into our maternal language, by sir Fraunces Bryant
knight, one of the kings most honorable chamber.
The first Chapter.
Of certain courtiers which ought to complain of none, but of them selves.
AFter that the noble prince Philippe of Macedony had ouerrunne the Athenience,
on a time he being at supper among certain of his Philosophers, asked them
which was the greattest thing in the world? One of them answered, that to his
thinking it was the water, because there was more of that only then of any
other thing under the sky. Another said it was the Sun, seeing his only
brightness does suffice to give light to the earth, to the stars, and to the
water. Another said it was the great hill Olympe, whose height passes the
clouds. Another said it was the most renoumed giant Athlas, on whose sepulcre
was builded the fearful mountain Ethna. Another said it was Homer, that in his
life was so much praised and after his death so much bewailed, yt vii. great
cities made war among the^ selfs for ye recovery of his bones, to keep
them as a relike. The last and most wise Philosopher said, that nothing in
this world ought to be calledgreat, but that heart which estemeth no great
things. O high and noble sentence, since that by that it is given us to
understand, that as touching the riches and honor of this world, more is ye
glory of him that settes light by them, then he that has the the cast for to
get them. Titus Liuius praises and never ceasseth to praise, the good consul
Marcus Curious in the house of whom, came Ambassadors of the Sannytes for to
recover certain lands that he had of theirs, offering to him for the same
plenty of gold and silver: He having in his hand certain herbs to put in his
pot for his diner, answered them after this sort, ye should have offered this
money to the Capitaines that disdaines to dress their own diners, and not to
me that desires no greater riches them to be lord over their lords.

Deserved not more praise this Marcus Curious in setting light those talentes of
gold of the Sannytes, then the Consul Lucullus for robbyng them of Spartes?
Deserved not more glory the wise Crates for the riches that he cast into sea,
their the king Nabugodonoser for the treasure that he robbed from the Temple?
To your judgment, did not they of the Isles of Bariares deserve more honor,
agreyng not to have among them neither gold nor silver, then the covetous
Greeks that took by force and pilled ye mines of Spain? Was not more greater
the heart of the good Emperor Augustus in setting light the Empire, then of
his uncle Julius Caesar that did take possession? It is nedeful to have
wisdom, experience to order it, cunnyng to set it forth, and fortune to bring
it to good end: but to uphold it and keep it, had need of great strength, and
for to dispraise it, a good heart, because that which is seen with the eyes is
more esier to dispraise, then that thing which we have already in our hands.
It has been seen that many noble men has had fortune so much at their
desires that they have enterprised a thing almost impossible to attain, ye
which after for lack of good discrecion were not able to keep it.

Whereby it is to be understand that the greatness of the heart does not
consist somuche in obteinyng the thing that we desire to have, as it is to set
light, and contemn that that one loves best. Apolonius Thyaneus, did he not
despise his own proper country and travailed thorowout all Asia for to go to
see the Philosopher Hyarchis in Y^^e? Aristotle leauyng the familiacitie he had
with Alexander, returned to his own house for to read Philosophy. N^^^^^s
nothing extemed the treasure that the great king Cyrus gave him for to follow
him in ye wars. The Philosopher Anatillus refused three times ye principality
of Athenes, saying: he had rather be servant to ye good, then a chastiser of
the evil. Cecilius Metellus a valiant captain Roman, neither would accept
the estate of Dictator that to him was given, nor ye office of Consul that to
him was offered: saying, that he would eat in rest, that which with great
trauail he had gotten in ye war. The Emperor Dyoclecian (as it is manifest)
forsook with his free will the Empire, for no other cause, but to fle the brute
of the common speech, and to live in rest at home. Worthy is he to be praised
that has ye heart to care little for an Empire or a realm: but yet more is he
worthy that can set light by him self and not to be governed by his own
will: for there is no man in this world, but that he is more in love with that
he desires, then with yt he has: but how coueteous or ambicious so ever any
man be, if he trauail x. days for that which he has, he will bestow an
hundredth to obtain that which he desires, because that we do not bestow our
labor as we should, but we stowe it after our desires. If we do travail, if we
be troubled, if we cannot sleep, it is not for necessity, but for to satisfy
our will and appetite. And that is worst of all, we not contentyng our selfs with
that we can: do procure to can that that we desire. O how many have we seen in
the court of princes, to whom it had been better for them that they had been no
lords of their will, and less of their desires, because sythens they did that
they might and desired, begone to do that they ought not to do? If the man ye
offe^des us ought to ask pardon, let every man ask pardon to himself before
any other, for in my life I found never none yt hurt me so much as my self, I
have been only the procurer of mine own hurt. Who made me fall into pride, but
mine only presumpsion and fondnes? Who durst have prisoned my sorrowful heart
with envy, but lack of natural government? who durst have inflamed mine
inwardes with the fire of ire, if it had not been my great impacience? what is
the cause I am so great a gurmander, but that my bringyng up was to delicate?
what is the cause I have not departed with my goods to the poor and nedye,
but the excessive love I had to my riches? who gave leave to my flesh to rise
against my folish desire, if my heart had not been fixed in voluptuous
pleasures? O my soul, of all this damage and open faults, to whom do you lay
ye blame, but to mine own sensuality? Great folly it is, ye thief being
within the house, to seek for him without: even so it is with us a manifest
fault of experience, when seeing in us the blame, and yet charge another with
the occasion: by this we ought to perceive that we shall never cease to
complain until the time we begin to amend. Oh, how often and many times has
virtue fought with the botome of our consciences, which stirred us to be good,
and our sensulitie resisted, which is vain frowardnes, by the which battle
followed a dark corrupt judgment: but to conclude, we of our selves as of
our selves are very miserable. The Poet Ovid reherseth the loving Philis the
Rodian co^plainyng of her self and says: Oh Demophon, if I had not bestowed
time to love the, and silver, and ships, for thexpedicio^ of thy voyage, thou
durst not well to have gone, nor I to have bewailed thy departing, in such
wise that with my own wepons was my body wounded. If we believe Josephus in
that he did write of Maryana, and Homer, in that he said of Helene, Plutarch in
that he spoke of Cleopatra. Virgil of ye queen Dydo, Theophrast of Pollysene,
Zantippe of Cammilla, Assenarius of Clodia: All these ladies and excellent
princes never found them selfs so deceived by their lovers as they were by
believing their own proper counsels, and lightly consenting to the same.

If to Suetone, Zantippe and Plutarch we will give credit and believe those
things that they declare of Pomp, Pyrrhus, Hannyball, and the Consul Marius,
of the Dictator Caesar, of Mark Antony and many others we shall find they
blamed not fortune so much to be vanquished by others, as in their prosperity
they were ruled by their own advise and counselles.

It is true, that often times the opinion of our kin and friends makes us to
enter into busynes out of the way of reason, not caryng but for a folishe
auauncement of goods and riches. And at the end when by their setting forth
one has enterprised a certain busynes of importance which does require aid
and help, those same be the last that shows them selves helping friends:
which is ye occasion many times that men cannot return from enterprisyng
such things as neither shall grow to their honor nor profit. Many men say
that they have enemies, recountyng them often without findyng number: Although
it be true if it be well noted, that none have oftener or agreater enemy then
him self. And the most greatest danger that I see, is that under the shadow
to prefer and make better my self, my self is the cause of my destruction.
The Philosopher Neotidas on a time being asked which was the best counsel
that a man might take? He answered, the counsel of others with the
dispraisyng of his own: and he shows the cause, for that the corrupcion of
man is such, that often he searches in him self with great pain, that which
in the head of another, he fyndeth with great ease: then it follows, that in the
best time of our life our own life deceives us, the evil comes forth on
every side, heavy thoughts ouertaketh us our friends leaves us, persecutors
tormenteth us, troubles makes an end of us, and ambicion burieth us. If we
behold this thing: what we be: whereof we be: and wherefore we be, we shall
find that our beginning is oblivion, our middle age trauail, the end sorrow,
and altogether an open error. Then se how heavy is the courtiers life, as also
how dangerous the way is, where as be stoones to stumble at, myer to stick
fast in, yse for to fall on, pathe ways for to lose him in, water for to
pass through, thefes for to be afraid on, great affairs and busynes to do, so
that hard it is for any to go there as they would, and more harder to ariue
there as they desire. All these things have we said, to the intent that the
Courtiers may understand that neither I nor they can chose ye good way and
leave the evil, void that that hurtes us, and conserve that which profits
us, follow reason and pluck away the occasion: but if by chau^se some good
fall to us, we thank fortune, and if evil come to us, then we do put the fault
in her.

The.ii. Chapter
How that none ought to counsel another to go to the court nor when he is there
to come from it, but every man to chose the life that best he likes.
ARistarch the great Philosopher of Theban, said that time and man was so
diverse, that hard it was for the most wisest to choose that to them was good,
and to keep them from that to them is evil.

There is nothing more true, for we see daily, with the same that one is
healed, another falls sick: with that that one waxes better, another waxes
worse: with that that one is amended, another is put down: and to conclude,
with that little thing that one is content withal another is in despair. The
learned Alchymus was by his Moecoenas king Demetrius, asked wherein specially
did consist ye greatest trauail of the world? He answered, there is few
things but in them there is either trauail or suspicion, but above all the
most excessive trauail that a man may have, is never to be satisfied: And
that this is true, we perceive that when a little thing co^tenteth us, how little
soever it be, we make it our paradise with ye rest of our life: which seldom
chaunseth to few me^, because that living as we live, not being contented,
would assaie and know if it were good to be a king, a prince, a knight, a
married man, a religious or a merchant, a laborer, a shepeherd, or of some
other estate. And at the end, when al is proved, it shall be hard to find
where we would rest, so inconstant is the lightness of men. The wise
determines y^ to chose the best is the mean. A simple creature is lightly
contented with a small thing, but he that has a great heart, thinks that
poverty is a grievous life, like as they that be of high estate fear ye fall
of fortune. Plato was in his young years very worldely, as he that had seen
much, as well in the wars as in offices, in which he was used, and also in
handy crafts. On a time it was asked him wherein he had found most quietness
and rest? He answered there is no estate of life wherein is not mutabilitie,
there is no honor where is peril, no riches where is no trauail, no prosperity
but it ends, nor also pleasure but fails: but when all is said, I never
found so much quietness of mind, as since I left mine offices in Cities,
withdrawyng me to my books: signifiyng, that as long as we live servants of
the world, we desire all,, we prove all, we procure al, then al things well
seen and tasted, all things do anoye us: the greatest part of our disquietnes
comes hereof, that the abundance we have, seems to us little, and the little
of others, seems to us much. We say that our wealth is trauail, and that the
evil hap of others is rest: we condemn others acts and we allow our own:
we watch to get somewhat, and suddenly we sleep to lose it again: we immagyn
that al men lives content, and we alone nedy: And yet the worst is, we believe
that that we dream, and put not our trust in that that we se before our iyen.
What way one ought to follow or what estate he ought to chose, none can well
know nor counsel, because y^ thing is so troublesome and without good
judgment, by which many is deceived? If the sailyng on the sea be dangerous,
so is the walking on the earth troubleous.

As touching our life, we see that he that is whole, daily falls sick, the
sick dies, some other scapeth deadly dangers, and some others lyngers forth
to death. As touching the walfaryng men, as soon comes he to his lodgyng that
goes foftly, as he that goes hastily and loses his way. He that is in favor,
living in slothful rest, had as much need of vpholdyng, as he that
continually sweates in trauail. Therefore I conclude, that there is nothing in
this world so certain, as that all things is uncertain.

Then let us return to that we spoke of: It is said that it is fearful, to
counsel any to marry, to study, to go to ye war, or to take upon him any other
thing, then that he is called to: because in this case none is so apt to
receive, yt to him is said as he is to receive that which he is naturally
inclyned to. Plutarche greatly praises in his book of the common wealth, ye
good Philosopher Plato (and not without cause) for he used a great policy,
which was that there was no young man entered into his school, but first he
would prove him whether he was inclined to lernyng or no, so that those that he
thought not apt to study, he sent them back, causyng the^ to use their lives
in ye common wealth. Alcib ia des the Greek man be a sufficient witness unto
you, which although he was young brought to the school, and taught of a
discrete master, yet notwithstanding his inclinacio^ was such, that he
professed himself wholly to the wars. To him that is borne to wear a sword
by his side, it seems him ill to wear a typpet about his neck, and he that
loves to keep sleep, the court is nothing fit for him. To her that desires
marriage, it is hard to keep her chaste: He that loves to be a barber, why
should he be made a Paynter. To counsel our friend to learn a craft for to
live by, is but well done: but especially to appoint him what craft he ought to
learn, that me thinks worthy to be reproved: which brought the laws of the
Lacedaemonians, the Lacedaemonians commaundyng to the fathers upon great pains,
to put none of their children to no craft, till they were.xiiii. years of
age to see that in the age of discrecion what their nature was inclined to. Let
us leave this long communicasion, and speak of that we ought to advertise the
redar of: to counsel any to leave the court, such counsel I think not best
to give, nor yet wisdom for other to take, seeing that there is doubt to
counsel any in that they ought to do: Howbeit mine advice is, that the sage
persons chose to live in a quiet state, and to dwell in such a place, that he
may lead a life without reproach, and christianly to dye. Oftentimes men do
remove from one country to another, from one town to another, from one
street, from one house, from one company to another: but to conclude, if that
he had peine in the one, he does complain himself utterly of the wrongs of
the others: And this is the reason, because he lays ye fault to the nature
of the country, which nothing else is but his own evil nature. What more shall
we say, but in Courts, in cities, in villages, and in other places, is seen
the virtuous and the discrete corrected, and the vicious not blamed. The wicked
with their wickedness sercheth by all means to make themselves worse. And
likewise does to ye virtuous with their virtues, make them selfs better in what
state soever he be called. As for the prelates, there is no charge in the
Church so dangerous but that a good conscience can avoid it, but a weak or
corrupt conscience may sone be cast great lord, he will say that he has
nothing where with to find him: If we advise him to be a religious, he will say
that he cannot rise early, if to marry he will say it will grieve him to here his
little children cry and weep, to go to study it would trouble his brain, If
he were cou^sailed to withdraw him to his house, he would say he could not
live without company.

Then presuppose that which is said, that none ought to counsel any to chose
the life he will take concerning his honor and the wealth of his life, because
afterward he will more complain him, of the counsel that he hathtaken, then
the evil that he has suffered.

The.iii. Chapter.
How that a Courtier ought to leave the Court for not being in favor, but
being out of it, to the intent of that being out of it be more virtuous.
PVblius Minus says in his Annotacio^s that we ought to think many days on
that which we entend to do in one day. The king Demetrius, soonne of
Antigonus was asked by one of his capitaines named Patroclus, wherefore he gave
not battle to his enemy Ptolome, seeing his strength, his wit and his number
of men? He answered, that a deed ones done, is hard to call back again, and
before a man begin a hard enterprise, he had need of long counsel. Agiselaus
a wise captain of the Lycaoniens being forced to answer ye Ambassadors of
the Thebeans said: Know not you O Thebeans that to determyne a thing of
importau^ce, nothing is meter then long study.

Plutarch does greatly praise the life of Sertoreius in that he was not rash
in determinyng, but grave in enterprisyng. Suetone says that The Emperor
August was never hastye to get friends, but very diligent to keep the^ when
he had them. Of these ensamples, note what dau^gier he falls in, that is
hasly in bussinesses and quick in counsels.

None will wear a garment if it be not sowed: nor eat the fruit, if it be not
ripe: nor drink the wine, if it be not clear: nor eat the flesh if it be not
dressed: nor warm him with wode, if it be not dry: Wherefore then do we
counsel us with grene counsel, which sooner shall smudder us then warm us.
The wise man ought to have before his iyen a sober deliberacio^ in his
affairs, for if he think one hour of that which he would say, he had need
think.x. of that that he would do: words be but words, they may be
corrected, but never the vnco^sidered deed The fault of this, is that every man
studyeth to speak, to dispute, to judge, but none to live well, nor yet to dye
virtuously. The grave persons that will conserve their authority may not be
testie or stubburne in such things as they enterprice nor wilful in that they
take in hand, nor fickil in that they begin: for one of the greatest fautes
that a man may have, is not to be found true of his word, and inconstant in
that he has begun. A noble heart ought to foresee that he is charged with and
if it be just and reasonable sooner to dye, then not to do it: by the which
noble hearts are known. It it were a thing hard and almooste impossible
Achilles to slay Hector: Agiselaus to overcome Brantes: to Alexander, Darrius:
to Caesar Po^peius: to Augustus, Marcus Antonius: to Silla, Mythridates: to
Scipion Hanniball: and to the good Trojan Dacebalus, these noble princes had
never been so much esteemed as they be, but that they uttered their noble
courage. Then, good advice joined with a noble heart, ought to govern great
enterprises. Then to our purpose, my master the courtier says, he will leave
the cursed life of the court, and go dye at home, saying, yt to live in such
trouble is a continual death. O how many and often times have I hard these
fair words, that never were followed, excusing them only by the desteny of
the court, in the which they were fast glued. When that a courtier lackes
money, that any man does him displeasure, or that he has lost his process: God
knows how many oaths he makes that he will forsake al, not to leave his
evil co^dicions, but because that his busynes goes backward: but long his
purpose lasts nor, for if our courtier hap to cum to wealth or that he be
inhaunced by his prince, ye shall see his former promises to wax cold, his
will and his desire to remain there in such wise ye ye would judge him to be
naturally borne there. Favor and couetuousnes guides the Courtier, so that one
grows with the other, and at the end converted from the manner of Christians
to courtiers. For all men knows that the court is a place where men may get
wealth, and likewise ye place of men's undoing: We have already rehearsed the
occasions why men do withdraw them from the court, some for lack of money,
some for poverty, or not being in favor, or for age, all these things be of
necessity and nothing of free will, nor yet praise to them that so withdraws
them for the causes before said: but the true leuyng of the Court, and of the
world is, when ye courtier is young, strong, in favor, rich, and in health,
then with good heart to leave the court, to find in other places honest rest
after his degree: this is said, to the entente that he which leaves the court,
should leave it merrily and without repenting, for fear that after his sorrow is
past, he would be ashamed to return to the same, where he may chaunse to have
great business.

The proud and impatient men do many things in a day which he had need to
mourn for all the days of their life.

A colloricke head is nothing mete for the court, for if he will be revenged
of the shames, injuries, crastes, and wrongs, that in the court he shall
find, let him trust that he shall suffer more in one hour, then he shall be
able to revenge in ten year: whosoever leaves the court let him leave it for
evermore: because that if he will return to it again, and leave his dwelling
in the country, he may be likened to him, yt has a continual Ague: he that
sins and mendes, and after returns again to sin, that sin is more
grievous then ye first. In likewise to leave the court, and after return to it,
is so open a fault that it cannot be hid, except ye will say, he goes to
sell virtue and to bye riches.

To our purpose, if we should ask of an ancient man, what has been the whole
course of his life, and that he would answer us, he has enterprised much,
wa^dered, spoken, searched, found and lost. etc. We would say that his life
has been a disse^blyng folly. What shall we say then of our inconstant
Courtiers that daily do the same things? which forgettyng themselfes, for the
obteinyng of a little favor, do against nature, flatter, and beg. Remember
above all things gentle reader here and else where, that I speak not but of
the indiscreet Courtiers that can not refrain their appetite with an honest
co^tentacio^: which thing most chiefly causes many sage and discrete persons
to give over the Court, because to refrain the will of the heart, is a greater
pain then to content the body: for the body is soon werye of sinnyng, but
the heart is never satisfied in desiryng: One may know easily the compleccion
of the body, but the mind of the heart never, and to contentyng less, for
the heart at every instaunt requires now one thing now another, and within a
little time after forgets all. O dissemblyng heart that under a pretense to
be clear and loyal, make men to judge that hypocrisy is devotion, ambicio^
nobility, avarice husbandrye, cruelty zele of justice, much bablyng
eloquence, folishenes gravity, and dissolucion diligence: To conclude, that
every man ought to know how much he may do: If a man know himself to be
ambicious, impacient, and covetous, let him go hardely to the court: And
contrary, if the courtier feel his nature content, peaceable, and desiryng rest
and quietness, let him be dwelling in the village, and he shall well know that
he never knew how to live, til he had drawn him self from the Court.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Of the life that the Courtier ought co lead, after that he has left the
Court.
MYronydes a wise and sage Philosopher, captain of the Boheciens said, that
ye prudence of a man was as well known by retiryng from the evil, as in chosyng
of the good, forasmuch as under the evil commonly the good can not be hid, but
under the pretense of good much evil may be dissembled: even much like as the
Antheme yt begynnes Persignu^ crucis and ends in Sathanas and Barrabas: In
like manner ye great evils have their beginning by sum pretense of fained
goodness, in such sort that they be counterfeict much like Maskers, wrapped in
swetenes as purging pylles, and gilte as is the Rubarbe. There is no man I
think so mad that keeps not himself in as much as he can from catchyng evil,
and specially from open evil: but contrariwise, it were wisdom to keep him
from that which is not altogether good.

Alexander the great, causing himself to be healed of certain wounds that he
had received in battle, was reproved of his great minion Parmeno for puttyng
himself into great hazard in the war: To whom Alexander said, assure me my
friend Parmeno of those that be dissemblyng friends, for I will be ware of them
that be my open enemies.

Alcibyades, Agiselaus, Pyrrhus, Antigonus, Lentulus, and Julius Caesar, were
so circumspecte in these things that they were always va^quishers, and died in
the hands of their friends, and specially because they chose the good and
left the evil.

Then he that leaves ye court ought not only for to see what he leaves, but
also what he takes, co^sideryng that as much or more hard it is to content
him having left the court, as it was before in the desiryng to be in the court:
what profits it to leave the court weary and troubled, If thy heart can find
no rest in the place whether thou resortest? Our body fulfilled with meats is
led where one will have it, but the heart is never satisfied with desiryng, and
would (if he might) be in favor with princes of the court, and on the other
side at his ease in ye village. If the Courtier daily have mind being at home
of the passions and affliccions that he had in the Court, it had been better
for him never to have gone from it, because that in remembryng them, the
thinkyng is more prickyng, and the mind weaker to resist them.

In the court of princes chau^ses often times that lack of money or other
great busynes makes a man abstain from doing evil, the which being after in
his house does such deeds unseemly to a gentleman, that they deserve to be
corrected, yea, and bitterly punished.

There be also another sort of men that forsakes the court to be more idle at
home: And such would be rejected from the number of honest men, seeing they
chose ye time for their purpose to sin in the village, fearing to be infamed
or dishonored in the court, and yet being in the country lives with shame
forgettyng all reason. To exchue these things he that leaves the Court ought
to leave his percialitie that he has followed, and to forget all passions:
otherwise he shall lament ye sweet bitterness that he leaves, and weep the life
that he has begun.

This is true, that in the court are more occasions given to destroy a man,
then are at home in his own house to save him. It is a small profit to ye
courtier the chau^gyng of his dwelling, onles by the same means he change his
conditions.

When the courtier says I will withdraw me to my country and go dye at home,
that is well said: but this shall suffice that he honestly withdraw him self,
without determyng there dye. This mortal life is to us so prescript, that we
ought not to pursue it with sorrow, but that we are bound to amend it. When
Job said Tedet animam meam vite me, it was not for that his life weried him,
but because he did not amend it.

Whosoever leaves ye court may be bold to say yt he goes not to dye: but may
well think he has escaped from a fair prison from a confused life, from a
dangerous sickness, from a suspicious conversation, from a great sepulcher,
and from a meruail without end. The wysest being in ye court may say every day
that they dye, and at their houses in the country that they live. And the
reason is: that being in the court, those necessary things that are to be done
in the world, cannot be done as they would, nor when they would, for lack of
liberty. Yet I will not say, but many in the court do their deuor to do as
they would, but I dare affirm yt for x. pound weight they have of honest
will, they have not half an ounce of honest liberty.

Likewise, let him that forsakes the Court set a wise order in such busynes
that he has to do, calling to mind that to go home to his country needs no
long journey, but to dispoyle him self of the evil clothes of the Court needs a
wonder long time. For like as vices increase in a man little and little, so is it
mete to root them out by little and little. This ought ye courtier to do that
minds to rule himself, pluck up by little pieces the most notable faults
that are in him, and so pretely dispatche himself of one vice to day, and from
another to morrow, in such sort that when one vice takes his leave and is gone,
straight way a virtue do enter in his stead, so yt in process he may go from
good to better. The courtier is in nothing more deceived then in living a wild
and wanton life, parauenture the space of.xx. or.xxx. years, thinks in a year
or two to become sage and grave, as well as though he applied all his life in a
sobre and sad life, and truly that happens for lack of good judgment, for
it behooves without comparison a longer time for to learn to cast away vice,
then to learn virtue: considering yt vices enter our gates laughyng and goes
out from our house weeping and lamentyng. O how much greueth it ye ambicious
courtier, when he can not command as he was wont to do? then it may be said,
yt to forsake the court is requisite to a good heart, and a good wit to
obtain rest.

Those that leave the Court for fainte heart, be of that nature that it is more
painful to them to see theimselues absent from the Court, then their joy was
when they were in ye court: which said persons if they would follow mine advice
and counsel should not only leave the court, but forget it utterly for ever.
And farther, the courtier ought to retire in such manner that he may come to
the Court again, if the fear and study in orderyng of his household
constrain him eftsoon for to desire the voluptuousnes of the court. In the
heart of the prudent courtier that forsakes the court, when there falls
bishoprics or other great offices, the affeccions and desires of the mind
ryngeth alarm, when he shall think if I had not come away so soon, that
office or that dignity had been mine: but he again reme^bryng that many such
things has fallen which he had not: so like wise might he have in the stead
of ye, a plain nay, of that which fell when he was gone. Then, is it not much
better to ouerse and travail his own house then to have such a shameful
denial in the court?

Therefore destinies of ye courtiers are so prompte and ready that for the most
part one is constrained to despise the^ more by necessity, then by will, and
in that mean while their purpose is at an end before they themselves beware
thereof, For when the Courtier comes to be at a quiet with himself, above all
things it is necessary that he take heed of pesteryng of himself, for if he
did live in the court evil willed, let him take heed that in the village he
despair not, by reason of charge, the importunity of his wife, of his
children, and the sautes of his servants, the grudgyng of his neighbors may
parcase make him astonyed: but to think again, that being escaped from the
dangerous golfe of the court, he may repute him self half a God. And besides
this, none ought to think that he dwelling in a village in the country shall
put away all troubles and displeasures, for it can not be, but he that never
fell in the crooked and rough way may happen to stumble in the plain way and
break his neck: and therefore it is necessary that he retiryng from the court,
take the time as it shall come, that he may the more occupy him self in
virtuous exercises, to ye intent that to much rest, and to much busynes of
mind let him not from the great good that comes of this, to be well
contented with a little. Join unto this also that there is none so much enemy
unto virtue as is idleness, of the which idleness be taken in the beginning
thoughts superfluous, and consequently the distruccion of men.

To the purpose, has not the courtier cause to complain, that occupies
himself in nothing but in eating, drinkyng, and sleapyng, and in the mean
season his better age, that is to say, his youth consumes away, as the fume of
smoke, which procedes of idleness in the court and doing nothing? where
contrarywyse he might in the village exercise himself to his honor, and to the
health of his body and profit of his neighbor.

In like manner also, the courtier that withdraws himself should use the
company of such as be grave, sage and honest, to the intent that in the stead
of liars, flatterers, and triflers which he was associate withal in in the
court, he may be accompanied in the village with wise and sage friends, or at
the hardest with good books, whereby in the lokyng of them he may virtuously
imploye the residue of his time, and with sobriety entertain every man, that
men may say he is come from the court to please the good, and not to rule. And
if parcase one would make him baylief in the village or other public office I
would counsel him to take heed thereof as he would of the pestilence, for
because there is nothing so troubleous nor so hard a burden to the mind as to
take charge of the rude and simple. I do not say nay, but that he may and
ought to help the poor commons of the village with such knowledge as he has
learned in ye court, or had before he came there, when they shall have need,
either for love or for money. Also if they be at variaunce, healpe to appeace
the^: if they be evil entreated, defend them. And this doing, he shall be
esteemed of the commons and praised of ye wise and prudent. Above all things
beware of prodigal apparel, superfluous ba^quetes, and delicate meats, and
strong or precious wynes. For the absenting from the court ought to be to none
other purpose but to live soberly in the village, or else shall he make of the
village the court, which should make of the court, the village. And the
courtier retired from the court ought to have in singular co^me^dacion mercy,
as to visit hospytalles, succor the poor, counsel the orphans, vysite the
prisoners, read the holy scripture, and finally that he study to dispose his
goods virtuously during his life, for when he shall be dead, every man will
claim his goods, but none will or can discharge his solle. And most chiefly,
let the courtier that goes from the court occupy himself virtuously to dye.
All these things that I have said, let no man say that they be more easy to
read then to do: for if we will enforce our selfs, we are more then our
selves, and do not then well remember our selfs.

The.v. Chapter.
That the rustical life is more quiet and restful and more beneficial then
that of the court.
THE village whereof we speak and the demaines thereof, Put we ye case that it
were all free and not subject to any lord (as certain there be so preuileged)
that every man there lies in his own house, whether it be by succession, or
that he have bought it freely without doing any homage or service to any man.
This I dare say, the courtier has not, nor is not in such free liberty in
respect of such as be of the village, forasmuch as of very necessity, my
master the courtier must wyn ye Marshal or Harbe^gar of the lodging, and must
receive at his hands the billet to come to his lodgyng, and that late enough
and weary to his host, break open doors, beat down walls, disorder houses,
burn implementes and sometime bet the good man, and defile the wife. O how
happy is he that has wherewithal to live in the village without troublyng
both of himself and many sundry places, without seking of so many lodgings,
without assayes of so many strange occasions of strange men, without weping
of any person, but is content with a mean estate, and is delivered of al such
break brains. Another benefit of the country is this, that the ge^tleman or
burges that there does inhabit may be one of ye chief or chefest, either in
bounty, honor, or authority, the which happens seldom in the court and in
great cities and tounes: for there he shall se other go before him, more trym
and more brave and gorgious then he, as well in credit as in riches, as well in
the house as without the house. And Julius Caesar said to this purpose that he
had rather be the first in a village, then the second in honor in Rome. For
such men as have high hearts and minds, and base fortune, it should be to
the^ much better to live in ye village with honor, then in the court
overthrown and abated, and out of favor. The difference between the tariyng or
abiding in a little place and a great place, is that in the little places are
found much people poor and nedy, of who^ men may take compassion: and in the
great place many rich men whereby envy is norished.

Another commodity in the village is, that every man enjoys in quiet and
peace such as God has given him, without to have such to come to their
houses, that shall co^straine them to make extraordinary expenses, or to have
his wife seduced, or his daughters defiled The occasions to do evil be put away
by reason that he is occupied in the mainteinyng of his household, in trainyng
of his daughters, in teaching of his sons and chastenyng of his servants.
He lives confirmed to reason and not to his opimo^: and lives hopyng to dye
and not as he that loves to live ever. In the village, thou shall not care for
good lodgyng, nor for lookyng to thy Horses and Mules, nor for the ladyng of
such things as they shall carry. Thou shall not here the criyng of pages, the
plaintes of the stuardes of the house, the babbling of the Cooks, nor thou
shall not fear neither Judges nor Justices lest they should be to sore against
the. And that which is much better, thou shall have no crafty knaves to
beguile the, nor women to betray the.

Another benefit of the village is this, that he shall have time enought to al
things that he will do, so that the time be well spent, time enough to study,
time to visit his friends, time to go a huntyng, and layser when he list to
eat his meat: the which layser courtiers commonly has not, forasmuch as they
employe the most part of their time in making of shifts to play ye courtier,
or to speak more plainly, to weep and lament, in such sort yt one may say
of the^ that which the Emperor Augustus said of a Roman a great busy broker
the same day that he dyed. I wonder said he, seeing the time failed him to chop
and to change, how he could now find layser to dye? Another commodity of the
village is this, those that be dwellers there may go alone from place to place
without to be noted to fall from gravity, they need no Mule nor Horse with
afoote clothe, nor page to wait of my lord, or damsel to wait upon my
lady. And that were scorneful to do in the court alone: And without danger one
may walk from neighbor to neighbor, and from land to land, and not thereby
minish any part of his honor.

Another benefit is, that men may go whether they will, clothed simply with a
staff in his hand, a swearde by his side, or hacbut in his neck, and if he
be weary of pounsed hosen, let him wear sloppes, if he be a cold let him
take his furred goune for all is one there. A good Gentleman dwelling in the
village and having a good cote of clothe, an honest Spanishe cloak on his
back, a pair of lether shoes, goes as well trymmed to the church as does
my lord the courtier to the court with his goune furde with Marters or Sables.
A man of the village of what sort soever he be, is in as good case, that rydeth
to market or to the faier to make provision for his household upon a mare or a
nagge, as a lord of the court is at Iustes upon a great courser trapped with
gold. And (when all is said) better is the poor ploughman on a poor ass,
living as he should, then the rich man well horsed, pillyng and doing
extorcion to pore honest men.

The.vi. Chapter.
That in the village the days seem more long and the air more clear and
better, And the houses more easy and testfull.
ENsuyng still the commodities of the village, we ought not to forget that he
which dwelles there, among other things has commodity of good corn, and
consequently good bread: contrary to this, in the court, and specially ingreat
tounes they have bread for the most part evil baked or evil leuened or not
leuened at all, and the cause is, forasmuch as in the tounes often there
lacks good corn, or good corn milles to grind the corue, and wholesome
water, whereby often has come among them great death.

Another commodity in the village is this, the which I praise mnche, he that
dwelles there, may practice and labor in mod things and better employ the
time then in the court or in ye great tounes: in which places it behooves a
man to dissemble, to say little, full of reuengyng and enuyous, a treder of
stones and paueme^tes, and must use gravity, and seldom to come out of his
house, and incessantly be grave. O half a God, that dwelles in the village,
where liberally one may speak what he will and jest with his neighbors before
his gates and his wyndowe. And this may he do without ever to change or to
lose any of his mean authority

Another commodity is in the village, that those that dwell there, be without
comparison more helthfull and less sick then in the cities and in the court,
because in the great tounes the houses be more higher, and the streets narower,
and more crooked, which is the cause that the air is corrupt and makes me^
very evil at ease. In ye village the houses stand more at large the men more
better disposed, the air better, the sun more clear, the earth more sweet,
the private goods or commons better ruled without contencion, and the exercise
more pleasant, and the company much better: And above all things the thoughts
lesser, and the pastyme more great.

Another commodity in the village is, that there are no yo^g Physicians, nor
old sickness: And contrary to this, the courtier is constrained there to part
his goods in four parts, the one part to flatterers, ye other to men of
law, another to pottecaries, and the fowerth to ye Phisicians. O well
fortunate village, forasmuch as in the, seldom or never is the French pockes
named, neither the pausy not yet ye gout: few or none there knows what is a
Iulep, a Pyll, a Sirup, or a Thysan, nor no sudden sickness. What will ye that
I shall say more of the village? And if it were not, but that for necessity,
they are compelled to build there little pretty houses, ye should scant find
one of them that knew what to do with mortar and stoones? And sometime they
are very well pleased with cabons made of small sticks well fastened together.

Another commodity in the village is, that thee days there seem to be more
long, and they are better employed, then they are either in the court or in the
great tounes, forasmuch as the years pass away there or one be ware, and the
days without any enoiyng of them. And how beit that the sportes and pleasures
be more in the village then in the tounes, yet so it is that one day shall
seine longer there then shall a month in the court: and the reason is, for that
the village is happy and fortunate, forasmuch as there the Sun semes to
make a more longer day, the morning is ready to show, and the night slow to
come. Scarcely one can perceive the days slide away in the court: In the
village if it be perceived, it is bestowed with honest busynes, which cannot
be done in the court.

In the village also is much more plenty of wood then in other places: hay,
straw, Otes much better chepe then in good tounes. Also in the village a man
is at liberty to eat his meat where he will, and when he will and with who^
he will: but in the court they eat late, the meat evil dressed and cold, and
with out savor, and that which is worst of al, for the most part, he must
eat with his enemies, where as the good fellows of the village lives at their
pleasures and without suspicion, keeping their three good fashio^s that belongs
to good repast, that is, first he erneth his meat next that he eats his meat
merely, and thirdly he eats with good company.

Another commodity is that the husbandman of the village has how to occupy
themselfes and how to be merry, which the courtier, nor the citezen has not,
thathath enemies enough to fear, and few friends to company withal. O
recreacion pleasant of the village, to fish with nets, and with hokes, to
catch birds with lyme, to hunte with dogs, to catch Conies with ferrettes,
and hayes, to shote in the crosbowe and the hacbut at stokdoues, at Mallardes
and at partryges: and se folks labor in ye vynes, raise diches, amend
hedgees, to jest with ye ancient laborers, All these pleasures have they of
the villages, whereas the courtiers and citezens desire it and cannot have it.

The.vii. Chapter.
That commonly the inhabitauntes of the villages be more happy then courtiers.
ANother commodity of the village is, that they do feel ye travails less on
the workyng day, and rejoice merely on the holy day: where the courtier
continually vexed with weighty and troubleous affairs, never knows when it
is holy day. O village, it is not so in the, whereas on the feastful day the
clerk cease not to toll the bell, to make clean the church, to make ready
ye alters, the people honestly apparelled the feasts commanded to be
observed, the curate preaches ye gospel, and after diner they make merry with a
thousand honest pastymes. In the great tounes the holydaies are known when
the wyfes go gaye, when they sleep long in the morning, when they play after
diner: and generally when they consume the day involupteousnes and vanities.

Another commodity is this, that where the courtiers use to eat flesh and
corrupt venison and wildefoule that is long kept, they of the village have
their meat fresh and fresh, tender and wholesome, and as one may say, in good
season: that is, housdoues, Partrige, pullettes, stockdoues, wodcockes,
Fesauntes, fat Capons, Conyes, Hares, and innumerable victayl of al sorts.
And over and besides this, to their great advantage they have sheep that
bears woll to clothe them, good mutton to eat, dong to make fat their
ground, and Kyddes and Goats also, with Oxen to labor in the plough, and kyne
to milk and make butter and chese: and hogs to make bacon of, Coltes for to
norishe and horses for to serve them and for to sell when need requires. And
another priuelege of the village is this, that the good shall be honored for a
good man, and the unthrifty person known as he is, which is not so in the
court, for there is noma^ praised for that he deserves to be praised, but
because he has authority and riches.

O how much is the wise man honored in the village for his wisdom and good
counsel? how many times is he tha^keo and how many presents has he? If
parcase one of his neighbors have any goodfruit in his garden, a good melon, a
good pear, or a good muscadel grape gladly they will present him therewith, as
to him that has deserved it.

Another preuilege of the village is this, that every man may marry his
daughters to his equalles and neighbors, that thereby daily he may receive
both pleasure and service, the which the courtiers cannot do that marry their
daughters so far from them, that for ye most part they lament them or they
see them. O happy inhabitor in ye village that fyndes at his gate husbands
for his daughters, and wives for his sons. He maryeth them nigh to him that
he may easly see his sons in law, his little nephues and his posterity: he
is beloved of the^, succored in his affairs, served and norished in his
sickness, and great comfort to him in his age.

Another commodity is, that they are not to much careful nor yet ireful or
envious: which commodity they of ye court and the citezens little tastes or
emoyeth: for the courtier many times lacks money, when his great affairs
should be brought to pass. I say therefore o happy man of ye village, that needs
not to go at ten of the clock to the palice to beg counsel, to speak fair to
ye vssher, to wait upon the president and make flectamus ienua to the lawyer,
and flatter the king and his counsel, and the Magistrate: but has instead of
these Idolatries for a happy solace, the benefits of nature and ye pastimes
thereof, to hear the sheep blete, the Bulls to bray, the Horse to nese, the
Nityngales to sing, ye Thrushes to warble, the Lynets to mynse their songs,
dogs to run, Lambs to leap, Kyddes to gambolde, and see the Pekockes set
up their tails like a whele, He^nesto kecle, kockes to crow, and a thousand
kind of beasts and birds play and sport.

Another commodity is, that in the village one may be there more virtuous and
less vicious then in the court or in the great citiees, and ye reason is, for
that in great companyes we shall commonly find a M. that keep men from good
doing and x. M. that will move us to do evil. And in the village every man
sanctifyeth the Sabbath day, keeps the feasts, hears the sermones, and by
this means with great labor works his soul health assisted by grace.

Wherefore the village is to be praised for that ye occasions of evil, and of
our destruction are not so plentiful and practiced there, as they are in the
court and in good tounes, no cokes houses to make them licorous: nor there are
no great estates where by envy should arise: there is no choppyng nor chaungyng
by usury: whores to quarrel and fight for, nor courtiers to torney in armure,
nor wanton and lewd places to corrupt youth withal: nor Justices to fear
them, ye (and that best of all is) no couetuousnes which should swalow up and
devour them.

Another preuilege there is, that there one may well gather some good, and
spend much less then in the court. For every man knows well what excessive
expe^ces are accustomed to be wasted in the court, and specially in these
days, that the great apparellyng of ba^kettes is such that they be well
worthy to be reformed. O peaceable peysau^tes which needs not the tapettes of
Flaunders, linnyng clothe of Holland, silver plate, garments imbrodered,
Parcement lace purfilde, nor yet carriage, Mulettes, varlettes to conduct them,
nor other superfluous attire: but contrary instead of that, is contented with a
little household well ruled, with a gross table and a few plain stoles to eat
his meat upon, with dishes of Peuter and a mattres for to sleep on, two
gounes, one for so^mer, another for winter, one geldyng in the stable, one
varlet, one chamberer to do him service: As much happy is a gentleman and as
much honored with his little company in his house in the village, as is a
rich lord in the court with his great pride, and ruflyng train.

The.viii. Chapter
That in princes courts the custom and use is to speak of God and live after
the world.
IN the Court, even as there is no rigorous justice, no father that chastises
his soonne, no friend that corrects one the other, none that loves his
neighbor, no bishop nor curate that governs well his sheep nor teaches them
after the gospel: So he that is by nature good, has great liberty to be
naught. In the court if one will be an adulterer, he shall have fellows. It he
will be a quareller, he shall have help, and that with such as will draw their
swords. If he be disposed to banquetyng, every where he shall find gluttons,
If he will manifestly and shamefully lie, he shall find companions ready that
will approve his lies: If he will steal, he shall find them that will
instruct him many ways thereto: If he will play, there is so many cards and
so many dise, that it is shame to see it: If one will be falsely forsworn, he
shall find them that will give money for forswearyng: Finally, if he will
utterly give himself to do evil, in the court he shall see perfect examples.
To the court resorteth men of diverse nations, some for business, some to plede
or to serve or to show them selves, which persons to bring themselves
acquainted are forced to follow the servants of such as be in authority, to
flatter them, and speak fair to the^: and to follow the companies and
fellowship of the taberers, the Pypers, the Musycians, the flatterers and merry
iesters, and at ye end become God knows poor and nedy gentlemen, in such
wise that by very necessity they be compelled to demand rewards, newyeres
gifts and new apparel. And yet to this evil fellows, they which give unto
them any good thing, give it rather to get themselfes a name to be called full
of magnificence then for any charity at all.

In the Court, fortune is inconstant, in that she promises, and yet more in
that which she gives, for at one instant, where one ryseth, another falls,
one is borne, another dies: he is auaunced that is unknown, and the faithful
servant forgotten, he that will abide is not recciued, but he that will run
away is taken in: fools are believed and wisemen belyed, opinions be followed
and reason let pass. With these things and other semblable things that we
assay and se in courts of princes, every manne may be assured that fortune
will knock at his door, though for the most part the Courtiers find sooner
their grave then any good fortune, and specially such that under color to be
descended of a good house, go to the court to brag, and yet nevertheless are
so folishe and ignorant, that it may be said they are more mete for the cart
then for the spear, so that they serve in conclusion to be a daliance to the
mockers and iesters. And one great mischief is in the court, that there is
ever hatred among the princes, envy among familiars, contencion among
officers and with their fellows. And among these there never lacks medlers
and busye bodies, which profit more thereby, then some doctor of divinity
does by prechyng. In the court all is suffered, all is dissembled withal, all
is inconstant, and all sorts desire there to live: and forasmuch as al such
desire there to live, it is impossible but there must be liars, players,
slaunderers, and a great number of naughty persons.

In the court the evil follows the evil: The brauler fyndes one to braule
withal: The adulterer one that he may sin withal: The thief a companion and
receiver: The sophister a babbler: and all rekened together, one ready to
deceive another.

In ye court every man praises and commends himself of holy purposes and
noble thoughts. One says he will withdraw himself from the court. And
another says he will forget his suites. Another says he will quench
enemitie. And when they have all said, all is but words, for the heart
thinks of nothing else but of the world. None knows there the one the other:
The men of arms go without harnys: The prelates without their rotchettes: The
priest without his porteaus: The daughter without her mother: The wife without
her husband: The clerk without his books: The thief without a spy: The
glutton from table to table. The vacabonde from place to place, and ye baude
from door to door, and from harlot to harlot. In the court there be bishops
to confirm curates, to baptize and change names: For he that is glorious gay,
they name him honorable, he that spendes all, full of magnificence, the cowarde
wise, the valiant ouerhardye, the fool joyous, the wise an hypocrite, the
malicious subtle, the scoffer eloquent, the adulterer Amorous, the coueteous
mesurable, and he that talks little, a fool and an ignorant person.

The.ix. Chapter.
In the court few amend, but many wax worse.
IN the court it profits little, men to be wise, unless they be fortunate,
forasmuch as good service is sone forgotten: friends sone fails and enemies
augment, the nobility does forget it self, science is forgotten, humility
despised, truth cloked and hid, and good counsel refused. The best mine and
the richest Alcumet that the Courtier may have, is to have wind at will to
sail with, that is, to be in fauorwith them that be favored, till fortune
laugh upon him: for the conditions and fashions of entretainment changes
daily and hourly. To prove this true, Plato neades not to speak, nor Cicero
to swear, forasmuch as before our eyes we see the fool become wise, the meke,
become proud, the sobre a glutton, the pacient a brauler, and the devout an
evil christian man.

In the court it is a great busynes and travail for to find virtue, and
greater daungier and peril to keep it. Is not humility lost among them that
be in honor, or patience among wrong doers, or abstinence among gluttons, or
chastity among women, or rest among busynes, or charity among evil
willers, or peace among sedicious, or silence amongst bablers, or good wit
whereis so much folly? In the court no man is content, every man co^plaineth
either because ye king gives him naught, or because the prince healpeth him
not, or that one or other is ever betwixt him and home: He complains of the
porter he will not let him in: of the treasurer that he pays him not: of his
crediture which takes away his goods: or of one or other that that does him
wrong in the court. If one read a letter of pleasure, he shall read an hundredth
of displeasure. The wife shall write to her husband and pray him for to come
home, yt he may marry his daughters being of age, or yt his children be
disobedient, that his friends has forsaken him, and that by ingratitude they
render evil for good, and werines does assail her on al sides, that her
tenau^tes call her to the law, that his goods be spent? surely he shall hear
such news, so that for two grotes that he gives to the bearer of ye letters,
he would gladly have given more to have hard no such news

In the court a man does many things by necessity, that to dye for it he
would not do in his house: he dynes and suppes with his enemies, he speaks
with him that he never knew nor pleases him not, defendes him that helps him
not, follows him that honors not him, lendes to him that pays him not,
dissembles with him that does him injury, and trustes to him that beguiles
him. O unhappy and sorrowful courtier if by chance he grow to be a poor man,
no man will succor him, and if he fall sick no man visites him, and if he dye
he is incontinent forgotten: if he be virtuous no man commendes him, and if he
be out of credit no man regardes him. In the court there is nothing more rare
nor more dear to recover then virtue, nor more esy to find then the
aboundau^ce of three manner of people. That is of tale bringers, of flatterers
and of liars. The liars deceives ye princes. The flatterers the rich men.
The tale bringers, those that be in favor. The women, deceives the me^. The
coueteousnes, ye old men. The pomp the prelates. The auaricious, the
priests. The liberty ye religious, ambicion, the presumptuous, ye wise
co^fide^ce in men, and al they joined together be deceived by fortune. In the
court men employe the time so evil that from the time the courtier does arise,
till he go to bed, he occupies him self about nothing but in askyng of news,
iettyng about the streets, write letters, speak of the wars, entertein them
that be in favor, counsel with baudes, make as he were in love and lose
always the time. In the court more then in any other place the things are
slow. For one rises late, and worst of all amends his life late. All things
there is variable and chaungeable and inconstaunt. The estates change, The
little assende, the great fall. The widows there be marde: The married be
defamed: The maidens be shamed: The good spirits be dulled: The valiant
becommes cowardes: The prelates wax worse and worse: The sciences are
forgotten: The yo^g leese their time: The old undone: This is ye courtiers
life. He is not worthy to be a courtier unless he be in debte and owes to the
draper for clothe, to the Merser for silk, to the tailor for the making of his
apparel, to the goldsmyth for jewels for my lord ye courtiers lady, to the
Judges for the disputyng of processes, to the servants for wages, to their
hosts for their spence. There is to much evil counsel even such as is more
then the half way ledyng to damnacion.

The.x. Chapter.
That a man cannot live in the court, without to trouble him self or some
other.
A Courtier does many things, more for to say, I do as other men do, then for
any need he has so to do. He bankettes with every man because he will not be
called an hypocrite, Plays because he would not be named a nigard, and
companyes with many, because he will not be named a solitaryma^ and geues to
rascal and naughty persons because he would not be evil said of them. A man
in ye court is full of pensiuenes and passions: For it is truth that it is
appropried to them of nature that folowes ye court, to be incessantly
tormented. He must praise his fellows, dispraise strangers, and look unto
therein that do well, and blame them that do evil, and spend at large with his
fellows, and against ye enemeys spare not his own proper life: And all this
must he do because he will not be dispraised. In the court commonly one
professes to wait of one master, but for all that he must serve at the tail
of diverse others lords. O broken heart of the poor courtier that must needs
serve such as knows him not, and make reverence to them that deserve not to
have it, and must say to my master the officer an hundredth times a day, sir
and if it please you. And he shall answer when I am at leyser? tarry a while at
the door. And yet we must call him master that deserves it no more then the
ha^g man that strangles a man with a halter. O what pity is it to se a poor
suitor in his nedy busynes follow the king from town to town evil norished
and worse lodged? The king has busynes, the counseler is defe, the Almoner
has no hand, and he that thou know has no eyes: And without money and
extreme pain, the five wits of nature be lain.

In the court, albeit that one has no enemies which is seldom seen, yet is
it truth that many times his own friends put him out of quiet, forasmuch
as if the courtier will take rest in his lodgyng, they grunt at him because he
will not go see his friends and provoke him to go follow ye princes in the
court, saying, that the rascal and the varlettes mock at him, that he goes
not thither and show himself free and liberal: and when he is arrived at the
court, which is a natural enemy to rest, and a desire of nouelles, then must
he change, as does the Egipcian, which every day seeks a new country, a
new lodging, new apparel and conuersacions, busynes and fashions of men. Lo
my friend and the reader of this: This is the life of the courtier as it is
here discribed: and also of him that lives in the village the which said life
of the peysauntes shall be much praised of many, and chosen of a few, because
that every man reads books enough and the more he reads ye less he
changes of his evil customs. And to call to reason why it is so, it follows
that the court of princes is good but for two manner of men, for them that be
in favor, and for the young which be yet of a weak judgment. And those that
be in favor, and does wait daily, se themselves so rich, so feared, and so
well accompanied that they feel not the pain of the court. And the pleasure
they get thereby makes them for conclusion forget themselves, yet
notwithstanding for all this, it is impossible but that their brains must be
troubled, because they be to much occupied, for their houses are to full of
people, their ears full of lies, their toungues to much troubled with answering
of every man, their hearts to much pressed to aid and help them that they
would help, and other. And finally ye greater in authority and credit they
be, ye shall se them ye more pensive and the more astonyed, and for the most
part sooner complain then rejoice: but command who command will, have
credit who will, the truth is, none can take pleasure of his goods, without
honest rest Beside this those which be said to be in favor, are ever in fear
to be put down from their authority: And by that means are in continual
dread and torment, the which is an enemy mortal to quiet and rest. And the
young in like case (as I have said) yt be without judgment and blinded in
vices, do not know nor see the inco^modities of ye court, nor care, neither
for favor nor honor, but bounden and drounde in volupteousnes and vices, pass
the better part of their days in the school that is nothing worth, under the
master of pardicion.

The.xi. Chapter.
That in the court those that be grave are praised and well esteemed, and the
other that does the contrary not regarded.
THe courtier should not aquaint himself with vain and idle persons, that he be
not reputed to be such as he companieth withal. For it had not been enough
for him to say he must needs do there asother do and dissemble as other
dissembles. Neither behooves it him not to cloak his naughty doing, in going
secretly to such as be naught, for why? the wits of the courtiers are so
fine, that they know not only what one says but what he thinks. There is
neither little nor great but men spy him whether he goes, from whence he
comes, and where he abides, with whom he talks, in who^ he trusts, and
what he will do, so well, that ye curtens may hide a person, but to hide ye vices
of the courters is impossible. The courtier also ought not to brag and crake
that things shall be as he would, he may not presume to speak to the king and
require audience as he himself lust: for he yt follows the court must be as
one that has no mouth to speak, nor hands to be avenged withal, being well
assured that there is no more love in the court, then are clothes upon a bare
horse. For he that is in the court, and is not armed with patience, it had been
much better for him not to have come out of his country, for being a
quareller and sedicious fellow, in ye court he shall be hated, and paradue^ture
banished from thence, and then his returning shall be to his utter shame.

Malice and displeasures take often an end in the village, but in ye court is
always an overplus of them. What is the cause? Fortune I say of her, which
has the rule over them who counts for a gooddesse, which is more feared of
a folishe opinion, then for any power she has over men.

The courtier also ought not to condiscende to that which his se^sualitie
requires, but to that which reason does persuade him unto, forasmuch as ye
one demaundes more then needs, and the other contents him with less then he
has. Forasmuch then as in the court, there is so many tables to glutton on, so
many new found plays to play at, so many quarelles to fight for, so many
matters to plead, there is no cause to marvel if the sage be cherished, and
the dissolute person blamed. The good man within ye court, is as a nutte within
the shale, and mary within ye bone, and a perle within the cokle, and a rose
among the thorns. I do not say reder, for the quality and quantity of the
malice of the court, that all be vicious that be there: God forbid that it so
should be, but when I call to remembrance we be all mortal men, I think it in
manner impossible to ariue safe into the port, among so many Syllas and
Caribdes. Ye will say that the wily and the subtle person there waxes rich,
and that the great su^mes of money be there: I confess it, and I would say
your saying should be good if they yt were of the best knowledge and the most
verteous number were auaunced for their prudence, as the other be by hazard and
chance or by theft, for the reward of virtue, is not like to the reward of
fortune.

Item the courtier ought not to give prese^tes, nor lightly take, for why? for
to give him that deserves it not, there lackes wisdom. And to receive of him
that one ought not, is a thing but vile.

Who that will exercise liberality, ought to considre what he gives, and to
who^ he gives: for it should be but folly to give that which one may not, and
that which he himself needs. And one ought to considre the time and the end
and the season, and wherefore he gives. And if the courtier give somethyng over
liberality and without just cause of recompense of him which is out of
credit and in the time that he begins to declyne.

Is not then the gift evil employed? is it not to be lamented that one geues
sooner to ye flatterer to tell some feined or liyng tales, or to a iester to make
the^ laugh, or to a common liar to make them talk, or to a pleasant fellow to
invent a lie, rather then to a trusty servant that has all ye days of his
life deserved to have thank for his good service? Yet for all this, mine
entencion is not to persuade great me^ that they should not give to all men: but
I say the true servants ought to be preferred, because it is more meter that
their service should be rewarded, then the presents of strangers considered.

When a man gives to strangers, the servants seeing the same draw back: ye
may be assured that they not only murmr at that which is given, but also
accuse him of his ungentle deed, and become a mortal enemy to him that the
thing is given unto. The gifts makes a man much subject that receives the^,
for as soon as any man does take of another an horse or a goune, or often sit
with him at his table, he binds himself thereby to bear him favor, to
defend his quarrel, to keep him company, to take his part, and to love that
that he loves. And reason will, that since one feleth profit of another that
he be not unkind, howbeit let a man beware to bind himself so much under ye
will of other men, that he thereby forgets his own honesty. Many young
children descended of an honest house go to ye court and take with them a good
part of their goods and consume the same plaiyng, eating, and drinkyng, and
vsyng baudry and adultery under color of learning their behauior: and resort
to the great men's houses, to no other intent, but to be much made of of the^
where they take a great repast, and afterward so play the young wanton fools,
that they spend rent, honor and all. And when the purse is flat, their office
is to go all the day in the streets to the churches and to the palaice to ask
news and tidings, only to pype out lies and fables at the lords boordes, and
all for to go scot fre. And there is a sort of young men in the court, yea I may
say to you, of those yt have beardes, that neither have master nor
entertainers, that as soon as a stranger comes to the court, straight ways
they boorde him, saying that they will show him the fashions and manners of the
court, the pleasures of the palaices, the manner how to keep him from
deceiptfull fellows, and to entertain young gentlewomen. And thus ye newecome
courtier that is yet a fool, in the mean season shall be handled in such wise
that now goes a goune, now a coat, another time a horse, and sometime purse
and all. And there is another sort of men in the court that busieth themselves
with so great authority and with so little wit, that after they have used ye
company of some great lord, they will send him a lettre by their page, saying
they be poor gentlemen, kynsfolke to some great men, and that they be there
suyng for some office, and that they have a payment in hand, wherefore they
require him to lend him a certain sum of money: And yet are they in no such
necessity, but only to get somewhat, either to buy a gay coat, or a horse,
or to keep a whore.

There is another sort of false and beggarly courtiers, the which after they be
ones used to the court, they go from church to church to ask for Gods sake,
saying they be poor suitors and that they love better to beg then to rob,
commending themself to the priests to beg for them on the poor parisheners
when they preach, and so take against reason the good yt poor men should have.

There is another sort of haunters in the court, that go from one house to
another of ye great estates and lords, counterfaityng to be diligent
servants, slatteryng ye steward, the butler, and the cook, and live of that
which is left of the diners, and go their ways with their pockettes and
their sleues full of meat for so suppe with all. And there is another manner of
sort that go two and two and three and three together in a morning to spy and
see if there be any thing evil kept, and with that to look and to prye if a
sword or a Spanishe cloak, or a purse be fallen aside, if there be, they sing
in a merry note this is pro nobis. Other there be y^ for to co^duict and defend
a whore when ye court remoues (as one may say more then ruffians) they live of
the gain of yt miserable woman. Another has falsdise, false marked cards for
to deceive the innocents, win their money, and lccse their own souls. And
there lackes not in ye court old women and wrinckled trottes yt after their
harvest is past, cloak the sins of other, and beguile those that be chaste and
undermine such as be married, hurt their neigbours, sell maidens to whoredom
for lucre, and do norishe them therefore, whereof folowes that these old whores
sometime sell we^ches better chepe then fishers do lamperyes. O behold the
company of the court, the holiness, the religion, the brotherhed, and finally
the foul disorder of the same. And I say for my part, go to the conrt who will
and there abide, and triumph who will: as for my self I do remember I am a
christen man, and that I must account for ye time I have lost, and therefore I
had much rather to labor and dygge and delue out of the court and be saved,
then to be nighe the king, my conscience not clean nor pure.

The.xii. Chapter.
That in the court of princes all say we will do it, but none do it.
BY as the great Philosoper of great renoume among the Grecians, said upon a
time to the great Alexander Quiliber in suo negotio, hebetior est quam in
alieno, meaning, that commonly every man is more blinded in his own affairs
then in another man's. And he so said by very good reason, for yt there be
men, which for to give a wise deliberate and sage counsel for to remedy a
sudden mischief, have excellent wits, so yt it be in another man's matter.
But in their own affairs they have neither wit to govern their own houses,
nor stable mind to cover their own miserye. Cayus Julius Caesar, Octauus
Augustus, Marcus Antonius, Septimius Seuerus, Marcus Aurelius, and other in
great nombre, that were esteemed in their privy busynes, that is to say, in the
rulyng of the common wealth, wonders witty: but we read that they were so
negligent in gouernyng their own housholdes, their wives and their family,
that it is much to their shame and reproach: therefore such be seen often to
be good to rule the commonwealth, that be nothing worth to govern their own,
and had need (if it might be honestly said) to have a ruler to rule them.

Plutarch reports that the noble and valiant capitain Niseas never lost
battle, but only in trustyng to much to his own wit and judgment. And if
we believe Hiarcas ye Philosopher, it is more hurtful to a man to stand in
his own conceit, then to phansye a woman: for in loving a woman, a man
hurts but himself: but in stickyng to much to his own phantasy, it may
redound to ye hurt of a whole common weal. All this that is said, shall be to
admonish them that tarry in the court, to be co^uersant with the grave and sage
persons, and with such as be learned, and such as have good experience: For
ye grave, learnes virtue: Scile^ce is a certain guide to a man: and
experience, is the consu^macion of all. For although the courtier being young,
be never so sage, grave, rich or in favor, he shall need a father to counsel
him, a brother to persuade him, a guide to teach him the way, and a master to
instruct him, and a corrector to punish him: because the mischiefs, crafts,
and wickedness does so abound in the court that it is impossible that a man
alone may defend him from all, and utterly resist them. For in the court
there is none so high away to destruction as for a man to be governed only by
himself, and have his own swinge.

The court is a perpetual dream, a botomelesse whorlepole, an inchaunted
phantasy, and a mase: when he is in, he cannot get out till he be morfounded.
One of the best remedies that the courtier may get against so many evils, is to
have a faithful friend that flatters him nothing, but that rather will correct
and rebuke him if he go home late, if he walk by night, if he be a false
player or whorehunter. But where shall we find such a friend? For we se the
friendship in the court is commonly used among young courtiers in this sort, that
so sone as ii. or.iii. are met together, strayt fall they to quarellyng,
fightyng, ryoting, so that there is rather occasion given to do evil, then good
cou^sail to refrain. Therefore he that haunteth the court, it were mete that he
had some friend to whom without fear he might common of his busynes, and that
the multitude be also to him common friends, but above al one perfect friend.

I would also he should keep himself from the conversation of sedicious
persons, from collericke persons and vacabondes, for the rascal sort will
slander and say, the king pays naught that those be in favor have all the
swing, that the officers are proud, that men's service is evil recompensed,
and the good unknown: With these words and such other like the pore
courtiers forgettes to serve and begin to murmr.

Also the good christian man ought not to cease to amend his life, for yt he
hops to live long: although those yt be old there occupy themselves rather
in new pastance, then to correct their old sins. Ye shall find them that
promise every day for to amend themselves in their age, and yet nevertheless
dye there worse then devils: the cause is that they all say we will do and yet
never do. There be some old dotyng fools, which shall brag of the kings and
princes which they have served, of the chau^gyng of offices yt they have seen,
and of the wars passed, and of the great mutabilitie and change of fortune.
And yet notwithstanding all that they have seen and endured, they be as gredy
of gain, and delight in young and foolish pastymes as though they were new to
begin to live. Alas miserable men that in perpetual trauail, and continual
sorrow, and infinite trouble have passed their lives, even from their first
time of knowledge (which is, xv. years) to the time of manhod, and then from
that time to their dotyng age, and all to have gained riches and increace in
renoune: not in all this time once remember that in the stead of a true and
perfect rest, they prepare for them selves a hell both for body and soul. The
courtier also ought not lightly to complain of adversities which many times
come to him, thinking that oftentimes (though it be our own fault) we do
complain of things which should complain of us, if they had a toungue.

What time a man sees him self base and is little esteemed, or poor and
forgotten of the rich, and deceived of that he looked surely to have,
incontinent he curses his fortune and lamentes his evil: In ye mean while it
is not fortune that has thus served him, but him self that has serched it
and found it. Such a man thinks to be quickly rich, honored and esteemed,
yt shortly after sees him self poor, overthrown, despised, and blamed of
all men, and cannot revenge himself, but only say, he is unfortunate and
unhappy to the world, and that it is mishap: which is not so, but his own
folly that makes him to leave the surety of his house and prepares himself to
the hazard of fortune, and therefore has no cause to complain but of himself
which chose the way to it. The best is, after that a man purposes himself
to continue in the court, yt then patiently he awayte and tarry the time of
auauncement or auau^tage that he looks for: or else if he cannot patiently
disse^ble with the time, let him not remain there, for contentacion consists
not in the place, but in the ambicious heart, and troubled mind. And take this
for a truth, ye that be courtiers that if.ii. or.iii. things succeed to your
purpose prosperoussy, there shall come a hundredth ouerthwarte the shynnes,
either to you or to your friends. For notwithstanding that ye courtiers doings
and desires come to good pass, there shall be things for his friend or fellow
that goes all awrye, whereby often times he lamte^es ye hurt of his friend, and
that which is denied him more then the pleasure he has of his own hap:
wherefore there is always lack or fault of contentacion. Will ye any more? the
being in court or out of the court, ye shall here no another matter, then, what
news at the court? what does the king? where is he? where is the counsel?
and where lies the officers of ye household? and this is most true, yt they
which desire to here such news, are as desirous to see news: And by this
means the poor wene to make theimselues rich, the rich the more to
command, and the lords ye more to rule. O what a pleasure is it for the^ to
be in the court hopyng that the king may know the^, that those that be favor
may dye, or that fortune may change, and that they come forward? And it
follows, that in tariyng the time, the time deceives them, and then death
takes them unware.

The.xiii. Chapter.
That there is a small nombre of them that be good in the Court and a great
nombre of good in the common wealth.
PLutarch in ye book entitled De exilio tells of ye great King Ptolome that
having on a day at supper with him seven Ambassadors of diverse provinces,
moved a question to them, which of al their common welthes gonerned them
selves with best laws and customs? The said ambassadors, were Romans,
Carthaginiens, Ciciliens, Rhodiens, Atheniens, Lacedemoniens, and Cicioniens:
among who^ the question was effectually debated before the king, forasmuch as
every one of the^ being affeccionate to his country aleged the wisest reason
yt he could. The good king desirous to know the truth and the resolucion of
the question commanded that every one of the Ambassadors should tell of the
best laws or customs that were in their common wealth three points, and that
thereby it might esely be seen which was better ruled and deserved more praise.
Then the ambassador of the Romans began and said, In Rome the temples be
honored, ye governors obeyed and the evil chastised. The ambassador of
Carthage said in Carthage the noble men never cease to prepare to the war,
the poor people to traueil, and the Philosophers to teach.

The ambassador of the Ciciliens said, In Cicill is true justice executed,
troth is beloved, and equality praised. The Ambassador of the Rhodiens said,
In Rhodes the old men are honest, the young men shamfast, and the women meke
and gentle. The Ambassador of the Atheniens said, the Athenieus do not consent
that ye rich should be parciall, nor ye mean people idle, nor the governors
without learning. The ambassador of the Lacedemoniens said, in Lacedemony envy
raines not because al are equal nor coueteousnes because all is common, nor
idleness because all men traueil. The Ambassador of Cicioniens said, in Cicion
they receive no strangers inue^tors of news, nor Phisious that kyl the whole,
nor advocates that makes the processes immortal.

When king Ptolome and his company had heard these so good and holy
obseruau^ces, he praised greatly the institucion of every of them, saying,
that he could not judge which was the best. This history is well worthy to be
noted, and better to be followed: And I believe if in our days so many
ambassadors should mete, disputing as these did of their common welthes, they
should find mo things to blame and speak evil of (and that without
comparison) then to praise and commend. In times passed the kings houses were
so well reformed, the kings themselfes so wise, and the governors so
moderate, that little offenses were chastised, and once to think of great
offenses forbidden: to the intent that the chasticement should be terror to
the evil, and the prohibicion a plain advice unto the good: It is not so in
our common welthes, where is done so much evil, and committed so many bitter
offenses and unhappiness, that those which the auncientes did chastise for
deadly sins by death, we dissemble them to be but venial: the truans and
wantons be so entertained as though we lacked them: and not as mete to be
chased and driven away.

My lady the widow or my masires that is married, if they fall to leude and
wanton living, ye shall not find one that will say mada^ or mastres ye do
naught: but rather six hundredth that shall procure her dishonor.

This is in our time, such is our fashion and manners which causes evil: so
that he is more to be praised which may be called good in our commonwealth,
then any of the Consuls of Rome, because that in ye old time it was almost a
monstrus thing to find one evil among a hundredth, and now it is a great
chance to find one good amongst a hundredth.

The holy scripture praises Abraham yt was just in Calde, Loath that was just
in Sodom Danyel in Babylon, Toby in Niniuie, and Neemyas in Damasco. And
likewise may we among this Cathalog of holy men number ye good courtiers if
there be any, but it cannot be forasmuch as none goes about to move the
courtiers to virtue, but that counsel them to perdicion.

There is in the court so many vacabondes, so many players, blasphemers, and
deceivers that we may be abashed to see such a multitude: but it were a
novelty to hear of the contrary, for why? the world has nothing in
hisrosiers but thorns, and for fruits of trees, but leaves, for vynes but
briars, and in their garnerdes but straw, and in their treasures, but Alcumyn.
O golden world, O world desired, O world passed: the difference betwixt you
and us is, that before you little and little the world passes, but before us it
is quite passed. In the O world every man undertakes to invent, to do, to
begin and to make an end of that he will: and that which is worst of all,
lives as he will: but the end is right doubtful. There is little to be
trusted in the O world. And contrary wise little to defend, little to enjoy,
and very little to keep. There is many things to be desired, many things to be
amended, and many things to be lamented. Our aunceters had the Iron world, but
our world may well be called the dirtie world, because it keeps us
continually in a filthy myer, and always we be there in defiled and rayed.

The.xiiii. Chapter
Of many offaires in the court, and that there be better husbandmen, then
commonly is of courtiers.
THe Poet Homer has written of ye travels of Vlixes one of the princes of the
Greeks: Quintus Curtius of Alexander and Darius: Moses of Joseph, And of them
of Egypt: Samuel of David and of Saul: Titus Liuius, of the Romans:
Thucidides of Jason, with ye Minotaure: and Salust of Iugurth and Cathelyne. I
then willing to follow these good auctors, have undertaken to write the unkind
travails of the court that the courtiers of our time have which have patience
enough for to suffer the^, and no wisdom to avoid them: then it is not
without a cause if I do call the travails of the court unkind, for they be
accustomed unto it as the old horses are to the packesadle and to the plough,
sith that the courtiers themselfes do suffer them so much and have no profit
thereof. Some men will say that I am evil advised because I write ye courtiers
have not their ease, seeing that he yt may attain to be in the court is
accounted to be fortunate. But he abuses him self, if he think that al such
as are out of the court be beasts and ignorant persons, and he only wise: they
rude and he delicate: he honored and they vile, they sta^me ryng and he
eloquent.

If it were so that God would that the most perfect men should be in the court,
it should be to us more then a fault, not incontine^tly to be a courtier:
knowing that there can be no better time employed, then that which is bestowed
in hearing the wise and sage men: but when all is said the places does not
better the men, but the men the places.

God knows (for example) how many gentle and good honest minds labor in the
villages, and how many foles and lubbers brag it in palaices. God knows
how many well ordered wits and judgments is hid in the villages, and how
many rude wits and weak brains face and brace in the court. How many be
there in ye court the which although they have offices, dignities, estates and
preeminences, yet in the village (after a manner of speaking) with great pain
they are not able to rule.x. men. How many come out of ye court correctors of
other, that the^ selves in the villages should be corrected? O how many things
is said among the poor laborers worthy to be noted? And contrary, spoken
before princes worthy to be mocked? O how many is in the court that make them
selves highly to be esteemed, not for to be honest and diligent, but to come in
authority? And how many is there in the village forgotten and not set by,
more for lack of favor then for either lack of wit or diligence: The
princes give the offices: Those that be in favor have the entry: nature the
good blood: The parents the patrimony: and ye deseruyng, honor: but to be wise
and sage comes only of God, and men have not the power to take it away.
And if it were so that princes might give good wit to who^ they would, they
should keep it for theimselues, seeing they never leese, but for lack of
knowledge. I take it for an evil point of such as newly comes from the court
to ye village, and being there, rather use mockyng then taste the benefit
thereof. But in the mean time, thou see their manner of life, yt is, to go to
bed at midnight and rise at x. of the clock, and in making ready till noone,
trimmyng their busshe, or bearde, and setting the cap a wry. And all the day
after, to talk of his darlyng yt he has in the court, or of the battle of
Granado where he did meruails. And some there be of them that will lie and
brag that they were at the journey of Pauay with the captain Antony Deleua: at
Tunes with the Emperor: or at Turron with Andrew Doria. And for all his brabling
he was no better then a ruffian or a zacar of Tholydo, or a knave of Cordoua.
We have rehearsed these things before written, to cause our minion friskers to
leave mocking of the poor inhabitants of the village, estemyng them to be
but fools and lurdens. For I believe, if my master the Emperor would banishe
all ye company of fools, I fear me he were like to dwell alone in the court.

Let us say then, that very late they of ye court know themselfes and ye order
of their life and profession, I mean ye profession of yt religion which they
keep straightly, the which consistes in this: theipromise to please the devil,
and to content the court, and to follow the world: They promise to be ever
pensife, sad and full of suspicion: They promise always to be choppyng and
chaungyng, full of busynes, to bye, to sell, to weep, to sin, and never to
reform themselves: They promise also to be iagged and raggged, an hungered,
indebted and despised: They promise to suffer rebukes of Lords, theft of their
neighbors, injuries of collerike men, mockeries of ye people, reproach of
their parents: and finally, missyng and lackyng of friends.

Lo this is the profession and rule of the obseruauntes of the court: which I
will not name a rule, but a confusion, not a order but a disorder, not a
monastery, but a hell, and a religion not of brethren, but of dissolute persons:
no pore Hermites but coueteous worldely men. O pity, O lack of good
judgment. The Oracle of Apollo being asked by the Ambassadors of the Romans
where lay the point for one to govern himself well, The answer was, for a man
to know well his own estate and degree that thereby one may rule his desires,
and bridle his affeccio^s. The courtier desiryng al, and perceueryng in
nothing, shall think in his mind, that if he get not in one year some fee or
office, that it is not for lack of knowledge: but as a person ignorant and
foolish blames his fortune, and curses the hour that ever he came thither,
without calling to mind that ye court is as ye Palm tree whose rote is a feadome
under the ground, before that he show two fyngers bread of leaves above the
ground. In like manner, a man must be long in service before he be promoted:
yet so much rests that ye perseueryng and abidyng by it, causes a man to
hope: For to say the truth, it is seen, if there be three which deserve more
then they have, there be three hundredth that have more then they deserve. O how
seldom times does fortune that she ought for to do? And how many times
fortunes hazard and chasice does better then the assurance of virtue? because
she measures her merits by ye evil length of opinion, and not by reason: she
makes the water burn without fire, the knife to cut with out stele, the Candle
to light without flame, the myll to go without water, and the cause is only her
inconstancy. If she laugh in ye court of any, it is but with her ears, If she
weep, it had been better never for a man to have come out of his house: If she
lift any up aloft, it is to throw him down again lower then he was: If
sometime she dissemble, it is to take one in a trap. Let no man then trust of
fortune, for she is so variable, that she never holds her promise of that she
gives, neither by word nor yet by writing that she makes.

The.xv. Chapter
That among courtiers is neither kept amity nor faith fulness: And how much
the Court is full of trauail, of envy and rancour.
ONe of the most excessive travails among the courtiers is, that none is
resident there without he be hated or at the lest that he hate: that is not
pursued or else doteh pursue, that does not mock or else is mocked.

And one unhappy thing is in the court, many there be that will do of their
bonette to you, that gladly would se your heads of by the shoulders: And such
there be that makes reverence unto you that would have his leg broken to se
you dead and carried to your grave: Is it not a great pity to be co^uersaunt
all day together, to laugh and make merye one with another, and yet have
mortal hate? Is not this more then a dissimulacio^, to honor him who^ they
would be glad to see led to the gallous? One thing for all, it is ambicion and
to much hope of sharp and bitter fortune, and lack of knowledge, of this,
that amity well observed, is much worth to moderate a man.

What life, what fortune, what taste may he take yt sees himself daily present
in the court, where is so much theft, bribry, murders, poysoners, felons, and
traitors ready to betray and sell a man, and he himself betrayed and sold?
And contrarywyse what felicity is it to be in the company of those, with whom
a man may faithfully recreate himself fearyng noman? In the court, there be
gentlemen so rooted in vengeance and hatred that by no mean, request, nor
gentleness a man may direct them from their evil ententes, in such manner that
they be glad to make war with their own houses, to chase peace from them
selves to the houses of their enemies? Whereby one may well presuppose as is
aforsayd, that uneath one may hope to have friends in the court, and less
trust: and the greater men in authority, ye more afraid they be to fall.
What then causes a man there to tarry in such trauail? I have wonder that any
can suffer it or have a heart to dissemble it. O how fortunate is he that
leads his life in the village, with ye mean busynes of his little possession,
in comparison of y^ courtier whose estate is ever unhappy and of al parts
miserable, that never ceases to hope of things vain, in procuryng unjust
things and such things that never can be determined. And if thoughts were
wind, and his desires waters, it should be greater danger to sail in his
heart then in the maine sea. In the court is one thing I wotte not what, and
one thing I know not how, and one thing I understand not, which causes
there incessauntly complaints, and continual choppyng and chaungyng, and
evermore dispite and envy: and that worst is there is no liberty to depart
thence.

The yoke of the court is hard, the bonds fast tied and the plough so tedious
that those that wene to be the first to triumph, are the first that labor and
draw the weighty burdens. And such as are poor and ignorant men suffer
these intolerable travails, because they would not be as subjects in their
own countries, and to have a greater liberty to do evil. But God knows what
such liberty costeth them, that for a short and vain pleasure purchase to
theimselues, continual trauail and perpetual bondage. The property of this
vicious liberty, or better to call it, this mischeuous subieccion, is, that at
the beginning it seems somewhat pleasant: but in the end al co^uertes to a
bitterness, sorrow, and lame^tacion, chiefly when a man has experience by little
and little of the vice that this life conteyneth. For if he accompany with
women, he must flatter them, serve them, and entreat them: And if money
lack, then must there be some deuilishe shift made.

deuilishe need. For why, when one comes new to the court, my lady dame
gorgious, ledes him a train, she entertaynes him, she makes much on him, she
colles him: but when she spyeth him to lack, she sendes him to pasture in the
bare fields. And if the time of eating come, the courtier must often times
feed with them, whom he would see eaten without sauce* Now, if his turn be to
play, therein is little profit: if he wyn, he must liberally depart with the
gain to those that stand by: and if he loose, they restore to him never a
penny. And if the courtiers turn be to jest, and to be merry, therein he finds
no fruit for the courtiers play begins in fair words, and ends with
braulyng, chidyng, and fightyng. And forasmuch as it is the worst life of al
other lives: Let us conclude that there is nothing worse then a vain courtier,
and an idle husbandma^.

The.xvi. Chapter.
By how much the common welthes and the courts of the time passed were more
perfect then the courts of the time present,
THe king Anchyses did lament ye distruccion of the proud Troy, done by the
princes of Greece: The Queen Rosaine bewailed her husband Darius, when he was
overcome by the great Alexander.

Jeremy the prophet complained the estate of Babylon, when it was held
captive. King David lamented his soonne Absolon when Ioab kilde him. The lady
Cleopatra thought no another but to dye for sorrow when her dear and well-beloved
Marcus Antonius was vanquished by the Emperor Augustus.

The Consul Marcus Marcellus lamented the city of Syracuse when he saw it on
a fire. Salust, Rome, evil governed. The Patriarche Jacob his soonne Joseph:
The king Demetrius his good father Antigonus when he found him dead at the
battle of Marathone. It shall be also convenient that among these well renoumed
princes we should lament the miseries of our time, in the which we see things
so merueilous, that ye curious auctours of the time passed never wrote things
se^blable unto them: Nor the men in those days never saw the like. Truth it
is that the Chroniclers in those days wrote what they would, In our time scant
any man dare speak.

The Philosopher Ariminius has written of ye abundance of Egypt: Demopho^ of
the fartilitie of Arabia: Thucidides of the treasures of Tyrus: Asclepius of
the Mines of Europe: Dodrillus in the commendacion and praisynges of Greece:
Leonides of the triumphs of Thebes: Eumenides of the government of Athens:
Thesiphontes of the order that is kept in the court, and of ye princely houses
of the Sicioniens: Pytheas of the profit that came by ye little speaking of the
disciples of Socrates: Apollinus of the continency and abstinence that was
kept in schools of the divine Plato: Myronides of the great exercise, and of
the little rest that was in the house of Hyarcas: Aulus Gelyus of ye temperance
and little eating, and of the moderate slepyng of the disciples of master
Fauorimus: Plutarch of the wise women of Greece, and of the chaste wives of
Rome: Dyodorus, how those that were inhabitants in ye Isles of Balyares cast
their treasure into the sea for fear lest the strangers for coueteousnes of
their riches should make the^ wars, and to the intent also that no parcialitie
should grow among themselves.

Hearing then all this that that I have said, I demand of the reader his
advise what my pen should write of our time? If we should write of bounty
and verity, we should falsely lie: If of riches, men be so gredy that all be
disposed to desire and hunger couetously. How shall we then praise ye men of our
time? Shall we say they be hardy and puissaunt and learned, and we se that they
employ their minds to nothing else but to rob and beguile each one the other?
How shall we praise them of prosperity and health, seeing that the pestilence
and the French pockes more then common is among them? How shall we commend
their continency and abstinence, seeing that scant in fifty years ye shall not
find one that will bridle his lust and desire? Shall we praise them of little
rest and of much exercise, when we se that there is a greater nombre that give
themselfes to idleness and thefery, then to honest travels and pains? How shall
we praise them of temperat eating, when we see in our days the belly is men's
God? How shall we commend them for having chaste women and obedient, seeing that
there is nothing more common among them then adultry?

Shall we say, they be not covetous, seeing that not only men search gold and
silver in deep mines, but men trauail to seek it as far as the Indiens, of a
vyneyarde so froson, of a tree so dry, of fruit so unripe, of a water so
troubled, of bread so evil bake^, of so much false gold, of a world so
suspicious, what shall we hope any other thereof but evil and confusion? Let us
read that is written of the courts of the princes of Siria, of Percia of
Macedonia, of Grecia, and finally of the Romans: And let us co^ferre these to
our courts, and ye shall see such evils and vicious customs in our common
welthes, that the auncientes did never attain to ye knowledge how to commit
such abhominacions, nor yet (I say) to inue^t such evils. In those most happy
times and golden worlds an evil condicioned man scant durst to have showed
himself in any honest company: but now alas (a thing to be lamented) the
world is so replenished with dissolute and corrupt living, that it is counted
but a small fault to be evil, except he be such a one as is past al shame
and grace. The courtiers will not deny me but that whiles they give atte^dance
for the vprisyng of their masters, they tell each one the other what pastyme
they have had the night before, how they have played, sworn and stared at
their game, of their laughynges, and the companies they have had with the gentle
dames: which of them was fairest and best apparelled? and sometime in secret of
those that they have committed adultery withal.

And thus, as the world is new, the inue^cions are new, ye plays new, the
garments new, new speaking, new manners, and new every year, every month ye
and every day, and every hour: we see vices so largely delated, and virtue so
diminished, that I am ashamed to write it: And the true cause is, that in ye
court virtue has many controllers and enemies, and vice innumerable vpholders
and maynteiners. For if there be brought into the court one laudable custom,
it is no sooner come, but furthwith it is chased away: And on the other part,
vice can not so sone appear, but it is as soon embraced and entertained. The
sage lawyer Lygurgus did defend expressly by a law that the strangers should
not know the secrets of his common wealth nor that his citezens should meddle
much abroad, for that purpose as is said, that in medlyng with them, they
should not learn their vices nor their barberous conditions.

In the time when Marcus Portius was Consul, there came an excellent Musician
out of Greece into Rome, which for because that he put one stryng more on his
harp then was accustomed to be played withal, he was by the consent of ye
people banished from Rome and his harp burnte: Howbeit in this our time, we
could well agree with Music, and would not pass how many stynges the harp
had: so that men might agree and stay them selves.

Plutarch says that he saw once at Rome a priest of Greece stoned to death in
the great place of Campus Marcus, because that he did sacrifice to the Goddess
Berecinthe in other manner then they were accustomed to be sacrificed unto.
Suetonius affirms that in.iiii.C.lxiiii. years which was the time that the
temple Vierges Vastales endured, there was never found but iiii. evil living
persons, which were Domicia, Rhea, Albina and Cornelia, the which for their
offenses were openly buried quick. If at this day one would registre the
names of such like, to be so punished, I leave it to your judgment whether
there should lack ha^gmen to do execucion. Trebelius Publius said that the
Emperor Aurilianus Quintus took a great friend of his from the office of
Dictator, which was named Rogerius, only because he had daunsed at the
weddyng of Posteria Auia his nigh neighbor saying, that the good Judge should
not leave his gravity and use such wild and common plays. But so it is,
whatsoever this Emperor said, In our time we will give license to judges to
remeue their feet as fast as they will, so that they hold their hands still.
It shall make no matter to the poor pleader whether his judge sing or dance,
so that he ministre justice with expedicion, that the the poor man come not
often times and give to much attendaunce. In this case it were very good to
raise ye Emperor Domitian, which as Suetonius writes made a law, that
whosoever prolonged the process of his clyant more then one year, that he should
for ever be banished Rome. If this holy law had dured to this day, there
should have been more banished in Rome and else where, then there are now
citezens.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Of diverse noble and valiant men, that left the court and the great cities and
drew them to their proper houses, more by will, then by necessity.
MArcus Crassus a captain of the Romans, was greatly commended and praised
for that he was valiant in the war, and wise in the busynes of his
household: This is that Crassus that followed the parcialitie of ye Consul
Silla against Marius and Julius Caesar after Dictator. It chaunsed on a time
that by the fortune of the sea, the said Caesar was prisoner to certain pirates
and robbers of the sea, and he said boldly to ii. or. iii. of the best of them
that kept him fast bound, It does (said he) grieve me much, not for that I am
taken prisoner, forasmuch as that is but hazard of the war, but of ye
pleasure that mine enemy Crassus will take when he does hear of ye news.
This Crassus was Master to a Philosopher named Alexandrius, that governed him
as a father, counseled him as a friend, and taught him as a master: And this
did he by the space of.xviii. years, which passed, then he demanded license
to return to his country: And going his way, said these words unto
Alexander: I ask of the none other reward for my pain, nor for my labors in
teaching of thee, then to grant that I shall never return to the court
again: and when I am gone that thou will never write unto me of thine
affairs, for yt I am so weary of being a courtier, that I will not only leave
the court, but also forgettt all that ever I saw or heard in it. Denis of
Siracuse, albeit that he was a cruel tyrant, yet notwithstanding he was a great
friend to the Philosophers, and a honorer of wise men. And he said that he took
much pleasure to hear of the wise and sage men of Greece, but he believed them
not, because their teachynges were words without deeds. Seven of the most
sagest and best learned of Greece came to Siracuse a city where the said Denis
was resident: that is to say, Plato, Chylo, Demophon, Diogenes, Myrtho,
Pyllades and Surranus the which meddled more of ye affairs of Denis then he
did of their doctrine. Dyogenes dwelled a xi. ycre with him, and after returned
to his country, where he being and washing of herbs for his diner, another
Philosopher said to him: If thou had not left ye service of Denis thou
need not now to have taken ye pain to wash thine own herbs and make them
ready for thy dinner. To whom Dyogines answered: If thou could have been
content to have washed and eaten herbs: you nedest not at this time to have
been in the court of Dionisius. Cato the Censor of whom the names of Cato first
began, was esteemed for one of the wysest of the Romans: And he was never seen
in.lxviii. years (for so long he lived) not once to laugh nor to do any thing
repugnant to his sage gravity. Plutarch says that he was in speaking
prudent, gentle in co^uersacion, in correctyng sharp and severe, in presents
liberal, in eating sober, and in that that he promised, sure and certain, and
in executing justice irreprehensible.

After the age of.lv. years he left the court of Rome, and with drew himself
to a little village nigh to Picene, which is now at this present called Puzol:
and there he passed ye residue of his years in quiet and rest, accompanied only
with his books, and taking for a singular recreacion for to go twice or thrice
a day to walk in the fair fields and the vines, and himself often to labor in
them. And it fortuned on a day when he was absent from his house that one wrote
with a cole upon his door O felix Cato, tu solus scis viuere, which is to
say, O happy Cato, thou only know how to live.

Lucullus Consul and capitain, a Romain, right valiant, brought to an end the
war against the Parthes which had continued by the space of.xvi. years,
whereby he gat great honor of the citezens of Rome, and immortal renoune for
himself and great riches for his family. And it is said of him, that he only
of all the Romans did enjoy peaceably in his age, the riches that he had
wo^ne in his youth in the wars. And after when he came from Asia and saw that
the commonwealth was in division betwixt Marius and Silla, he determined to
leave Rome and make a house in the country nigh to Naples upon the sea side
(now at this present time called ye Castle of Lobo) which he edified and lived
there xviii. years in great tranquillity. His house was haunted with many
people, specially with great capitaines that went into Asia, and with
Ambassadors that came from Rome, which he received very gently and benignly.
One night when his servants had made ready his supper with a less diet then
he was accustomed to have, they excusing theimselues that they ordained the
less because he had no strangers: He said unto them, although said he, that
there be no strangers with me, know not you that Lucullus must suppe with
Lucullus.

Plutarch speaking of this valiant man's exercise that he did after he was
retired to the place aforesaid, says that he delited much in huntyng and
hawkyng, but above all pleasures he most delited in his Library, there reading
and disputyng incessantly. Helius Spertianus says that Dioclesian, after that
he had governed the Empire xviii. years, forsook it, and went to take his
pleasure in the fields, there in quiet to end the residue of his life,
saying: that it was time for him to leave ye dangerous estate of the court and
get him to a peaceable life in the village. Two years after he was thence
retired, ye Romans sent unto him a solemn Ambassade to inuit and desire him
effectuously that he would take pity of ye common wealth, and return,
promisyng him that so long as they lived there should none have the name of
Emperor but he. Now when ye Ambassadors arrived at his house, they found him
in a little garden where he was setting of Lettys and Onyons: And hearing what
they said unto him, he answered in this wise: Do you not think my friends,
that it is much better for him that can sow his Lettys, and afterward
pleasantly and merely to eat the same, so still to exercise himself, then to
return and enter into the goulfe of troubles in a common wealth? I have assaied
both, I know what it is to command in the court, and what it is to live and
labor in the village, wherefore I pray you suffer me here to abide in pacienee,
for I desire rather here to live with the labor of my hands, then in the sorrow
and cares of an Empire. Note by this example that the life of the laborer is
more to be desired, then the life of a prince.

Cleo and Pericles succeeded in the rulyng of the commonwealth after Solon, a
man excellently learned and well esteemed, and taken among the Grecia^s for half a
God, by the reason of the wise laws he made among the Atheniens: These two
noble governors were much be loved, because that (as Plutarch tells)
Pericles which.xxx. years had the administracio^ of ye business and affairs of
ye city, was never seen to come into any man's house but his own, nor yet to
sit in any open place among ye common people, such a gravity was in him.

About the years of his age which was.lx. he went from Athens to a little
village, where he ended the rest of his days, studiyng and passing the time in
husbandrye: He had a little small gate or wicket in the entryng of his house,
over which was written Inueni portu^, spes, and fortuna valete. That is to say,
forasmuch as now (and before I have knowledge of vanitee) I have found the
port of rest, fie of hope, and fortune farewell. By this example, no courtier
can say that he leads a sure life, but only that courtier which does as
this wise captain did, withdraw himself.

Lucius Seneca, was as who should say, a right leder to good manners, and a
instructor to good letters to Nero the sixth Emperor of Rome, with whom he
tarried.xxiiii. years, and had great doings of things pertainyng to the common
wealth, as well of private causes as otherwise, because he was sage and of
great experience. And at the last, coming to great age and weryed with the
continual conflictes and business of the court, left the court and went and
dwelt in a little mancion he had nigh to Nole Campana, where he lived after, a
long time as witnesses his books De officiis, de Ira, de bono viro, de
aduersa fortuna and other books which were to long to rehearse. At last
(fortune and man's malice did their office) Nero commanded him to be slain,
not for that he had committed any crime worthy to dye, or done any thing
otherwise then an honest manne ought to do: but only because the lecherous
Domicia hated him: Note well reader this example, that sometime fortune
pursues him that forsakes ye court, as well as the courtier.

Scipio the Affrican was so esteemed among ye Romans, that in.xxii. years,
whiles yt he was in the wars he never lost battle: And yet made he war in
Asia, Europ, and Africa, and to this, never committed act worthy of reproach:
And yet he wan Africa and put to sack Carthage, brought in bondage Numance,
overcame Hannibal, and restored Rome weakened and nere destroyed by the loss
they had at ye battle of Ca^nes. And yet for all this, being of ye years of.
lii. he withdrewe him from the court of Rome to a little village betwixt Puzoll
and Capua, where he lived a solitary life, and so content withal, that whiles
he tarried there a xi. years space, he never entered into Rome nor Capua.

The divine Plato was borne in Liconia, and was norished in Egypt, and learned
in Athens: It is red of him, that he answered ye Ambassadors of Cirene that
required of him laws to govern them selves in sure peace, in this wise:
Difficilimu^ est homines amplissima fortuna ditatos legibus co^tinere. Which is
to understand, that it is hard to bring to pass to make rich men to be
subject to the rigor of the law. To conclude, Plato not willing to abide
longer the clamor and cry of the court, went and dwelt in a little village two
miles from Athens called Academia, where the good old man after he had tarried
there. xiiii. years, teaching and writing many notable doctrines, ended there
his most happy days. After the memory of him, the au^cientes called yt
village Academia, which is to say in English, a schole: The conclusion is that
all these honorable sage princes and wise men, left Monarchies, kingdoms,
cities, and great riches, and went into the villages, there to search a pore,
an honest, and a peaceable life.

Not that I will say that some of these left ye court, to be there poor and
banished and rebuked, but of their fre will and fre liberty, minding to live a
quiet and honest life or they dyed.

The. xviii. Chapter.
The Aucthor complains with great reason, of the years that he lost in the
court.
I Will demand of mine own self, mine own life, and make accoumpt of
the same, to the intent that I will confer my years to my traueiles, and my
travails to my years, that it may appear how long I left of to live, and
began to dye.

My life (gentle reader) has not been a life, but a long death: my days a
play new for to begin: my years a very tedious dream: my pleasures Scorpions:
my youth a transitory fa^tasy. My prosperity has been no prosperity: but
properly to speak, a painted castle, and a treasure of Alcumyn.

I came to ye court very young, where I saw diverse manners of offices and
chaunges, even among ye princes that I served. And I have assayed to trauail by
sea and by land, and my recompense was much more then I deserved: and that was
this, that sometime I was in favor, and sometime out of favor. I have had
experience of ye somersautes of destines: I have had in the court fre^des and
enemies: I have had false reports: I have been even now glad and merry, and
forth with sad and sorry: to day rich, to morrow poor: now mounted upward,
and strait thrown dounewarde: This has been to me a maskyng, where I have
lost both money and time. And now I say to the my soul, what have thou
gotten of this great journey? The recompense is this, that I have gotten there a
gray head, fete full of ye gout: mouth without tethe: raines full of grauel: my
goods laid to pledge: my body charged with thought: and my soul little cleansed
from sin. And yet is there more seeing yt I must needs speak, that is, that I
have returned my body so weary, my judgment dull, my time so lost, the best of
my age so passed, and that is worst of al, I found no taste in any thing that
is in the world: so that to conclude, I am of my self al weary of my self.
What should I more tell or say of the alteracion of my life, and of the
chaunges of fortune? I came to the court innocent, and come from it malicious:
I went thither true and meaning truth, and returned a liar: I went thither
humble, and returned presumptuous: I went thither sobre, and returned a gurmand
and glutto^: I went thither gentle and human, and returned clean contrary.
Finally in going thither I marde my self in all points: And I have no cause to
lay y^ faut in my masters, for ye vices soon learned without a master, and
cannot be forgotten without a corrector. O miserable that I am, I kept in the
court an account of my goods, to know how they were wasted, and not for to
distribute them to the poor: I took head of my honor for to increase it, not
for to better my self by the time: I took care of them that should pay me, to
know what was owyng me, and not that I might get to profit the poor withal,
but to profit in riches and not in virtue. I held an accoumpt with my
servants, to none other purpose, then to know how long they had been with me
and served me, and not to enquire what life they led: Finally, I held a cou^pt
of my life, but it was more to conserve it, then to correct it.

Lo, behold, this was my accoumpt, this was my calculacion, this was the
Arsmetrique that I learned in the court.

Let us yet go a little further and se mine exercises. I never was yet in the
court but I found to whom I bare malice, or else that envied me. I was never yet
in the palaice but I found a window open, and a courtier murmur. I never yet
spoke to princes, but I went from them not contented in my mind with some
part of their answer. I never yet went to bed without complaint, nor never
did rise without a sigh. If I went about to do any good thing, my great affairs
hyndered me. If I would study, my fellows let me. If I went to take any
honest and quiet pastyme, mine affairs would not permit me. If I kept my self
solitary and from company, my thoughts martyred me: Finally there was never
any thing that so vexed my heart as the lack of money in my purse. And yet all
this is nothing, remembryng that I was ever enuyous to such as were mine
equalles: a flatterer to my superiors, and without pity to mine inferiors: and
where I phansied one, I bare hate almost to all other. I found every man worthy
of reprofe, but against my self I could not suffer a word to be spoken. O
how forgetful have I been, which should forget or a morsel of meat had
been put in my mouth, and have talked aloude to my self alone, as it had been
one that had been mad? O how often has chanced me yt in coming from the
counsel weary, or from ye palaice thoughtfull, I would not hear mine own
seruau^res speak, nor dispatche such as I had to do wtall? O how many times
have I been so drouned in busynes, that I could not moderate my pensiuenes,
although my friends did counsel me to the contrary? O alas, how many times
has my mind pressed me to leave the court and the world, and to yield my
self to some solitary desert, as an Heremite? because I saw ye king auau^ce
him and him, and I put back as a person half desperate.

Moreover to fulfill my travails, always I went askyng and serchyng news of
the affairs of ye court: always harkenyng what one said of another: always
spiyng and watchyng: and all this considered, I found by mine accoumpt, that I
lived in heauynes, captivity, and state of damnacion.

Let us yet go farther: If I were rich, one or other serched some mean to
devour me: If I were poor, I found none to succor me: my friends cried out
upon me, and mine enemies sought my death. Ouermuche bablyng of the courtiers
brake my brains: and much silence made me to sleep, and the solicitude caused
me to be sad: And ouermuche company oppressed me: much exercise weryed me, and
idleness confounded me.

To conclude, I so burdened and vexed my self in the court with so much
trauail in naughtynes, yt I durst not desire death, although I had no desire to
live.

The.xix. Chapter.
The aucthor makes accoumpt of the virtues that he lost in the court, and of
the evil customs that he learned there,
But now to proceed, my fortune passed, my fre^des dyed, my force decayed, and
my first fashio^s failed: O if al my pains had been ended at the first time
when I came to the court, how happy had that been for me? but now all
consumed, I complain singulerly of my traitorous heart, which would never
cease to desire vain things, and the cursed tongue to speak sclau^derous
things. O gentle reader, be not weary, if I tell thee in few words the
difference betwixt him that I was when I went first to the court, and that I
am now since I have been in the court. First and before that I did cast my
self into this perilous labyrinthe (which is to say a prison full of all
snares) I was a good devout person, gentle and fearful: and since I have
learned to be a mischievous fellow, slow in doing good, and little or nothing
regardyng ye wealth of my soul. I went thither being very young and of good
disposicion, and came from thence deffe, and more then spurblynde, and no more
able to go then he that is full of the gout: And briefly and old grysard,
full of ambicion, in such wise, that I am so variable, that scant I know on
what ground to set my feet. My heart was of so depraved a sort, that it
desired to be discharged of all accions, and yet for all that found no another
but peril and torment.

Sundry times I purposed to leave the court, and suddenly I repented. Sometime I
purposed not to come out of my lodgyng, and strait ways I was enforced to trot
a trot to the court. Sometime I purposed not to come to the palaice, and or I
were ware I was compelled to go thither sometime or it were day. I purposed to
be no more vexed, and suddenly my passions augme^ted, And it followed that my good
purposes ceased and went from me: and I did that was leude and naughty. Behold
how I lived of wind and of fools imaginacions as many a foolish courtier
does. I have pha^tasied with my self (in the court sometime) that I governed
the king and the princes, and that I came of a noble house and ancient stock,
excellent in science, great in favor and beloved of all men, sage in counsel,
moderate in speaking eloquent in writing, prudent in service, and conformable
to all. But when I waked out of my folly as from a dream, and looked to my
feet, I knew easly that I had born false witness to my self of this golden
and pleasant imaginacion, and saw of truth in other, ye which I dreamyngly
imagined of my self.

I serched the way how to be esteemed of every man, holy, wise, gentle,
content, and of a good zele, and a sea of sadness. Lo this fault happens to
courtiers as it did unto me, yt is, to join folishe liberty with virtuous
honor, which be two things that cannot agree, because that disordinate will
is enemy to virtue and honor. But for my part good reader, I give thanks unto
God, my affeccions be somewhat wasted and mortified, for I was wont (...) in
service, to desire daily that e court might remove: (...) I care not though
seldo^ (...) never I come from my h^se I had a special lust to (...) for
news, And now I care n^^ for them at all. I saw the time when I loved not to
be out of company, And now I desire no thing more then to be solitary. I was
wont to delight to hear, to see iuglers, daunsers, liars, and daliars: And now
so to do, were to me more then death. In like manner I was wont to solace my
self in Fishyng, Hunting, shootyng in the Hackbut: And now I mind no another
but to bewail and lament the time I have lost: and call to mind the first
time that the Emperor took me into his service, from thence where I was
norished from my tender years in great fear, and not knowing what the world
was, but occupied only in my deuocions and lernynges: I often rose at midnight,
I comforted the sick, I red the gospel and other good books of good doctrine.
Briefly, every man did help me to be good, and chastised me from evil: If I
did well, I was praised: if I did evil, I was corrected: if I were heavy, I
was comforted: if I were angry, I was appeased if in any agony, my fre^des
prayed to God for me: O what cause have I to repent out of measure, thus to
have forsaken rest and godly living and to have enjoyed episcopal dignity, in
which the Emperor set me: forasmuch as a verteous life is ye haven of all
good, and the Episcopal dignity the sea of all daungier. Lo how I have passed
my good years without emploiyng my time well, and without knowledge what my fortune
should be. I do therefore admonish the reder, to do better then I have done in
ye court, if you be there, or else to forsake it in a better hour then I have
done: for so doing thou shall declare thy self, that thou have determined to
live sagely and well advised.

The.xx. Chapter.
The auctour takes his leave of the world with great eloquence.
FArewell world, forasmuch as one can nor may trust of ye nor in the. For in
thy house (o world) the passage is paste, and that which is present goes soon
away, and that which is to begin, comes wondrous late, forasmuch as he
that thinks himself most firm, sonest does fall, the most strongest
soonest does break, and perpetuities soonest decay, in such sort that those
which be destinate to live an hundredth years, thou suffer him not of all
that time, to live one year in quiet.

Farewell world, forasmuch as thou take, and renderest not again, thou
weryest, but comfortest not, thou robbest, but make no restitucion, and you
quarellest, but do not pacify, and accusest before thou have cause to
complain and geuest sentence before thou hear the parties, even till thou
kill us, and then buriest us before we dye.

Farewell world forasmuch as in thee, nor by thee, there is no joy without
trouble, no peace without discord, love without suspicion, rest without fear,
abou^dance without fault, honor without spotte, riches without hurt of
conscience, nor high estate but he has somewhat that he complains of.

Farewell world, forasmuch as in thy palaice promises are made and never
kept, men serve and have no reward, they are invited to be deceived, they
labor to be troubled, and trauail to take pain, they laugh and are beaten,
thou fainest to stay us, to make us fall, thou le^dest. to pull away strait
again, thou honor us, to defame us, and correctest without mercy.

Farewell world, thou flau^derest them that are in credit, and do auau^ce
the infamed, thou let ye traitors pass fre, and put true men to
their rau^somes, thou persecutest the peaceable, and fauorest the sedicious,
thou robbest the poor and geuest to the rich, deliuerest the malicious, and
condemnest innoce^tes, guest license to depart to the wise, and retainest
fools: and to be short, the most part do what they list, but not what they
should.

Farewell world, forasmuch as in thy palaice no man is called by his right
name, for why? they call the rash valiant: the proud, cold hearted: the
importune, dilligent: the sad, peaceable: the prodigal, magnifical: the covetous
a good husband: the babbler, eloquent: the ignorant, a little speaker: the
wa^ton, amorous: the quiet man, a fool: the forbearer, a courtier: the
tyrant, noble. And thus thou world, call the counterfeat, the true
substance, and the truth, the counterfeat.

Farwell world, for thou deceiuest all that be in thee: promisyng to the
ambicious, honors: to the gredy, to come forward: to the brokers, offices: to
the covetous, riches: to the gluttons, ba^kettes: to the enemies vengeance: to
the thefes, secretnes: to the vicious, rest: to the young, time: and to al thing
that is false, assurance.

Farewell world, for in thy house fidelity is never kept, nor truth
maintained: and also we may see in thy house, one glad, and another afraid:
some ouercharged: some out of the right way: some void of comfort, desperate,
sad, heavy, ouerburdened and charged, and more then lost, and sometime both.

Farewell world, forasmuch as in thy company, he that wenes himself most
assured, is most uncertain, and he that folowes thee, goes out of the way: and
he yt serves thee, is evil paid: and he that loves thee, is evil entreated:
and he that contents thee, contenteth an evil master: and he that haunteth
thee, is abused.

Farewell world, forasmuch as thou have such mishap, that services done and
presents offered to thee, profit nothing, nor the lies that is told thee,
nor the ba^kettes made to thee: nor the faythfulnes we give to thee: nor the
love we bear to thee.

Farewell world, forasmuch as thou deceiuest al, backbitest all, and
slau^derest al, chasticest al, threttest us al: achiuest all, and in the end
forgettest all.

Farewell world, since in thy company al men complain, all cry out, all
weep, and all men dye living.

Farewell world, sythens by thee we hate each one the other to the death: To
speak till we lie: to love, till we despair: to eat, till we spue: to
drink, till we be dro^ken: to use brokage to tobbery: and to sin, till we
dye.

Farewell world, for being in the, we forget our infa^cy, and our grene age,
with out experience: our youth, in vices: our middle age in turmoilyng and
busynes: our old age in lame^tacions, and all our time counted together in
vain hopes.

Farewell world, for in thy school we are led til ye here be white: the eyes
blered: the ears deaf: the nostrels droppyng: ye forehead wrinkled: ye fete
goutie: the raynes full of grauel: ye stomach full of evil humors: the head
full of migrain: the body full of sorrow, and the mind full of passions.

Farewell world, for none of thy lovers come to good profit, witness those
that daily we see, are not false knaves marked in the face? thieves hanged?
manquellers headed? robbers by ye hye ways, set upon wheles? heritikes
brent? false money makers boiled: killers of their pare^tes, torn in pieces,
and other diverse punishementes of such as are great in favor with thee?

Farewell world, forasmuch as thy servants have no more pastyme, but to trot
by the streets, to mock one another? to seek out wenches? to send presents:
to beguile young girls: write amorous letters: speak to baundes: play at ye
dise: plede against their neighbor: tell news: invent lies, and study new
vices.

Farewell world, for in thy palaice none will do good to other: for the Boar
fightes against the Lion: the Unicorn against the Cocodril: the Egle against
ye Vultur: the Elepha^t against ye Mynotaure: the Sacre against the Kyte: the
mastyf, against the Bull: One man against another, and al together against
death.

Farewell world, because you have nothing, but to our ruin: For often the
yerth opens before our feet: ye water drounes us: the fire burns us: the
air mistempers us: the Winter does kill us: the So^mer does chafe us, the
dogs does byte us: the Cattes does scrat us: the Serpe^tes does poison us:
the Flies does prick us: the Flees does eat us: and above al, worldely
business deuours us:

Farewell world, seeing no man can pass thy dominion in suertie, for in every
pathe we find stoones to stumble at: bridges that brekes under us: Snow that
lets us: Mountains that werye us: Thunders that fears us: Thieves that
rob us: Encou^ters that hurtes us, and evil fortune that killes us.

Farewell world, forasmuch as in thy country there is little health: for some
be lippers, and some have the French pockes: some the Canker, and some the
gout: and some have the foul evil, and some the Sciatica, and some the stone,
and some Quotidian fevers: some wanderyng fevers, some tercian and quarten
fevers: spasmes, paulsies, and the most part sick offaire folly.

Farewell world, forasmuch as there is not a man in thy house but he is
noted with some defaute in his person: For if there be any talle man, the rest
is lubberlike. If he have a fair face, his iye shall be too black: If he have
a good forehed, it shall be wrinkeled: If he have a welfauored mouth, he shall
lack teethe: If he have fair hands, he shall lack fair here, And if he have
fair here, he shall have a foul skin.

Farewell world, forasmuch as the inhabitau^tes in thee are so variable to
manners and co^dicions, that some will follow the court, some will sail on the
sea: and if one would be a merchant, the other will be a husbandman: If the
one will be a hu^ter, the other will be a fisher: If one will govern a
Monarchy, ye other under pretense of yt, will pyll and poll ye poor people.

Farewell world, for as much as in thy house there are none that prepare
themselfes to live, and much less to dye: And yet we see some die young, and
some in middle age, some in old age, some dye by ha^gyng, and some by drounyng:
some dye for hunger, and some in eating, slepyng, and restyng, and some or they
beware, and for the most part or they look for death.

Farewell world, forasmuch as we can neither know thy disposicion nor
condition: For if one be wise, another is a fool: If one be fine, another is of
a gross wit: If one be valiant, another is a coward: If one be given to
peace, another is sedicious: And if one be of a gentle spirit, another is very
froward.

Farewell world, seeing noman can live with thee: for if a man eat to little,
he becommes weak: if to much, he waxes sick: if a man labor, strait he is
weary: if he be idle, he lives bestly: if he give little, he is called a
nigarde: if he give much, he is called prodigal: if a man visit his fre^des
often, he is called importune: if to seldom, full of disdain: If a man suffer
wrong, he is called false hearted: And if he do revenge then is he wilful: If
he have friends, he is praised: If enemies, he is pursued: if one tarry to long
in a place, he waxes weary: and if he change to often, he is grudged at.
Finally, I say, that such things as displease me, I am forced to follow, and
that which I would, I cannot come by.

O world unclean, I conjure thee thou filthy world, I pray O thou world,
and protest against thee thou world, that thou never have part in me, for I
demand nor desire nothing that is in thee, neither hope of any thing in thee,
for I have determinined with my self that posui finem curis, spes, et fortuna
valete. I have finished worldly cares, therefore hope and fortune farewell.

FINIS.
EXCVSVM LONDINI, IN AEDIBVS RICHARDI GRAFTONI, TYPOGRAPHI REGII. MENSE
AVGVSTII.

M.D.XLVIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.


