A COMPEND Of the Controversies of RELIGION, Wherein TRUTH is confirmed, and
Error convinced, By Authority of Scripture, Witnessing of Antiquity, and
Confession of Party: Most necessary for all, in this Backe-slyding Age.

By W. G. Minister of God's Word.

Hieron. lib. 1. adv. Pelag. Non enim de Adversario victoriam, sed contra
mendacium quarimus veritatem.

ABERDENE, Printed by Edward Raban. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE, MOST worthy of all Honor, and truly Religious, The
Countess of EINZIE, Lady GORDON, etc.
MADAME,
THE sedulitie of the emissaries of that Apostaticke Church of Rome, who like
the Pharisees of old, did compass Sea and Land, to make a proselyte to
themselves, should teach us, who are Teachers of the Truth, to be ashamed to
be less ^iligent in a better Cause, and for a better Master. These are
busily dispersing their Manuels, and sowing their Pople and Tares (like that
wicked Adversary) secretly in the LORD'S Field, to draw men from the Truth:
and why then should no we be busy by Voice, and Writ also, in sowing the
good Seed of the Word, to keep Men with the Truth This has moved me to pen
thi^ COMPEND OF CONTROVERSIES, which the simplest may understand clearly, the
busiest-employe^ may peruse frequentlie, and the weakest memory may retain
easily: for it is not unknown to any, how our greater Books of
Controversies, penned by their grave and godly Authors, are neglected for the
most part, and thought a tedious Task, once to read over: but as for this,
each on^ (who has but the least care to know or bide by the Truth) may count
i^ but an easy exercise, there-by to recreate themselves at any occasiona^
vacancie. And therefore I have here in put GOD'S Sword chiefelie i^ Man's hand,
to maintain GOD'S Cause, and contented with the most selected places only in
each head of Doctrine; which for the solid securing of the Conscience, in the
knowledge of the Truth, and powerful convincing of seducing Error, as the
Gleanings of Ephraim were better than the Vintage of Abiezer; so are these few
smooth Stones, taken out of the Brook of the Book of GOD, more fit for the
little David's of the LORD'S People, to sling against the forehead of bragging
and blaspemous Error, than Readiness vnwealdie Armor, or the wearisome weight of
cunning forged reasons, and hudge heap of humane testimonies.

And yet, lest that Antiquity (where-of Babel's brood causeleslie braggeth)
should seem al-together either neglected by us, or not to make for us, I have
joined some testimonies of Fathers, that are clearest for understanding,
shortest for memory, most punctual for convincing, and a few of many, to
avoyde tediousness.

Whereunto is at last added, for the full triumph of Truth, the clear
Confession of our Adversare Party; that so out of his own mouth, the wicked
servant may be condemned, and it may be seen what is the force of prevailing
Truth, even our Enemies being Judges. And so in sum, that there is no point
of Papal doctrine, but that First, it is against Scripture: Secondly,
contrary to the faith of the primitive Church: and Last, taught, and
acknowledged with us, by the Doctors in the Roman Church it self, far
other-wyse than the Jesuits now anie-where profess: such is their bragging of
Unity, or rather the confusion of the speech of those builders of Babell.

Which pains of mine heere-in, for the profit of others, I have humbly
dedicated to your religious honor, whom all the godly who knows you, as a
Pattern of zeal, and constancy, affects dearly, praysetb truly,
admireth justly, honors deservedly, prays for earnestly, and thanketh
the LORD for his rare Graces bestowed upon you vnfeignedlie, to the great good
of his Church, and your eternal glory. Wherewith also mine heartliest
apprecations shall joyntlie concur, that the bountiful hand of that good GOD,
whom in the zeal of His Truth, ye have constantly followed, may beape upon
your honor, your most noble, and heroicke Husband, and that happy offspring
of those hopeful Olive Plants, which the Lord has give^ unto you, all the
blessings what-so-ever, that either Heaven can afford, or mortality may be
capable of.

Your Honors most humbly devoted, WILLIAM GVILD.

TO THE READER.
COurteous Reader, for shortness sake, and thine ease, I have of many places
of Scripture, adduced these only, that are most plain, pithie, and pertinent;
and succinctlie so touched the same, that I have left to thy judicious
attention, the further pondering of the same; and that out of them thou may
see, that Faith (as Saint Jude says) which was once delivered to the Saints,
and which we should earnestly contend for: as also (as Tertullian says,
prescrip. adv. haeret. c. 32.) That the doctrine of the Adversaries being
compared with the Apostolic, by the diversity and contrariety of it
thereunto, does pronounce, that it has for its Author, neither an Apostle,
nor any apostolical man. Which for a short instance, their doctrine,
concerning the Word, prohibiting people the use, or knowledge of Scripture
(contrary to Col. 3.16.) and concerning the Sacrament, their depriving them of
the Cup (contrary to 1. Cor. 11.28.) and concerning public Service and
Prayers, their having the same in an unknown tongue, (contrary to 1. Cor.
14.) against all subterfuges, does most clearlie evince.

As for the Testimonies of Fathers, (keeping the nature of a Compend) I have
^yke-wyse alleged, of a number, a few of the fittest; where-as, (as Augustine
said to the Pelagians, lib. 2. de nupt. and concupisc. c. 29. If I would have
collected all, it would have been too long a work, and I would seem,
perhaps, to ^aue had less confidence in the Cano^icke Authorities: o^ to have
equally mat^hed, that which is ad pugnam, or victory, and that which is
fittest ad pompam, or ^iumph together.

And last of all, I have brought our Adver^ries own Confessions: and so, (as
is said, ^ai. 19.2.) I have set the Egyptian, a^inst the Egyptian; that by
their own grand ^hampion, Bellarmine, the true verdict ^ay pass on their
Religion, who says, That (...) is a most sure note of false doctrine, ^at
heretical Authors agree not amongst ^em-selues. (Bell. lib. 4. de Eccles. c.
^0.. add.)

In all which I have had that care of agree^ent of each Text and Testimony,
with their Original, that I dare appeal the knowledge and conscience of the
most malicious Gainesayer of the Truth thereof: and for facilitating thy
pains, I have by a diverse Letter from the rest, pointed at those words,
where-in (as Sampson's strength lay in his hair) the force of each testimony
consists: Aiming singlie (the Lord knows) that (as Jerome said to the
Pelagians) the Truth may only triumph, and Verity may have victory. And
beseeching God so to bless thy perusal hereof, to His glory, and thy good,
that His grace may be found effectual to thy conversion, if thou be
contrary minded; or to thy further establishing and confirmation, if thou be
already a Child of the Truth.

Thine in CHRIST JESUS, W. Guild.

A COMPEND OF THE Controversies of Religion.
CHAP. I. OF SCRIPTVRE.
(...). I. That the Apocrypha are not Canonicke Scripture, or of Divine
authority to confirm points of faith.
1. Authority of Scripture.
LVKE 24.27. And beginning at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto
them in all the Scriptures the ^inges concerning himself. Not^ then, That our
Savior compre^ndeth all the Scripture of the old Te^ment, in Moses and the
Prophets, of whom Malachi was the last, as 2. Esdras, 40. is clear: and
therefore Esdras, ^o makes mention of him as last, and the rest of the
Apocrypha books that ^re written after him, are no part of ^ine Scripture.

Act. 26.22. Having then obtained help of GOD, I continue t^ this day,
witnessing both to sma^ and great, saying, none other things than those which
Moses an^ the Prophets did say, should com^ Mark then, that Paul also
compr^hendeth all divine Scripture in the wr^ of Moses and the Prophets
allanerlie,(...) alleged none other thing for confirm^tion of his Doctrine,
but the foresay^ Scripture: and therefore did not a^knowledge any other
apocryphal boo^ to be of divine authority, or fit f^ that purpose. Romans 3.2.
Unto them (to w^ the Jews) were committ^ the Oracles of GOD. Note the^ That
seeing the Apocrypha books w^ not committed to them, nor ever^knowledged by
them, as divine inspy^ Scripture (as the Papists themselu^ confess, Bellar.
lib. 1. de Purg. cap.(...). ad primum.) Therefore it followe^ that they are not
the Oracles of Go^ nor of divine authority. 2. Tim. 3.16. All Scriptu^ is
given by divine inspiration. Note then, That the abridgement(...) lie of
another man's work, and an hu^ane History, done by great pains, ^uch as the
Apocrypha books of the ^achabees are confessed to be, 2. Machab. (...) 23.) is
no part therefore of canonicke ^cripture.

Again, 2. Pet. 1. 21. For ^he prophecy came not in old time ^y the will of
man, but the holy ^en of God spoke, as they were mo^ed by the holy Ghost.

Remarke then again, That Scripture was no private task undertaken by the
^ill of man, as the Apocryphal book of ^he Machabees is formerlie
acknowled^ed. And again, seeing that the holy spirit spoke by them, therefore
it follows, that, that Book cannot be of the ^pirits inspiration, wherein
the Author ^howeth, if he has done slenderly and ^eanlie, it is all he could
attain unto, as (...). Machab. 15.38. he freely confes^th: for this were
blasphemouslie dero^atorie to the holy Ghost, and to the au^oritie of holy
Scripture.

And no less derogatorie is that place ^f Ecclesiasticus, 31.21. against both
the ^odestie of the holy Ghost, and gravitie ^f Scripture, which says to him
that ^ath eaten immoderatelie, If thou have ^ene forced to eat, go forth,
and spew it out, and thou shall have rest there-after

I omit sundry contradictions Truth, where-of the Spirit of Tr^ could not be
Author, as Tobit 5.(...) where the good Angel is made to(...) which is only
proper to Satan, and(...) evil angels: and against Heb. 1.14. t^ he says,
that he was of a carnal p^ creation, whose nature are only to(...) created
spirits.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THE Church indeed reads the Books (says saint Jerome)(...) receives
them not amongst Canon^ Scripture, Ierom. praef. in Proverb. Wh^ remarke, that
Jerome sets not do^ there his own private opinion, but general tenet of
the whole Church in time: And therefore his testimony, ac^ding to Cardinal
Peron's words in^ Epistle, (Observatione quinta) is a s^cient evidence of the
faith of the Ca^licke Church at that time: where(...) says, that when the
Fathers speake^ as private Doctors, but as witnesse^ those things which the
Church did(...) believed in their time, affirming that s^ a thing was the Faith
or practice of(...) whole Church: then their testimon^ sufficient to declare
the vnanim com^ of the whole Church. In like man^ also with Jerome does saint
Greg^ acknowledge them not Canonical, Greg. (...) 9. Moral in Job, cap. 17.
Nor does (...) ancient Council of Laodicea, Can. (...) account them any
ways as such.

3. Confession of Party.
And, because they are doubtsome, they (...) are not numbered in the Canon of
^pture, says Cardinal Hugo, de S. ^ro, in his Prologue on Joshua. The ^e
likewise says Cajetan, and Hugo S. Victore.

(...). That the Scripture contains all things which are necessary to
salvation to know, without Popish Traditions.
1. Authority of Scripture.
^SALME 19.7. The Law of (...) the LORD is perfect, conver^ the Soul: The
Testimony of (...) LORD is sure, making wise the ^ple. ^ote then, That Gods
word is called ^ect and Sure, (as saint Peter also cal^ it, 2. Pet. 1.19.) in
opposition to ^ecessitie and nature of Traditions, ^ch are both needless and
unsure, ^h. 15.9. 2 Thessalonians. 2.2.

Proverb. 30.6. Add thou not to his word, lest he reprou^ thee, and thou be
found a liar. Note then, That they are pronounce^ liars, who accuse Gods word
of impe^fection, and therefore would add the^ unto unwritten Traditions in
matters(...) salvation.

2. Tim. 3.15.16.17. An^ that from a child thou have known^ the Scriptures,
which are able t^ make thee wise unto salvation through faith, which is in
Chri^ Jesus. Note then, If the Scriptures alone b^ able to make us wise unto
salvation (which is all we need) wherefore ser^ Traditions?

Again, verse. 16.17. A^ Scripture is given by inspiration(...) God, and is
profitable for doctrine reproof, correction, and instructi^ in righteousness,
that the man(...) God may be perfect, through lie furnished unto all goo^
works.

Note then, This is all that we can seek^ what needs therefore Traditions?

Iam. 1.21. Receive with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save
your Souls. Note then, That it alone, is able to do, all that, which we can
require. So Act. 20.32. it is said to be able to build us up by grace here,
and to bring us to the inhe^itance of glory hereafter, and further we cannot
wish for.

Gal. 3.15. Brethren, I speak to you after the manner of men: tho ^t be but a
man's testament, yet if it ^ee confirmed, no man disannulleth, nor adds
thereto. Note then, That it is far greater impiety to add to Christ's own
Testament, confirmed by His Blood.

The examples also of the Apostles ^roue this: for as for doctrine, of Saint
Paul, it is written thus, Act. 28.23. That when they had appointed him a day,
^here came many to his lodging, to whom he ^xpounded, and testified the
Kingdom of GOD; persuading them concerning JESUS, ^oth out of the Law of
Moses, and out of the Prophets. And Act. 26.22. Saying, ^one other things than
those things which ^he Prophets and Moses did say should come. As he then
teached nothing but that which was contained in Scripture before him: so
neither should Pastors now teach, but what is contained in Scripture before
them: Therefore, Gal. 1.8. H^e is accursed (although an Angel) that teaches
beside that. And in disputing, it is said, Act. 17.2. And Paul as his manner
was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath d^yes reasoned with them out o^ the
Scriptures. No word of Tradition. See Apollo's like practice, Act. 18.28. just
conform heereto.

In like manner, for believing, Act. 24.14. This I confess (says Paul) that
after the way which they call Heresy, so worship I the GOD of my Fathers,
believing all things which are written in the Law and Prophets. No word then
of unwritten Traditions, which he made a ground of his Faith.

So Act. 17.11. The Bereans searched the Scriptures daily, whether these
things were so, (to wit, as Paul taught) therefore many believed.

Note then, That it was not for any warrant of traditions that they believed.
but upon warrant of Scripture only, that they grounded their faith.

2. Witnessing of Antiqui^ie.
THe holy and divine inspired Scriptures, are all sufficient (says
Athanasius) for the full instruction of truth, Athan. lib. contra Gentes.
Whence also says Tertullian, Take from Heretics wherein they agree with
Heathens, that by Scripture only they may debate their questions, and they
cannot stand. Tertull. lib. de resurr. carn. cap. 3.

3. Confession of Party.
ALL Doctrines of Faith and Manners (says Bellarmine) which is simply
necessary for all men, are plainly set down in Scripture. Bell. lib. 4. de
verbo, cap. 11.. vltimo.

. 3. That the Scripture is plain in all things necessary for salvation to
know, although in all places generally it be not alyke perspicuous.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Psalm 19.8. The Commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
Psalm. 119.105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
Verse. 130. The entrance of thy word gives light, and it gives understanding
even unto the simple. Note then, If that the very entrance gives light, and
understanding to the simple; then what does a daily progress? And if the
simple get understanding thereby, how can it be so obscure, that the learned
only should read the same allanerlie?

2. Tim. 3.15. From a child thou have known the Scripture. Note. If children
then may attain to the knowledge of Scripture, then it is not so obscure, that
those of perfect age cannot know the same.

2. Pet. 1.19. We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereto ye do well
in taking heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, etc. Note then,
That as a shyning light can not be called dark it self, which illuminateth
dark places; so neither can Gods word, which illuminateth our dark
understandings.

2. Cor. 4.3. But if our Gospel be hid, it is to them that are lost, in whom
the god of this world has blinded their minds that believe not, etc. Note
then, That it is not the fault of Scripture, that it is hid to any, more than
it is the fault of the clear Sun, that a blind man sees it not.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
IN those places which are clearlie set down in Scripture (says Augustine)
all those things are to be found which contain both Faith and Manners, Aug.
lib. 2. de doct. Christiana. cap. 9. Which Chrysostom likewise avoweth, saying
no less, Homil. 3. in 2. ad These.

3. Confession of Party.
BEllarmine affirms, that all doctrines of Faith and Manners, which are
simply necessary for all men, are plainly set down in Scripture. Bell. lib.
4. de verbo. c. 11.. vltimo.

. 4. That the Scripture is to be read by the People: and therefore that the
same for that end should be translated in their vulgar language.
1. Authority of Scripture.
DEuter. 6.6.7. And these things which I command thee this day, shall be in
thine heart: and thou shall teach them diligently to thy Children: and shall
talk of them when thou sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the
way, and when thou lie down, and when thou rysest up, etc. Deuter. 29.29.
The secret things belong to the Lord our God: but these things which are
revealed, belong to us, and to our children for over, that we may do all the
words of this Law. Note then, That the People are bound to know Gods word,
because they are bound to obey Gods word. See in like manner, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
etc. the book of the Law commanded to be read by the King, for the same end
that he may learn to obey the same. As also ( Joshua 1.8.) by the Judge of
the people. And last of all, by all sort of people, as is clear, Deuteronomy.
6.6.7.9. And by this subsequent testimony: to wit,

John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life, and they are these that testify of me. Those of Baerea therefore, Act.
17.11. They searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so,
teaching all people to follow their example.

Ephesians. 6.17. Take the sword of the spirit, which is the word of GOD. Note
then, That all Christians whatsoever, because all are spiritual warriors, are
bidden arm themselves with the Scripture: so that who forbids them the
knowledge thereof, they make them naked before their spiritual enemy.

Col. 3.16. Let the word dwell in you plenteouslie, that thereby ye may teach
one another: and be ye filled with Knowledge. Col. 1.9. Note then, That this is
far from popish ignorance, and their forbidding the people to read the Word
of GOD: for ^o, how can it dwell in them plenteouslie, and they be filled with
the knowledge thereof?

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
Chrysostom speaking thus of the forbidding thereof: It is (says he) the
working of the inspiration of the Devil, not suffering to look in the
treasure, lest we should attain to the riches thereof: What a Pest then is
it to think that the reading of the Scriptures belongs only to Clergy men?
Chrysostom. hom. 2. in Matthew. Whence he says then, I beseech you all that are
seculare men, to get Bibles to your selves, the medicine of the soul: and if
ye will not get more, get the New Testament. Chrysostom. hom. 9. ad Coloss.
Hereunto witnesses also Theodoret. lib. 5. de curand. graec. affect.

3. Confession of Party.
IT is manifest (says Bishop Espenseus) by the Apostles doctrine, Col. 3.16.
and by the practice of the Church, that of old the public use of scripture
was permitted to people. And so says Alphonsus de castro. verbo. scriptura.

. 5. That the Scripture is the perfect rule of Faith and Manners, and the
infallible supreme Judge in controversies of Religion.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ISai. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
this word, it is, because there is no light in them. Note then, That in Gods
word is the last, supreme, and only infallible decision to be had
concerning either Faith or Manners: and therefore the sentence of all men
whatsoever is to be tried ^hereby, and reduced thereunto.

The Bareans therefore, Act. 17.11. searched the Scriptures, whether those
things were so, that Paul taught unto them, although an Apostle, and famous for
many miracles also.

Deuteronomy. 12.8.32. And ye shall not do every man what is right in his own
eyes: but whatsoever I command you, observe to do it. Thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it. Ezekiel. 20.18.19. But I said unto their Children
in the Wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your Fathers, neither
observe their judgementes, nor defile your selves with their Idols. I am the
Lord your God, walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments to do them. Note
then, That men's traditions, nor ancient custom, is not the rule of faith, nor
manners, but only the Lords Word.

Mark. 7.7.8. In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines, the
traditions of men. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the
traditions of men. Matthew. 22.29. Therefore do ye err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God. Note then, that Scripture is the entire rule
of truth, the ignorance whereof is the cause of error amongst the seduced
people.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THis cause (says Augustine) requires a judge: and who shall be judge? let the
Apostle be judge, because by the Apostle Christ speaks. Aug. de gratia, and
lib. arb. cap. 18. Let us stand therefore to the judgment of the holy
inspyred scriptures (says Basil) which God has set over us. Epist. 80. ad
Eustathium.

3. Confession of Party.
Basil (says Bellarmine) wills, that both parties stand to the judgment
of Scripture, which none can reject.

. 6. That the Scripture is not a dumb Judge, but that GOD by it speaks to
His Church.
1. Authority of Scripture.
John 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have eternal
life; and these are they that testify of me. Note then, That in the same
sense, that Christ calls the Scripture a witness, it may be called a judge,
and in the same manner to pronounce judgment in controversies, as it bears
witness. Seeing then a witness must have speech, (else he can be no
witness) in that the Scripture then is said to bear witness, it follows
also, that the Scripture after a sort speaks.

John 7.42. Has not the Scripture said, that Christ comes of the seed of
David? etc. Lo! speech expressly attributed to Scripture. Again,

Heb. 12.5. And ye have forgotten the exhortation that speaks to you, as
unto Children, etc. In like manner,

Luke 16.29. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them
hear them. Ergo, It implies that their writs do ^n a manner speak, seeing
that we are ^idden h^are them. Heb. 11.4. By faith Abell offered unto God a
more excellent sacrifice than Kain, by which he obtained witness, that he was
righteous God testifying of his gifts: and by it, he being dead, yet speaks,
If Abell then being dead, is said ye^ to speak by that record of his faith
which is set down in Scripture; eve^ so may the Prophets and Apostle^ being
dead, be said likewise yet to speak by these records of their doctrine of
faith, which is set down in Scripture, and which is the Christian foundation
whereon the Church is built. Ephesians. 2.20.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
GOD himself speaks to us by the Scripture, says Cyrillus Alex. lib. 11.
in John. c. 21. And even Christ himself this very day is crying unto us in
his Gospels, says Chrysostom. homil. in Psalm. 95.

3. Consent of Party.
THE Scripture therefore (says Bellarmine) both by words and similitudes
every where cries, that a sinner in no sort can dispose himself to receive
grace. Bell. lib. 6. de lib. arb. c. 5.. huc denique.

CHAP. II. OF THE CHVRCH.
. 1. That the estate of the true Church is not ever visible to all men, and
chiefly to the enemies thereof.
1. Authority of Scripture.
I. KIngs 19.10. And Eliah said, I have been very zealous for the LORD of
Hoasts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down
thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets, and I only am left, and they seek my
life. I ask, Where was then a visible company of true and public
worshippers at this time in Israel?

And that the like estate of true professors was at one time both in Israel
and Judah, is evident out of 2. Chron. 15. 8. and 1. King. 15.9. the whole
Kingdom of Judah being idolatrous, in Abiiam's latter reign, and at the same
time whole Israel being idolatrous under Jeroboam.

Again, 2. Chron. 28.24. it is recorded, how at once both Judah was altogether
idolatrous under King Ahaz, and the Lords public worship utterly was
abrogated, and at the same time Israel was even so under their Kings Pekah and
Hoshea.

Of this time it is said in History, 2 King. 17.16. And Israel left all the
Commandementes of the Lord their God, and made them molten Images, even two
calves, and made a grove, and worshipped all the host of Heaven, and served
Baal. Verse. 18. So there was none left, but the tribe of Judah only: and Judah
kept not the Commandementes of the Lord their God, but walked also in the
statutes of Israel, which they made. And so the Lord rejected all the seed of
Israel, and afflicted them, etc.

And of this time also it is said in prophecy by Jeremy, (Ier. 5.11.) For
the house of Israel, and the house of Judah, have dealt very treacherously
against me, says the Lord. And by Ezechiel (23.13.) it is said, that these
two sisters in their spiritual whoredoms took both one way.

Note then, When both this people, which only were then counted Gods Church,
made defection with their Kings ^n common, to the public practice of
^dolatrie only, and abrogated the public worship of the true God alluterlie,
where was then the face of a visible company of true professors, having a
pub^icke worship? Therefore, Zeph. 3.12. the Lord says of his true Church,
Then I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, that
shall trust in the Name of the Lord. Which is far from an outward pompous,
and a glorious visibilitie to all.

Mark 14.27. And Jesus said unto them, All ye shall be offended because of me
this Night; for it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the Sheep shall
be scattered. I ask then, when this was done, Where was a visible company to
all of true professors to be pointed at? Revel. 12.14. And to the Woman were
given two Wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the Wilderness
unto her place, where she is nowrished for a time, and times, and half a
time, from the face of the Serpent. This wom^ the Romanists themselves (as Lyra
and^thers) interpret to be the true Church lurking under persecution, (as
Elias d^ three years and an half in the W^dernesse, where he was miraculous^
fed.) I ask then, at this same time, she could lurk under persecution, a^
yet be gloriously and conspicuous^ visible to all? Or, Rev. 13.3. When the
time of Antichrists prevaili^g the Earth shall follow the Beast, wh^ shall such
visibilitie be? Even no when as the Rhemists, on the 2 Thessalonians. 2. grant: but a
communion in heart onl^ and a practice of worship in secret.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
SOmetimes the Church is not app^rent (says Augustine:) to w^ when wicked
persecuters above measu^rage against her. Aug. epist. 80. ad Hes^chium.
Therefore the Church lookin^ forth, as the Moon has often times h^ eclypses,
says Ambrose, lib. 4. hexam. c.(...)

3. Confession of Party.
THE confession of our Adversari^ is likewise thus, that in the time o^
Antichrist, the communion of Christian in the true Church shall be only in hear^
and their worship only in secret; for s^ says the Rhemists, on 2 Thessalonians.
2.3. So that our difference is not so much in the ^sition of invisibilitie, as
in the appli^tion unto persons and times.

(...) 2. That the visible Church of Christian professors may err from the
truth in common, both Pastors and people, (although not all and every one.)
1. Authority of Scripture.
ISai. 1.21. How is the faithful city become an Harlot? Ier. 5.11. For the
House of Israel, and the House of Judah, ^aue dealt very treacherously
against me (says the Lord.) Ier. 2.8. The Priests said not, Where is the
Lord? and they that handle the Law, knew me not: the Pastors also transgressed
against me, and the Prophets prophesied by Baall, and vvalked after things
that do not profit. Lo then, what a general Apostasy of all sorts is set
down here. Again, v. 26. As the Thief is ashamed when he is found, so is
the House of Israel ashamed: they, their Kings, their Princes, and their
Priests, and their Prophets: saying to a stock, Thou art my Father, etc.
Behold then again: no sort excepted.

Isai. 9.16. The leaders of this people cause them to err: and they that are
led of them, are destroyed. Note then, that the leaders in a Church, and people
that are led, may both make defection: and so a whole Church, which consists
of both.

Isai. 56.10. His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant: they are all
dumb Dogs, etc. Note then, how general a defection may be amongst Teachers
in the Church of God: and how the chief Pastoures have first made Apostasy,
let these examples verify.

2. King. 16.11. And Vriah the Priest built an Altar, according to all that
King Ahaz had sent from Damascus, etc. Again.

Matthew. 26.65. Then the High Priest rent his garments, saying, He has
blasphemed: what need we Witnesses any farther? etc. Mark 14.64. Ye have
heard ^is blasphemy: How think ye? who ^ll condemned him to be guilty of
^eath. Note then, how grossly also the ^erie hie-priests under the Law
erred, and the chief Pastor that sat in Moses hair erroniouslie decreeted
with his ^hole counsel: the one, in making an ^olatrous Altar, and erecting
idolatrous ^orship: and the other, pronouncing ^e truth in Christ's own mouth,
to be ^asphemie, and himself worthy to ^e. And therefore, how groslie he ^d
his Church may err, who preten^eth now to be the Christian High-^riest, see.
5.

2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Let no man de^iue you, by any means: for that ^ay shall not
come, except there come (...) falling away first, and that man (...) sin be
revealed, the son of ^rdition. Note then, that in the Christian Church (...)
great Apostasy from the Truth is ^re-tolde, before that by the preaching
^gaine of the same clearlie, Antichrist be ^vealed, and made known: So that in
the time of his prevayling, no public^ exercise shall be of the true Christi^
worship, but in secret only: and this(...) very Rhemists on this place
confess.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
ANd the poison of Arrius (saye^ Lyrinensis) did not only infect a p^ of the
Church, but almost the whole wo^ (Vnic. Lyrin. adu. hereses, c. 6.) So the the
whole world sobbed, and admired t^ it was made Arrian, as testifies S. Iero^

3. Confession of Party.
OF that time when the Arrian her^ domined over the whole world, S. ^rome wrote
that the ship of the Chu^ was almost sunk, says Gregory of Va^tia, analys.
lib. 6. c. 4.. probatio 4.

. 3. That the Church of Rome in p^cular may err, and as shall(...) proven,
has erred, by all the p^ticulars ensuing.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Romans 11.20. Because of v^beliefe, they were broken o^ and thou stand by
faith. Be n^ high minded, but fear. Note, Now then what greater hi^
mindedness can the Roman Chur^ show, than to say, she cannot err? and if
this were true, what needed her to fear? and yet I hope she cannot exeeme her
self from this Apostolic exhortation, which is so expreslie written to her,
and bids her fear.

Again, ver. 21.22. For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed
lest he spare not thee. Behold, therefore, the goodness and severitie of
God: on them which fell, severitie; but toward thee, goodness, if thou
continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut off.

Note then, that the Apostle shows, that the Church of Rome, as well as other
Churches of the Gentiles, may fall away from the truth, and be cut off from
being a true Church: otherwise, if she had infallibility, this his
exhortation should have been altogether needless: neither should he have
spoken doubtinglie after this manner, saying, if thou continue: but
particularly excepted her as one, that could not, but continue.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THey have not Peter's heritage (says Ambrose) who have not Peter's faith.

. 4. That personal succession to the Chaires of true Teachers, priviledgeth
not their successors from error.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Exodus 32.21. And Moses said to Aaron, What did this people unto thee, that
thou have brought so great a sin upon them? Lo then, How the very first
sitter in the high priest's chair, falls filthilie in grossest idolatry.

2. Kings 16.11.16. And Vriah the Priest built an Altar, according to all that
King Ahaz had sent from Damascus, etc. Thus did Vriah the Priest, according to
all that King Ahaz commanded. Note then, That notwithstanding of his succeeding
personally to the office of the high priesthood, he performs all the
idolatrous King's commandments, and so foullie erreth.

Mat. 26.65. Then the high Priest rent his garments, saying, He has
blaspemed. Note then, That the high Priests succession, nor place, freeth him
not from erring, in calling CHRIST'S truth, blasphemy.

Mat. 23.2. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses chair. But yet.

John 7.48. Have any of the Rulers and Pharisees, believed in him? Yea,
more-over. Mat. 16.6. Then Jesus said unto them, Take heed, and beware, of the
leaven of the Pharisees, and of the Sadduces. Verse 12. Then they understood
that he bade them not beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, but of the
doctrine of the Pharisees and Sadduces. Note then, That notwithstanding of
their sitting in Moses chair, they both rejected Christ, and his truth, and
taught contrary falsehood: neither believing in the Son of God themselves,
nor yet truly teaching the people of God, concerning their MESSIAH.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
NIcephorus does testify, that Nestorius and Macedonius, arch-hereticks,
succeeded to S. Andrew the Apostle in the Church of Constantinople, called
before Byzantium. Niceph. lib. 8. chronol. cap. 6.

3. Confession of Party.
THat almost all Arch-hereticks were either Bishops or Priests, says
Belarmine, Lib. 1. de Pont. Cap. 8.. 4.

. 5. That the Jewish Church pretended n^ less infallibility, than the Roman
does: and had far greater, and more particular promises, and ye^ erred.
1. Authority of Scripture.
AS for the pretense, we see it se^ down, Ierem. 18.18. in these words,
Come, let us devise devices against Jeremy: for the Law shall not perish from
the Priest, nor Counsel from the Wise, nor the lord from the Prophet. And
there^re from the like words in Malachie 2.(...). which the Papists would have
thus, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek the Law
^t his mouth, they gather the High ^riests infallibility under the Law ex
^acto, and conclude the Popes infallibi^tie under the Gospel ex aequo:
allead^ing to the same purpose that of Deuter^omie 7.10. In like manner.

As for Promises, it is said, Psalm. ^32.14. The Lord has chosen Sion for an
habitation, and has said, This is my rest for ever. And again, Isai. 33.20.
Look upon Sion, the city of our solemnities; ^hine eyes shall behold
Jerusalem, (...) quiet habitation: a Tabernacle that shall not be taken down:
not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed: neither shall any of the
cords ^hereof be broken.

Note then, And ask, where ever any such promises are made unto Rome: but in
the contrary, a fearful destruction for her gross idolatry, is clearlie
foretold; Revelation 18.

And last of all, for praises, it is said of Jerusalem, and Gods Church there
Psalm. 87.3. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God. But of Rome the
most glorious thing that is spoken of her, is, That she should be a gloriou^
Harlot, Revel. 17.4.18. And Thessalonie^ equalleth her in that which the
Apostle spoke of the faithful, only of his tym^ in her; and where-of the
Papists so much glory: which by collation, and inspection of the places, is
most clear and evident, Romans 1.8. 2. These. 1.4.

. 6. That the Word of GOD purelie preached (under which the due administration
of the Sacraments is comprehended) is the only clear and truest note of a
true Church.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 4.8. And what Nation is there so great, that has statutes and
judgments so righteous as all this Law, which I set before you this day?
Psalm. 147.19. He shows His Word to Jacob, His statutes, and His judgments to
Israel: He has not dealt so with any Nation, etc. We see then, that Gods
people was ever differenced from all other nations, and known by his word and
ordinances, to be his peculiar Church.

John 10.27. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow Me.
Note then, Where Christ's voice sounds, and is believed, and obeyed, there is
his Church.

John 8.31. If ye continue in My Word, then are ye My Disciples indeed. Act.
2.42. And they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayers. Note then, That continuance in
Christ's truth, and apostolic doctrine, with the holy exercise of prayer,
and participation of Sacraments, is a clear note to know a true Church.

1. Tim. 3.15. Which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and ground of
truth. The meaning whereof the Apostle gives Heb. 3.6. saying, Whose house
are we, if we keep fast the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope
firm to the end.

Note therefore, That the Church is so called, and known to be such, by
keeping fast and firm the truth of Gods Word in profession, and that
confidence and hope that it breeds in our hearts, sure to the end.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THe Church consists not in Walls, but in the truth of doctrine, (says
Jerome) so that there is the Church where ^rue faith is, ( Hierom in Psalm.
133.) and ^hey are good Catholics only, who ^ollow the right faith (says
Augustine, lib. de vera religione, cap. 5.)

3. Confession of Party.
THe confession likewise of our Adversaries is thus, The Church consists not
in men (says Lyra) in respect of their power or dignity Ecclesiasticke,
or Civil; because many Princes, and Popes too, have been found to have made
defection from the faith. Therefore the Church consists in those in whom is
true knowledge, and the confession of faith, and the truth of God. Lyra in
Matthew. cap. 16.

. 7. That multitude is no note of a true Church.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. KIngs 19.10. And Elias said, I have been very zealous for the LORD of
Hoasts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, cast down thine
Altars, and slain thy Prophets, and I, even I, only am left, and they seek
my life. I ask then, If a visible multitude was a note here of the true Church
in Israel? or the two tribes of Judah being compared with these ten, which of
them was the greater multitude? or the whole twelve compared with the whole
world beside, which of these were maniest? and consequently, by the note of
multitude, who was the true Church?

Isai. 1.9. Except the Lord of Hoastes had left to us a very small remnant,
we should have been like Sodom, and like unto Gomorrah. Note then, That the
true professors are called a very small remnant: which is far from being
the greatest multitude of men.

Ier. 3.14. I will take one of a City, and two of a Family, and bring you to
Sion. Note then, That one of a City being the fewest that can be, that the
greater multitude is left uncalled to the truth effectualie.

Mat. 7.13. Enter in at the strait gate, for vvide is the gate, and broad is
the way that leads to destruction, and many there be who enter in
thereat. Note then, If few enter in at the strait gate, that leads to
salvation; and many at the wide gate, that leads to damnation: then paucitie
should be rather a note of the true Church, than any wise multitude; seeing
Rev. 13. the whole World is said to follow the beast.

Luke 12.32. Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give
to you a Kingdom. Note then, If Christ's Flock be little, then multitude is
no good note to know the same thereby.

Examples of the paucitie of Gods true Church in the house of Abraham, compared
with the rest of the world, and of the true professors at Christ's Passion,
verefie this point.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THe multitude of Associates shall no wise show thee to be a Catholic, but
an Hareticke (says Jerome, dialog. contra Pelag. lib. 3.) Therefore where are
they that define the Church by multitudes, (says Gregory Nazienzen) and
contemns so the little Flock of Christ? Oratione de seipso contra Arrianos.

3. Confession of Party.
THat time when the Church seemed to lurk (says Gregory of Valentia) being
compared with by gone times, it may be found, that the Church was not with the
multitude, etc. Greg. de Valen. analys. lib. 6. c. 4.. probatio. 4.

. 8. That outward glory and worldly prosperity, whereby a Church is
visiblie conspicuous to all, is not a mark of the true Church.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ZEph. 3.12. I will leave in the midst of thee, an afflicted and poor people,
that shall trust in the Name of the Lord. Note then, That Gods Church often times
like the 7000. reserved in Israel, or Gods people preserved till their
evocation in the midst of Babell, or rather a poor and afflicted company,
compelled often times to lurk as the woman in the Desert, than to be ever
gloriously conspicuous, and visible to all.

Isai. 54.11. Oh, thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted;
behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colors, and thy foundation with
Saphyrs. Mat. 24.9. Then shall they deliver you into tribulation, and shall
kill you, and you shall be odious to all Nations for my Names sake. John 15.20.
Remember my word that I said to you, The servant is not greater than his
master: if they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you, etc. 2.
Tim. 3.12. And all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
persecution. Acts 14.21. Confirming the hearts of the Disciples, they exhorted
them to continue in the faith; and that we must with much tribulation enter
into the Kingdom of God. Note then, Out of all the former, that persecution
rather, which makes men lurk, is a note of the true professors of Christ,
than worldly prosperity, which makes men to be gloriously visible, and
outwardly conspicuous; and that the one estate happens far ofter than the
other to the Church of God.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
WHile Antichrist shall reign (says Jerome) the Church shall be driven to
the Desert, and given to Beasts, and suffer what-so-ever the Prophet
descrybeth. (In c. 2. Sophoniae, in finc.)

3. Confession of Party.
WE say not (says Gregory of Valentia) that the Church shall be ever
conspicuous, as if we would have her ever alike easily known: for we know,
that she is so tossed, whiles with the waves of Errors and Schisms, and
whiles of persecution, that she is hard to be known to the unskillful, that
are not prudent to consider of times and circumstances of things. Valentia,
analys. lib. 6. c. 4.. propositio 4.

. 9. That Miracles are no note of the true Church, neither personal
succession, nor Antiquity.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 13.1.2. And if there arise amongst you a Prophet, or a dreamer of
Dreams, and gives thee a sign, or a vvonder, and the sign or vvonder come
to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other gods,
(which thou have not known) and let us serve them: Thou shall not hearken to
the words of that Prophet. Note then, That miracles cannot authorize false
doctrine, nor be any sure note of a true Church, or true teachers therein.

Mat. 24.24. For there shall arise false christ's, and false prophets, and shall
show great signs and wonders: in so much (if it were possible) that they
should deceive the very Elect. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Whose coming (to wit,
Antichrists) is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders. Note then, That Antichristianisme is advanced by miracles in the
latter times: and therefore they can be no sure note of the true Church; but
rather a clear note of the false Church in the latter times.

As for Succession, it is already spoken of,. 4: That it can be no note
(except it were in true doctrine:) For so the high Priest, and erroneous
Pharisees, who persecuted Christ and His Apostles, should have been the true
Church; having their succession from Aaron, and sitting themselves in Moses
Chair.

Neither can Antiquity nor Duration be a note of the true Church; for with
the very first Preaching of the Gospel the mystery of iniquity began to
work, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. And for Duration, it shall last to the end of the
world, and have some being: for so the Apostle testifies, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
That, that man of sin, Antichrist, shall piece and piece be consumed by the
breath of the LORDS Mouth; but shall be utterly destroyed with the
brightness of His coming only.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THe Church is not made manifest to be Catholic (says Augustine) because
miracles are done in her, de unit. Eccles. cap. 16. Yea, they are more to be
found amongst them who are false Christians (says Chrysostom) being lying
wonders. hom. 19. in Matthew. operis imperf.

3. Confession of Party.
They would be rather an hinderance now-a-dayes, (says the Jesuit Stella)
than any ways an help to adduce men to the truth, in Luc. 11. p. 64. So
also says Stapleton, prompt, morale in dominic. 24. post Pentecosten. Not
only for the greater try all of the faithful, may Antichrist, and his
nearest forerunners, work true miracles: But what-so-ever other Heretics,
(says he) as inchanters also do by Gods permission. And therefore he
shows, that in the Ecclesiastical History we read, that the Novatian
Heretics wrought miracles in Christ's Name. And the Donatistes vaunted
greatly of their miracles against Augustine: to whom he answered, de unit.
Eccles. cap. 16.

CHAP. III. OF PETER, AND THE Popes Supremacy.
. 1. That Peter had no supremacy of power over the rest of the Apostles: and
consequently that his pretended successor should claim none over their
successors any where.
1. Authority of Scripture.
MARK 9.35. And he sat down, and called the twelve, and says unto them,
If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant of
all. Mat. 20.25. Ye know that the Princes of the Nations exercise dominion
over them; and they that are great, exercise authority upon them: but it shall
not be so amongst you; but whosoever will be great amongst you, let him be
your servant. Note then, That Christ decydeth not the controversy in Peter's
favors; telling that he had made him chief, or was to make him: but
forbids any supremacy of jurisdiction one over an other, unto them all
alike. In like manner.

Mat. 19.28. In the regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the
Throne of His glory, ye shall also sit (says Christ) upon twelve Thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Note then, That there is not a word here
of one throne for Peter above the rest; but twelve thrones, and equal judging,
designing equal authority: even as they are all alike called the foundation
of the Church, Ephesians. 2.20. and so not Peter alone, nor any pretended
successor.

1. Pet. 5.1. The Elders which ^re amongst you, I exhort, who am ^lso a
fellow-elder, and a vvit^esse of the sufferings of Christ, etc.

Remarke then, That these humble styles and manner of exhorting others, is
far ^om the proud claim of Papal juris^iction over all men, and these
haughty ^tles that the Bishop of Rome presump^uouslie usurps.

Acts 8.14. Now when the Apostles that were at Jerusalem ^eard that Samaria
had received ^he Word of GOD, they sent unto them Peter and John. Note then,
Peter's submission to his ^ellow-brethren, pleading no exemption ^r privilege
of supremacy, nor impu^ng to them any sauciness, as the Pope ^ould do to
other Bishops, if they pre^med to send him in like sort to preach ^n any
foreign Country.

Gal. 1.1. Paul, an Apostle, neither of men, nor by man. Note then, That he
disclaimeth the ^aving of his Apostolic power any ^ayes of Peter, as
Superior, nor any ^ther power, as the following words ^stifie.

Gal. 2.6.11. They that seemed to be somewhat in conferenc^ added nothing to
me: bu^ when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the face^
Remarke then, How far this fact o^ Paul's crosses the supremacy: and if(...)
Bishop would be well entreated, tha^ now so publicly would with-stand the
Pope to his face in like manner.

Verse 9. And when Iame^ Cephas, and John, who seeme^ to be pillars,
perceived the gra^ which was given to me, they ga^ to me and Barnabas the
rig^ hand of fellowship. Note then, That Peter is here ranke^ after James, and
all three are equall^ called pillars, and receives Paul an^ Barnabas as
companions always; Pa^ witnessing elsewhere, that he was r^ inferior to none
of the Apostles:(...) which makes plainly against Peter's s^premacie above
all the rest as their he^ in authority.

Remarke then, by all the former pl^ces: First, That Christ never gave an^
supremacy of jurisdiction to Peter,^boue the rest of the Apostles; but a-lyk^
forbad it to all. Secondly, That Peter never claymed any such, as both his
Scripturall Titles, and his actions make clear. And thirdly, That the rest of
the Apostles never acknowledged any such: which as well their speeches, as
their deeds, make manifest. And so consequently, That his pretended
Successors wrongfullie usurp the same.

And if any might challenge the largest charge, or jurisdiction to be called
Universal Bishop, it was Paul; unto whom was committed the Gentiles; and who
says, 2. Cor. 11.28. that he had coming upon him daily the care of all the
Churches.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
TO this our doctrine against Peter's supremacy over the rest of the Apostles,
Antiquity thus witnesses: The rest of the Apostles (says Cyprian) were the
selfsame that Peter was, endewed with a-lyke fellowship, both of honor and
power. lib. de unit. Eccles.

3. Confession of Party.
CHRIST would not have the rest of the Apostles subject to Peter, (says
Caietan) but all a-lyke, as Brethren. comment. p. 278. cited in judice errarum
Cajetani a Catharin^.

. 2. That the Pope is not the Head or husband, and foundation of the Church, as
the Papists hold, (Bellarm. lib. 2. de pontif. cap. 31.) and therefore that
all men are not bound to be subject to him.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Ephesians. 5.23. For the Husband is the Head of the Wife, even as Christ is the
Head of the Church, and is the Savior of the Body. Note then, That as an
Husband will be only Head, and have no substitute in his place, with his
wife, under him: no more will Christ (who is a jealous God) have any other
Head, or Husband over His Church, under Himself.

Note also, That he that is the head of his Church, is the savior of the
body: which seeing the Pope dare not take upon him, neither should he the
style of head, that does import the same.

Ephesians. 4.4. There is but one body: Therefore but one head. Where note, That the
Church is not a perfect body, having an head of its own, beside Christ; but
Christ and His Church makes up a perfect body; He being the only Head,
and the Church His Members. 2. Cor. 11.2. For I have espoused you to one
Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin to Christ. Note, That he
says to one, and not to two; for so the Church should not be thought a
chaste spouse to Christ only.

John 3. 29. He that has the Bryde, is the Brydegrome: but the friend of the
Brydegrome, who stands and h^areth him, rejoices with ^oy for the voice of
the Brydegrome. Note, That John makes one only Brydegrome, as there is one
only Bryde: and, that none can be called Brydegrome, but that one, who owes
the B^yde: he himself (although the grea^est amongst the sons of women) and
^ll others, being but friends only of ^he Brydegromes, but not having right
^o the Bryde her-selfe.

1. Cor. 3.11. For other Foundation can no man lay, beside that which is laid,
which is CHRIST JESUS. Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the foundations of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief corner stone. Note then,
That any one, can never be called the foundation of the Church, but Christ
alone: and as for others, the whole Prophets and Apostles are called so in
common, in respect of their doctrine, and not of their persons: and they only
themselves are so, but neither one of them above the rest, nor yet any
successor.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
TO this our doctrine, that the Pope is not the head, husband, and foundation
of the Church, testifies Antiquity: It is Satanicall pride (says Gregory)
by an arrogant title of Head, to subject so all Christ's members to one man,
which do coheyre to one only head, Christ Jesus allanerlie. lib. 4. ep. 36.
where he shows also the style of Universal Bishop, to be alyke
Satanicallie proud, and altogether Antichristian^ which he, nor none of his
predecessors, would ever accept, nor use. Add hereunto likewise the decree
of that famou^ Council of Chalcedon, against universal supremacy, Council.
Chalc. Act. 16. Next, for the title of Husband: if thou be the friend of the
Brydegroome (says Bernard. Epist. 237.) call not his beloved spouse, thy
chief one, but his; challenging nothing as proper to thee over her: except it
be that if necessity so require, thou ought to give thy life for her: and
if Christ have sent thee, think that thou art not come to be served, but to
serve.

3. Confession of Party.
ANd last, for the style of Foundation: When in holy Scripture (says Pope
Gregory) in the singular number a foundation is spoken of, there is none other
designed to be such, but Christ Himself allanerlie, in 38. Job. cap. 9.

CHAP. IIII. OF THE CHVRCHES Right Worship.
. I. That Prayers and all public wo^ship, should be in a language known to
the people.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. COrint. 14.7. And even things without life, giving sound, whether pipe or
Harp, except they give a distinction in the soundes, how shall it be known
what is piped or harped? Verse 9. So likewise you, except ye utter by the
tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken?
for ye shall speak into the Air. Verse 11. Therefore, if I know not the
meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him that speaks a Barbarian; and he
that speaks, shall be a Barbarian to me. Verse 15. What is it then? I will
pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also: I will sing
with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also. Verse 16. Else
when thou shall bless with the spirit, how shall he that occupies the
rowme of the unlearned, say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks, seeing he
understands not what thou say? Verse 18. I thank GOD, I speak more
tongues than ye all, yet in the Church I had rather speak five words with
understanding, that by my voice I might teach others also, than ten thousand
words in an unknown tongue. Note then, That this doctrine and choice of P^ul
's, is fure from the popish practice of their Matins, and Masse-mumbling, which
they use in Latin.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
IF ye meet together (says Ambrose) for the edifying of the Church, then
those things should be s^ide which the hearers may understand: for what
profits it that one should speak with a tongue which himself only
understands? and he that hears profits not there-by. Amb. in 1. Cor. 14.
The same also does Chrysostom affirm, Hom. 18. in 2. ad Corinth: and
Augustine, on Psalm. 18.

3. Confession of Party.
OVt of this doctrine of Paul's (says Cardinal Cajetan) it is collected,
That it is better for the edifying of the Church, that public prayers, which
are said in the peoples hearing, be said in a vulgar tongue, known to the
people and clergy, rather than in Latin. Cajet. in 1. Cor. 14.

. 2. That Christ is our only Mediator in Heaven: and that to Him, and by Him
only, we should go to GOD.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. TIm. 2.3. For there is one GOD, one also Mediator between God and men; the
Man CHRIST JESUS. Note then, As he makes not two sorts of gods, but one God;
so he admits not two sorts of mediators in Heaven, but one Mediator only.

Ephesians. 2.18. For through Him, we both, have an access by one Spirit unto the
Father. Heb. 7.25. Wherefore He is able also to save them to the uttermost,
that come unto God, by Himself: seeing He ever lives, to make intercession
for them. Note then, That by Himself, and not by others, He will have us
come to GOD.

1. John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the righteous; and He is the propitiation for our sins. Note then,
That to be our Advocates, the Saints must also be our propitiation: which
seeing none is but Christ on^ie, therefore He only is also our advocate
allanerlie.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
AS for all Christian men (says Augustine) they commend each another in
their prayers to Go^* but he for whom no man prays, but he himself for all
men; this is the only and true Mediator, Christ Jesus. Aug. lib. 2. contra
epist. parmen. c. 8. Yea, what is so proper to Christ (says Ambrose) as to
be the Advocate of his people, at the hands of God his Father?

3. That the Saints are not to be invocated, but GOD onli^.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Romans 10.14. How then shall they invocate Him, in whom they have not believed?
Note then, That seeing we must believe only in God, (therefore says Christ
John 14.1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me:) therefore also we must
only invocate or in-call upon God. For cursed are they who trusts in the
creature. Ier. 17.5.

Romans 8.15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear;
but ye have received the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba Father.
Note then, That being Gods adopted sons, we are exhorted not to fear to go
to Him, as to a loving Father: and that the spirit of grace in our hearts,
teaches us to cry, or in-call upon none other, but upon God, who is our Father.

Luke 11.2. And He said to them, When ye pray, say, Our Father, which art
in Heaven, etc. Remarke then, That Christ directs us, only to pray to God.

Psalm. 50.15. Call upon Me in the day of troubles I will d^liver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. Lo, Gods own precept to in-call upon Him, w th His
gracious promise of granting our Prayer, to encowrage us: and that to Him o^^ie
belongs the religious worship, both of Prayer and Praise.

2 Wi^n^ssing of Antiquity.
IT is clear then, (says Athanasius) that the Patriarch Jacob coupled none
other in his praye^s with God, than this Word, which he therefore calls the
Ang^ll, because he only reveals his Fathers will. Ath^n. contra Arrianos,
oratione 4. So likewise says Augustine, the names of the Saints are in
their own order rehearsed amongst us, but not invocated by us. Aug. lib. 22.
de civit. Dei, cap. 10.

. 4. That the Saints know not our hearts, nor our particular necessities; and
therefore are not to be prayed unto.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. KIngs, 8.39. Then hear thou in heaven, thy dwelling place, and forgive,
and give to every man according to his ways, whose heart thou know: (for
thou, even thou only, know the hearts of all the children of men.) Note
then, That he who hears in heaven, must know the hearts, and the sincerity
thereof: which seeing the Saints do not, but God, even God only;
therefore they hear not, nor can not receive our prayers.

Romans 8.27. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of
the spirit, etc. Note then, That he must know the heart, and the sincerity of
prayer flowing there-fra. on whom we must call; (seeing many times neither is
our distress visible, nor our prayers vocal) but God only knows the
heart, 2. Chron. 6.30. For thou o^elie know the hearts of the children of
men, says the Scripture: therefore God only is to be in-called upon.

2. King. 22.19. Because thine heart was tender, and thou humbledst thy self
before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this Place, etc.
therefore I have also heard thee (says the Lord.) Lo then, In Prayer that
the LORD looks to the disposition of the heart: which disposition seeing He
only sees, and hears us accordingly; To Him therefore only must be put
up our prayers.

Isai. 63.16. Doubtless, Lord, thou art our Father, tho Abraham be ignorant
of us, and Isaac acknowledge us not, etc. Note then: If Abraham, the Father of
all the Faithful, be ignorant of the necessities of his children on earth;
how much more are other Saints, of the effayres of their fellow-brethren here?

Job, 14.21. His sons come to honor, and he knows it not: (speaking of
the dead) and they are brought low, but he perceives it not. Ecclesiastes,
9.5. The living know, that they shall die; but the dead know not any thing: (to
wit, of the worl^e, or worldly effaires, as the popish Doctors, L^ and Ferus,
expound.) Whereupon it follows, that they are not to be invocated.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THERE are the souls of the dead (says Augustine) where they see not what
things are done or befalls in this life to men. And again, the Prophet
says, Thou art our Father, for Abraham has not known us, and Israel has
been ignorant of us. If so great Patriarchs then (says he) knew not what
befell this people, begotten of themselves, etc. How are the dead mixed in now
to know the effairs and actions of the living, to help them there-in? Aug. de
cura pro mortuis.

3 Confession of Party.
NOthing of th s was delivered or taught (s^y h E^kius) in the Scriptures of
the Old Testament: and in the New Testament also, the Apostl^s nor Evang^lists
n^^ther by word nor writ, tradition ^or Scripture, l^fe any such thing behind
them, the the Sainct^s should b^e prayed unto. Eckius in enc^irt^^o. de v^^er
(...) s^n^s. So that for An (...), from the beginning it was not so, ( Matthew.
19.8) for Au^^oritie. it is not required by God at our hands* ( Is i. 1.12)
and for S^^uritie, it is not of faith, as is presery^ed, James 1.6.

. 5. That no reli^ious servic^, (which the Papists c^ll Duli^,) should ^e gi^^^
to (...), ^^^^h^r Saint or A^g^ll, but to God only.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. SAMUEL, 7.3. Prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve Him only. Note
then, That all religious service is proper to God only, as His prerogative
Royal, and due to no ^reature.

Romans 7.6. But now we are d livered from the Law, that being dead wherein we
were held, that we should serve Him in newness of spirit. Note here, That
our whole worship of God, and du^tie to Him, is called Service, or a Religious
Dulia, due only to the holy Trinity.

Coloss. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels; intruding in those things which he has
not seen, vaynlie puffed up with his fleshly mind. Note then, That any
worshipping of Angels, is expresselie forbidden, as an idolatrous practice,
able to depryue us of our reward of eternal life; and where-of there is
neither example to be seen in the godly, nor warrant in God's word: but
which is a doctrine proceeding from a vain, and puffed up fleshly mind; that
thinks every thing good in God's worship, that it self devyseth, having a
show of wisdom and humility.

Revel. 22.8. And I John saw these things, and heard them: and when I had
heard and seen, I fell down, to worship before the feet of the Angel, which
showed me these things. Verse. 9. Then says he unto me, Do it not, for I
am thy fellow servants, and of thy Brethren the Prophets, and of them which
keep the sayings of this Book: Worship God. Note then, That the Angel
refuses all religious service, and worship, because such is not due to be
given by one servant to another: but by all the fellow-servantes, to their
common Master: to whom therefore the Angel directs it, saying, Worship GOD.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
WE honor the Saints with Love, but not with Service, says Aug. de vera
relig. c. 55. therefore he truly keeps the truth, who worshippeth not the
creature, but the Creator (says Cyrillus) and serves Him only. Cyrill.
Alex. lib. 1. 2 Thessalonians. c. 1. and lib. 2. c. 1.

3. Confession of Party.
Many Christians (says L. Vives) worship no otherwise the he and she
Saints, than they do Go^ himself: neither see I (says he) in many things
what difference there is between their opinion of the Saints, and that which
the very Heathen had of their gods. Vives i^ August. de civit. Dei, li^. 8. c.
vlt.

. 6. That no religious wors^ip is d^^ to the Virgin Marie, which the Papists
call Hyperdul^a.
1. Authority of Sc^ipture.
IErem. 44.17. But we will do certaynlie what-so-ever goes forth of our
own mouth, to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, and to po^re out drink
offeringes to her, as we have done, we and our Fathers, etc. For then we had
plenty of Victuals, and were well, and saw no evil. Remarke then: If this
o^de idolatrous fashion be not the very alyke as the practice of Popery, and
their pr^tence now: who cont^^rie to God's word, will worship the V^rg^ne
M^^ie, as Queen of H^av^n, and make offeringes to her, because heir
forefathers and so, and that then it was a good world with them: and
therefore are guilty of alyke Idolatry.

Matthew. 2.11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the Child, with
Marie his Mother, and fell down, and worshipped him. Note then, That no word
is that those wise men worshipped her likewise, being moved by the Spirit of
God, to do what they did; and by the same Spirit, to omit, what they omitted.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
IF God will have the Angels not to be worshipped, how much less her that was
borne of Anna? etc. And again, Al-bee-it the tree be pleasant to the fight
(say^h the same Epiphanius) yet it is not for meat: and al-be-it Marie be most
fair, and pleasant, and holy, and honored, yet not to be worshipped:
therefore let her be had in honor, but let the Lord only be worshipped,
Epiph. lib. 3. here is 79.

3. Confession of Party.
IT is come to that [sayeth Cassander] that Christ now reig^ing in heaven, is
made subject to the Virgin Marie, as it is sung in some Churches, O happy
Mother who expiateth our sins; by the authority of a Mother, command thy
Son. Cassand. consult. art. 21.

CHAP. V. OF IMAGES.
. 1. That it is not lawful to represent GOD by any Image, as the Papists do
by the image of an old man.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Exodus 20.4. Thou shall not make to thy self any grave^ image, nor the
likeness of any thing, that is in Heaven above, nor in the earth beneath, nor
in the waters under the earth. Note then, That when they make God like an old
man, they liken Him to that which is in the earth beneath, against God's
Commandment.

Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. Take therefore good heed to your selves, for ye saw no manner
of similitude on the day that the LORD spoke to you in Horeb, out of the midst
of the fire: Lest ye should corrupt your selves, and make you a graven Image,
the similitude of any figure, the likeness of a male or female. Lo then, how
careful the Lord was for preventing this error.

Isai. 40.18. To whom will ye liken GOD? or what likeness will ye compare
unto Him? The Papist would answer, We will liken Him to an Old Man.

Romans 1.23. And they changed the glory of the incorruptible GOD, into the
similitude of a corruptible man. R^m^ k^ then, how the Old Idolaters, and the
new Romanists, jumpe here in one.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
IT is not to be passed by (says Origin) that the Apostles speech not only
rebukes them who worship Idols: but that they a^e to be accounted amongst
the Hereti^kes, ^alled Anthropomorphi^a: who ^etting up in the Church the
bodily image of a man, calls that the image of God. Orig^n, in Romans 1.23.
yea, it is extreme folly and wi^kedn^sse (says Damas^en) to represent that
which is invisible and incorporeall, and can neither be circumscryb d nor
figured. D^mas. lib 4. de orthod. fide, c. 17.

3. Consession of Party.
But unto the true Go^, who is incorpor^all, no corpor^all image can be
formed, as says D^m^scen, etc. Thus speaks Aquinas, part. 3. quaest. 25.
art. 3.

. 2. That no Adoration is to be given to Images, (as the Papists teach: S^e
Bellarmine, lib. 2. de reliq. c. 21.) nor no sign thereof.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Exodus 20.5. Thou shall not bow down to them, neither worship them. Note then,
That bowing down is forbidden, as well as wo^shipping.

Levit. 26.1. Neither shall ye set up any image of stone in your land, to bow
down to it, for I am the Lord, your God. Note therefore, That as all religious
worship is due only to God, so all religious bowing of the knee* as a token of
th t wo^sh^p, is only due to God; and therefore forbidden to be given to
images.

Romans 11.4. I have reserved unto My self seven thousand men, who have not
bowed the knee to the image of Baal. Note then, That the Lords true worshippers
will not bow their knee to an image: for to do so, except to God only, is
palpable idolatry.

Romans 14.11. For it is written, Every knee shall bow to Me, and every tongue
shall confess to God. If prayer then belong not to deaf images, nor
confession of sins; so neither does religious kneeling, but only to God
alone; and so not to blind idols.

Ephesians. 3.14. For this cause (says Saint Paul) I bow my knees to the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ. Note then, That he exhibiteth religious kneeling, as
due only to God.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
BY Scripture testimonies it is to be shown [sayth Gregorie] that it is not
lawful to worship what-so-ever is made by the hand of man: (and thereafter he
says) and therefore eschew, by all means, the adoration of images, Greg.
lib. 9. Epist. 9. ad serenum.

3 Confession of Party.
AS for the worship of images (says Polydorus) not only those that are not of
our religion, but as Saint Jerome testifies, all the ancient Fathers almost,
condemned the same, for fear of idolatry. Polyd. virg. lib. 6. de invent.
rerum, c. 13. Neither is that a reason worthy, which is obtruded by some
(says their own Cassander) that they give that honor, not to the images, but
to those whom they represent: for this color of excuse, the very Pagans had.
Cassand. consult. art. 21.

. 3. That the practice of the old Idolaters, and new Romanists, jumplie agree.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 27.15. Cursed be the man that makes any graven or molten image, an
abomination to the Lord, the work of the hands of the crafts man, and puts
it in a secret place: and all the people shall say, So be it. Now, How many
such are made, and set up in secret corners amongst the Papists, no man but
knows.

Ierem. 10.4.5. They deck it with Silver and Gold: they fasten it with Nails
and Hammers, that it move not. Even as the Papists do their rich Images, above
their Altars, and Church doors.

Verse 5. They are upright, as the Palm tree but speak not; they must needs
be borne, because they cannot go, etc. Even as the Papists Images and Relics
are borne in their solemn Processions.

Verse 5. Fear them not, for they cannot do evil, nor is it in them to do
good. A Papist would hardly believe this, that will go so far in pilgrimage
to the Image of our Lady of Loretto; which (as they say) has done so much
good, and so many M^racles.

Ier. 11.13. According to the number of thy Cities, were thy gods, O Judah; and
according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem, have ye set up Altars, to
the shameful thing, etc. Note then, How justly this may be ^aide of Popery,
who appoint to every City, a patron Saint, whom they wor^hip, as the tutelar
gods were worship^ed of old; and according, yea, be-yond the ^umber of their
streets, they have Altars, and altarages erected to the creature.

(...). 4. That Images are not fit Books for instruction of the people, but
only Gods Word preached.
1. Authority of Scripture.
IErem. 10.8. But they are altogether brutish and foolish: be stock is a
doctrine of vanity. Verse 15. They are vanity, and ^he work of errors: in
the time ^f their visitatio^, they shall perish. Note then, That that which is
the ^orke of error, cannot be the teacher ^f truth.

Zech. 10.2. For the Idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a
lie, etc. Habak. 2.18. What profits the graven Image, that the maker has
graven it, the molten Image, and a teacher of lies? etc. The Papist would say,
that it profits to be a book to the Laics, but Gods Mouth says, that it
is a teacher of lies, a doctrine of vanity, and a work of errors. Now lies,
and vanity, and error, is no good instruction.

g O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that ye should not obey the
truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidentlie set forth,
crucified amongst you? Note then, That the preaching of Christ's truth, and the
knowledge thereof in the word, is recommended as the vivest picture of Christ,
and the most precious and hallowed crucifixe that we can set before our eyes
daily, or lay up in our breast.

Two points of doctrine, 1. Tim. 4.3.
where-by the Scripture points out clearelie the Apostaticke Church of false
and impure worshippers.

CHAP. VI. THAT NO MEATS are to be abstained from, for Conscience sake.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. COr. 10.25. All that is sold in the Shambles, eat; asking no question,
for conscience sake. Verse 27. If any of them that believe not, bid you to
feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you, eat; asking
no question, for conscience sake. Romans 14.17. For the kingdom of God is not
Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and joy in the holy Ghost.
Matthew. 15.11. Nor does that which enters in at the mouth, defile a man; but
that which proceeds out of the mouth, that defiles a man. 1. Tim. 4.1. And
the Spirit manifestly says, that in the latter times some shall depart from
the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils: Verse 2.
Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience seared with an hot iron.
Verse 3. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which
God has created to be received with thanksgiving, of them which believe and
know the truth. Verse 4. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving. Note then, That it is a manifest
badge of Antichrist's doctrine, the forbidding of meats for conscience sake:
and therefore it is evident, That Popery is Antichristianisme.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
WHere we learn (says Augustine) that in eating, it is not in the sort of
meat, but. in the immoderate gluttony, that any man is to be blamed. Aug.
^ib. 16. de civit. Dei, c. 37.

3. Confession of Party.
TO prescrybe any choice of meat (says Cardinal Cajetan) forbidding another,
it disagreeth altogether from the whole doctrine of the Gospel. Cajet.
comment. p. 252. As he is cited by Eckius, in indice errorum Cajetani.

CHAP. VII. OF THE MARRIAGE of the Clergy, That the same is lawful.
1. Authority of Scripture-
HEb. 13.4. Marriage is honorable in all: Therefore in the clergy. 1. Cor.
7.2. To avoyde Fornication, le^ every man have his own Wife, and let every
woman have her own Husband. If every man, then, be permitted to have the
remedy of Marriage, then Clergymen are not debarred.

Verse 9. But if they (to wit, the unmarried) cannot contain, let them marry:
for it is better to marry, than burn. But the Roman Doctors will say, That
it is better to burn in lust, yea, to commit adultery, for the quenching
thereof, than that a Clergie-man marry. Bellarm. lib. de monachis, c. 34..
est autem. and their canon law, causa. 27. q. 1. c. 21. says even the like.

1. Timoth. 3.2. A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife.
But the Pope will cross Paul, and say, That he must be the husband of no
wife. So well does Truth and Error agree.

1. Cor. 9.5. Have we not power to lead about a Sister, a Wife, as well as
other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? Remarke then, That
the very Apostles, and Peter, were married men, and forsook not their wives
company, even in the time of their Apostleship.

1. Tim. 4.1.3. And the Spirit speaks manifestly, that in the latter times
some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils, etc. forbidding to marry.

Note then, That forbidding any sort of persons, or calling, to marry, is a
clear note of an Apostaticke Church, seduced by error, and venting the
doctrine of Satan.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
NOw the Apostle admits, that he shall be the husband of one wife, (says
Clemens) whether he be Presbyter, or Deacon, or laicke, using marriage
without reproof, Clemens, Alex. lib. 3. stro^. And he preasseth to stop the
mouths of Heretics (says Chrysostom) that condemns marriage: showing,
that it is so void of any fault; yea, it is so precious, that a man may
therewith be advanced to the holy order of a Bishop. Chrysostom. in 1. ad Tit. hom.
2.

3. Confession of Party.
BY the decree of the Council of Gangra (says Alphonsus) it is most clearlie
evident, that by the Law of God, single life is no-wise needful, to the
receiving of holy orders, nor yet is marriage (says he) prejudicial to
Priesthood. Alphon. de castro, verbo sacerdotium.

CHAP. VIII. OF SIN.
. I. That Concupiscence which remains in the regenerate, is Sin properly,
against that decree of Trent, sess. 5.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Romans 7.7. Nay, I had not known sin, but by the Law: for I had not known
concupiscence, except the Law had said Thou shall not covet. Verse 23. But I
see another law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, etc. Note
then, That Concupiscence is sin properly, because it is forbidden by the
Law: And secondly, because it rebelleth against the Law: and therefore the
Apostle calls concupiscence sin properly, when he expresselie says,

Verse 17. Now then, it is no more I that do it, but sin, that dwells in
me. Again, 1. John. 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us.

But remarke, that if concupiscence were not sin in the godly, they might at
some time say, (having their actual sins purged) That there were not sin
any more in them.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
COncupiscence of the flesh (says Augustine) against which the good spirit
desires, is sin, because it rebelleth against the dominion of the mind.
Aug. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 5. c. 5.

3. Confession of Party.
COncupiscence is formallie sin (says Cajetan) in so far, as it is a part of
original sin. Cajet. in Romans 7.

. 2. That all Sin is mortal by nature, and none are venial, but only by
Grace, to those that are penitent.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Romans 6.20. For the wages of sin, is death. Note here, That there is not an
exception of any sort of sin, from deserving death: therefore, all sin is
pronounced mortal.

1. John 3.4. Who-so-ever commits sin, transgresses the Law: for sin is
the transgression of the Law. Gal. 3.10. But cursed is every one that
continues not in all things, which are written in the book of the Law, to
do them. Note therefore, That we see if it deserve once to be called sin
properly, it deserves also the curse of the Law, which is death eternal, and
consequently is mortal.

1. Ioh. 1.7. And the Blood of Jesus Christ His Son, cleanses us from all
Sin. Remarke then, If all sin requires Christ's Blood shed, and death to
purge it; then all sin deserves death, and therefore is mortal.

Mat. 12.36. But I say to you, That every idle word that men shall speak,
they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment. Note then, That at
the day of judgment those sins which Papists call Venial, will prove then
Mortal; because they will be punished with eternal death, seeing no
temporal or lighter punishment is to be then inflicted, or there-after
sustained.

2. Witnessing of Antiqui^ie.
THose which we think to be small sins (says Jerome) exclude us from the
Kingdom of God. Hieron. in 5. c. ad Galat.

3. Confession of Party.
Sins which are called Venial, (says Vega de justif. lib. 14. c. 13..
decet.) they are properly and simply sins: therefore we see that they are
aeque peccata, although not aequaliter peccata, and consequently mortal, So also
says Cajetan, on Matthew. 5.19. By the least are understood (says he) even
those whose transgression is mortal. Cajet. comment. p. 294. as he is cited by
Eckius, in indice errorum Cajetani.

CHAP. IX. OF PREDESTINATION.
That we were not predestined unto life, for our foreseen good worke^, as
the cause; but unto good works, as the fruits, and that of mere grace.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Ephesians. 2.8. For by Grace ye are saved through Faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God: Not of works, lest any man should boast: for
we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God
has before ordained, that we should walk in them. Note then, That good
works (as Bernard says) are the way where-in we must walk to the kingdom,
but not the cause, why either in election, or glorificat^on, it is bestowed
upon us.

Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in Him, before the foundation of the
World, that we should be holy, and without blame, before Him in love:
Having predestined us unto the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, to
Himself, according to the good pleasure of His Will, To the praise of the
glory of His grace, wherein He has made us accepted, in His beloved. Mark
then, That our election is not for our foreseen holiness, but that we should
be holy: and the ground thereof is set down therefore to be the good
pleasure of the Lord's will: and the end of all is, the praise only of the
glory of His own grace: and so no praise to us for any foreseen merit.

Rom, 9.15. For he says to Moses, I will have mercy, on whom I will have
mercy; and I will have compassion, on whom I will have compassion, So then,
it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God, that
shows mercy. Note then, That the cause of our election is in God himself,
to wit, free mercy, and not in man, of foreseen merit.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
AVgustine thus says to the Pelagian Heretics, Ye say, that Jacob was loved
(says he) for his future works, which God foresaw that he was to do: and so
ye contradict the Apostle, who says, That it was not of works* as if he
might not have said, that it was not of his present works, but of his future
works. But he says simply, that it was of no works at all, that grace might
be commended. Aug. lib. 2. contra epist. 2. Pelagianor. c. 7. As also, if the
cause be asked (says Fulgentius) of the predestination of the godly, there
is none other, but the only free mercy of God to be found. Fulg. lib. 1. ad
Monimum, f. 10.

3. Confession of Party.
ANd that we are elect not only freely, but also without the foresight of
good works, the Apostle teaches, Romans 9. (says Bellarmine, lib. 2. de
gratia, and lib. arb. c. 10.. esse denique.) As also Estius affirms, that
this opinion anent predestination, to wit, that the same is not of foreseen
faith and good works, is maintained by most of all their Schoolmen, where-of
he rehearses sixteen by name of the most famous. Estius in lib. 1. sent.
did. 41.. quarto.

CHAP. X. OF VOCATION.
. I. That there is no foregoing preparations in us naturally, unto our
effectual calling by grace, as merits of congruitie.
1. Authority of Scripture.
2. TIm. 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us, with an holy calling: not
according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus, before the World began. Note then, That
preparatorie works in us is altogether excluded, and all attributed only to
mere grace, in our effectual calling.

Ephesians. 2.3.4.5. Amongst whom also we all had our conversation in times past,
in the lusts of our flesh; fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and of the
mind, and were by nature the children of wrath, even as others: But God, who
is rich in mercy, for his great love vvhere-vvith he has loved us, Even when
we were dead in sins, has quickened us, together with Christ; for by grace
ye are saved. Consider then, Before our effectual calling, what wicked works
the Apostle shows does preceede in all men; meriting wrath, and not any
gracious calling: and seeing we are all dead in sin before our calling, what
preparations can be in a dead man of himself, to his quickening and reviving
again?

Tit. 3.3. For we our selves also were some-tymes foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy,
hateful, and hating one another: But after that the kindness and love of God,
our Savior, toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness, which we had
done, but according to his mercy, he has saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost. Note then, What sort of works
the Apostle reckons up, which preceedeth our calling, from which he exeemeth
not himself, being a bloody persecuter, immediately before his calling, and
had no other works of foregoing preparation, but persecution of Christ's
members, even as Manasseh.

Romans 8.7. For the carnal mind is enimitie against God; for it is not subject
to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. I ask then, How can it prepare it
self unto Gods calling, unto whom it is enimitie? or fit it self to be
subject to Gods Law, which the Apostle says, is impossible to it?

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THe Elect he preventeth with grace, being altogether unworthy of mercy
(says Fulgentius, lib. 1. ad Monimum, f. 5.) with whom homologateth Augustine
enchiridio ad Laurentium, c. 30.

3. Confession of Party.
WHerefore I see most learned and godly men incline (says Vega) unto this,
that the Church should reject that merit, which they call de congruo. Vega
Jesuit. lib. 8. de justif. c. 8.. quia.

. 2. That the first conversion of a Sinner, is a work only of mere grace,
and not partly flowing from man's free will.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart also I will give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh. Note then, That by taking away the old heart
al-together, he shows that there is no fitness in our natural disposition,
to will or cooperate with his grace: and that by giving a new heart
al-together, that it is he that works in us by his grace, both the willing
of our conversion, as also the performance thereof, as the only Author and
finisher of our faith.

John 15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, etc. But note,
that if it be in our will, to embrace grace offered, or not to embrace it (as
the Papists say) then it will follow, that by the power of our own free will,
accepting of grace, (which is indifferently offered to all alyke) that we
choose God, and he not us.

1. Cor. 4.7. For who has made thee to differ from another? and what have thou
that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why do thou
glory, as if thou had not received it? To this Question a Papist would
answer, that the power of his own free will, that accepted grace offered,
made him to differ from another; and not God, or the power of his grace only.
He will also say, (according to their doctrine) that in the work of his
conversion, he had freedom of will, which he did not receive by grace; and
therefore has that where-of to glory, which he received not.

2. Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing,
as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Note therefore, That our
ability to will our own conversion, or to accept grace offered, is all of God
allanerlie.

Philip. 2.13. For it is God which works in you, both to will, and to do, of
his good pleasure. Remarke then, That it is expresselie called Gods work in
us, of effectual grace, to be willing of our own conversion, and not a
freedom by nature.

Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us, together
with Christ: for by grace ye are saved. Note then, As a dead man of himself
cannot will his own quickening, but is meerlie passive in the act thereof, so
neither can a dead man in sin, of himself will his own conversion; but is
meerlie also a sufferer in his first turning to God.

John 6.44. No man can come to Me, except the Father draw him. Note then, When
He says, No man can come, that he breaks (says Saint Jerome) the proud
freedom of man's will. Hieron. lib. 3. adn. Pelagianos.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THey are not my words, but the Apostles, (says Bernard,) that any good that
can be, whether to think, or will, or do the good which he wills, he
ascrybeth all to God, and nowise to his own free will. Bern. tract. de gra.
and lib. arb. prope finem. So also Augustine, lib. de spiritu and litera, c. 3.

3. Confession of Party.
THe Scripture therefore (says Bellarmine) both by words and similitudes,
everie-where cries, that a sinner cannot in any sort dispose himself to
receive grace. Bellar. lib. 6. de lib. arb. c. 5.. huc denique.

CHAP. XI. OF JUSTIFICATION.
. I. That we are justified by Faith only, as the hand or instrument that
lays hold on GODS free mercy, and CHRIST'S merit, for our absolution.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by Faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 3.28. We conclude then, that a man is
justified by faith, without the deeds of the Law. Note then, That faith is
made the only instrument; and all other righteousness, except Christ's,
(whereon faith lays* only hold) is expresselie excluded.

Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but
by the faith of Jesus Christ; even we have therefore believed in Jesus Christ,
that we might be justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of
the Law: for by the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. We see
then again, any inherent righteousness in man (which is his obedience to the
Law) al-together excluded from having place in our justification; and that the
righteousness of Christ alone, is that where-on faith only lays hold, for
our absolution. Therefore the Apostle says, Romans 5.9. Much more then being now
justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THis is ordained by God, (says Ambrose) that who believes in Christ, shall
be saved, without works, by faith only, getting the free remission of his
sins. Ambrose, in 1. Cor. cap. 1. Therefore (says Bernard) a penitent
sinner being justified by faith alone, shall have peace with God. Bern. Sermon.
22. in Cant.

3. Confession of Party.
IN that the Protestants urge ever (says Cassander) that we are justified by
faith only, it is the more tolerable; seeing they expound, that by faith
they understand grace, that is correspondent there-to. So that it is all one,
to be justified by faith only, as to be justified by grace, and not by
works. Cass. consult. art. 4.

. 2. That we are not justified by our works before God, or that no inherent
righteousness in us, is the formal cause of our justification.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Romans 3.20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law, there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: For, Verse 24. We are justified freely by his grace,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Romans 11.6. And if by grace, then
it is no more of works, otherwise, grace is no more grace: but if it be of
works, then it is no more grace; other-wyse work is no more work. Romans
4.4. Now to him that works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of
debt. Verse 2. For if Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God. Romans 3.27. Where is boasting then? it is excluded.
By what Law? of works? nay, but by the Law of faith. Remarke then, That by
all the former places, our works are expresselie debarred from having any
place in justification, which is by grace: and grace, and our inherent
righteousness, are so opposed in that work, that they can not consist: but
the one is ever destructive of the other.

Note also, That the Apostle clears playnlie that place of James, 2.21.
showing, that Abraham's justifying by works, was not before God, but by them
that he was declared only before men, to be righteous and just.

Romans 5.16. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the
judgment was by one unto condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses
unto justification.

Note then, That our justification stands in the remission of sins; and
this remission is a free gift: and if it be a free gift, then it is not of
debt: and if not of debt, then not of our works, as the Apostle had formerlie
concluded. Romans 4.4.

Gal. 5.4. Who-so-ever then of you are justified by the law, ye are fallen
from grace.

Note then, That the fleeing to our own righteousness in justification, is
called an head-longs falling from grace, to perdition.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THE redemption of the Blood of Christ, should be vile in our eyes, (says
Ambrose) nor should the prerogative of men's works succumbe to the mercy of
God, if justification which is by grace, were due unto any preceding merits.
So that it should not be the gift of the free bestower, but the reward o^ the
meriting worker. Amb. lib. 1. de voc gentium c. 5. Remarke here, That both our
first justification, and that which they call the second, even to the end of
our life, is only of mere grace.

3. Confession of Party.
WE are said freely to be justified, (says Benius) because nothing that
preceedeth our justification, whether it be faith, or works, deserves the
grace of justification. Benius de efficaci Dei auxilio, c. 18. Vasques also the
Jesuit, rightly observes thus, to wit, That a number of their most learned
Doctors, whom he accounts good Catholics, differ in this point only in
words, but agree in deed. Of which number he names Vilhelmus Parisiensis,
Scotus, Occam, Gregory Ariminensis, Gabriel Biel, Antididagma Coloniense,
Enchiridion Coloniense, Johannes Bunderius, Alphonsus de Castro, and Andreas
Vega, who was present at the handeling of this matter, at the Council of
Trent. Vasques, in 1. 2. quast 114. disp. 214. c. 1.

. 3. That it is Christ's righteousness only, which in justification is
imputed unto us, unto remission of sins.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ISai. 53.5. But he was vvounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for
our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed. Note then, That by Christ's stripes and satisfaction,
is our healing or justification: and that this satisfaction of Christ's is made
ours only by imputation, that Roman Doctor confesses, Bellarmine, lib. 2. de
justificatione, c. 10.. deinde.

Ier. 23.6. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely,
and this is his Name vvhere-by he shall be called, THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS. Philip. 3.9. That I may be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, even the righteousness which is of God by faith. Remarke then, That
the only righteousness where-on the Apostle relyeth for acceptance, is not
his own, or man's, but Christ's, who is also God* and therefore whose
satisfaction or obedience is of an infinite virtue, to appease an infinite
wrath; and is by faith only laid hold on, and applied, and so made ours, by
mere imputation.

2. Cor. 5.21. For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Note then, That as
Christ was made sin for us, that is, a sacrifice for sin (as Ose 4.8. sin
is there taken) only by having our sins imputed to him; so are we also by
imputation only made the righteousness of God in him.

Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience many are made sinners, so by the
obedience of one, shall many be made righteous. But many were made sinners,
being yet in his loins, only by imputation, (as the Apostle says, verse 12.
In whom all sinned) therefore also by the obedience of Christ many are made
righteous by imputation only, in the act of justification before God, as said
is.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
CHRIST'S condemnation is our justification, says Beda, in Psalm. 87.

3. Confession of Party.
CHRIST is called our righteousness, (says Bellarmine) because he has
satisfied the father for us, and gives to us that satisfaction, and
communicates it so unto us, when he justifyeth us, that it may be justly
called our satisfaction and righteousness. Bell. lib. 2. de justif. c. 10..
deinde. So also, c. 7.. qu^rto.

CHAP. XII. OF SANCTIFICATION.
. 1. That there is no man perfectly sanctified in this life, or in-abled so to
live here, vvith-out transgressing God's Commandments.
1. Authority of Scripture.
1. KIngs 8.46. If they sin against thee, (for there is no man that sins
not.) Note then, That Solomon denies, that any man in the world is so
perfectly sanctified, but he sins.

Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made mine heart clean, I am pure from sin?
A Papist will say, that sundry can say this.

Prove. 24.16. For a just man falls seven times, and ryseth again: but the
Wicked shall fall into mischief. Note then, That he shows, that the most
godly sins oft-tymes; and that this is the difference between them and the
wicked, not, but that both do sin, but the godly ryseth again by
repentance, and the other lie still in sin continually, while punishment or
mischief light upon him.

Job 9.20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I
say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. Remarke then, If such a
commended man as Job was, was not perfect, who other may say, that he is so?

Romans 7.23. But I see another Law in my Members, warring against the law of my
mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in my
members. Philip. 3.12. Not as tho I had already attained, either were already
perfect. Note then, If such a rare Saint as Paul, denied, that he was
perfect, and complained of his often sinning: who is he now, that of himself,
without blasphemy, dare affirm the contrary?

1. John 1.8. If we say then, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us. Iam. 3.2. For in many things we offend all.
Remarke, How the Apostles exclude not themselves, and who then can except
himself?

Luke 11.4. And forgive us our sins. Note then, That Christ has taught all
God's Children, who call him their Father, to beg daily forgiveness, as well
as daily bread. And therefore none can exeeme himself from daily sinning:
else it were needless to beg daily pardon. And this Christ has taught us to
say (says Jerome) non humilitatis mendacio, not through humility to lie, as
the Pelagians expounded it: but through the fear of humane frailty, dreading
our own conscience. Hieron. lib. 3. advers. Pelagianos.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
ALl these examples I run over, (says Jerome) to show, that the Law was
never yet fulfilled by any man. lib. 2. contra Pelagianos. For this is the
privilege of Christ, and if he be without sin, (says he) and I also
without sin, what is the difference between me and God? Hieron. lib. 3.
adv. Pelagianos. Hereunto accords like-wise Bernard, sermon. 50. in Cantica.

3. Confession of Party.
IT is impossible (says Aquinas) to fulfill the whole Law, etc. and never any
could keep yet the Law as it is commanded. Aquin. in 3. Galat. Lect. 4.

. 2. That no man can do works of greater perfection, or more, than God has
commanded, which the Papists call works of supererogation. Bellar. l. 2. de
Monachis, c. 13.
1. Authority of Scripture.
TO convince this proud error, it might suffice what is formerlie proven, to
wit, if no man can obey the very Law perfectly, how much less is he able to
obey it, and more? yet let the Canon of Scripture batter this proud Tower of
ambitious Babell.

John 6.38. For I came down from Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the
will of him that sent me. Note then, If the full perfection of Christ
consisted in doing of God's will only, what blasphemous pride is it, to say,
That they do more than God's will? for if it be his will, then he has
commanded it: and if they do their own will, how dare they say, That their
will is perfecter than the will of God?

Psalm. 103.20. Bless ye the Lord, his Angels, that excel in strength, that
do his commandment, hearkening to the voice of his Word. Remarke again, That
the perfection of Angels is placed heere-in, that they do what by his word the
Lord commands them. Therefore, what Luciferian pride is it in man, to stretch
his perfection further than the Angels?

Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect. But if there be rules of
perfection above the Law, then it will follow, that the Law is an imperfect
rule of holiness.

Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thine heart, and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. Now what perfection can possibly
be beyond that, which is commanded? seeing all the heart, all the soul, and
all the mind is required: and the Law it self is made here the model of all
perfection, inward and outward.

Philip. 4.8. Finally, Brethren, vvhat-so-ever things are true, vvhat-so-ever
things are honest, vvhat-so-ever things are just, what-so-ever things are
pure, vvhat-so-ever things are loue-worthie, vvhat-so-ever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on those
things. Remarke then, That there is nothing that one can do which is good, but
may be redacted to one of the forenamed properties: and therefore there is no
good thing that one can do, but it is expresselie commanded. But indeed it is
to be granted, that the popish works of Supererogation, are nowhere commanded,
to wit, to eat the bread of yldenesse, and live an impure single life, in
their monkish Cloisters: in respect the one is injust, and the other impure,
and both to be hated, against the forenamed properties.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
FOr the remission of the sins of their brethren (says Augustine) the blood
of no Martyr was ever shed, which Christ only has done for us: not that we
should imitate him there-in, but congratulate for that which he has bestowed
on us. Aug. tract. 84. in Johan.

3. Confession of Party.
BEllarmine shows, that not only sundry recent Divines of theirs, but also
the Divines of Lovane, did teach, that the sufferings of the Saints are no
satisfactions, but that Christ's satisfaction is only that unto us. Bell. lib.
1. de indulg. cap. 4.

CHAP. XIII. OF GLORIFICATION.
. 1. That our good works merit not eternal life, or glory, for their own
condignitie and worth, as the Papists affirm. Bell. l. 5. de justificatione,
c. 17.
1. Authority of Scripture.
JOB 35.7. If thou be righteous, what give thou him? (to wit, to God) or
what receives he of thine hand? Note then, That we cannot merit at God's
hand: for to be righteous, is a thing that we are bound to be: and when we
are so, God gets no profit there-by

To this same effect therefore Christ says, Luke 17.10. So also ye, when
ye have done all those things, which are commanded you, say, we are
unprofitable servants, we have done but that which was our duty to do.

And holy David confesieth thus of himself, saying, Psalm. 16.2. My goodness
(Lord) extends not to thee.

Thus we see then, that all our good works, is a debt-bound service only to
God, who has created us; and that when we have done them, yet he is not
benefited.

But so it is, that a work that meriteth, must not be debt, (for no man
meriteth reward, by paying his debt) and it must bring some good also or
commodity to the rewarder, if it merit at his hand, which our works do
no-wise to God.

Romans 8.18. For I reckon that the sufferings of this present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory, which shall be revealed in us. Note
then, If the very sufferings, and Martyrdomes of God's Saints, merit not
eternal glory, because there is no proportion between them, (as ought to be
between a work, and the reward that it meriteth) much less can the actions
of any servant of God's, be meritorious at his hands of eternal life. Which
there-fore if anie-where it is called a reward, it is in respect of the time
when it is given, to wit, at the end of our service and lyfe-tyme, as the
penny wages, but not in respect of any meritorious quality.

Romans 6.23. For the wages of Sin, is death: but the gift of GOD is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Remarke, therefore, that eternal life is
not called the godlies wages, as death is called the wickeds wages: but death
is called the wages of Sin, because sinners themselves merit it: and
eternal life is called the free gift of GOD, through CHRIST, (as the word
(...) signifies:) because without ^nie meriting thereof by themselves, by
grace they receive it, as a free gift, through the merit of Jesus Christ
allanerlie.

Ephesians. 2.8. For by grace ye are saved, through faith; and that not of your
selves, but it is the gift of GOD. Romans 11.6. And if by grace, then is it no
more of works: otherwise grace is no more grace. Romans 4.4. For to him that
works, is the reward not reckoned of grace, but of debt. Remarke then, that
to obtain eternal life by grace, and to obtain it by the merit of our works,
are set as things contrary: even as free gift, is contrary to obliged debt.
And yet contrary to so clear Scripture, (such is the pride of Papal
doctrine) it peartlie avoweth, eternal life to be a debt, and that God is our
debtor; not only because of His promise, but also because of our works.
Bellarm. L. 5. de Iustif. Cap. 18.. Sed facilis, etc.

Luke 12.32. Fear not, little flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give
to you a Kingdom. We see then, that heavenly Kingdom called here a gift,
and that it is God's good pleasure only, which is the cause why we get the
same, and no merit of ours.

Ephesians. 1.5. Having predestined us unto the adoption of Children, by Jesus
Christ, to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will, to the praise
of the glory of his grace. Note then attentively, That if the foresight of
our merits, was not the cause why God predestined us to eternal life, but
only his own good pleasure, to the praise of the glory of his own grace;
Then it is still the same good pleasure of God, that is the only cause, why
he gives us eternal life, to the praise of the same glory of his grace, and
not of us, or any of our merits. Other-wyse, the cause should not be one,
but diverse, yea, contrary, why GOD bestows upon us one and the same thing,
which were absurd: to wit, Eternal life in our election before time, and the
possessing us therewith at our glorification in time.

Remarke lyke-wyse, That it is to an inheritance of adopted sons that we are
predestined: ( For if we be Children, we are also Heirs, says the
Apostle, Romans 8.17.) If, there-fore, eternal life be an inheritance, it is no
purchase of works: and who-so-ever by such a title claymeth the same, he
renounceth the lawful succession there-to as a son, and so falls from
Grace, Gal. 5.4.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
ALthough the Lord bestow Heaven upon the Godly, according to their works,
yet it is not for their works, says Gregory, on these words of Psalm. 7.
Auditam fac mihi, etc. And first, thou must believe, (says Bernard, tria
Bernardi credenda) that thou can not obtain remission of sin, but by the
meers mercy of God: There-after, that thou have no good works, but that which
is His free gift: And last of all, that thou can not merit Eternal life, by
no works of thine; but that He freely lyke-wyse bestows that on thee.
Bern. Sermon. 1. in Anunc. Mariae.

3. Confession of Party.
Neither are our works, what-soever they be, of that worth (says Ferus) that
they deserve duly and condignlie any such reward. Ferus, in Ioh. 3. f. 69.
So says Alphonsus de Castro, verbo meritum. Therefore Bellarmine is forced to
conclude, That for the uncertainty of our own righteousness, (says he) and
the danger of vain glory, it is most safe, to put our whole confidence in
the only mercy and bounty of God. Bellarm. Lib. 5. de Iustif. Cap. 7.. sit
tertia.

. 2. That there are no super-aboundant meritorious works, or sufferinges of
Saints, left behind them, to be the treasury of the Church, for the help
of others to Heaven, that want merits, to be disposed of only and dispensed
by papal indulgences, as the the Romanists teach.
1. Authority of Scripture.
THIS error might seem already sufficiently convinced, while as it is
clearlie proven, that no Saint was ever yet able for themselves, either by
their works, or sufferinges, to merit Eternal life: Yet for farther
conviction, let these places of Scripture raze the foundation of this lofty
Error.

Isai. 43.11. I, even I, am the Lord: and beside Me, there is no Savior. But
the Doctors of Rome say, That it is no absurdity to say, that beside Him,
there are Saints also who may be called our saviors in a part: for so says
Bellarmine. (Lib. 1. de Indulg. Cap. 4.. sexta.) and that by the great heap,
says he, ( cap. 2.. and tamen.) of their super-aboundant sufferings, they are
able to expiate exceeding many, and great sins, of other men: and so by this
doctrine of theirs, ye see, they give the Lord flatly the lie.

Ezekiel. 18.20. The righteousness of the righteous, shall be upon him; and the
wickedness of the wicked, shall be upon him. Remarke then, that it shall
not be upon another, but upon himself: and that it is a strange madness in
Popery, that so stiffelie they will deny, that the righteousness of Christ
can be imputed to us, or made ours in justification; but will affirm, that
the righteousness of Saints, and her men, may be made ours, by their Pope's
Indulgences.

Act. 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other; for there is none other
Name under Heaven given amongst men, where-by we must be saved, Lo here,
Full salvation attributed to Christ only, excluding all others under Heaven,
from having any part in the glory of that work.

1. Cor. 1.13. Is Christ divyded? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye
baptized in the name of Paul? Note therefore, That to make Christ's merit and
sufferings to expiate some sins and punishments, and the merits and
sufferinges of Saints to expiate other sins, (both many and great,) and
other punishments, if this be not to divide Christ? and to divide the work of
man's salvation, between the Creator, and the creature? Of whom we may
lyke-wyse inquire at them; Were these Saints crucified for man-kynde? or was
ever any man baptized in their name? And if not, then their sufferings can-not
be our satisfactions, nor can any thing super-abound in them, to expiate the
sins of other men: for, for this end only Christ was crucified, and for
this cause are we in Christ's Name also baptized: professing by his bloodshed
and sufferings alone, that we have full ablution and expiation of our sins:
therefore is it said by himself, I have trodden the wine press alone, and of
the people, there was none with me. Isai. 63.3.

Heb. 10.14. By one offering, he has perfected for ever, them that are
sanctified: That is, as is said, Heb. 7.25. He has perfectly saved them.
Note therefore, That he has left no supplement, to be made by others.

Coloss. 1.19.20. In him all fullness dwells; (there is no defect then in his
sufferinges, nor no need on our part, to go anie-where else,) and by him,
(and not by others) even by the blood of his Cross, (and not by the
sufferinges of Saints) are all things reconciled, says the Apostle. Matthew.
25.9. But the wise answered, saying, Not so, lest there be not eneugh for us
and you. Remarke then, That the Elect Saints figured by the wise Virgins,
have no more sanctification, than will be found eneugh to themselves only:
and therefore that the same is not so super-aboundant, that they may spare to
others.

2. Cor. 5.10. For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in his body, (not then in the
bodies of others) according to that which himself has done, whether it be
good or bad. Therefore, not according to the good which another has done, and
which through super-aboundance has been left in the treasure of the Church, to
help others to Heaven.

Revel. 14.13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying to me, Write, Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, from hence-foorth; yea, says the Spirit,
that they may rest from their labors, and their works follow them. Remarke
then, That their works bide not behind themselves, to be applied or employed
for the help of others; but they follow them; for the witnessing of their
faith, and the increase of glory to themselves.

CHAP. XIIII. OF PVRGATORIE.
. 1. That the godly are purged from all sins what-so-ever here, and that by
Christ's blood allanerlie; so that there remains no sort of sins to be
purged after this life, in any fyerie Purgatory.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Ezekiel. 18.22. If a sinner turn, I will forget all his iniquities. Note then,
At the very instant of our conversion, that we are purged from all our sins
what-so-ever: and so, no venial sins are left to be purged elsewhere.

Isai. 38.17. Thou bast in lou^ delivered my soul from the pit o^ corruption;
for thou have cast a^ my sins behind thy back. Note then, That none are
reserved to be satisfied for by man himself, in any imagined Purgatory;
but all are casten behind the Lord's back.

Psalm. 51.7.9. Wash me, and I shall be vvhiter than the Snow: hide thy face
from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities. Remarke therefore, That where
God purges, the party purged is made so clean, that there remains not the
least spot behind, to be taken away by any after Purgatory; and it is not
some of our greater sins only, but he blotteth out all our iniquities
what-so-ever, where he shows mercy: so that the party is made whyter than
the Snow.

Col. 2.13. And ye being dead in your sins, and in the uncircumcision of
your flesh, he has quickened together with him, having forgiven all your
trespasses. Note then, That none are excepted.

Heb. 10.14. By one offering has he perfected for ever, them that are
sanctified: That is, (as Heb. 7.25. is said,) He has perfectly saved them.
And if this be, it follows, that he has left no sin, nor no punishment
heere-after for sin, untaken away: and so no supplement to be made to his
satisfaction, by any sufferinges of ours, in an imagined Purgatory.

1. John 1.7. And the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son, purges us from all
sin. Note then, How clearlie this error of Popery is heere-by convinced,
that says, that his blood purges us only from mortal sin, and that there
is a fire after this life, that purges us from venial sins, and temporal
punishments: where-as the Spirit of God says, that Christ's blood purges us
from all sin: and so gives flatly this spirit of error the lie.

Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is God
that justifies, Or who shall condemn? seeing Christ has died. Note, If
Christ's death then, and the merit thereof, has abrogated all, then there
remains not the guilt of any sin, nor the condemning to any satisfactorie
punishment, to be sustained by any of God's Elect heere-after, in any fyerie
Purgatory.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
CHRIST by his death (says August.) and by that only one and true Sacrifice
offered for us, has purged away, abolished, and put out, what-so-ever sort of
faults; where-by we were detained justly by principalities and powers, as
guiltle to vnder-lye punishment. Aug. lib. 4. de trinitat. cap. 13. As also the
same says Pope Leo. Epist. 81. ad Monachos Palestinos.

3. Confession of Party.
CHRIST hy his death, (says Lombard) and by that one true sacrifice of his,
has abolished what-so-ever faults we had, where-by we were holden by Satan,
to undergo punishment. Lomb. lib. 3. sent. did. 19. Lyke-wyse, we confess,
(says Bellarmine) that Christ has satisfied to his Father for us, and for
the whole world perfectly; yea, most fully, as many Scriptures teach us.
Bell. lib. 2. de indulg. c. 7.. quod enim.

. 2. That Christ freeth the Godly from all punishment heere-after, as well as
from all guilt here.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ISai. 53.4. Surely, he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows.
Note then, That if Christ has borne our sins, no other-wise than by
sustaining the whole punishment due for them, and for that end, to discharge
us of the same, (nam si tulit abstulit,) it follows then, that no part
thereof hereafter abides to be sustained by us.

Verse 5. And by his stripes we are healed. Note then, That as bodily healing
stands in this, that the pain is wholly taken away; so our healing by
Christ's stripes, imports this, that the whole punishment of sin is taken
away.

Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. If then, there
be no condemnation, therefore there is not (as the Papists say,) some
condemnation, to wit, to the suffering of a temporal punishment hereafter, in
the fire of Purgatory.

Col. 1.19. In him all fullness dwells. Note then, That seeing all fullness
of Salvation is in Christ, and of his fullness we all receive, (as says
Saint John, 1.16.) Therefore we receive full deliverie from all punishment of
sin, as well as from all guilt thereof.

Heb. 10.14. By one offering, he has perfected for ever, them that are
sanctified. Note therefore, That he has perfectly delivered them from all
sort of sin, and from all sort of punishment: other-wise he could not be
said to perfect, or perfectly save.

Coloss. 2.13. Having freely forgiven, all your trespasses. Matthew. 6.12. And
forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Out of both which places
then remarke, if our sins be our debt, as Matthew calls them, and that they
are all freely forgiven, as Paul witnesses; then all payment of them, or
punishment for them, is lyke-wyse freely discharged, and we thereof fred. It
being against sense to affirm other-wise, to wit, that the whole debt should
be discharged, but not the whole payment.

Note lyke-wyse, That we crave forgiveness, as we forgive others: and God
promises such forgiveness to us, as we give to others. But he wills us to
forgive others fully, and freely, (as Matthew. 18.35. is evident,) without
keeping the least purpose of the meanest revenge in heart unto them. Therefore
such is his own forgiveness to us, without keeping the least purpose of
tormenting us, in a fire as hot as Hell, after death, and there-after, that
he has forgiven us freely.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
WHere there is grace, (says Chrysostom) there is pardon; and where there is
pardon, there is no punishment at all. Chrysostom. hom. 8. in Epist. ad Romans
Therefore (says Augustine,) Christ by vnder-going the punishment, and not the
guilt, has abrogated both the punishment, and the guilt. Sermon. 37. de verbis
Domini.

3. Confession of Party.
THe sufferings of Christ (says Bellarmine) are able to expiate all sin,
original, and actual; mortal, and venial: and all punishment, eternal, and
temporal; and all this by it self alone. Bell. lib. 2. de indulg. c. 5.. at
non.

. 3. That no man can satisfy for his sins, in any measure, neither here,
nor in Purgatory.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ISai. 63.3. I have trodden the Wine Press alone, and of all the people, there
was none with me. Mark then, If Christ was only able to tread the
Wine Press of God's wrath, then he alone is able to satisfye for sin, (for
both these are one) and all man is excluded.

1. Tim. 2.6. Who gave Himself a Ransom for all. Note then, That a Ransom,
or satisfaction for sin, must be of an infinite value, such as no suffering
of man can be; and therefore the Son of God behoved to give Himself, who
was of infinite power and majesty, to be this Ransom for sin.

Heb. 1.3. When He had by him self purged our sins, he sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty, on high. Remarke then, That to purge sin, is the
privilege of Christ, which he reserveth only to himself, by himself, and
his own sufferings allanerlie doing that, and not by others, or any of their
sufferings here, or hence, permitting that to be done.

Heb. 7.25. Wherefore, he is able to save them to the vtter-most, that come
unto God by him. Note then, If Christ saves us to the vtter-most, there
remains no place for humane satisfaction.

Acts 4.12. Neither is there salvation in any other, etc. Note then, That if
all our salvation be in Christ, and flow from him only, then it is not in any
measure in our selves, and from our selves: so that we our selves, in respect
of our own satisfactions, may not be called our own redeemers, as the
Papists blasphemouslie teach, and the Council of Trent has in effect
decreed. Bell. l. 1. de indulg. c. 4.. sexta.

Col. 1.19. In him all fullness dwells, and by him, even by the blood of his
cross, are all things reconciled. Advert then, That our reconciliation to God,
is only attributed to the satisfaction of Christ's bloodshed on the Cross;
and therefore no humane satisfaction has place in this work, seeing
reconciliation is the work of a Mediator, and our Mediator behoved to
participate of both natures, that in himself, and by himself, he might
reconcile both.

Revel. 7.14. And he said to me, These are they which came out of great
tribulation, and have vvashed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb. Note therefore, That the very Martyrs that suffer for Christ,
acknowledge only the blood of Christ, to be the perfect satisfaction, and
expiation of their sins; and therefore are said to make their Robes white,
by dipping them no-wise in their own blood of Martyrdom, as any way purging,
or satisfactorie, but only in the blood of the Lamb of God, that takes away
the sins of the World.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
BY what pains, and what fastings, can we wash away our sins? says
Ambrose, in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 20. For the only painful suffering of the second
Adam (says Bernard) purges them whom the only sin of the first defiled, and
not that any man's own satisfactions can avail for himself; for what is
our penance? but that if we suffer not together, we can-not reign together.
Bern. de verbis lib. Job. in sex.

3. Confession of Party.
THe sufferings of Christ is of an infinite value, and therefore to join the
satisfactions of the sufferings of the godly thereunto, is al-together
superfluous, says Durandus and Mairones, cited by Bellarmine, l. 1. de indulg.
c. 4.. tertia. As al-so the very gloss of the canon Law, Did. 1. de
penitentia verbis, Dic quod, etc. says, that it is neither by contrition of
heart, nor confession of mouth, that sins are for-given; but only by the
free grace of God: but the contrition of the heart, is a sign in-deed, that
our sins are for-given, as external penance is a sign of the contrition of
the heart, (say they:) which contrition, even free grace preceedeth.

. 4. That the Souls of the Godly, after Death, go immediately to Glory,
and to no mid place of torment.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ISai. 57.1. The Righteous is taken away from the evil to come: he shall
enter into peace. Note then, That there is no middle estate, nor place spoken
of, but that immediately is subjoyned unto the righteous man's departure out
of this life, his present entry in-to peace; and therefore in-to no torment.

Luke 16.25. And Abraham said to him, Son, remember that thou did receive
good things in thy lyfe-tyme, and Lazarus lyke-wyse evil; but now he is
comforted, and thou art tormented. Remarke therefore, That we have only two
places mentionate in Scripture, whither souls go immediately after death, to
wit, a place of Comfort, which is Heaven, to the godly; and a place of
Torment, which is Hell, to the Wicked.

Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, Verelie, I say unto thee, this day thou
shall be with me, in Paradise. Lo then, immediately after death the
Heavenly Paradise is promised to the penitent thief: and so is it al-so given
to all other penitent sinners.

2. Cor. 5.1. For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were
dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal
in the Heavens. Note then, That the Apostle shows, that after this mortal
life ends, we get instantly a better in the Heavens: and this Bellarmine
himself in those same words, collecteth out of this foresaid place, Bell. l.
1. de sanct. c. 3.. denique: and therefore, thus concludes: Wherefore (says
he) it is good for us to die soon in this World, that we may quickly begin
to live in Heaven.

Verse 8. We are confident, I say, and vvilling, rather to be absent from the
body, and to be present with the Lord. Note then, That there is no mid estate
of the godly soul departing; but as soon as it departs out of the body,
and is absent there-fra, instantly it enters in Heaven, and is present with
the Lord.

Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which
is far better. We see then, Upon the dissolution of the soul from the
body, follows instantly the conjunction thereof with Christ.

Revel. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from hence-foorth,
now, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their
works follow them. Remarke then, That the godly instantly after death,
become blessed; and immediately rest, and are rewarded in glory.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
AFter the departure of the soul from the body, instantly (says Justinius)
the souls of the godly are carried to Paradise, and the wicked to Hell.
Hereunto agrees also Augustine, medit. 22. showing, that the soul being
loosed from the body, instantly goes to Heaven. And again he says, For
the souls of the godly after their separation from the body, are in rest:
but the souls of the wicked (says he) suffer punishment, until the bodies
of the one rise to eternal life, and of the other unto eternal death, which
is called the second. And that he knew no third place, he testifyeth in his
fyft Book of the Hypognostickes, about the midst: See Augustine, l. 13. de
civit. Dei. c. 8.

3. Confession of Party.
THe Apostle's reason, (says Bellarmine) 2. Cor. 5.1. is excellent, to wit,
this, If this mortal life perish, we have instantly an-other, far better,
in the Heavens, Bell. lib. 1. de sanctis, c. 3.. denique.

CHAP. XV. OF CERTAINTY OF Salvation.
. I. That the Godly may be assured of their Salvation here.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Job. 19.25. For I know, that my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at
the latter Day vp-on the Earth. Note then, That Job assures himself, that
Christ is his Redeemer, and therefore that he shall be saved by Him
eternally.

Psalm. 17.15. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall
be satisfied with thy likeness, when I awake. Note then, That we see the
like assurance in David, of full salvation to soul and body, after his
resurrection.

2. Tim. 4.7.8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the faith; from hence-foorth is laid up for me the Crown of
Righteousness: (and lest such a great Apostle only, might seem justly to
have such confidence, he subjoyneth) and not only for me, but for all them
that love his second appearing. And therefore, again al-so he says of all
the faithful.

Romans 8.37. For I am assured, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, or any other creature, shall separate us, from the love of God.
John 3.16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son,
that every one that believes in him, perish not, but may have eternal life.
Note then, That every one that is a true believer, may be assured (according
to Christ's own Word) of eternal life, as if his Name were specified
particularly: for as we apply the precepts of the Law, as spoken to every
one of us particularly to do them, why shall we not in like manner the
promises of the Gospel, to believe them?

1. John 5.13. These things have I written unto you, that believe in the Name
of the Son of God, that ye may know, that ye have eternal life. Remarke
then, That he says, that all true believers may know, and be assured of
their salvation; and that the Word of God is written, and left with us for this
our certification.

Ephesians. 1.13. In whom al-so after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the
holy Spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance. Consider
therefore, That to assure the Godly of their salvation, the Spirit of God is
given, with the word of promise, as a seal to stamp in that persuasion in
their souls, and as an earnest, or arles-pennie, to make fast the Bargain.
And if any man have not the Spirit of GOD, the same is not his. Romans 8.9.

Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self al-so bears witness, with our spirit, that
we are the Children of God: and if children, heirs of God, and coheyres with
Christ. Note then, What greater certainty can be wished, than the godly have
of their salvation? when they have the very Spirit of God inwardly witnessing
the same to their souls.

Gal. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God has sent the Spirit of his Son
in-to your hearts, crying, Abba Father. Note then, That the spirit of prayer
directed a-right, and felt with-in us, is a sure fruit of our adoption, and a
solid assurance of our salvation.

Romans 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons
of God. Note then, That how many so-ever follow the direction of God's Spirit,
in an holy course of life, may be assured of their salvation.

1. John 5.10. He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in
himself: he that believes not God, has made him a liar. Note then, What an
heinous offense it is, to doubt of the truth of God's promises to us,
concerning our salvation, through his Son Christ Jesus. Not but that many
dear Saints labor under this doubting; (for God gives not the full
certainty of faith to all, at one time, nor after a-lyke measure,) but they
are displeased therewith, as a fruit of incredulous corruption; and they know,
that they should be fully assured of the truth of God's promises to
themselves, without staggering: like Abraham, of whom it is witnessed, Romans
4.20. that he staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief, but was
strong in faith, giving glory to God.

Heb. 10.22. Let us draw near then, with a true heart to God, in full
assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and
our bodies washed with pure water* and let us hold fast the profession of our
faith, without wavering, for he is faithful that promised. Note then,
Here-in expressed our Christian duty plainly, to the perfection where-of we
should daily aim, leaning to this sure ground that can-not fail, to wit,
that our God is faithful, who has firmlie promised.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THou art made secure (says Augustine) not of thy self, but by the Lord;
thou art secured of thy pledge, hope with Christ, for the Kingdom of Christ,
even now thou have the pledge. Aug. sermon. 5. de verbis Apostoli, tom. 10.
Neither is this presumption, but faith (says he,) for to tell what thou have
gotten, is no presumption, but devotion. Aug. sermon. 20. de verbis Domini.
Whereunto al-so accords Bernard. Epist. 107.

3. Confession of Party.
THose who are in Christ Jesus, they have no cause to fear, seeing they are
sure of their salvation, says the Bishop of Bitonto on the 8. of the Romans.
And there is none of the Ecclesiasticke, nor Schoolmen (says Cassander) who
diligently urge not this confidence, and assurance of the mercy of God, and
glory to come; and teaches that it ought to be opponed to diffidence, and
doubting. Cass. consult. art. 4.

CHAP. XVI. OF PERSEVERANCE.
. That the faithful Children of GOD, can never totallie fall from Grace, nor
finally perish.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Psalm. 37.28. For the Lord loves judgeme^t, and forsakes not his Saints:
they are preserved for ever. Note then, That God's Saints persevere, because
God himself he forsakes them not, but preserves them, by a constant, and
secret preservation ever.

Psalm. 73.23. Never-the-lesse, I am continually with thee: thou have holden
me by my right hand. Note then, That God's holding of us, is the cause of our
standing: where-in because he fails not, therefore we finally fall not.

Ierem. 31.3. The Lord appeared of old unto me, saying, I have loved thee,
with an ever-lasting love; therefore with loving kyndnesse have I drawn thee.
Note then, That the maine cause, is in God of our perseverance, to wit, because
his love is not changeable: For whom He loves, He loves to the end. John,
13.1.

Ierem. 32.40. And I will make an ever-lasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them, to do them good: and I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Lo then, The cause of our
not-departing from God, is his never-turning away from us; and therefore our
perseverance stands upon a sure ground.

Matthew. 24.24. For there shall arise false christ's, and false prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders: in so much (that if it were possible)
they shall deceive the vere Elect. We must note therefore, that Christ's own
mouth declares it to be a thing impossible, that God's Elect can finally,
and fully, fall from truth, and grace.

John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me: and him that
comes unto me, I will not cast forth. John 10.28. And I give them eternal
life, and they shall not perish, and no man shall pluck them out of mine hand.
John 17.11. Holy Father, keep them in Thy Name, whom thou have given me,
that they may be one, as we are one. Note then, Out of all the former, that
the Saints perseverance is sure, in respect they are the Fathers gift, to the
Son, and that they are kept ever sure in the Sonne's own hand, and protected
lyke-wyse so safely by the Father, that it is as impossible to divide any of
them from the rest of the Members of Christ's mystical body, as it is to
divide Christ himself from his Father, who are one: and therefore the Apostle
cries out, saying, Who shall separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus? Romans 8.35.

Romans 11.29. For the gifts and calling of God, are without repentance. Malac.
3.6. For I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed. Note therefore, That on the Lord's constancy, the constancy and
perseverance of the Godly is grounded.

Romans 8.29.30. For whom he fore-knew; he also predestined, etc, and whom
he predistinated, them also he called: and whom he called, them also he
justified: and whom he justified, them also he glorified. Note then, That
this golden chain of Salvation, can never be broken, as long as the first
link thereof, which is our election, is kept sure in the Lord's own hand: so
that whom he has predestined to glory, he shall keep sure vnfallen,
finally and fully, away from the middle linkes and graces, that lead
there-to, until he invest them in glory.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THis God has promised, (says A^gustine) saying, I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me: which what other thing is it, but
that such shall be my fear, and so great, which I will put in their hearts,
that they shall constantly adhere to me. Aug. tom. 7. de bono persever. c. 2.
And again, Christ placing them so, that they should go, and bring forth
fruit, and their fruit should abide: who dare say, Perhaps it will not a-byde?
for the Lord's gifts, and calling, are without repentance. Aug. tom. 7. de
correp. and gratia. c. 12.

3. Confession of Party.
THe confession lyke-wyse of our Adversaries, is this: Lyra and Carthusian, on
John 10.28. declare this to be the cause of the Godlies perseverance, because
their predestination (say they) can-not be frustrate, which it destinating
them to glory, will not suffer neither tentation, nor interveaning
persecution, be able to separate them from Christ.

CHAP. XVII. OF BAPTISM.
. That the Children of the Faithful, departing, are not deprived of the
blessed vision of God, through want of Baptism.
1. Authority of Scripture.
GEnes. 17.7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations. Mark then, That not only are the
Parents within the covenant of grace, but their children also, and their seed
after them: and even as the female was comprehended under the male, because
incapable of circumcision, and so saved amongst the Jews; so are Infants,
dying in the Mothers womb, comprehended under their believing Parents, because
incapable then of Baptism, and so are saved amongst Christians, if they belong
to election.

Exodus 20.5. I am a jealous God, who visits the sins of the fathers, upon
the children, to the third and fourth generation, of them that hate me, but
show mercy to the thousands of them that love me, and keep my
commandments. Note then, That the Lord's promises are to show mercy to
thousands of the generation of the godly, (excepting neither age, or sex, nor
whether they die in the womb, wanting Baptism, or live in the World, and get
the same.)

Acts 2.39. For to you is the promise, and to your children, and to all that
are far off, vvhom-so-ever the Lord our God shall call. Ierem. 1.5. Before
thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee. Note then, That if an Infant
may be sanctified in the Mothers womb, then that Infant dying there-in, may
be saved: for whom-so-ever the Lord sanctifyeth, them also he saves.

Luke 1.41. And it came to pass, when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Marie,
the Babe did leap in her Womb. Behold then, here a divine faith infused in
the heart of the Baptist, while as yet he was in his Mothers womb, able, if
he had died there-in, perfectly to have saved him. And who can certainly
defyne of God's secret working, or deny the salvation of others?

Joshua 5.5. Now all the people that came out, were circumcised: but all the
people that were borne in the Wilderness, by the way, as they came out of
Egypt, them they circumcised not. Remarke then, That as the children that died
during those forty years in the Wilderness, were not for want of
circumcision therefore condemned, under the Law: so neither are the children of
Christians, for want of Baptism, when it can-not be had, condemned, now under
the Gospel. It being not the want, but contempt of Sacraments, that is judged
damnable.

1. Cor. 7.14. For the unbelieving Husband, is sanctified by the Wife, and the
unbelieving Wife, is sanctified by the Husband; else were your children
unclean, but now they are holy. Note then, If the children of one only
believing parent be esteemed holy, how much more then should the children of
Parents, both believing, be esteemed holy, and so charitablie judged of, (if
they die without Baptism) to be eternally saved?

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
WHat Reason, or Nature, (says Bernard) teaches, that none of those who may
die, can obtain internal and eternal salvation, whose body outwardly is
not sprinkled with the element of water? And therefore he affirms thereafter,
that in case contempt be not the cause, that then the Parents faith is not
only profitable, but sufficient also for the child. Bern. Epist. 77.

3. Confession of Party.
As to Infants, the Churches faith, and of them that offer it, is imputed as
their own: Even so, the will and desire of Baptism, (says Cassander) which
the Church, and specially the Parents have, is accepted by the same indulgent
Father, who accepts of the will, as the deed, and tyeth none to
impossibilities, nor his grace simply to the external action of Sacraments.
Cassand. consult. art. 9. And of this same mind also Alphonsus de Castro
testifyeth Gerson and Cajetan to be. (Alphons. de Castro, de Here Is. verbo
Baptismus.) And Lombard, speaking of the true sense of these words, John 3.
Except a man be borne anew, etc. says, But this is to be understood (says
he) of them who may, but yet despyseth to be baptized. Lomb. lib. 4. did.
4.. his autem.

CHAP. XVIII. OF THE LORD'S Supper.
. I. That Christ Jesus glorified Body is only in the Heavens.
1. Authority of Scripture.
ACts 3.21. Whom the Heaven must receive up, (or contain) until the times of
the restitution of all things. Note then, That the Heavens must contain
Christ's glorified body, till the end of the World; as the Belief says
accordingly, That from that place shall He come, to judge the Quick and the
Dead.

Matthew. 26.11. The Poor ye have al-wayes with you, but Me ye shall not
have al-wayes with you. Remarke then, That the Popish practice, would make
Christ a liar; while as the Priests say, that they have Christ always with
them bodily between their fingers, in their daily Masses.

John 16.28. I came from the Father, and am come in the World: again, I leave
the World, and go to the Father. Note then, As he was bodily present in the
World, when he came from the Father; so he shows, that according to that
presence, he has left the World, when he returned to his Father, and is now
only spirituallie present (as he promised) with his own to the end of the
World. Matthew. 28.20.

Matthew. 24.23. Then, if any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or
there is he; believe him not. So neither should Christians now believe those
consening Priests, that say, Here is Christ in the Mass, Host, or there in
the Pixe, or Procession.

Acts 7.56. And he said, Behold, I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of
Man standing at the right hand of God. Behold here then, the witnessing of
the first Martyr, where he declares the glorified body of Christ, only to
be in Heaven.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THere is one person (says Augustine) God and Man, and Christ is both these,
everie-where by that, where-by he is God: but in Heaven, by that, where-by he
is Man. ( Aug. Epist. 507. ad Dardanum.) For when he was on Earth, he was not
then in Heaven; and now being in Heaven, he is not to be had on Earth, says
Vigilius, lib. 4. contra Eutychen. And so says Fulgentius the very same.
Lib. 2. ad Thrasimundum.

3. Confession of Party.
HE left the World, according to his bodily presence, (says Lyra, on John
16.28.) and he said, Ye shall not have me al-wayes with you, by my
corporal presence: other-wise he says, I shall be with you to the worlds
end, Lyra in Matthew. 26.11.

. 2. That Christ's Body is not in many places at once, invisiblie, and
vnpalpablie.
1. Authority of Scripture.
HEb. 2.17. Wherefore, in all things it behoved him to be like unto his
brethren. Note then, If it behoved him to be like to us in all things, then
his body must be visible, and palpable, and contained in one place, even as
other glorified bodies are.

Matthew. 28.6. He is not here, for he is risen, as he said. Remarke then,
That according to the Romish doctrine, if Christ's body may be in many places
invisiblie at once, the Angel's reason here should be of no force: for it
might have been replied, That although he be risen, yet he might at the same
instant have been invisibile in the Sepulcher.

Luke 24.39. Behold mine hands and feet, that it is I my self: handle me,
and see; for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye see me have. Note then,
That after his Resurrection, our Savior's Body was visible and palpable, his
Resurrection adding glory to his Nature, but no-wayes quite abol^shing his
Nature; as the Papists do, who change not only Bread in-to his Flesh, but
his Flesh in-to a Spirit, which has neither flesh nor bones, as the Disciples
saw Christ's body have.

Acts 1.11. This same Jesus which is taken up from you in-to Heaven, shall so
come, in like manner as ye have seen him go in-to Heaven. Note then, That
the Angels testify, that as his going up from men to Heaven, was sensible and
visible; so should his bodily coming from Heaven back again, be sensible
and visible: which seeing no such coming has been hither-to, or can be
seen, it is evident, that his coming down invisiblie, to be amongst the
Priests fingers, when he consecrateth the host, is a ridiculous fantasy.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
THe Body of Christ (says Theodoret) has its former shape and figure, and
circumscription; and, as I may briefly say, the same essence of a body, although
after the resurrection it was made immortal mortal, and free from corruption.
Theod. Dialog. 2. And in the same Dialogue, from the circums^ription thereof,
he proves the visibilitie thereof: and by the visibilitie thereof, where it
is, that it is circumscrybed; saying, that, that only is invisible, which
can-not be circumscrybed. In like manner Augustine says, that it is
profane, not to believe and profess (says he) the son of God according to
his humanity, to be corporeal and local, after his resurrection. Aug. 4.
tom. de essentia divinitatis.

3. Confession of Party.
HAndle me, and see: by this (says Lyra, on Luke 24.) he show that he had a
true body, and not an imaginary. And on Acts 1.11. he shall come (says he)
in the same form and substance of flesh to judge, as he came to be judged:
for although he has received immortality, he has not lost the true nature of
humanity.

. 3. That after consecration, the Bread, and Wine remains in substance, in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Matthew. 26.29. But I say unto you, I will not drink henceforth of this fruit
of the Vine. Note then, That Christ calls it expresselie the fruit of the
Vine, which he had drunken with his Disciples, at his last Supper.

Verse 26. And as they were eating, Jesus took Bread, and blessed it, and
brake it, and gave it to the Disciples. Note then, That it was still Bread,
after distribution: for the word [it] is still relative to the bread which
Christ took: and he said, [This is] not, [ this shall be, by
transsubstantiation,] [ my body, which is given for you, says Luke, 22.19.]
Now all men know, that it is not the host of bread that was crucified for us,
[doe this in remembrance of me.]

Note then, That a remembrance is not of a thing present; so neither is
Christ's Body, after the Popish manner.

1. Cor. 10.16. The cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? Remarke then, How the Apostle expound^th
Christ's words: calling that the communion of Christ's body, which himself
called his body. Now the communion of a thing, is not the thing it self; for
these two are diverse.

1. Cor. 11. For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do
show the Lord's death, till he come. Note then, That the Apostle calls that
[bread] which we eat in the Sacrament, and not humane flesh. Next, that we
show, or represent Christ's death in the Sacrament: therefore Christ being
only represented there, is not there bodily: And thirdly, it is said, till
he come: therefore it clearlie again follows, that he is not already
there.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
NEither does the mystical signs, after sanctification, depart from their
own nature, (says Theodoret) for they remain still in their own substance,
and figure, and shape, and may be handled and touched, as they were before.
Theod. 2. Dialog. Whereunto consents, Ambrose, in 1. Cor. 11. saying, That
it is bread, where-of all participate, to wit, according to its natural
substance. As also Gelasius, in his book of two natures, saying, After
consecration, that yet the substance and nature of bread and wine do still
remain.

3. Confession of Party.
POpe Innocent 3. in his fourth book of the mysteries of the Mass, cap. 27.
testifyeth, that Christ, after consecration, calls that which was in the Cup,
the fruit of the Vine. And Bellarmine grants, that it is probable, that there
is no express place of Scripture, that evidentlie can enforce
transsubstantiation to be admitted: for that it is by these words, which they
commonly adduce, he says the most learned, and sharpest witted amongst them
(as Scotus was) has thought the clean contrary. Bell. lib. 3. de Euchar. c.
23.. secundo.

. 4. That Christ Jesus is not received by the bodily mouth.
1. Authority of Scripture.
John, 6.35. I am that bread of life: he that comes to me, shall never
hunger; and he that believes in me, shall never thirst.

Note therefore, That the way how to eat, and drink of Jesus Christ, is to
believe in him.

Verse, 53. Verelie, verily, I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the
Son of Man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. But remarke, that
many have gotten life eternal, who never did eat Christ with the bodily
mouth, by the Papists own confession, as the Thief on the Cross, and many
more others, which die after Baptism.

Ephesians. 3.17. Christ dwells in your hearts by faith. Note then, That as his
dwelling in us is, such is our receiving of him, and that the one, and the
other, both are spiritual by faith.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
WHerefore preparest thou thy teeth, and thy womb? (says Augustine) believe,
and thou have eaten. Tract. 25. in John. And even hither-to he may be touched,
but by affection, not by the hand, by desire, not by the eye; and by faith, and
not by the senses, says Bernard. sermon. 28. in Cant. So says Ambrose
lyke-wise, lib. 6. in Luc. c. 8. And therefore concludes there-after, saying,
Not upon the earth then, nor in the earth, nor according to the flesh, must we
seek Thee, if we would find Thee. Ambr. lib. 10. in Luc. c. 24.

3. Confession of Party.
HE expounds (says Lyra) that which He said before, and what it is to
eat His Flesh, and drink His Blood; that it is, to abide in Christ, and
Christ in him. (Now, Christ abides in our hearts, and that by faith, says
the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.17.)

. 5. That CHRIST JESUS is not received by the Wicked.
1. Authority of Scripture.
John, 6.51. I am that Bread of Life, which came down from Heaven: if any man
eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever. Note therefore, That in respect the
Wicked get not Eternal life, that therefore they no-wise participate of Christ.

Verse 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, abides in me, and
I in him. But the Wicked, neither are in Christ, as Members; nor is Christ in
them by his Spirit: but the spirit of Satan only, whose members they are;
and therefore they no-wise are partakers of CHRIST JESUS.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
He who disagreeth from Christ, he neither eats his body, nor drinks his
blood, (says Augustine) although he daily receive the Sacrament of so great a
thing, to his condemnation. August. 3. Tom. Sent. 339. Et Lib. 21. de Civit.
Dei, Cap. 25. And he that remains not in Me, and I in him, let him not say,
or think, (says Bernard, in the person of Christ) that he eats my body,
or drinks my blood. Bern. Epist. ad Fratres, de monte.

3. Confession of Party.
He that abides not in Christ, (says Lyra) and Christ in him, he eats not
Christ spirituallie, although he participate of the Sacrament corporally. (And a
little after:) For the Sacrament it self, is taken by some unto life, and by
some unto death: but the matter of this Sacrament, is by all unto life, and by
none taken unto death. Lyra, in Joan. 6.

. 6. That Christian People (for whom Christ shed His Blood) should not be
defrauded of the Cup, which is called, The Communion thereof.
1. Authority of Scripture.
Matthew. 26.27. And taking the Cup, he gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying,
Drink ye all of this. Note, That where-as He says only of the Bread, Eat
ye, He speaks more expresselie of the Cup, saying, Drink ye all; that
none should be excepted.

1. Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing, which we bless, is it not the
communion of the Blood of Christ? I ask then, Where-fore hinder the Popish
Clergy their People, from so comfortable a Communion? seeing the Precept of
Drinking, must belong to them, to whom the reason of the Precept most
belongs, which is the comfort of remission of sins, and the remembrance of
Christ Jesus passion, 1. Cor. 11.25. If therefore people should apply the one,
and remember the other, then surely they should participate of the Cup.

1. Cor. 11.28. But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
Bread, and drink of that Cap. No^ then, That as all faithful Christians are
bound, to prove and examine t^eir own conscience before communicating; so are
they ordained to drink of the Cup. Therefore ye see, that in the two
preceding verses, and in the subsequent, both Eating and Drinking, are ever
joined together, and enjoined to all.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
ONe Cup is distributed amongst us all, says Ignatius, Epist. 6. ad
Philadelph. And to every one of those that are present, the Deacons distribute
Wine and Water, says Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. And unto all men what-so-ever,
is one Body, and one Cup, presented says Chrysostom, Hom. 18. in 2. Cor.
Cap. 8.

3. Confession of Party.
OF old, that the Eucharist was given unto Laics, under both kynds, for many
ages, (says Alphonsus) we are instructed by the Writs of many holy
Fathers. Alphon. de Castro, contra here is. verbo Eucharistia. And more
particularly says Cassander, thus, It is evident, that the Universal Church
to this day, (says he) and the Occidentall, or Roman, a thousand years,
and more, after Christ, in the solemn, and ordinary administration of this
Sacrament, did exhibit, to all the members of Christ's Church, both the sorts
of Bread and Wine. Cass. consult. art. 22.

CHAP. XIX. OF THE MASS.
. I. That the Popish Priests have no calling, to sacrifice Christ's Body in
the Mass.
1. Authority of Scripture.
HEb. 5.4. No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of God,
as was Aaron. Now let us see then, where Christ anie-where called, or ordained
any to sacrifice his body again, which himself did once for ever vp-on the
Cross.

Luke, 22.19. Do this in remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11.26. Ye shall declare
the Lord's death, till he come. Note then, That the Lord's Supper was
ordained, that all Christians should remember his suffering, and sacrifice on
the cross, and should declare his death, till himself come to judgment
again: but not, that any should sacrifice Him up again daily, as tho he
were already come, and were bodily present amongst the Priests fingers,
daily to offer up.

Heb. 7.23. And they truly were many Priests, because they were not
suffered to continue, by reason of death but this man because he continues
for ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood. Note then, It being unchangeable, or
perpetual, that it admits no succession of a subordinate Priesthood.

Verse, 25. Wherefore he is able also, to save them to the uttermost, that
come to GOD by him, seeing he ever lives, to make intercession for them. Note
then, That the Priesthood of Christ, consists not only in that oblation of
himself, once vp-on Earth, but in his continual intercession for us, ever in
Heaven: which seeing he performs that by himself, and therefore admits
no sort of successor there-in; so lyke-wyse by that once oblation of himself,
and the perpetual recent virtue thereof, he saves all them to the
vtter-most, that come to God by him: and therefore neither in that part of his
Priesthood, (which he will have entire) admits he any suffragan, or
successor what-so-ever.

Verse, 17. For he testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedek. Note then, That as there was no Priesthood secundarie, or
successiue unto Melchisedek's, which was typical; so there is none secundarie,
or successiue unto Christ's, which is true and eternal: else they could not
be said, through their difference, to be of one order.

Verse, 26. For such an High Priest became us, who is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, who needed
not daily, as those Highpriests, to offer up sacrifice, first for his own
sins, and then for the peoples. Note then, That if the popish sacrificers
succeed to Christ, it must be in his high priesthood, (for such a one only
the Gospel acknowledges: and to do that which he did, is an act of the
high priest of the Gospel only.) Now the Gospel requires the high priest
thereof, to have such qualities as are here set down: which if the Popish
sacrificers dare not claim to, then let them not claim succession to that
office, which requires those qualities; nor to the proper act thereof, which
is, the sacrificing to God his own only Son.

Heb. 9.14. Who through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to
God. Note then, That our high priest, i^ both the Sacrificer, the Altar, and
the unspotted sacrifice it self: These the^ who claim, that they succeed him
in his priesthood, must be these thre^ lyke-wyse; else his priesthood and their
are no-wayes one: and so their priesthood must be a new one of their own, but
not a succeeding to his.

Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers. Note then, That the Apostle, in
nominating all these offices, which Jesus Christ had ordained in his Church,
makes no mention at all of any sacrificers of his body.

Again, at large in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, he shows all the
duties of a Bishop, or Pastor in Christ's Church, but he makes no part of
his charge, the sacrificing of Christ.

Revel. 1.6. Who has made us Kings, and Priests, unto God his Father. Note
here, That all Christians are called Priests, in respect of their spiritual
sacrifices of prayer and praise, etc. that they offer up unto God; but nowhere
are pastors of the Church particularly so called: the holy Ghost foreseeing,
that some would arise, that would vsurp that style only to themselves, in an
injurious sense, unto the Son of God.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
TO this our doctrine, that the popish Priests have no calling, to sacrifice
Christ's body, which they claim unto from Christ's fact, and institution of
them, to succeed there-in to him in the last Supper, the clear confession of
our Adversaries jumping therewith, shall serve to convince them: for there is
no express mention in the History of the Gospel, (says Suarez) of a
sacrifice or oblation; as also the fact of Christ which is declared, might have
been done by him without any sacrifice, to wit, by consecrating the Bread and
Wine, and giving the same to his Disciples, without any intention of
sacrificing: and therefore he concludes, that it is conjecturall only, to
think, that any such thing is agreeable, either to the words or deeds of
Christ. Suarez, in 3. part. D. Thomae, tom. 3. disput. 74. sect. 1.. secundo
potest.

In like manner, the same Suarez reports, that the Bishop of Bitonto, and
others, did defend, that Christ, in that night of the celebrating his last
Supper, offered up no sacrifice. Suarez, ibid.. 2. Page 949. For if he had
offered up an expiatorie sacrifice then, where-by the sins of the World had
been done away, then in his last Supper he behoved to have died, and so needed
not to have died the day after, according to Hebr. 10.10.

. 2. That the Mass is no propitiatory sacrifice, but al-together derogatorie
to Christ's propitiatory sacrifice, offered on the Cross.
1. Authority of Scripture.
HEb. 9.22. Without shedding of blood, there is no remission. Note then: Seeing
they call the Mass an unbloody sacrifice, that therefore the same is no-wise
propitiatory for the remission of sin.

Verse. 25.26. Not that he should offer himself often, etc. for then must he
often have suffered. Remarke then, That it is all one thing, in Scripture,
Christ to be offered, and Christ to suffer: and therefore to offer Christ
daily, is all one, as Christ to suffer daily, which is both absurd and
blasphemous.

Verse, 26. But now in the ^nde of the World, once has he appeared, to put
away sin, by the sacrifice of himself. Note then, That once only has he
suffered, and therefore once only was he sacrificed; and that by that
sacrifice once made, by himself alone, our sins are put away: and therefore
no other sacrifice, but that only, is alone propitiatory.

Again, verse 26. Where he says, That once he has appeared, to put away
sin, by the sacrifice of himself.

We remarke, that a propiatorie sacrifice, should be ever apparent and
visible: and therefore seeing Christ, nor his sacrificing, is not apparent, nor
visible in the Mass, therefore it follows, that in the Mass there is no
sacrifice at all, let be, propitiatory.

Verse, 27.28. And as it is appointed to men, once to die, but after that, the
judgment; So Christ was once offered, to bear the sins of many. Note
then, That to say, that Christ is offered daily, is as absurd, as to say, that
a dead man dies daily.

Heb. 7.27. Who needs not daily, as those Highpriests, to offer up
sacrifice, etc. Heb. 9.12. But by his own blood, he entered once in-to the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. Note then, That the
repetition of Christ's sacrifice daily, imports a-like imperfection
thereof; as the daily offering up of sacrifices under the Law, imported the
imperfection of that legal priesthood: which is both absurd and blasphemous,
to affirm of Christ's.

Again, Remarke, that the Apostle shows, that Christ's bloody sacrifice,
where-by he entered in-to the holy place, is of an infinite worth, having
obtained eternal redemption for us: where-as all Papists grant, their
sacrifice of the Mass to be but of a finite worth, and therefore is not one,
but far inferior to the sacrifice of Christ, and consequently also then
priesthood to his. From whence also it follows, that they succeed not to
Christ in his priesthood, after the order of Melchisedek: but have a new one of
their own coining, far differing from Christ's, and millions of degrees
inferior there-to.

Heb. 10.18. Now, where remission of sin is, there is no more offering for
sin. Verse, 14. For by one offering, he has perfected for ever, them that
are sanctified. Note then, If that one, and once offering of Christ, avails
for ever, to the remission of sin, and perfecting for ever of them that are
sanctified; it follows necessarily, (as the Apostle says) that there is no
more offering for sin: and consequently, no more needc of sacrifices
propitiatory, nor any further immolation of Christ, for the remission of sin.

And therefore we conclude, That seeing the sacrifice of the Mass is neither
the reiteration of Christ's sacrifice, (for that were to accuse it of
imperfection, as Heb. 7.27.) nor yet the continuation of it, (for so he should
daily die, as Heb. 9.25.26.) nor that it is visible, bloody, nor of an
infinite worth, as His was: Therefore it is no-wyse Christ's sacrifice
propitiatory, but a blasphemous, idolatrous abomination, flat derogatorie
there-to.

2. Witnessing of Antiquity.
TO this our doctrine, That the Mass is no real, and properly a
propitiatory Sacrifice, witnesses thus- Antiquity: Because we are delivered
(says Ambrose) by Christ's death, as myndfull thereof, in eating and
drinking, we represent that Body and Blood which was sacrificed for us. Amb.
in 1. Epist. ad Cor. cap. 11. So lyke-wise testifyeth Eusebius* After that
Christ offered up that admirable and excellent sacrifice to his Father, for the
salvation of all, he instituted, that we should offer up the remembrance of
that benefit, in place of a sacrifice to God. Eusebius. de demonstr. Evang. lib.
1. cap. 10. With whom atlast accords thus Saint Bernard: As after a manner
(says he) Christ is daily yet sacrificed, while as we declare his death: so
he seems also to be borne, while as we likewise represent his Nativitie.
Bern. Sermon. 6. in Vigilia Nativitatis Domini.

3. Confession of Party.
THat which is offered and consecrated, is called a Sacrifice and Oblation,
(says Lombard) because it is a remembrance of that true Sacrifice and holy
Oblation. Lomb. lib. 4 sent. did. 12. So lyke-wyse says the Gloss upon
Gratian: where it is said, that in this mystery, Christ dies, and his flesh
suffers: that is, his death and suffering is there represented. Gloss. de
consecr. did. 2. cap. quid sit. And last of all, (says Vasquez) the whole
form of the sacrifice of the Mass, where-by Christ is said to be
there-insacrificed, is the very representation of the death of Christ.
Vasquez, Disput. 222. cap. 8. As also Aquinas propounding that question
directly as well as Lombard, whether or no Christ be sacrificed in the
Eucharist, gives such an answer, as we will all gladly subscrybe: for he
gives two reasons, wherefore the Eucharist is called a Sacrifice: first,
(says he) because it is a representative image of the Passion of Christ: and
secondly, because by this Sacrament, we are made pertakers of the fruit of
Christ's Passion. And in that same place he says, That it is the fore-sayde
passion; that was the only true sacrificing of Him. Aquin. 3. Part. Quaest.
83. Art. 1.

FINIS.
CHAP. XX. AN APPENDIX, OF ANTICHRIST.
To the Reader. Of the necessity of this Appendix.
AFter the proclayming of the Eternal Gospel, Revel. 14.9. there is a fearful
Commination, against all those that any more follow the Beast, or receive his
mark: to wit, That they shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of GOD, and
be tormented with eternal Fire. It is, therefore, very behooffull, for
every Christian to know this Beast: that as the People followed Absolon, tho
in their simplicity; so men follow not lyke-wyse, in obstinacy, against
revealed Light, that detected dissembler now, and Traitor to GOD'S Truth.

For this cause, as the Star made the VVyse-men know CHRIST, and where He
was: So have I set the Star of GOD'S Word before thine Eyes, to lead thee
to the knowledge of Antichrist lyke-wyse, and where he is. And what-so-ever
place of Scripture I have adduced to indigitate Antichrist, (as the finger of
the Baptist pointed out CHRIST) I have, for thy better satisfaction, and
convincing of the Adversary, brought either the Exposition of ancient Fathers,
or Roman Doctors, there-on; and have made the application, out of the Records
of their own Histories: so that their own mouth, shall indyte their own
Dittie, and save that pains to their silent party.

And all this I have taken from ancient unsuspected Books of their own, which
I have beside me: using all fidelity for thy assurance, and all perspicuous
brevitie that is possible, for thy contentment and ease.

OF ANTICHRIST.
. 1. What sort of Adversary he is, to wit, not an open Enemy, but a
counterfeit, or a masked Foe, under the Christian name.
2. These. 2.3. Let no man deceive you, by any means, for that day shall not
come, except there be a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition. Note then, That Antichrist shall be an
Apostate Christian, and no Jew, under the Christian name, making defection from
the truth of CHRIST: for so says Bellarmine, (Lib. 3. de Pontif. cap. 2.. ad
postremum.) By this falling away, (says he) most rightly may Antichrist be
understood; for he shall be so notable an Apostate, that he may be called
the Apostasy it self.

Remarke also, That therefore he gets Judas style, and is called The son
of perdition: because as Judas was the ringleader of those that came against
Christ, yet professing himself a chief Disciple, and saluting Christ as his
Master; so is Antichrist the ringleader and head of those that are against the
truth of Christ, yet professing himself a chief christian, and a Deputy
for Christ: therefore says Augustine (tract. 3. in Epist, Iohannis,) that
Antichrist is the greater liar, who professes with his mouth Jesus to be
Christ, but denies him by his deeds: which being contrary to the doctrine
of Christ, they are contrary to the Word of God, which Word of God is Christ.
Therefore he concludes, Let us then (says he) take heed, not to his tongue,
but to his deeds; and where his deeds speak, wherefore require we words?

Revel. 13.11. And I beheld an-other Beast, coming out of the Earth, and he
had two harnes, like the Lamb, and he spoke as the Dragon. Note then, That
here again Antichrist is descrybed, (as all men confess.) And this is that
Beast, says Augustine, (Hom. 11. in Apocalip.) which under the christian name
resembles the Lamb, that he may secretly power in the poison of the Dragon.
This is that heretical church, which would not counterfeit the likeness of
the Lamb, if she did openly speak; but she counterfeiteth christianity,
that the more securely she may deceive the simple. And there-after he says
more expresselie, That this heretical, and antichristian church, shall
heere-in make her selfelike to Christ; which although her members be spirituallie
persecuting Christ, yet they will seem to glory of the sign of the Cross of
Christ.

. 2. The time which is fore-tolde of Antichrist's coming, and that the same is
already past.
2 Thessalonians. 2.7. Only he who now lets, will let, till he be taken out of
the way. This Bellarmine expounds, according to common consent, ( lib. 3. de
pont. c. 5.) to be the decay of the old Roman Empire.

Now that this is performed, let a cloud of Popish Authors testifye: Aquinas
on this place of Paul's, says thus, That as it was a sign of Christ's
coming, to wit, the domining over all of the Roman Empire; so is it a sign
of Antichrist's coming, to wit, the revolt of Countries from the Roman
Empire. But (says he) Countries have long since revolted from the Roman
Empire. Wherefore he is forced to grant, that in place thereof, there is
only to be seen a spiritual Monarchy at Rome: and from whence we
therefore conclude inevitably, That Antichrist is come.

So says Haymo also, a Germane Archbishop, on this place, who wrote in the
800. year of God: The Apostle shows, (says he) that our Lord shall not
come to judgment, while first a decay be of the Roman Empire; which we now
see fulfilled, and that Antichrist does now appear in the World, who shall
kill the Martyrs of Christ.

Lyra likewise, on this place of Paul, says, that in his time, the whole
Kingdoms of the World had already revolted from the Roman Empire.

And the Author of Fasciculus temporum, in the life of Honorius 1. shows,
that this irrecoverable decay began anno 639. So that now, (says he) all the
four Monarchies are decayed, and there rests none now, but that of
Antichrists.

Revel. 17.12. And the ten horns which thou saw, are ten Kings, which
have received no Kingdom as yet, but receive power as Kings at one hour with
the Beast. This Bellarmine expounds ( lib. 3. de Pont. c. 5.) to be the
dissolving of the Roman Empire, in-to several free Kingdoms, which before
were but tributarie Provinces; and which must be understood of the old Roman
Empire, which was in Saint John's days, and so is already fulfilled: and
can-not so be understood of this new one, which consists not of so many
Kingdoms, and is but an image only of the old, erected by the Pope, and
subject unto him. And so (according to John's words) is not divisible in so
many Kingdoms.

That this dissolution then of the old Empire is already accomplished, by the
revolt of tributarie Kingdoms from the same, and their assuming of power, to
be free Monarchs, is already proven by the forenamed testimonies: and in
special, by that of Lyra's, whose words are these, The whole Kingdoms of the
World (says he) have already, as it were, revolted from the Roman Empire,
denying to be subject there-to, or to pay tribute: and now many Years ago,
the Empire has also wanted an Emperor.

Whence it follows, that as sure Antichrist is come, as it is sure that the
old Roman Empire stands not entire, but is dissolved, by the revolt of
Kingdoms there-fra, which of old were subject there-to: and that at that same
instant time, when those assumed power, as free Kings over their Countries,
that even then Antichrist was already come, and grew great in the Church:
seeing it is expresselie said, that those Kings at one hour receive power
with the Beast.

. 3. The place in general where-in Antichrist is to be found.
2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who sits in the Temple of God: That is, (as not only
expound Jerome and Theodoret, but their own Saint Aquinas, and Lyra, on this
place,) who rules in the Church: or, as Augustine says, ( Lib. 20. de
civitate Dei, c. 19) who gives him-felfe out, as if he, and his followers,
were the only true Church.

Both which, that the Pope does, Bellarmine bears witness, proving his
Monarchicke ruling in the Church. Lib. 2. de Pont. c. 12. and that he, and his
followers, are only the true Church, in his fourth Book, De Ecclesia,
throughout.

. 4. The place in special, where-in Antichrist his seat is to be found.
REvelat. 17.9. The seven heads, are seven Mountains, where-on the Woman
sits. Which signify Rome, says Bellarmine, (Lib. 1. de Eucharist. Cap.
11.. respondeo Sacramentalem) which is situated on seven Hills.

Whereunto the Rhemists also are forced to consent, saying, on the fifth verse
of this same Chapter, As in the beginning of the Church, Nero, and the rest of
the persecuting Emperors, (which were figures of Antichrist) did principally,
sit in Rome: So also (say they) the great Antichrist shall have his seat there,
as it may well be.

Note then, That Antichrist must not only (by the Papists own confession)
rule as a Monarch in the Church generally: but also, that Rome must be his
seat particularly. Where-in that he has sitten long a-goe, has been
proved by the time of his coming, and is clearlie testified by their Petrarch,
a Roman Arch-deane, and Channon, who lived anno 1350. and who thus testifyeth
of Rome in his time, That it was even then the seat of the Whore; and that
even then the Kings of the earth did drink the Wine of her Fornication. So
that no-thing more was to be expected, than the performance of that which the
Angel says, Babylon is fallen. Petrarch, Lib. Epist. 18.

. 5. His Qualities and Actions, where-by to know him: and first, his exorbitant
Pride.
2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called
God. That is (as says their Carthusian) above all creatures, that are either
reputed, or for some singular perfection, or eminency, are so called, gods;
being such by participation of name only, as says their Aquinas.

Now, these are either heavenly Angels, so called, Psalm. 97.7. and expounded
so to be, Hebr. 1.6. or they are earthly Princes, so styled, Psalm. 82.6.

But to apply, that the Pope exalts himself above all these, let his
Cardinal Turrecremata testify, where he says, ( Lib. 2. summa, cap. 52.)
That as Christ got dominion from His Father, above all Principalities, and
power above all creatures what-so-ever that have being, that all knees should
bow to Him: So He has granted most fully this dominion and power to Peter,
and his successors. Hence was that proud word in the Bull of Clement the
fifth, concerning those that died coming to his Iubile, saying, We command
the Angels, etc. And hence also is that proud claim of Boniface the eight, in
his decretall, Extravagant, lib. 1. tit. 8. vnam sanctam. Affirming, that he
was to judge all men, and to be judged of none; and that all men (whether
Kings, or Subjects) under pain of damnation, should profess their subjection
to him, as their only supreme Lord, both in spiritual things, and temporal.

. 6. His Blasphemy.
2 Thessalonians. 2.4. So that he as God, sits in the Temple of GOD, showing
himself that he is God. Revel. 17.3. And I saw a Woman, sit upon a
scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of Blasphemy. Now, that in both these
places Antichrist is descrybed, all men admit. Let us see then, if the Pope
sits as God, in the Temple of God; 1. Usurping the style of God, 2. as also,
His proper prerogatives: 3. and last, by usurping the proper styles of the
Son of God; let us see, if he be that Beast, full of the names of
Blasphemy.

1. First then, that he assumeth the style of God, is evident out of his canon
Law, ( Did. 96. c. satis, etc.) whence Pope Nicolas 2. infers, that he is
to be judged by none. Which privilege seeing he grants not to any Prince,
it is evident, that he usurps not that style in that sense, that it is
attributed to Magistrates in Scripture, and who are never, but in the plural
number only, called Gods, but not any of them, a God, in the singular.

2. Next, that he usurps God's proper prerogatives, is evident in his
dispensing with God's Law: the reason where-of is, because (says Angelus
Clavasinus, in his Summa Angelica, tit. Papa, f. 141.) we have by the example
of God himself, that he oft-tymes has dispensed with his own Law.
Therefore it follows, that the Pope likewise doing so, shows himself,
that he is God, or God's equal. For it is a common rule amongst themselves,
that an inferior can-not dispense against the command of a superior. ( Summa
Antonini. Part. 3. tit. 22. cap. 6.. 2.) And it agrees also with common sense
and reason.

A few examples of such dispensations, in place of many, we will bring out of
their own Authors. The foresaid Angelus, in his summa Angelica (f. 141.)
relates, that Pope Martin the 5. gave one a dispensation that married his own
Sister: and shows, that Saint Antoninus is a conjunct recorder of this with
him.

Lyke-wyse, Villa, Scotus, and Orbellis, all three, on the fourth Book of
Sentences, report, how that Pope Lucius dispensed with Panormitan, an
Archbishop, to have two Wives at once, out of the fullness of his power, (say
they) against that Apostolical precept, 1. Tim. 3.2. ( Villa. f. 195. did.
27. Scotus, f. 255. d. 33. q. 2. Orbellis, d. 33.. 2.

3. Last, that he usurps the proper styles of the Son of God, and so is
that Beast, Full of the names of blasphemy, let these instances testify: 1.
He is called, That light that came into the world, and which the world
received not (John, 1.10.) for so the Bishop of Bitonto, in his oration before
the Counsel of Trent, publicly proclaimed him. Which title to be only
competent to Christ alone, both the text manifests, verse 8.9.10. and, 12,
and their own Authors, Carthusian, Lyra, Ferus, and many more, on that place
testify. 2. He is called, The Husband of the Church, by Bellarmine (lib. 2. de
Pont. cap. 31.) which Aquine, Lyra, and Lombard, (on 2. Cor. 11.2.) shows, to
be the proper style of Christ Jesus allanerlie. 3. By the same Bellarmine, in
his Preface, De summo Pontifice, he is called, That corner stone, proved and
precious: which title of Christ's alone, Lyra; Hugo de S. Charo, Pintus, and
Perusin (on Isai. 28.) shows, to be incommunicable to any what-so-ever: he
being called [the corner stone,] because he coupleth (say they) both Jew and
Gentile in one unity of faith, [proven] by the passion of his cross, and
[precious] in respect both of the infinite value of his person, being God and
Man, as also of the merit of passion, which redeemed the whole World. And
last, he is called by Turrecremata, (lib. 3. summae, cap. 9.) King of Kings,
which is only proper to our Savior, ( Revel. 19.16.) and due to him
allanerlie.

. 7. His Idolatry, or spiritual Whoredom.
REvel. 17.6. And upon her forehead, was a name written, Mystery Babylon, the
Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth. Now of the verity here-of
in Rome, let their own doctrine and confessions, in one instance only,
concerning the worshipping of Images, clearlie bear witness.

Their doctrine is this, That the same honor is due to the Image of Christ,
which is due to Christ himself: for so say their canonized Saints, in their
authorized wrytings, Saint Aquinas, 3. part. q. 25. and Saint Bonaventure.

Like-wise, That the Images of Christ, and of the Saints, are to be
worshipped, not only by accid^nt, or improperlie; but also by themselves, and
properly; so that the worship stays in the image it self, and as they are
considered, even in themselves, and not only as they supply the place of
that which they represent. So teaches Bellarmine, (lib. 2. de reliq. c. 21.)

Their confession of the Idolatry that is amongst them, conform to this
doctrine, is such: Polydorus Virgilius says, ( lib. 6. de inventione rerum,
cap. 13.) that in his time, it was come to that madness and impiety, that
those carved and painted Images, were so worshipped, as if they had sense and
that the rude people did more confyde in them, than in Christ himself, or the
Saints.

Cassander also (lib. consuls. c. de imag.) affirms, that the worship of
Images, was come to that highest adoration amongst them, that ever was used by
Pagans, to be given to their Idols; and to that extreme vanity, that they
have left no-thing undone, which the very Heathens performed, in dressing and
decoring their Images. And there after concludes, that as long as the occasion
of such error is not taken away, but that Images decked with gold, and silk,
and precious stones, are set in Churches, and on Altars, that so long no end
of superstition is to be hoped for.

. 8. His Cruelty.
REvel. 17, 6. And I saw the Woman drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and
of the Martyrs of JESUS. This to be true of the Popes, I shall adduce only
their own witnesses: Platina, in the life of Sylvester the 3, testifyeth, That
the Popedom was at that time come to this pass, that he who exceeded most in
pride, and bryberie, attained to that degree of honor, all good men being
opp^essed by them: which fashion (says he) I wish our times had not kept: and
except God prevent it, we are to see worse.

In like manner, thus does the Author of Fasciculus exclaim, ( f. 49.) saying
of the 900. year. O worst time that ever was! (says he) where-in the godly
man is perished, and Truth is decayed amongst the sons of men! O what
contentions are in the Apostolic seat! what emulations, sects, envy,
ambition, intrusion; yea, and persecution is now! Alace, what company, what
assembly, yea, what man then, may be now secure?

Also in the life of Boniface the seave^th, he says, that many were slain,
as in the primitive Church, for that (to wit) which the Pope called Heresy.

And in the life of Innocent the third, like-wise he shows, that 100000. of
the Waldensis were partly slain, and put to flight, by the Earl of
Montferrat, assisted at the Pope's command, with Bishops and Abbots.

And that in Mystical Babylon, the blood shed in the whole Earth, may be
found, Onuphrius, in the life of Julius the second, shows, that the Pope was
the very fyre-brand, and stirrer up of Wars, everie-where through-out all
Christendom.

This is then, that killing of the two Witnesses, ( Rev. 11.3.) whom Augustine,
(hom. 8. in Apoc.) and Beda on that place, expound to be the true professors
of Christ's Church: and for number, called two, because (says Beda) of that
illumination by the light of the two Testaments, whose truth they purelie
profess, and whence, (says Augustine) all that suspicion of some, is
al-together excluded, who think, that those two Witnesses shall be two men,
who before Christ's coming had in the Clouds ascended unto Heaven.

. 9. His Simonie, or spiritual Merchandise.
2. PEt. 2.3. And through covetousness, shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you. Therefore, Revel. 18. amongst the merchandise of Mystical
Babylon, is recounted last, as most special, to sum up all the souls of men.

Of the practice of this simonie, first, in an ordinary custom of buying and
selling the Papacy it self, let that testimony of the Popes Secretary,
Platina, in the life of Sylvester the third, suffice, who says, that they who
most exceeded in Pride, and Bryberie, attained to that degree.

Next, for selling of inferior cures of souls, let first a Pope himself
speak, to wit, Pius the second, who before his coming to the Popedom, in his
fourth Epistle to John Peregall, his Procutor at Rome, writes thus: There is
no-thing (says he) that the Court of Rome gives without Money: for the very
imposition of hands, and the gifts of the holy Ghost are sold: neither is the
remission of sin bestowed upon any, without large Money.

Here-of also testifies their Poet, and Carmelite Friar, Mantuan, in his Book
Of the calamities of time, saying, All things are to be sold at Rome,
Churches, Priesthoods, Masses, holy Orders, etc. Prayers, yea, Heaven, and God
Himself are to be sold there.

Whence it is, that their own Duaren testifyeth, in his Book for defense of
the liberties of the French Church, that in the time of Pius the third, for the
annats of benefices in three years, the Pope drew out of France five and
twenty hundredth thousand Crowns; and for dispensation, to have two or three
Benefices together, that he got two hundredth thousands of Crowns.

Whence also it is, that the Abbot of Vrsperg, in his Chronicle ( f. 321.)
says, That the water-floods of all the Treasures of the Earth, did flow to
Rome, to quench her thirst of Money, which was al-wayes insatiable, and which
her Chancellarie and Penitentiarie Courts sufficiently can testifye.

. 10. His false Miracles, or lying Wonders.
2 Thessalonians. 2.9. Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power,
and signs, and lying wonders. Now, Augustine (de vnitate Ecclesiae) calls
these Miracles, lying: not only because they induce to lies, but because they
are either feigned by men, and so are not true, or else they are the tricks of
lying spirits, and so either a falso, or ad falsum.

Now, that both these last sorts have been frequent, and ordinary in the
Popish Church, is more than notorious.

Of the first sort then, their own Lyra, testifyeth thus, in his exposition on
Daniel, 11. Some-tymes now also in the Church, (says he) is a great
deceiving of the people, by miracles feigned by Priests, and their adherents,
for their worldly gain.

Of the second sort, where-by they chiefelie ectablished their Purgatory, thus
speaks Chrysostom, (hom. 29. in Matheum) These voices (says he) that say,
I am the soul of such a one, proceed from the fraud and deceit of the
Devil: for it is not the soul of the departed that says that, but Satan,
who, that he may deceive the hearers, feigneth himself to be that foul.

Of all Miracles then, that are pretended to be wrought in the latter days by
the Roman Church, we may answer with Augustine's words, saying, The Lord has
made us wary of these Miracle-workers, foretelling us, That in the last
days, false prophets shall arise, working signs and wonders, that they may
seduce (if it were possible) the very elect: so that how many Miracles they
obtrude for them, with as many arguments furnish they us, against them: seeing
no Church, but the false Church of Antichrist, is fore-tolde, in the latter
days, to work, or pretend such.

. 11. His Name, and Mark.
HIs Name, that most ancient Father Ireneus, in his fyft Book, says most
probably, is, Latinus: devotating there-by, that he shall be a Latin, or a
Roman Bishop. And the imposing of which name on others, is, by professing of
themselves to be Romanists, that all men may acknowledge there-by subjection
to his Sea, and service; or at least, be of the number of his name: that is,
(as Carthusian expounds) that they be at least so accounted by others, that
they are his followers.

But beside this, he has a Mark, which he imprinteth on his special ones;
and which Augustine, Beda, Lyra, and Carthusian, expounded, to be a full
conformity to his obedience, and doctrine, and which Under Christ's Name, in
Hypocrisy, (say they) they shall take upon them, in their foreheads, by an
open and impudent profession: and in their right hand, by a resolute practice
and action. And which may clearlie now-a-dayes be seen true, both in those
Jesuits, and their Iesuited followers; as-well in their practice of Idolatry
against GOD, as also in their treacherous cruelty against man lyke-wyse.

. 12. Of Antichrist's daily consumption, and final destruction at last.
2 Thessalonians. 2.8. And then shall that wicked man be revealed, whom the LORD
shall consume by the Breath of His Mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of His coming. This Cardinal Cajetan so expounds, By the Breath
of His Mouth, that is, (says he) by the spiritual virtue of the Word of the
Gospel, piece and piece, turning away men from Antichrist's following, and
leading them to embrace the truth of the Gospel. And this is that victory of
the Lamb, spoken of, Revel. 17.14. over those European Kings and Countries,
who before, as his secular arm, gave their power, with one accord, to the
Beast, and persecuted Christ's Servants; but being converted now, by the
spiritual virtue of the Gospel, hate that idolatrous Whore, and shall make
her desolate, and burn her with fire, for her threshing is come: and yet but a
little, and the time of Harvest shall come. Even so, Come Lord Jesus.

FINIS.
Escapes in Printing.
IN the second Chapter, page 42. to the Witnessing of Antiquity, proving,
that Personal succession, to the Chaires of true Teachers, priviledgeth not
from Error, is to be added the example of Honorius, the pretended successor
of Peter, and yet an Heretic, condemned in three famous Councels, and
avouched to be such, by a number of Auncientes, Greek and Latin, as
Tharasius, Theodorus, Epiphanius, Psellus, and Beda, whom Bellarmine sets
down, Lib. 4. de Pont. cap. 11.. septimum.

To the Confession lyke-wyse of Party, concerning the Church of Rome, is to be
added, these ingenuous words of Lyra, to wit, That many Popes have been found
to have made apostacy from the truth. Lyra, in Matthew. 16.

In the second chapter also, page 55. the Witnessing of Antiquity is omitted,
to wit, the testimony of saint Ambrose; which proves, Miere personal
succession, to be no note of the Church: whose words are these, They have not
Peter's heritage (says he) who have not Peter's faith. Lib. 1. de penit.
cap. 6. Neither do we prove the faith, by men's persons, (says Tertullian)
but rather the persons by the faith. Lib. de praescrip. contra hereticos, cap.
3.

The Confession also of our Adversaries is this: It follows not, therefore,
(says Bellarmine) necessarily, that there is the Church, where there is
succession. Bell. lib. 4. de Ecclesia, cap. 8.. dico secundo.

In like manner, in the same second chapter, and page 55. the Witnessing of
Antiquity is omitted, to wit, saint Augustine's testimony, proving Duration,
or Antiquity, to be no note of the Church: whose words are these, The two
Cities of the Church of the Godly, and Wicked, (says he) are in this
world, both to remain even to the end. Aug. in Psalm. 64. and lib. 15. de
civit. Dei, cap. 1.

The Confession lyke-wyse of our adversare Party, is this: Because many, even
till Christ's time, (says Cajetan) shall continue in the doctrine of
Antichrist; therefore it is said, Whom He shall abolish, with the
brightness of His coming. Cajet. in 2 Thessalonians. 2.

And, in a word, That all the Notes of the Church, which the Papists adduce,
(except those that may be reduced, to the profession of the Truth) are no
true Notes at all, let this Confession of our adversare Party suffice. For
true Notes (says Bellarmine) should be proper, and not common, no, not in
opinion. And again, They should also (says he) be al-to-gether
inseparable. Bell. lib. 4. de notis Ecclesiae, cap. 2.. ac primum, and. tertio.
Which being applied to Antiquity, Multitude, Universality, and such others,
will prove clearlie, That they are no true Notes, of the true CHVRCH.

FINIS.
A Table, of the Contents of this Book.
CHAP. I. Of Scripture.. 1. That the Apocrypha is no canonicke Scripture. 2.
That Scripture containe^h all things necessary for Salvation to know, without
uncertain Traditions. 3. That Scripture is plain in all things necessary for
Salvation to know. 4. That the Scripture should be read by the people: and
therefore translated in-to their vulgar Tongue. 5. That Scripture is the
perfect rule of Faith and Manners, and the infallible supreme Judge, in all
controversies of Religion. 6. That the Scripture is not a dumb Judge, but that
GOD by it speaks to his Church.
CHAP. II. Of the Church.. 1. That the estate of the true Church is not ever
visible to all men, and chiefelie to the enemies thereof. 2. That the visible
Church of Christian professors, may err from the truth in common, although not
all, and every one. 3. That the Church of Rome may err, and has erred. 4.
That personal succession, freeth not from error. 5. That the Jewish Church
pretended no less infallibility, than the Roman does, and yet erred. 6.
That the Word of GOD purelie preached, and due administration of Sacraments,
is the true mark of a true Church. 7. That Multitude is no note of a true
Church: neither personal succession, nor Duration. 8. That outward glory, and
visibilitie, is no note of a true Church. 9. That Miracles are no note of a
true Church.
CHAP. III. Of Peter, and the Pope's Supremacy.. 1. That Peter had no
supremacy of power over the rest of the Apostles: and so neither should the
Popes, over their successors. 2. That the Pope is not the Head, Husband, and
foundation of the Church: and therefore that all Christians are not bound to
be subject to him.
CHAP. IV. Of the Churches right Worship.. 1. That prayers, and all public
worship, should be in a known language. 2. That Christ is our only Mediator
in Heaven: and therefore that we should go to Him, and by Him, unto GOD
only. 3. That the Saints are not to be invocated. 4. That they know not our
hearts, nor our necessities, and therefore are not to be prayed unto. 5. That
no religious worship of Dulia, is to be given to any creature. 6. That no
religious worship is due to the Virgin Marie.
CHAP. V. Of Images.. 1. That it is unlawful, to represent GOD the Father by
an old Man. 2. That no adoration is due to Images, nor any sign thereof. 3.
That the practice of the old Idolaeters, and new Romanists, jumplie agree. 4.
That Images are not fit books for the instruction of Laics, but only GODS
Word.
CHAP. VI. That no Meats are to be abstayned from, for conscience sake. CHAP.
VII. That the Marriage of the Clergy, is lawful. CHAP. VIII. Of Sin.. 1.
That concupiscence in the Godly, is properly sin. 2. That all sin by
nature is mortal.
CHAP. IX. Of Predestination. That we are predestined of free Grace, and not
for foreseen works.
CHAP. X. Of Vocation.. 1. That we have no merits of congruitie, as natural
preparations, to our effectual calling. 2. That our conversion is of miere
grace, and not partly of our own free will.
CHAP. XI. Of Justification.. 1. That we are justified by Faith only. 2.
That no inherent righteousness in us, is the cause of our justification. 3.
That Christ's righteousness only, is imputed to us, unto our absolu^ion.
CHAP. XII. Of Sanctification.. 1. That none can keep the Law perfectly in
this life. 2. That none can work any works of Supererogation.
CHAP. XIII. Of Glorification.. 1. That our good works merit not eternal
life. 2. That the Saints leave no meritorious works, nor sufferings behind
them, to help others.
CHAP. XIV. Of Purgatory.. 1. That Christ's Blood only purges perfectly
from all sin. 2. That Christ delyvereth from all punishment heere-after. 3.
That no man can in any measure satisfy. 4. That the souls of the Godly at
death, immediately go to Heaven.
CHAP. XV. Of certayntie of Salvation. That the Godly may be assured of their
salvation.
CHAP. XVI. Of Perseverance. That the Godly can never totallie fall from
grace, nor finally perish.
CHAP. XVII. Of Baptism. That the children of the Godly, dying, are not, for
want of Baptism, deprived of God's blessed vision.
CHAP. XVIII. Of the LORD'S Supper.. 1. That Christ's glorified body, is only
in the Heavens. 2. That Christ's body is not in many places at once,
invisiblie, and vnpalpablie. 3. That after consecration, the substance of Bread
and Wine, remains. 4. That Christ is not received by the bodily mouth. 5.
That Christ is not received by the Wicked. 6. That the people should not be
deprived of the cup.
CHAP. XIX. Of the Mass.. 1. That the popish priests have no calling, to
sacrifice Christ's body in the Mass. 2. That the Mass is no propitiatory
sacrifice, but al-together derogatorie to Christ's.
CHAP. XX. OF ANTICHRIST.. 1. What sort of Adversary he is. 2. The time of
his coming. 3. The place in general where he is to be found. 4. The place
in special where his seat is. 5. His Qualities and Actions, whereby to know
him: and first, his excessive Pride. 6. His Blasphemy. 7. His Idolatry. 8.
His Cruelty. 9. His Simonie. 10. His false Miracles. 11. His Name, and Mark.
12. His daily consumption, and full overthrow.

FINIS.

