Mount Caluarie, THE SECOND PART: Compyled by the Reverend Father Don Anthonio
de Gueuara, Bishop of Mondonnedo, Chronicler and preacher unto Charles the fifth.

In this Book the Author treats of the Seven Words which Christ our
Redeemer spoke hanging upon the Cross.

Translated out of Spanish into English.

ornament with palm tree IL VOSTRO MALIGNARE NON GIOVA NVLLA.



LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for Edward White, and are to be sold at his
shop by the little North door of Pouls, at the sign of the Gun. Anno. 1597.

A Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
PAter ignoice illis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt. Chap. 2 How the son of God
said unto his Father, that those which crucify him, be not his enemies but
his friends. Fol. 7 Chap. 3 How the son of God put himself a mediator betwixt
God and mankind, and what torment he received thereby. Fol. 13 Chap. 4 Of many
qualities and conditions which the prayer of, Father forgive them, had in it:
and how it is meet for us to follow it in our prayers. Fol. 20 Chap. 5 Why the
father answered not his son when he prayed for his enemies. Fol. 24 Chap. 6
How Christ prayed for his enemies on the cross more heartily then he did in
the garden for himself, seeing the one prayer was made with condition, and the
other not. Fol. 30 Chap. 7 How God is more merciful now than he was in time
past: and why Christ did not say that he did pardon his enemies, when he asked
pardon for them of his Father. Fol. 35 Chap. 8 How our Lord reckons with the
Synagogue: and of five cruelties which the Jews used in the death of Christ.
Fol. 42 Chap. 9 How that Christ's mercy was far greater toward the Synagogue,
than their naughtiness toward him; seeing he pardoned her, though she
desired no pardon. Fol. 51
The Contents of the second word.
OF the conversion of the good thief, and of the great wonders which our Lord
did unto him in this case. Fol. 64 Chap. 2 How Judas Iscarioth was a great
thief; of the thefts he committed; and how he fell from the apostleship.
Fol. 69 Chap. 3 Here are reckoned many other great offenses which Judas
committed, and diverse treasons which he did against Christ. Fol. 76 Chap. 4 Of
the great virtues which the good thief had which died with Christ, and how he
believed: and of that which the Prophet Jeremy speaks to this purpose. Fol.
83 Chap. 5 How three hours in which the good thief was with Christ upon the
cross, did profit him more than the three years profited Judas in the which
he followed Christ: and how some steal until they come to the gallows, and
how this thief stole upon the gallows. Fol. 90 Chap. 6 How the good thief had
nothing remaining on the cross, but his heart and his tongue: and that by
these two he gained glory: and there are curious points uttered touching the
heart. Fol. 96 Chap. 7 How the naughty thief lost himself only for want of
faith: and of two chalices which the scripture makes mention of, of which both
the thieves drank of. Fol. 105 Chap. 8 Of the great charity which the good
thief had toward the naughty thief in correcting him of evil doing, and in
aduising him of the good which he lost. Fol. 113 Chap. 9 Why the good thief
did not chide with the naughty thief, because he did not love Christ, as he
did chide with him because he did not fear God: there are many notable things
brought touching the fear of our Lord. Fol. 121 Chap. 10 How the son of God
was more grateful unto the good thief, which bare him company on the cross,
than Pharoahs cupbearer was to Joseph who accompanied him in prison. Fol. 130
Chap. 11 Of these words Domine memento mei, Lord remember me, which the good
thief spoke unto Christ: the which words are devoutly and deeply expounded.
Fol. 139 Chap. 12 How our Lord heard the thieves prayer upon the cross, and
how Christ answered in the seven words for sieve which he spoke unto Christ.
Fol. 149 Chap. 13 How the son of God never used this word Paradise, until he
promised it unto the good thief: and of many learned expositions of this
saying, Hodie mecum eris Paradiso. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.
Fol. 157
The Contents of the third Word.
THat the love which the mother of God had, did exceed the love of all other
men, and also the love of Angels. Fol. 174 Chap. 2 How that if the love which
the mother bare unto her son was great, so likewise the love which the son
bare his mother was no less: and to prove this, there is expounded a saying of
the Canticles. Fol. 181 Chap. 3 Of the first and second word which holy Simeon
spoke unto our Lady: and how many fall from the law of Christ, without his
fault. Fol. 189 Chap. 4 Of the third word which old Simeon spoke unto the
Virgin in the Temple: and of three authorities touching this purpose. Fol. 195
Chap. 5 How Solomon did inherit the kingdom of his father David's pleasures:
and how Christ did inherit the kingdom of trauails. Chap. 6 Of the sword of
grief which killed the son of God, and went through his blessed mother. Fol.
212 Chap. 7 How the Virgin and her family stood hard by the cross, and others
sat a far off. Fol. 220
The Contents of the fourth Word.
HOw Christ in this speech more than in all the rest seems to change his
style of speaking. Fol. 233 Chap. 2 How Christ does complain upon his father,
because he does break all his anger upon his body. Fol. 242 Chap. 3 How Christ
complains of his Father, because he took all his friends from him in his
passion, and all others which he knew. Fol. 247 Chap. 4 How Christ complains
on his Father, because he bathed his body with the blood of his veins, and
drowned his heart in waters of distress. Fol. 255 Chap. 5 How Christ
complains of his Father, because he did permit those to crucify him which
were wont to be his friends: and how he calls them friends. Fol. 260 Chap. 6
How Christ complains unto his father, because they made more account of
Iepthes daughter in the Synagogue, than they do at this day of his death in
the church. Fol. 265 Chap. 7 How Christ complains unto his father, because
they did open his wounds through malice, as they did stop up Isaacs wels
through envy. Fol. 273 Chap. 8 How the son of God complains to his father,
because they did load his body with stripes, and his heart with care and
anguish. Fol. 286 Chap. 9 How the son of God complains upon the Synagogue,
that having carried them upon his back, yet they be ungrateful unto him.
Fol. 297 Chap. 10 How Christ complains unto his Father upon us for our
ungratefulness, considering that he has taken upon himself all our offenses.
Fol. 303 Chap. 11 Christ complains unto his Father, how badly envy did use
him: and how in Samaria they sold an ass head for fourscore pence, and they
gave but thirty for his. Fol. 310 Chap. 12 Christ complains unto his Father,
that all other martyrs had their pains and troubles inflicted upon them at
diverse times, and he is all at once. Fol. 318
The Contents of the fifth Word.
WHy the son of God did bid all those which were athirst come unto him, and yet
said upon the cross that he himself was a thirst. Fol. 335 Chap. 2 How the
Crows gave the Prophet Helias meat, and how the Jews gave Christ neither meat
nor drink. Fol. 342 Chap. 3 How the hangmen drank the wine which was brought
unto him and the other thieves, and did suffer Christ to die with thirst. Fol.
349 Chap. 4 He follows the authority of the Prophet Osee, and speaks of the
garments which Christ left in pledge. Fol. 356 Chap. 5 Where is brought a
figure of Tobias, and declared to the purpose. Fol. 362 Chap. 6 Here the Author
follows the figure which he touched before, which is declared well to the
purpose: and there is brought also a prophecy of Jeremy. Fol. 368 Chap. 7 Of a
new thirst which King David had, which was a thirst not to drink, but to save
himself. Fol. 376 Chap. 8 God complains that we forsake him for vile and
base things: and does compare us unto old pooles. Fol. 381 Chap. 9 How the
son of God did not refuse to drink gaul and vinegar, although he kniw it
would kill him. Fol. 385 Chap. 9 How the synagogue could give Christ nothing to
drink but rotten dregs. Fol. 390 Chap. 11 How the synagogue gave Christ that to
drink that she her self was, that is gaul, and that which she had, that is
vinegar. Fol. 393 Chap. 12 How that the thirst that Christ had upon the cross,
was not so much for drink, as to desire to suffer for us. Fol. 398 Chap. 13
Where he goes forward with the figure aforesaid. Fol. 405 Chap. 14 Of the
cruelty and ingratitude that the Jews used in giving Christ gaul and vinegar,
and how he satisfied for every sin in particular. Fol. 407
The Contents of the sixth Word.
HEre are put diverse understandings of this speech: Fol. 429 Chap. 2 Against
disordered eaters and drinkers, and how Christ was a greater martyr than any
other, and there is declared a prophecy of Esayas. Fol. 434 Chap. 3 Of the
greatness of the son of God, and how all things have weight and measure, and
number, saving only the humanity of Christ. Fol. 441 Chap. 4 Herein is
entreated of the greatness and wealth of Salomons temple, and how that in the
holy temple of Christ's humanity, the holyghost has bestowed greater
workma^ship, riches, and spiritual gifts, the^ the temple which Salomo^ built.
Fol. 448 Chap. 5 How that all the mysteries and prophesies which God had
prophesied of him were fulfilled in Christ in Jerusalem. Fol. 455 Chap. 6 Here
he entreats of that high prayer which Christ made upon the table, saying,
Pater sancte non pro mundo rogo, sed pro illis vt serves eos a malo. In which
prayer if he obtained consta^cy and stoutnes for his Apostles, yet he forgot
not the weak saying, Non rogo vt tollas eos a mu^do. Fol. 463 Chap. 7 Herein
he entreats of the variety, and diversity of names of the sacrifices of the
old Testament, and of the excellency of the sacrifice of the new Testament.
Fol. 473 Chap. 8 Wherein is declared a figure when Moses did anoint the altar
seven times with one finger, and how that unction was a figure of Christ, and
fully accomplished in his most sacred humanity. Fol. 480
The Contents of the seventh Word.
HOw God is the only and true comforter, and how he was Deus vltionum to the
Synagogue, and is to the church Pater misericordiarum. Fol. 486 Chap. 2 Of the
difference that is betwixt David's testament, and Christ's testament, seeing the
ane comma^deth to revenge other men's injuries, and the other pardons his own
death. Fol. 492 Chap. 3 Of the difference betwixt the blood of Abel and the
blood of Christ, and how unlike their cries unto God are. Fol. 496 Chap. 4
Where Christ complains on the Christian man's soul, because she was
ungrateful for the benefit of her creation and redemption. Fol. 498
FINIS.
Here begins the first of the seven words, which Christ our redeemer spoke
upon the altar of the Cross, saying, Pater ignose illis quia nesciuns quid
faciunt: that is, My father, pardon these which crucify me, because they know
not what they do.
CHAP. I. Pater ignosce illis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt.
THe son of God spoke these words at the hour of his death upon the altar of
the cross, as if he would say. O my eternal, just, and holy father, the first
thing that I request of thee on this cross is that thou would forgive all
these, which take my life from me, seeing they know not how highly they offend
thy goodness and clemency. Super inimicos mees prudent em me fecist^, says
king David in his Psalms, as if he would say. O great God of Israel, I give
thee many thanks, for that thou have endued me with the virtue of prudence, by
the which I have learned to do my self good by the enemies which persecute
me, and forgive them the injuries which they have done unto me. For the better
understanding of that which Christ said upon the cross, and of that which
David uttered in this Psalm, it is to be understood, that amongst all the
Cardinal virtues, the first and chiefest is, Prudence, because that without
her, justice ends in cruelty, temperancie in weakness, sloth and idleness;
fortitude in tyranny, might and power in pride, boldness in folly and
madness, and knowledge and skill in malice. Plate said, that Prudence was such
a great gift, that with her alone the wise man amer^^l^th that wh^^h is past;
strengthe^^th that which is broken, rules and governs that which is present,
provides for that which is to come, redresseth that which is amiss, and
mainteineth that which is well done. Eschines the great orator says, I have
known many Grecians of my time which were eloquent in that which they spoke,
subtle in that they invented, bold in that which they took in hand, wary in
their doings, close and dissembled in that they went about to have, and also
modest in their behauior, which notwithstanding for want of a little wisdom
and prudence lost all in one hour. Socrates said often unto his scholars, that
they were not tied and bound wholly unto the letter of that which he taught
them: for I am your master said he, to tell you only what you are to do, but
prudence must afterward teach you when you are to do it, and how you are to
do it, and whether you are to do it or not; and if you are to do it, then
why are you to do it. Cicero to Atticus says, Thou art not to call him wise
which has seen much, read much, and knows much, but him only who knows
how to use it well, and apply it in time and place: for there is nothing more
prejudicial to a Commonwealth then to be governed by one which has great
knowledge and small wisdom. The famous S. Augustine says in an epistle, when
the son of God said, Estote prudentes sicut serpents, Be ye wise like
serpents: what else would he say, but that simple and wise men were better for
the government of his church than the learned and arrogant. Seneca in a book
De virtutibus, says, The wise man loves with moderation, serves with care,
suffers with patience, speaks with measure, visits without disquietnesse,
promises that which he is able to perform, concealeth his intention,
trusts whom he ought, holds his tongue in that he knows, and never
strives with him which is mightier than himself. Noui David viru^ bellic^sum
and prudentem verbis, said a knight of the Jews unto king Saul being possessed
with the devil, as if he had said; I know one of Isaies sons called David, who
can deliver thee of this evil, who is in age a youth, in blood noble, in
countenance shining and bright, red heared, low of stature, strong in forces,
and above all very considerate and wise in his words. It is much to be noted
that the holy scripture does not commend David, for that he showed wisdom in
his behavior and countenance or in government, but only in speaking, because
there is no one thing whereby a man is known to be endued with the virtue of
prudence and wisdom more than by the words he utters with his mouth. Seneca
says, That all the things of this life have a place of remaining, and a being,
in which they are maintained, and time in which they are made, a quality and
condition unto which they incline, and an end where they rest: which we say by
reason of speaking, in the which also is required a convenient time for that
which we are to utter, and order in knowing how to speak. Vae mihi quia tacui,
said the Prophet Jeremy, as if he would say, Woe be to me, woe be to me O
mighty God of Israel, for all the sins which I have known, and all the
naughtiness which I have concealed and dissembled, the which if I had revealed
would have been amended, and the which if I had discovered should have been
punished. Also the wicked Cain said, Mayor est iniquitas mea, quam vt veniam
mer^ar, the which words it had been better for him never to have spoken than
to have uttered, for he did sin much more in not acknowledging mercy in God,
than in depriving his brother Abel of his life: behold then how Jeremy was
found fault with for holding his tongue, and Cain rebuked for speaking, whereof
we may infer, what great need we have of the virtue of prudence, because she
may instruct us what to say, and advise us likewise what we ought not to
utter. Solomon said like a very wise man, Yempus tace^di, and tempus loquendi,
in which words he gives us license to speak, and brideleth us to hold our
tongue, because it is an extremity to be always silent, and the sign of a
fool to talk overmuch. Cicero in an epistle says, That a man is known to
be good or bad by the works he does, but he is known to be wise or a fool
by the words he speaks. To come then to our purpose, all this long discourse
which we have made is to prove, that the son of God was very patient in
holding his peace, and very discreet in speaking: for he never spoke unless
thereby he thought he should do good, nor did never hold his peace, unless he
thought that sca^dale should rise of his speech, B^de says upon these words,
d^r^ine verba vitae habes, That the son of God was so discreet and wary in his
words, that he never opened his mouth unless it were to preach, nor never held
his peace unless it were to pray. Christ's own enemies reported openly of him,
Quod nunquam homo sic loquutus est, that no man ever spoke as he spoke: for he
never murmured against any man, he never accused any man, nor iniuried any for
injury done unto him. S. Barnard says; O sweet Jesus, redeemer of my soul,
the Prophet says very well of thee, Ignitum eloquium tuum, considering that
all thy holy words moved us to pity, stirred us to charity, invited us to
goodness, trod down wickedness, provoked tears, converted Commonwealths,
lightened our consciences, and made our hearts meek and gentle. They presented
Christ before four seats of judgment the day of his holy passion, that is
before Pilate, before Herod, before the high priests houses, the Pontife
Caiphas, and the tree of the cross before his father, before whom he spoke
only, and in the presence of the others was for the most part always silent,
and that for certain not without a high mystery and hidden secret. The mystery
then of this secret is, that he would not answer, in the first two Tribunals
when they accused him of wickedness and scandale: but upon the cross where he
was an advocate, he began presently to speak and plead for us, saying. Pater
ignosce illis, Father forgive them, in so much that for to excuse my offenses,
he omitteth to answer for himself. What means this O good Jesus, what
means this? Thou do not answer when thou art spoken unto in that that
touches thy self, and in that that concerns me do thou answer not
spoken unto? Do thou make intercession for my fault, and do thou not
remember thy own life? Who but thou did ever excuse those which accused him,
and defend them which condemn him? Anselmus in his meditations says, O quam
ignitum est eloquium tuum, My sweet Jesus seeing that on the cross thou
did excuse me which was in the fault, and returnedst no answer for thy
self being without fault, the which thou did being enflamed with love, and
very full of grief: Now that thou do entreat, now that thou do crave,
why do thou not entreat thy good father that he would mitigate thy griefs,
as well as forgive sinners? Have thou no pity of thy own holy members which
are loosed one from another, and have thou it toward thy enemies which are not
as yet converted unto thee? Seeing thou art as well bound to defend the
innocent, as make intercession for the wicked, why have thou no pity upon thy
own innocent flesh, as well as of my enormious crimes? Vbertinus says, O quam
vehementer est ignitum eloquium tuum, My good Lord, seeing thou do excuse
him who is culpable, entreatest without entreaty, forgiuest without
satisfaction, heapest up for those which will not repay thee, and also die
for those which have put thee to death: Seeing the law of Moses commands that
the malefactor should pay a tooth for a tooth, a hand for a hand, foot for
foot, eye for eye, and life for life, why do thou O mighty redeemer give thy
hands unto those which bind the^, thy feet unto those which pierce them with
nails, thy eyes unto those which make thee blind, and thy life unto those
which take thy life from thee? If thou will not revenge thy injuries, why do
thou not let justice do justice upon thy enemies? S. Barnard says in a
sermon, from the time that our Savior was taken in the garden, until he was
crucified on the cross, the works which he did were many, but the words which
he spoke were very few; whereby he gave us to understand, that in time of
great vexations and persecutions, it is fitter for us to help our selves with
patience than with eloquence. In this first prayer which the son made unto
the father, it is to be noted who the father is, what that is that he asks,
of whom he asks, when he asks, from whence he asks, how he asks, and
for whom he asks; for by so much the more one business is greater than
another, by how much the inconveniences are greater which it draws after it.
He who asks is the son, he of whom he asks is the father, that which he
asks is pardon, the place from whence he asks is the cross, the time is
when he dies, those for whom are his enemies, the manner how is with many
tears; in so much that a prayer offered with all these circumstances, ought
of great reason to be heard. This prayer of Pater ignosce illis, Father pardon
them, is a very high prayer, seeing that he which made it was the son of
God, who says, Si quid petieritis patrem in nomine meo dabit vobis, And if
this be so, how is it possible, that the father should not grant all that
which the son requesteth, seeing he promises to give all things that shall
be demanded in his name? If this be a great prayer by reason of him which
makes it, it is also a very great and high prayer by reason of him unto whom
it is made, which is, Pater misericordiaru^ and deus totus consolationis, The
father of mercies and the God of all comfort: the which eternal father
created us with his power, guides and governs us with his wisdom,
sustaineth and vpholdeth us with his essence, and forgiueth us with his
elemency, how is it possible that a son which has such a father, or a
father which has such a son should not grant his demand? This prayer of
Pater ignosce illis, was also very great because of the place where it was
made, which was in the mount of Caluarie, and on the altar of the cross,
where the wrath of the eternal father was appeased, his blessed son put to
death, the wicked devil overcome, the old sin forgiven, and all the world
there redeemed. S. Ambrose upon S. Luke says, how much the Jews dishonored
the holy temple, so much Christ honored the Mount of Caluary; for they made a
den of thieves of the house of prayer, and the son of God made a house of
prayer, of a den of thieves. O good Jesus what is there now that thou do not
make clean, what do thou not renew, what do thou not sanctify, what
do thou not make holy, seeing thou wentest to the Mount of Caluary to pray
for sinners, which before was infamous, by reason of execution done there upon
malefactors? The son of God praying on the infamous and stinking place of the
Mount of Caluary, gives all men license to pray unto God, where they will, and
how they will, and for whom so ever they will, because the perfection of
prayer, does not consist of the place where we pray, but of the small or great
devotion with the which we pray: According unto that which the Samaritane
woman said unto Christ. That many Jews would not pray but within the temple;
and it may be to take away this error we do read that the son of God did not
pray there, but preach only; which our blessed Savior did because no man
should excuse himself from prayer and devotion, saying that the temple was
shut up. Vbertinus says, that the son of God is not ashamed to pray, Pater
ignosce illis, on the dunghill of the Mount of Caluary; and art thou ashamed to
pray alone in thy house? O what a high charge and office the office of
meditation and praieris, considering that Christ his being naked on the cross
with his hands bound and tied, his feet peirced with nails, his head crowned
with thorns, his mouth seasoned with vinegar, did not hinder him to pray,
Pater ignosce illis, Father forgive them: and seeing he pardoned and forgave
with his heart, and prayed with his tongue.

CHAP. II. How the son of God said unto his father, that those which crucify
him, be not his enemies but his friends.
QVid sunt plagae istae in medio manuum tuarum, his plagatus sum in dom^ eorum
qui me diligebant, said God by the Prophet Zachary in the thirteenth chapter,
as if he would say, Who has given thee these cruel wounds in the midst of
thy hands; the Prophet answered and said, Lord, they wounded me thus, in the
house of those which loved me much. These words were not spoken voluntarily,
nor of every man, seeing they cannot be applied, neither to the nature of
mankind nor of angel, because men are not wont to receive stripes and words in
their friends houses, but in their enemies. The Prophet touches a new thing,
and a high mystery, in saying that he was whipped and wounded in the house of
his well-willers, and therefore it is needful for us to lift up our
understanding, to discover and reach unto this high secret, because that high
mysteries are fit only for heroical and high persons. This demand and this
answer, passed on the altar of the cross, betwixt the eternal father which
asked, and his blessed son which answered: who [not being content to entreat
only for his enemies, saying: Pater, Father forgive them] would also have
excused them, and take all blame from them, in saying, Nesciunt quid faciunt,
They know not what they do: the father said unto him, Quid sunt plagae istae?
so said the father unto his son, which is as much as to say, O my son if thou
do say, that none of these Jews, are guilty and culpable of thy death and
passion, I pray thee tell me, who made these cruel wounds in the midst of thy
tender hands? The son answered his father, His plagatus sum, in domo eorum qui
me diligebant, which is as much as to say; O holy and eternal father, I
received these wounds which thou see in my tender hands, in the house of
those which were my friends: and if I be ioifull in receiving them, why art not
thou glad in forgiving them? Thou know well O my father, that nothing can be
called an injury in this world, but only that which is done against our proper
will. If I die by thy commandment, and to obey thy will, and because so it is
needful for the world, why should I call them enemies which execute thy
commandments? Give me leave O my father, give me leave seeing I must die, to
sell my death dearly, give me leave, seeing I lose my life to employ it well,
which I shall think well bestowed, if thou pardon those which take my life
from me, and have pity on those which offend thee: for what does it avail,
that I die for sinners, if thou will not forgive them their sins? Thou
know O my good father, that by pardoning and suffering, the redemption of
the world must be wrought. If thou should not be satisfied with the
death which I suffer, and with the life which I offer thee; in giving me
another life, I would offer it unto thee, and giving me another death, I
would accept it, to the end O my good father, that thou should be wholly
appeased, and all mankind pardoned. O everlasting goodness, O infinite
charity, O inspeakable clemency shown in this answer, calling that a house
of friends which was a fortress of enemies, and going about to excuse those
which he should accuse, and in purposing to appease him, whom he should
have stirred up to wrath and indignation. Fulgencius upon this place says,
Notwithstanding all the enemies and persecutors which the son of God had in
this world, yet he never used this word Enemy: which is evident by this
demand of his fathers, who asking him where he had been so euilly handled and
wounded, sought out a new devise because he would avoid this word of enemy,
and lay the fault upon his friend rather than confess that he had any enemies,
because God was wont to have many familiar friends in the house of the
synagogue, which were holy men: our blessed savior would not account of the
injuries which the Jews did presently unto him, nor of the vvounds which
they gave him, but respected rather the services which the old Patriarchs had
done unto him. It is greatly to be noted and weighed, that in the answer
which the son gave unto the father, he did not say that he had been vvounded
in the house of those which then loved him, but in the house of those which
were wont to love him, for he says, In domo eorum qui me diligebant, and
not qui me diligunt, and yet notwithstanding all this, he does not only, not
call them enemies, but tells his father that they did unto him the works of
friends. What means this O sweet Jesus, what means this? If those of the
house of Israel were thine, in times past, I pray thee did not thou unto
them more good turns than they did services unto thee? If thou do reckon of
the services which the fathers did unto the^^ a thousand years ago, why do
thou not make account of the vvounds, which their children gave thee not
longer than one hour agone? O good Jesus, O redeemer of my soul what humane
judgment, yea what angels understanding is able to conceive or reach unto
this, why thou should rather respect old services, which ordinarily other
men forget, than thy own injuries which run freshly from thy blood like
streams? Seeing we have already told you who prayed, which was the son; and
unto whom he prayed, which was the father; and where he prayed, to wit
upon the cross: it is time now to tell you what prayer he made, and for whom
he prayed, for seeing the son of God betook himself to prayer in such a
narrow extremity, it is to be thought, that he entreated some great and
weighty matter. Vbertinus says, That when the divine word was nailed upon
the cross, as it were almost dead, having his flesh pierced with nails, and
his bowels burning with the love of charity, forgetting his own self, and
having his enemies in remembrance, lifting up his holy eyes unto heaven, said,
Pater ignosce illis, qui nesciunt quid faciunt, which is as much as to say, O
my eternal and blessed father, in recompense of my coming into the world,
preaching thy name, appeasing thy wrath, reconciling thee unto the world, I
desire of thee this one thing for a spiritual guerdon, and reward of all my
travails, that is, that thou would pardon these sinful Jews, father I am
very well pleased, that thou would not yield unto my natural desire of
life, when I prayed unto thee in the garden, if it would now please thee to
hear me in praying for them: for I think it a far greater benefit that
they live in their souls, than a hurt unto me to die in body. Pater ignosce
illis, Father forgive them, for I die because they sinned, and if I die it is
because they may live: and in so difficult a matter as this, it is far greater
reason that thou have more regard unto my new death, than unto their old fault.
Father forgive them, seeing the death which prevailed on the wood, I have here
crucified with me upon the cross, the which being so it is far greater
reason, that thou esteem more of the charity with the which I die for them,
than of their malice with the which they put me to death. Father forgive
them, for if thou vvilt punish these Jews with all rigor of justice, it will
be but a small punishment to condemn them for ever to hell: but if thou do
otherwise, as there was never any wickedness done like unto this, so likewise
thou shall never bestow thy accustomed mercy like as in forgiving these their
offenses. Father forgive them, for if my death be sufficient to redeem all
those which shall hereafter be borne, or be already borne, it is not reason
that these unhappy Jews should want the benefit of it, and so much the more
because that if my blood be shed by thy holy will and consent it would be
reason that it should be well employed by thee. Forgive them O my father
forgive them, for seeing the party iniuried (which am I) do pardon the injury,
why wilt not thou O my father pardon that which concerns thy justice? What
has justice to do there, where there is no complaint of one against another?
Father forgive them, seeing the time is now come whereof the Prophet speaks,
Tempus miserendi deus tempus miserendi, Time of forgiving good Lord, a time of
forgiving: it is neither just nor reasonable that rigor should take place
there, where mercy by thee has been publickely proclaimed. If it be true as
true it is, that, misericordia and veritas obuiuerunt sibi, and also that
iusticia and pax osculatae sunt, Why will thou execute justice upon this
people, seeing the Prophet says, that peace and justice have embraced one the
other. Father forgive them, seeing I ask it in the end of my life, and entreat
thee at the hour of my death, thou must think my father that it behooves me
very much, that they be pardoned, because that by my example none should
presume to call himself my servant, in my church, if he do not reconcile
himself first unto his brother. Father forgive the^, for seeing the old law
ends when I shall say, Consummatum est, All is finished; and the new law
begins when I shall say, Commendo spiritum meum, I commend my spirit, it
would not be reasonable that under the law of Grace, we should consent that any
thing should be unfitting or unfit, nor that under the law of Love, we should
permit ranckor and malice. Father forgive them; for if in the wilderness of
Aaron, when thou wast angry with all the Jews, thou did forgive them, and
reconcile them unto thee for no other cause but only because Moses and Aaron
did offer a little incense unto thee: why will thou not forgive them now,
seeing I do now offer for them, not incense, but my self crucified? Father
forgive them, for seeing they be thy creatures by creation, thy clients by
law, my children by redemption, my brethren by blood, my acquaintance by
education, my followers in doctrine, and so near of kindred unto my disciples;
why should I consent to their loss and condemnation? Father forgive them,
seeing I came not into the world to procure thee enemies, but to give thee new
friends, and to take thy old griefs and sorrows from thee: for otherwise if
by my death, this people should remain in thy disgrace and hatred, it would
seem that my death, would rather move thee to indignation, than appease thy
wrath. If my death make not an atonement betwixt you, who is able to do it? O
my good father when thou did command me to come down from heaven, and also
to die upon the cross, did not thou promise and agree, that thy anger and
my life, and my life and thy anger should have an end at the same hour? Father
forgive them, and fulfill thy agreement, give that which thou have promised,
and seeing in thy presence my life is deerer unto thee than thy anger, I am
glad and willing to die, if by that means thy ire may be appeased. O blessed
prayer, O holy wish and request, never heard of before! O happy petition,
which thou made sweet Jesus in thy last hour, wherein thou did show by
deeds all that thou had preached with words, seeing thou did entreat
for those which put thee to death, and ask pardon for those which crucified
thee. Let all the prayers be brought forth, that ever were made in the world,
and we shall easily perceive, that there was never any equal unto this prayer
of Christ's: for there was never any which had that intent which he had, nor
asked that which he asked, nor compassed that which he compassed. What did
the great Patriarch Jacob request of Laban his father in law, but only his
fair daughter Rachel for his spouse? What did the women of Israel demand of
the women of Egypt save only their silver and gold? What did Anna Helcans wife
and Samuels mother, request of God in the temple, saving only that it would
please him to give her a son? What did the Jew maid called Axa ask of her
father Calaph but only the pasture which held water, because the other which
he had given her was dry? What did the mother of the Zebedees require of
Christ, but only that he would make them the greatest lords of his kingdom?
Which of all these do ask any thing of God for their enemies, or yet for
their friends? Every man did ask for that which was fittest for his own
turn, every man sought for that which was good for himself, no man entreated
for his neighbor, no man remembered his enemy, no man made intercession for
another, no man loaded himself with other men's faults. Only the son of God
made man, prays for his enemies in the last supper, saying; Pater, keep
those which believe in me: and prays also upon the cross for his enemies,
saying: Pater ignosce illis, so that like a merciful lord he defends the
good, and pardons the wicked.

CHAP. III. How the son of God put himself a mediator betwixt God and mankind,
and what torment he received thereby.
QVaesiui de eis virum qui interpeneret sepem, and staret oppositus contra me:
these are the words of the great God of Israel, spoken to the Prophet
Ezechiell being in the captivity of Babylon, not far from the river Cobar in
the two and twentieth chapter of his prophecy. And it is as if he would say,
Ezechiell I have been many a day angry with Jerusalem, and I seek out a holy
and a virtuous man, which should put himself like a hedge betwixt me and the
people of Israel, because their offenses might not come unto me, nor my
punishment reach unto them. We may infer of the complaint which our Lord
makes in this place, what great scarsitie there was in the synagogue, of good
men, seeing he found not one among them all which was worthy to appease the
wrath of the Lord, and to help and succor the people. The merits of good men
are of great force and power before God, for to pardon the evil in their
faith, which is easily seen in all the cities of Sodom which he did pardon
for ten good men's sake, and all the twelve tribes of Israel which he pardoned
for one alone: but alas neither in the synagogue was there found that one,
neither in Sodom those ten. To say the truth it was no marvel that he was
not to be found in all the synagogue, with those conditions, which God required
in him: for he ought to have been a man in discretion and not a child, and the
Lord himself was to make choice of him and no other, and he was to be an
Hebrew and not a Gentile, and he was to put himself a mediator betwixt God and
the people, and it was required that he should be partial on neither side. And
our Lord was not content only with this, but that mediator ought also to have
desert and merit in him, to appease Gods indignation, and not sin to stir
him to wrath. S. Gregory upon Ezechiell says, I doubt whether a man endued
with these conditions, and shining with these virtues, might be found amongst
the Angelical Hierarchies, how much less among humane creatures, because such
a one should be more than man, yea he should be equal with God. Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and David, and all the letanie of the old and new testament, were
not equal with God, nor any thing more then men, seeing they were borne in
sin, and attained unto no divine secret without it were revealed unto them.
The son of God only was equal unto God, and the divine word only was more
than man, because in him, and in no other, those conditions of a holy man were
found which God sought for, and the virtues which should pacisie God his wrath
and anger. The first condition which God required, was, that this mediator
should be a man in wisdom, and not a child, which may better be verified in
Christ than in any other, seeing that from the first instant that he took
humane flesh upon him he saw the divine essence, and knew as much as he does
now in glory, which is not so in other men, seeing they are long a bringing
up, and wax old very timely. The son of God was also an Hebrew of the
tribe of Judah a which was the most honorable stock of all the tribes, and
he was of Nazareth which was a holy land: and he was also the most
honorable of all his kindred. Thirdly, the son of God was best beloved of
his father because of him, and of no other, he said in his baptism. Hic est
filius meus dilectus, as if he would say, This is only my lawful child, in
him only am I well pleased, this only is my heir, him only I do tender and
love, in him I delight, and take great contentment. Fourthly, the son of God
was a very thick mud wall, a close hedge, which put himself betwixt God
and the people, when he suffered himself to be crucified upon the cross,
upon the which as strong battelments they discharged all the sins which
were in the world, and all the wrath which God had. O glorious hedge, O
happy wall, O strong vvounds, such vvast thou O redeemer of my soul, seeing
thou did permit, and consent to put thy self a mediator betwixt God and
man, to the end they should unload and put upon thee all the sins of the
world, and all the vengeance which God was to take for them. S. Gregory upon
Ezechiell says, The son of God only was the man he sought for, this was
the wall he required, this was the mediator he asked for, this is the
pacifier of the old quarrel, and of Gods wrath, this is the reformer of new
grace, and this is the ouerthrower of the old sin. S. Jerome upon this place
says. The man which God sought by Ezechiel, who else was he, but the son of
the living God, and our redeemer? Who like unto an vnexpugnable wall, did put
himself boldly betwixt God and us, saying, Pater ignosce illis, Father forgive
them. By which words, he did not like, that our sins should come into the
sight of God, neither suffered he Gods wrath and vengeance to descend upon us.
Origin upon S. Mark says, That when the two chief captains of the
synagogue, Moses and Aaron, perceived that the Lord began to pour his wrath
and anger upon the people, they went immediately unto the tabernacle, the one to
pray, and the other to do sacrifice to be a mean betwixt God and them; because
that otherwise, God would have poured out his anger upon them, and the
Synagogue have received great hurt and detriment. That which happened unto
those two holy men in the desert happened unto Christ on the mount of Caluarie,
who seeing the elements to be troubled, and the dead to rise again, to revenge
his death and punish that nation, he made himself a mediator and a stikeler
betwixt God and them, and prayed, Paterignosce illis, as if he would say,
Pardon them my father, pardon them; for if thou will not pardon them, it will
be a greater grief unto me to see them lost, then my passion which causes
me to die. What would become of the Jews then, if Christ had not said unto
his father, father forgive them, and what should betide us now if he should not
say. Pater parce illis, Spare them father. S. Barnard says in a sermon, That
this word of Ignosce illis, Forgive them, is of such a deep consideration,
that it should never be out of a sinners mouth, nor blotted out of his memory:
because that the son of God did show his mercy more unto us in two things
the^ in all the rest: that is, in the pardon which he got us of his father, and
in the blood which he shed for us on the cross. Anselmus reasoning with Christ
says, What do thou cry for, what do thou ask, what do thou entreat
for, what will thou, what seek thou, what say thou to thy father O good
Jesus, what say thou? I entreat O my father, that thou would forgive
them, because they know not what they do, and that thou would load my flesh
with thy anger; and I entreat that there remain nothing vnteconciled unto
thee, because that my redemption would seem imperfect and insufficient, if
there should remain in any a fault to be redeemed, and in thy self any anger
to punish us. O what an enflamed charity, what a wonderful example, what
incredible patience, what entire love thou did show us O sweet Jesus in
this speech of, Father forgive them, the which thou did utter not for an
ease to thy grief, but in favor of thy persecutors! O what infinite
goodness, what unspeakable clemency, what strange charity does shine this
day in thee O my Jesus and savior, seeing thou do loose those which bind
thee, pleadest for those which diffame thee, entreatest for those which accuse
thee, excusest those which blame thee, and pardonest also those which will kill
thee! What means this O good Jesus, what means this? do thou pray for
them at the very instant which they blaspheme thee, mock thee, and laugh thee
to scorn? They have pierced thee with a spear, and yet do thou give them
an acquittance and a release of the blow? What mortal man can praise himself
or bost to have done that which thou have done, that is to crave pardon for
murderers before they have confessed their fault, and seek to release them
before they have repented? They will not return into the city before thou
have yielded up the ghost, and wilt not thou die before thou have first
pardoned them? Who ever saw or heard any thing like unto this; to wit, that
pardon should proceed first out of his blessed bowels, before the blood should
end to issue out of his tender veins? Do thou not remember to ask a
sepulcher for thy body, and do thou remember to ask forgiveness and mercy
for those which crucified thee? O sweet Jesus, O my souls glory, who but thou
could have the breath going out of his body, and Ignosce illis Pardon them in
his mouth? To defend thy self could not thou open thy mouth, and to excuse
thy enemies could not thou keep it shut? S. Chrysostom says, The son of
God only was he, who on the altar of the cross, inspeaking these words,
Father forgive them, coupled, joined, and handfasted together, pity and
cruelty, the offense and mercy, anger and patience, hatred and love, killing
and pardoning. With as great reason (says Hilarious) we can now say, Vbi sunt
irae tuae antiquae, as the Prophet David said, Vbi sunt misericordiae tuae
antiquae, seeing we be certain that from the hour that the son of God died
upon the cross, we may call him, Pater misericordiaru^, as the Synagogue called
him, Deus vltionu^, The God of revenge. No man ought to distrust Christ's
goodness and mercy, although he have been never so great a sinner, so as he
live and die a Christian: for seeing he pardoned those which would not be
pardoned, he will much rather pardon those which ask for pardon. S. Barnard
as if he were in a maze says thus unto Christ; O good savior, O my souls
delight, if thou will pardon thy death, why do thou pardon it before thou
be dead? they took thy life from thee, to the end that thou should forget
such a grievous injury done unto thee, and make no reckoning to be revenged. It
is a tolerable thing to forgive the injury done unto thy self; but why do
thou forgive the injury done unto thy sorrowful mother and thy blessed father,
not calling the parties offended unto it? Thy mouth is now ready to receive
vinegar, thy person to be mocked, thy side to be pierced, thy body to be
buried, and yet do thou make intercession for that wicked people? Do thou
entreat for those which crucify thee, and do thou not remember those which
weep by thee? Now that thou have pity on the offenses of the synagogue, why
have thou not also compassion of the tears of thy blessed mother? S. Cyprian
upon the passion of our Lord says: All things end with thee, and all forsake
thee O sweer Jesus upon the altar of the cross, saving only thy patience, with
the which thou did dest suffer thy torments, and thy charity with the which
thou did forgive thy enemies, seeing thou do pray for those which
crucify thee, entreat for those which blaspheme thee, hold thy peace against
those which spit on thee, excuse those which accuse thee, and pardon those
which pardon not thee. O my redeemer, what a pitiful heart have thou, that
considering how the Jews themselves gave thee license to take reuengement on
them: saying, Sanguis eius super nos, His blood upon us, yet thou did not
only not use this liberty given thee, but forsookest it, and there pardoned
thy injury. O how contrary these two speeches are, Sanguis eius sit super nos,
Let his blood fall upon us, and Ignosce illis, Pardon them: seeing that by the
first the Jews crave punishment of God, and in the last Christ asks pardon
of his father for them: in so much that the blood of Christ which they asked to
be against them, the son of God asks that it may be for them! What have thou
to do O good savior, what have thou to do with the Jews (says Vbertinus) and
hangmen and torturers? They go about to condemn thee, and thou to save them;
they to accuse thee, and thou to excuse them; they to carry thee to Pilate to
be condemned, and thou to thy father that they may be pardoned; they to say,
crucifige, crucifige, crucify him, crucify him, and thou to say, Ignosce,
ignosce, Pardon them, Pardon them. At what time the son of God hanging upon the
cross, prayed on one side unto his father, and on the other side the Hebrews
prayed Pilate; there was a great conflict betwixt Gods justice and mercy: for
justice willed the prayer of Sanguis eius, Let his blood fall upon us, to be
heard, and contrary mercy forbad it, and would have Pater ignosce illis, but in
the end mercy had the upper hand, and reuengement had no part therein. Whose
heart says Bonauenture would not bleed, and who would not love thee O good
Jesus, to see thee say to thy father, my father forgive them, and not my father
examine them, and to see that thou do forgive the^ without asking, yeeldest
unto them without entreaty, and pardonest them without amendment? It is such a
high mystery says S. Augustine, and a hidden Sacrament, to see the son of
God release injury with mercy and clemency, and not punish their crime with
revenge, and that the prayer of Ignosce illis, Forgive them, prevailed against
that of Sanguis eius, His blood light upon us; that although it may well be
rehearsed, yet it cannot be well comprehended and understood.

CHAP. IIII. Of many high qualities and conditions which the prayer of, Father
forgive them, had in it: and how it is meet for us to follow it in our prayers.
CVm clamore valido and lachrimis efferens preces and supplicatienes, exauditus
est pro sua reuerent^^, says the Apostle in his Epistle to the Hebrews, chap.
5. as if he would say: When the son of God was crucified: upon the tree of
the cross, he made many requests unto his father, and with many supplications
entreated him, praying unto him with a loud voice, and pouring down many tears
before him. This prayer was well heard of the eternal father, and very
acceptable unto his divine clemency, partly because he who prayed was a
person worthy of great reverence, and partly because the prayer which he made
was founded upon great pity and mercy. It appears well that he which prayed
was of an excellent and perfect condition, and he very mighty unto whom he
prayed, and that which he prayed of great merit, and the manner which he
observed in prayer a perfect platform of prayer, seeing that the Apostle in
this place lays down such high conditions of this prayer which Christ made
upon the cross. Whereof although much be spoken, yet there remains much more
not spoken of. First then he says that Christ prayed once on the cross,
because he says, Cum clamore, with a cry; and with a high and loud voice,
because he says, valido, strong; and that with tears Cum lachrimis; and that
he prayed and offered his prayer at the same time unto his father; and that
the quality of the prayer was to entreat and beseech, preces and
supplicationes; and that his prayer was heard of his father at that very
instant when he made it, because he says, and exanditus est pro sua
reuerentia. The condition and quality of the prayer which the son of God
made upon the cross, which the Apostle touches here, is very great and worthy
to be marked and observed with great heed, and followed with great diligence:
for if we fail in any one of these conditions, we are said rather to cry out
then to pray. Theophilus upon the Apostle says, That when the Apostle says
that the son of God prayed with a loud voice upon the cross, he means
that he offered and directed his prayer with all his heart, and with all his
will unto God only, and unto no other. For to say the truth, he is said to
pray aloud, whose mind is not distracted and drawn into many thoughts. When
the Apostle says that Christ prayed aloud on the cross and with a strong
voice, he lets us understand with what a fervent desire and great devotion,
he prayed: for there is nothing requested aloud and by crying out, which is not
either through abundance of love, or overmuch grief. Both together forced
Christ to cry out upon the cross, that is, the great love he bare unto his
friends, and the overmuch pain he suffered in his members. When the Apostle
says, That the son of God offered up prayers and supplications upon the
altar of the cross, he declares, as Theophilactus says, That the prayer
ignosce illis was extended unto the good and unto the bad: in so much that for
his enemies he offered prayers for the pardon of their sins, and for his
friends he offered up oblations for to confirm them in his grace. As the
son of God was Lord over all men and died for all men, so upon the cross he
prayed for all men. For if the wicked had need of him to help them to rise, the
good also had need of his help to keep them from falling. Anselmus in his
meditations says, That when the Apostle says, that the son of God was not
content to pray only with devotion, but also offered up that prayer unto his
own father, it is to let us understand, that for the saving of all the world
he offered up his pains and sorrows for a recompense, his life for a
satisfaction, his person for a reward, his blood for a price, and his soul for
a sacrifice. It is also to be weighed, that the son of God made not this
holy prayer of Pater ignosce illis, Father forgive them, sitting but upright,
not being at liberty but bound, not in a low voice but aloud, not laughing but
weeping, and that which is most to be marvelled at; the words that he prayed
with, were very few, but the tears he bathed them with, were very many. O good
Jesus, O my souls pleasure, who could be worthy to stand at the foot of thy
cross, to see how thy blood ran from the thorns, and thy tears flow from thy
eyes, in so much that at the same hour and moment, thou did water the earth
with tears, and pierce the heavens with sighs! O what a sacred word was that,
O what a holy prayer was Pater ignosce illis, Father forgive them, seeing that
it was made by the son of God upon the altar of the cross accompanied with
sighs, washed with the blood of Christ, and offered up with the tears of the
redeemer! Although the son of God requested the greatest matter of his father
and of the greatest weight that ever was demanded of him, that is to wit,
Pardon of his precious death, yet the tears which he shed were so many, and
the love so great with the which he asked it, that if he had asked a greater
matter of him, his father would never have denied it him. S. Basil says, O
what great hurt sins bring unto us, considering that for to lighten us of
them, and obtain pardon for them, it was needful for Christ to pray unto his
father for the^, and offer oblation, and cry out, and suffer his blood to be
shed, and tears to pour down from his eyes, so that thou O good Jesus did
buy my great offenses by the weight of thy blood and tears. Our Lord when he
prayed for his enemies upon the cross, taught us what form and fashion we
ought to keep when we pray, that is, to shed blood from our members, and fall
tears from our eyes. The son of God wept when he prayed for his enemies, and
art not thou ashamed to laugh and talk, when thou praiest for the remission of
thy sins? Yea and if thou can not weep in thy prayers, yet tell me why thou
do talk overmuch? Barnard says, That it is more then a jest, rather then a
prayer, if at one time thou would pray and talk: for if thou be not
attentive unto that that thou praiest, neither will our Lord be unto that that
thou demandest. Defecerunt prae la^hrimis oculi mei, says Jeremy in his
Lamentations; as if he should say. I had such great compasston to see all the
Jews led captive unto Babilonia, that my eyes with very weeping lost their
sight. And indeed there is no greater token that a man is in true charity, then
to see him have compassion of other men's hurts; and thereupon it happens that
good men weep sooner for the wicked then for themselves; the which happened
also unto Christ upon the cross, who wept first for his enemies, before they
wept for their own sins. It is a very proper thing unto the chosen people of
God to weep a like for other men's harms, and for their own; because it is
the property of true Christian charity, to take as great grief to see his
brother lost, as pleasure to see himself saved. One of the greatest
privileges that good men have is, that even as they merit in taking comfort
and joy of the good that is done to good men, so they are grieved at the hurt
which falls unto evil men, in so much that the good man and the just reapeth
profit and commodity of every man's conversation. Who doubts but that the
lamentation which Christ made upon the cross, was far greater then that which
Jeremy made on the Mount Sion? But now it is to be understood that Jeremy wept
for one people only, and the son of God for all the universal world. Jeremy
wept only tears from his eyes, but the son of God wept tears from his eyes and
shed blood from his vains. Further Jeremy complained that by weeping he had
lost his sight only, but our sweet savior did not only loose his sight with
weeping upon the cross, but also his very life. O good Jesus, my souls
delight, what patience is sufficient, or by what justice is it reason that I
should commit the offense, and thou shed the tears? Art thou not content with
Ier^my to make fountains of tears of thy eyes, but also to make streams of
blood of thy vains? With all those sighs which proceed from thy heart, with so
many griefs which thy members endure, with so many tears which run from thy
eyes, and with so much blood which flows from thy vains, who would not grant
thy request, and who would not have compassion of that which thou suffer? O
who can be able tosay with Jeremy, Defecerunt prae lachrimis oculi mei, Because
that the greatest hap which could light unto me were, that in amending my
faults I could recover my soul, and in weeping many tears lose my sight.

CHAP. V. Why the father answered not his son when he prayed for his enemies.
VOs cogitastis malum de me, sed deus vertit illud in bonum: ego pascam vos and
paruulos vestros. When the great Patriark Jacob died in Egypt, and that all
his children remained under the power and will of their brother Joseph, and
being afeard least he should call to mind how they had sold him unto the
muleters of Egypt, the good Joseph spoke these words unto them. You my
brethren did think that you had done me great hurt, but you did me great good:
for your selling of me was the occasion that I came unto prosperity, and to
rule and govern all Egypt, in so much that the great goodness of our Lord
turned your gall into honny, and your poison into triacle. Fear not, nor yet
have no suspicion, that I will revenge for that injury, or that I will take
satisfaction for that reproach and shame; but I have rather a will to look unto
your wants, and give nurriture unto your children. It is not necessary to
expound this glorious figure, unto those which are curious in the scriptures,
seeing all this was fulfilled literally in our good Jesus. Yet notwithstanding,
we will say something touching this figure, because all me^ may perceive how
well the truth answers unto the figure, the sense unto the letter, the proof
unto the prophecy, and that which was prophesied unto that which after
happened. What did it mean that Joseph was envied of his own proper brothers,
but that the son of God was hated of all the Jews? Who was sold unto the
Ismalites like Joseph, but the blessed Jesus, who was also bought with money?
Who like unto Joseph was cast into prison, because he would not commit
adultery with his mistress, but only the son of God, which was condemned unto
death because he would not consent to sin with the Synagogue? who like unto
Joseph did pardon the manslaughter committed by his brothers, but only the son
of God, who was not content only to pardon his enemies, but also prayed unto
his father for the^? The pardon which Christ gave his enemies, was of greater
value the^ that which Joseph gave unto his brothers, because without
comparison, it is a greater mischief to take ones life from one, the^ to sell
his person. O how rightly may the son of God say unto the Jews which killed
him, Vos cogitastis de me malum, sed deus vertit illad in bonum. You thought
todo me hurt, but God does turn it to my good, considering that they thought
at one time to put him to death upon the cross, and take all power from him
upon earth! but he maugre theirmalice rose the third day, and like unto
another Joseph had al power given unto him upon earth, and in heaven. You O ye
Jews Cogitastis de me malum, When you bereaved me of my life, but my blessed
father did turn it to my good, when at the same time my life ended, the
Synagogue was buried, and the Church took her beginning. With just occasion,
and with no less reason good men may say unto the evil, the just unto the
unjust, those that are persecuted unto the persecutors, Vos cogitastis de me
malum, You think to hurt me, but God turns it unto my good: for when they
think to suppress and tread them down, they exalt and life them up, and
thinking to diffame and discredit them, they give them credit and honor: for
the Tyrant Herod did much more good to the innocent children, when he caused
their throats to be cut, then if he had caused them to have been kept and
brought up. There was never done in the world (says S. Augustine in his
Confessions) nor never shall be done a wickeder part then the killing of Christ:
and yet there was never so great good done, nor never shall be as has been
gathered by the death of Christ, that is, the redemption of all the universal
world; in so much that God never permits any evil to be done, whereof he
does not draw some profit. Cyprian in his book of Martyrs says. If the
devil do tempt thee, if the flesh disquiet thee, if the world hate thee, Iacta
cogitatum tutum in dominum, Cast thy thought upon God: for although Tyrants,
and naughty men think to do thee hurt, yet have a sure confidence and hope,
Quod deus vertet illud in bonum, That God will turn it to good: seeing that
the evil Christian goes out of tribulation moved and stirred up, but not
amended; and the good and virtuous man chastised, bettered, and amended. The
excommunicated Jews, Cogitabant de Christo malum, when at the foot of the
cross they said, Vah qui destruis templum dei, Thou which do destroy the
Temple of God: but the son of God turned that into good, when he said, Pater
ignosce illis, Father forgive them, in so much that the have which they used in
speaking ill and cursing of him, and reuiling him, our good Jesus used in
blessing and praying for them. It is here now to be weighed how it can be
true, that the son of God was heard of his father as S. Paul says, Pro sua
reuerentia. Seeing that God answered him no one word at all? For the better
understanding of this point, it is to be presupposed, that in some requests
which were made unto the son of God, if he would not yield unto that which
was demanded, he answered them presently by word, but when it pleased him to
condescend unto their petition, he performed it with deed without any word
speaking, we have example of both these in the Zebedeans his cousins, unto whom
he answered, Nescitis quid petatis, You know not what you ask: and when the
great John Baptist sent to know of Christ, Es tu qui venturus est? He answered
no one word unto the Embassy more, then that he began immeadiately before the
Ambassadors to work such great miracles, that they knew by them that he was the
Messiah promised unto the Jews. When the collectors of the tributes of
Capernaum said unto Jesus that he was to pay his Didrachma, which was the
tribute due unto the king, he answered them no word at all, but sent S. Peter
unto the sea, and of that which the disciple fished the master pared his
tribute. To apply this unto our purpose, we say that what magnificency Christ
used unto Iohus desciples, and unto the rent-gatherers of Capernaum, the
selfsame used the father toward his proper son on the cross, not answering
him by word unto Pater ignosce illis, Father forgine them; but by deed
forgiving the wicked their offenses, if they would at any time be sorry and
repent them of their sins, and by confirming the good in grace. Beda upon
Luke says, That the prayer which the son of God made was not mad in vain,
considering that by the merit of that prayer, and by him who prayed it, all our
prayers both are, and have been heard: and for this cause the Apostle says,
Quod offerebat oblationes and preces, Because he prayed for all men, and in
the name of all men; and so he wept for all, and in the name of all. O good
Jesus, O glory of my soul, what do I want if I do not want thee, and what
have I not, says Barnard, if I have thee? I have and possess thee O my good
Jesus, seeing that I am partaker of thy prayers, I have part in thy tears, I
have thy gifts in pledge, I am the successor of thy sorrows, and heir
apparent unto thy sweatings. Damascen says as the Apostle does: Exauditus est
prosua reuerentia, Christ was heard upon the cross, seeing that by the merits
of, Father forgive them, the Centurion immeadiately there said, Vere hic erat
filius dei, Truly this was the son of God, and the good thief also said,
Domine memento mei, Lord remember me In whose power says Fulgentius^, but
only in the virtue and power of the prayer of Paterignosce illis, within a
short space after that Christ had so prayed, did some strike their breasts, and
some say, This man was just? By the merit of this holy prayer, the Apostles
converted three thousand men in one day, and five thousand another day: by
reason that the son of God had gotten pardon for the excommunicated
synagogue, glorious S. steven was baptized, holy Paul converted, and the good
Matthew called to be an Apostle. O what a difference there is betwixt the
prayer which Christ made in the garden, and that which he made upon the cross:
in the one heeswet blood, and in the other he shed tears; in the one he prayed
that the bitter challice might pass, and in the other pardon for the
synagogue: and that which Jesus prayed for himself was denied him, and that
which he prayed for others was granted him: In so much that his blessed
father had more pity on the sins of that people, than on the flesh of his
own son. O great goodnest O infinite charity? The Son of God is in the
garden alone, he is prostrate on the ground giving up his ghost, and yet ready
for a new combat, his blood issues from all the pores of his body, he prays
thrice for himself, and thou will not hear him, and when he prays for his
enemies do thou hear him at the first word? Why do thou not grant him
his request, seeing that when he prayed upon the cross for his enemies, he
called thee nothing but Father; but when he prayed in the garden alone for
himself, he called thee, My Father, which is a sweet word, and a word of a
gentle and courteous son. What would become of us (says S. Jerome) if Christ
should not in his glory above, repeat that word unto his father, Pater ignosce
illis, Father forgive them? Christ said once only, Father forgive mine enemies,
and he repeateth it a thousand thousand times in heanen for his Christians: for
even as we never cease from sinning, so the son of God never cease to pray
for us. Saint Steven did not see Christ sitting by his father, but on foot;
and the reason was, because that at that instant when S. Steven fell down on
his knees to pray for his enemies, Christ rose immediately also to pray and make
intercession for them: so that that prayer which Saint Steven made here upon
earth, our sweet Jesus presented presently unto his father in heaven. It is
deeply here to be weyed, that Christ did not say, Lord forgive them, but,
Father forgive them; because this word Lord is a fearful word, but this word
Father is a word of joy: and therefore when one man calls another Father, it
seems that he does bind him to answer him friendly, and not to deny him any
thing that he demands. We shall find often in holy scripture, that when God
was angry with the Hebrews, he said always, Ego Dominus qui loquor vobis, I
am the Lord which speak unto you: but when he would as it were flatter them
and make much of them, he always said unto them, Ego ero illis in patrem, I
will be a father unto them: that is, that he would deal with them like a
pitiful father, and not like a rigorous Lord. In so much that this word Pater
Father, breeds love, and this word Lord brings fear. Always when the
son of God made any great prayer or asked any great favor at his fathers
hands, he began his petition with Father, O just father, O holy father, making
reckoning that by calling him father, nothing should be denied him which was
his son. If Jesus Christ should have begun his prayer with Lord, as he began
it with Father, it would have seemed that he had called upon Gods justice and
power, and not upon his will and mercy: and therefore in saying, Father, he
entreated him that he would not judge as a Lord of justice, but like a father
of mercy. O depth of all goodness! O bowels full of charity! what else did thou
mean when thou begannest thy petition with Father, but that thou would give
him to thy enemies for a father who is thine own proper father? what goodness
in all the world can be equal unto thine, or what like charity can be found,
seeing thou art the plaintiff and the party offended, yet thou gave him unto
thy enemies for a merciful father, whom thou should have given for a
rigorous judge? Then let us conclude, that when the son said unto his father,
Pater ignosce illis, that at one time he prayed unto him that he would forgive
them their sins, and that at the same time he would vouchsafe to take them
for his children.

CHAP. VI. How Christ prayed for his enemies on the cross more heartily then
he did in the garden for himself, seeing the one prayer was made with
condition, and the other not.
SVpra dorsum meum fabricauerunt peccatores, and prolongauerunt iniquitatem
suam. These are the words of King David in the 128 Psalm, spoken in the name
and person of the son of God: and they are as if he should say. I know not O
mother the Synagogue, what I have done against thee, nor wherein I have offended
thee, and yet thou have gainsaid me from my childhood, thou have persecuted
me from my manhood, thou have defamed me, ever since I began to preach unto
thee, and in the sweetest time of al my life, thou have crucified me. But this
is nothing O mother Synagogue, this is nothing in comparison of that, that thou
did lay all thy sins upon my shoulders, which never had lost their
innocence, nor never done unto thee any injury. Supra dorsum meum, And sinners
have built upon my back, seeing that Adam has cast his disobedience upon me,
Eve her gluttony, Cain her son his murder, king David his adultery, the
Tyrant Roboam his Idolatry, and all the Synagogue her malice. Is it not true
that sinners have built upon my back, seeing that I must be punished and pay
for all the offenses that the sinful Jews committed? The Jews would
willingly have laden Christ on both his shoulders, that is they would have
cast upon him both the pain and the offense: but good Jesus took upon him the
punishment like a redeemer, but charged not himself with the guilt of sin
like an offender. S. Augustine upon S. John says, That the son of God does
not complain, that they burdened both his shoulders, but only one, seeing he
says, Supra dorsum Upon my back, although his enemies would have ouercharged
and wearied them both, by killing his humanity, and darkening his divinity,
by blotting his fame and credit and hindering his doctrine; but our mighty
redeemer suffered them only to lay the punishment on him, and take his life
from him. Basil says, That sinners build upon one shoulder only, when they
have no other goodness in them, but the bare name of Christians only: and just
men build upon both his shoulders when they are at one time both Christians and
virtuous men. Thou must know (brother) that in the law of Christ it is not
sufficient that a man be called a Christian, unless he be also such a one
indeed. Sinners build upon one of Christ's shoulders only, when they serve God
in wish and desire only, and serve the world with all their might and power,
which is a mean rather to condemn them then to save them: for in the Church of
God there are many condemned by good wishes and desires, but not one by good
works. Christ complains, that cursed Heretics do build upon one shoulder,
when they confess only his humanity, and take away his divinity; which is
great wickedness and falsehood: for he is as true a God as he is a man and as
true man as he is true God. Christ's complaint of the Synagogue does not end
here, but he says further, Et prolong auerunt iniquitatem suam: as if he
would say, Thou was not content, O ungrateful Synagogue, to impute thy offense
unto me, and lay all the punishment due for it upon my back, but thou have
also prolonged thy naughtiness and perseuered in thine infidelity, heaping
sin upon sin, malice upon malice, envy upon envy, and idolatry unto
idolatry. When did the forsaken Jews prolong their iniquity, but when at the
foot of the cross, they were nothing forrie to have crucified Christ, but were
grieved to see him rise again? S. Barnard says, that Christ had great reason
to say that the Jews had prolonged their iniquity, because that at the time
of his passion, for the better reuengement unto their malicious hearts, and the
more to torment Christ's blessed members, they would have been glad that day had
been longer, and that Christ's life had continued a longer time. The hatred
which those wicked Jews bate unto Christ was so great, that sometimes they
desired nothing more then to see him yield up the ghost, and sometime they were
never satisfied and full in doing him injury, insomuch that if they did
crucify him with their hands, they did also crucify him much more with their
hearts. We should have great compassion upon the Jewish nation which do
prolong their iniquity until the end of the world: for as the Apostle says,
the Synagogue shall never be all lightened until all the Gentiles be
converted. It may be said not only of the Hebrews, but also of many
Christians, that Prolong auerunt iniquitatem suam, who in stead of amending
themselves, go on every day empairing themselves, so that they are like unto
those which are sick of the dropsy, who the more they drink the more they
thirst; so they the more they sin the greater lust they have to sin. And as
Christ with great reason said, that the Hebrews did prolong their iniquity
against him, with the like reason may they say of Christ, that toward them he
prolonged his mercy, seeing he was as hasty in procuring their pardon, as they
were in causing his passion. What should become of me O sweet Jesus, what should
become of me says Anselmus, if as every day I add naughtiness to
naughtiness, and so prolong my iniquity, thou did not add goodness unto
goodness, and so prolong me thy misericordiam? O sweet Jesus and my souls
delight, of whom may it so truly be said as of thee, that thou have prolonged
thy mercy, seeing that thou wast upon the cross as it were gaping for death,
and yet pardoning thy enemies? And although I do every day prolong my
iniquity, and thou every moment prolong thy mercy, notwithstanding thy mercy
exceeds my iniquity: for otherwise my sorrowful soul should long ago have
known what thy rigorous justice had been. Cyprian says upon the passion of
our Lord, that he has much more prolonged his mercy, seeing he said not in
his prayer, Father forgive them if thou will, but absolutely that he would
forgive them; and that not by the rigor of justice due unto them, but by the
sole mercy of him which made the petition. Behold then O my soul, behold that
with greater devotion and affection the son of God prayed for thee upon the
cross than he did for himself in the garden, seeing that he said there,
Father if thou will, let that chalice pass; but on the cross he said not If
thou will, but Father forgive them. In so much that it seems that he left
the care of his passion unto the will of his father, but the pardon of his
enemies he desired presently to be given. What means this O sweet Jesus,
what means this? It seems that thou do put it in consultation whether
thou shall die or not, saying unto him Father if thou will; and do thou not
give thy father leave to think whether he shall pardon that wicked people or
not, but that he should there presently forgive them? The son of God says
unto his father (as Gregory reports) Father forgive them, and not If thou will,
because we should understand that when we forgive and be reconciled unto our
enemies, we should do it so sincerely and heartily, and with such good will
that we should never turn our face from them, nor never deny them our
communication. I will not (says Hugo) call that a Christian forgiving, when we
forgive our enemy under condition never to speak unto him, nor go by his
gate, nor dwell where he has to do: for our redeemer excepted no condition
in the pardon of his passion. It is also deeply to be weighed, that the son
of God did not say upon the cross, Father forgive him, but Father forgive
them: That is, he asked forgiveness not for one in particular, but for all the
whole world in general. Whereof it is inferred that seeing he prayed for all,
that there was sin in all. When Christ said Pardon them and not pardon him,
he gave cause of great hope unto all sinners, that they should be pardoned by
him, seeing he forgot not to redeem any, nor to pardon any man, nor leave out
any man not spoken for of his father, but made all men partakers of his
passion. As the son of God said unto his father, Pardon them, so if he had
said Pardon him, he would have put all the church in an vpro^e and hurliburly,
and all the world in a confusion and doubt in knowing who were condemned, and
who pardoned. Rabanus upon S. Matthew says, That when the Maker hanged upon
the cross, if he had said Pardon him, as he said Pardon them, then we should
not have known whether he had pardoned Judas which sold him, or Herod which
scorned him, or Pilat which condemned him, or S. Peter which denied him, or
Caiphas which blasphemed him. And he says further, that the cause why Christ
said unto his father, Pardon them, and not pardon him, was because our good
Lord is so liberal in giving and so noble in pardoning, that he cannot forgive
any one sin alone, if there remain any other hidden offense in the sinner.
Factious and envious men are wont to pardon some of their enemies, and not
other some: but the son of God for a certainty does not so, but he would
forgive all men together, and redeem all men together. S. John said not of
Christ, behold him who takes away the sin of the world; but said behold him
who takes away the sins of the world. He said not unto Mary Magdalen, thy
sin is released, but thy sins are forgiven thee: In so much that in matter
of sins God cannot but either wholly winck at them, or wholly pardon them.
For as S. Jerome says, No man ever heard the son of God say, I pardon thee
such a sin or this sin or that sin, but he always said I pardon thee
all thy sins, and thereupon praying upon the cross unto his father, he did
not say Pardon him, but said Father pardon them. For it seemed unto him, that
the value of the blood which he shed, was of such price, that those for whom
he died were but few, although he died for those which were absent, as well
as for those which were present, for the quick and for the dead, for those
which were already past and for those which were to come, for the just and for
the sinners; and that one drop of his blood which he should shed, would be
sufficient to redeem a thousand of worlds: and if this were so, what reason
had he to bestow it upon one alone, seeing there did abound for all the world?
The son of God debated not the matter, nor played not the huckster with his
father in contending, how much blood shall I give thee for their pardon;
because he would let us understand in this, that he paid very well, yea and
repaied for all the sins which were forgiven. For to conclude, all the sins
in the world might have been numbered, but the price of the blood of Christ could
not be valued. O good Jesus! O my souls hope, if in favor of great sinners
thou did say, Father forgive them, why do thou not say in my behalf who
am a great sinner, Pater ignosce illi, Forgive him? If the Jews have been
ungrateful toward thee for the miracles which thou did amongst them, have
not I been much more ungrateful for the benefits received of thee? If thou
did pray for the Israelites which did kill thee once, why do thou not
pray for me which kill thee every day? Do not I put thee to death every day
and every hour, seeing I do crucify thee as often as I sin against thee?
Seeing the sins which are severally in other me^, are together in me, why
do thou not say, Father forgive him, as thou did say, Father forgive the^?
Say then O my good Jesus, say unto thy Father, Father pardon this sinner,
seeing that by how much the more my sins and offenses are greater then other
men's, by so much the more thy mercy will shine by forgiving me.

CHAP. VII. How God is more merciful now then he was in time past: and why
Christ did not say that he did pardon his enemies, when he asked pardon for
them of his father.
POnam contra te omnes abommationes tuas, and non parcet oculus meus super te.
These are the words of the great God of Israel, spoken with much anger and
very great fury to the people of Israel, by the mouth and preaching of the
holy Prophet Ezechiel chapter. 7. as if he would say: I am so angry with thee O
Synagogue, and have pardoned thee so often, that I am now determined to lay
open all thy wickedness, and not forgive thee any one of them: because that as
mercy does follow thy amendment, so justice and rigor may follow thy hardness
of heart. Before the son of God came into the world to take man's flesh upon
him, God was much more accustomed to use his justice then his mercy; seeing
that in all the story of the old Law, those which he chastised were very many
in number, and those whom he forgave very few. And that we may prove it to
have been so from the beginning of the world, how did he punish Adam, and Eve
his wife for no other cause but for eating the apple which was forbidden them?
Did he not condemn the wicked Cain to wander throughout all the world, and
have a shaking in his head, for the murder which he used against his brother?
Who is ignorant how God did drown many in the universal flood for the sin
of the flesh, and sunk those of Sodom for the sin against nature, and let
the ground open and swallow up Dathan and Abiron for the rancor of envy? And
did not God command Moses and Joshua, to take out of the camp and stone to
death the Jew for hiding a barrel of gold at the sack of Ierricho, and
another Israelitie for gathering sticks upon the Sabbath day? Hieremie never
ends to bewail the captiuitiy of Babylon, whereof he says, Destruxit and
non pepercit he destroyed and spared not. But God commanded that all that
kingdom should be made desolate and destroyed, not pardoning nor forgiving
any one. When the Lord commanded king Saul to go and take Amelech his
kingdom, he advised him and instructed him, that from the king himself which
sat in his throne unto the beast which fed in the meadow he should not pardon
any one, but sley and kill them every one. In the ninth chapter of Ezechiell,
God said these words unto the striking Angel, Senem, and iuuenem, and
virginem, and paruulum interfice, and sanctuario me^ incipe, etc. as if he
would say, Go throughout all the city of Jerusalem, and put to the sword all
the old men, and all the young men, all the virgins, and all the children, and
because no man shall think that any place may save him, thou shall begin this
my punishment with the Priests of the Temple. Cadent a latere tuo mill, and
december millia a dextris tuis, says the Psalmist, as if he would say: Thou do
so severely revenge thy injuries O great God of Saboth, and so punish our
offenses, that as often as I look upon thee I see both thy arms armed, and both
thy hands covered with blood, insomuch that if a thousand men are fallen at thy
left hand, there are other ten thousand slairie at thy right hand. When the
eternal God had seen that they had put to death his well-beloved son, being
accustomed to punish presently and not to pardon, he darkened the light of the
sun, made the earth to quake, rent the veil of the Temple, and opened the
sepulchers of the dead, because those which were dead should rise again and
take reuengeme^t of those which were alive. When the son of God perceived that
all this was done for his sake, and that his father would destroy all the word
for to revenge his death, he lifted up his eyes unto heaven, and with a
sorrowful voice said, Father forgive them, because they know not what they
do: as if he would say; O my eternal and holy father, I beseech and pray thee
that thou would forgive this unhappy people, seeing thou should make more
account of the blood which I shed for the^, than of the offense which they have
committed against thee. It is now now time for a thousand to fall on thy left
side, and ten thousand on thy right: for seeing that I stand betwixt them and
thee, it is not reason that they should fall but rise, nor that thou should
punish but pardon them. O what a happy time! O what a happy age the Catholic
church lives in, in the which he which is iniuried is reconciled and made our
friend, the judge become our advocate and spokesman for us, our accuser turned
to be our defender, and he who was wont to fear us with justice, does now
flatter us and entice us to him with mercy. How shall David be able to say now,
Cadent a latere eius mill, A thousand shall fall on his side, seeing the son
of God has said upon the cross, Father forgive them? In the law of grace, and
under the yoke of Christ it is not time to go astray but aright, not to cast
away our selves but to save our selves, not a time of justice but of mercy,
not to punish but to pardon, neither is it time to fall but to rise. It is much
to be noted, that the son of God did never command any man to fall and throw
down himself, but rather bad all men rise up, as it appears in the
ninteenth of S. Matthew, where he says, Rise up and take thy bed, and in
another place Arise maid, and he said unto him whom he raised from death in
Naim, adolescens tibi dico surge, and likewise he said in the garden to his
Disciples, Rise let us go. It is the property and office of the devil, to
counsel and procure men to fall: for so he counseled Christ in the desert,
when he said, I will give thee all these things, Si cadens adoraueris me, as if
he would say; I will make thee Lord over all the world, if thou will but fall
down on the ground. O my sweet Jesus I will live with thee, who commands me
to rise, and not with the devil who counsels me to fall: for he is
desirous to have me fall, and thou and no other art able to help me up again.
Why should I live with the devil who deceives me a thousand ways, or with
the world which puts me in a thousand dangers, or with the flesh which
asks of me a thousand pleasures? O redeemer of my soul, O sweet delight of
my life, I will live and die with thee, and no other, for if I be sick thou
do heal me, if I be sorrowful thou do comfort me, if I be falling thou
do help me, if I be fallen thou do help me up, and if I have sinned thou
do pardon me. He is the disciple of the devil, who goes about to throw down
his brother, and he is the son of Christ who does help to lift up his
neighbor: for we are not able in this life to do any man a greater favor, then
to keep his credit and honor, and to help him to save his soul. When the
giver of life said upon the cross, Father forgive them, by those speeches he
meant to obtain two things of his father: That is, that he would neither punish
their bodies like unto murderers, nor condemn their souls like unto traitors.
O infinite goodness! O clemency never heard of before! O redeemer of my soul,
do thou dissemble with the treacherous, pardon murderers, excuse traitors,
undertake for the credit of the infamous, and turnest unto sinners? It is
little when I say thou do turn unto sinners, seeing thou do not only turn
unto them but also die for them. What is the reason O good Jesus, what is the
reason that thou do pray unto thy father that he would forgive them, and
do not say I do forgive them. When thou say, Father pardon them, why
do thou not say also, I pardon them? Art thou the party iniuried, art thou
the party shamed and disgraced, art thou the party agreeued, and do give
the liberty of pardoning them unto another? It is a high mystery, and a
hidden Sacrament, to think that the son of God would not say I pardon them,
but entreat his father to pardon them, making greater reckoning of the injury
which they had done unto his father, then of the death which they procured unto
himself. The reason why the son of God would not say, I pardon them,
although he were the party offended, was to tell us plainly, That he did not
esteem those which put him to death his enemies, rather his deer brothers and
great good doers unto the world, having more regard unto the good which they
had done in causing the world to be redeemed, then unto the hurt which they did
in causing himself to be murdered. When good Jesus said, Father forgive the^,
it is no more the^ to say, thou art he my good father who must forgive the^,
because they have broken thy law, discredited thy doctrine, violated thy
temple, and put to death thy son. If thou do say that I should forgive the^,
I say I have no cause to forgive: for I take my death as well revenged, and my
life as well bestowed, seeing that by the merit thereof all the world may live,
and heaven made open unto all men. S. Augustine says, That if the son of God
had holden the Jews for his enemies, as they accounted of him, it was in his
power to forsake them, and go preach unto others; but because he esteemed of
them as of his kindred in blood, neighbors by nature, brothers by law,
disciples in doctrine, it was not needful for him to say on the cross I
forgive the^, seeing he was not angry toward the^, nor moved at al with the^.
They bare rancor and hatred unto Christ, but nor Christ unto the^; and therefore
notwithstanding all the reproaches they used toward him, and all the injurious
speeches they gave him, he never left off preaching unto the^, nor never ceased
to work miracles amongst them. With what face could they say that Christ was
their enemy, seeing he raised their dead, cast out devils from them,
instructed their children, cured their friends of diseases, and also forgave
the^ their sins? Seeing the son of God had done the works of a friend among
them, and that of a true friend, why should he say upon the cross, I do also
forgive the^, seeing he did not hold any one of the^ for his enemy? If sweet
Jesus was angry with the^, if he misliked the^, it was not for the injuries
which they did unto him, but for the offenses they committed against his
father; and therefore he committed the pardon unto him which was most iniuried,
protesting that himself was not offended with the^. O sweet Jesus how can
thou say that thou wast not offended nor injured by the^, being as thou wast
iniuried and crucified by their hands? and although thou do not complain upon
the^, nor revenge thee on them, nor yet accuse the^; yet O my redeemer why do
thou excuse them? Barnard says, That the son of God was replenished with such
great charity, and such inspeakable pity toward those which crucified him,
that he could not obtain leave of himself to impute any fault unto them,
seeing he had charged himself with the pain due for it. Cyprian says, That
seeing Christ was the true mediator, pacifier, and stikler betwixt his father
and the world, it would have been euilly thought of to say, that any one of
them were his enemies: and thereupon it is that seeing he had no enemy there
amongst them, he had no necessity to say on the cross, I pardon them. If the
son of God (says S. Chrysostom) hanging upon the cross, should have said,
I also pardon them, it would have been thought that he received greater
grief for the torment which he himself suffered, than of the injuries which
were done unto his father; which for a certentie was not so: for if it were
possible, Christ would more willingly return again into the world to die,
than endure to see one injury done unto his father. Who dare now, O good Jesus
(says S. Barnard) who dare ask a revenge of the injuries done unto him,
seeing thou did make such small account of those which were done unto thy
self? Do not thou reckon of the cruel thorns which pierced thy holy head,
and shall I make account of an angry word which my brother speaks against me?
How shall I dare to say, that I have enemies, seeing thou do handle those
which nailed thee unto the cross like brothers? It ought to be a strange
speech in the mouth of a Christian to say, This is my enemy; for in making thy
brother thy enemy, thou do loose Christ, and causest him to be no more thy
friend. It is much to be noted, that Christ entreated not his father to pardon
them after they were dead, but asked that he would pardon them quickly, yea and
that very quickly, because he would let us understand, that the value of his
precious blood was of such great price, that at that instant that it began to
be shed, at the same time it began to do good. The redeemer of the world
would not leave us out of the favor of his father, nor an enemy unto any; in
token whereof he came into the world, saying, Et in terra pax hominibus, Peace
unto men upon earth: and went out of the world, saying, Pater ignosce illis,
Father forgive them. The son of God (says Cassiodorus upon the Psalms) is not
like unto the children of this world, who leave unto their children a little
wealth with much strife, seeing that by that speech of, Father forgive them,
he redeemed us with his blood, baptized us with his tears, anointed us with
his sweat, instructed us with his doctrine, loosed us from the devil, and
reconciled us unto his father. O how much are we bound unto thee, sweet Jesus,
for praying unto thy father that he would forgive his enemies before and not
after thy death, that is, before the tears of thy eyes were dried up, and
whilst the wounds of thy body were yet fresh. What would have become of mankind
if Christ at his death had bin angry with us? When he said in his last Sermon,
Pacem meam do vobis, I give you my peace, What else meant he, but that he left
us reconciled unto his father, and united unto himself? How could the eternal
father (says Anselmus) deny his blessed son the pardon which he demanded,
seeing he asked it with such mild words, with such sorrowful tears, with
such fresh wounds, with such loving bowels, with such continual sighs, and
with such great and passing grief? We may then conclude, that when Christ
prayed his father to pardon quickly and without delay, he teaches us, that
before we die and go out of this life, it is convenient for us to pardon all
injuries; for otherwise those in the other world shall have great occasion to
weep, which would not in this world speedily forgive.

CHAP. VIII. How our Lord reckons with the Synagogue: and of five cruelties
which the Jews used in the death of Christ.
SIt Dominus iudex inter te and inter me, said the most renowned king David
unto his Lord and king, king Saul, Reg. chap. 24. as if he would say, I will
have no other judge betwixt me and thee, O great king of Israel, but only the
mighty God of heaven, unto whom it is well known how faithfully I do serve
thee, and how cruelly thou do handle me. Origin says, that king David ought
to have great priuitie with God, seeing h^e chose him for the judge of all the
words he spoke, of all the thoughts he conceived, of all the works which he
did, of all the enmities he suffered, yea and of all the friendships he
followed. David could not justify his cause better, than to refer the
justice of it unto the hands of God, who is so just in his person, so upright
in his judgment, that neither prayers bow him, neither threatenings fear him,
nor gifts move him, nor words deceive him. When good king David cited Saul to
appear before the judgment of God, David could have cut off his head if he
would, as he did the guard of his garment: but yet he would not do it,
because he did set more by Gods favor than by Saul's evil will. Saul was a
capital enemy unto king David: he caused him to flee his country, forsake
his kindred, deprived him of his riches, banished him his court, separated him
from his wife, and proclaimed him to be his public enemy. And yet
notwithstanding all this, David (if he had listed) could have been revenged
of Saul, as especially when he stole the bottle from under his beds head, and
cut away a piece of his garment: yet the pitiful king David would not only
not do it, but showed himself angry with those which durst counsel him unto
it. Origin says, that only because Saul was anointed king by the God of
Israel, it seemed unto good king David, that he deserved pardon, and that that
was a sufficient cause to make him reverenced of all, and offended by none. We
are anointed with a better ointment than king Saul was: for he was anointed
with the oil of the Olive tree, but we are anointed with the blood of
Christ; and therefore he who does persecute a Christian, does persecute one who
is anointed by Christ. Good king David respected it not that Saul did abuse
his regal unction and anointing, but only because that he was anointed by
a good Spirit, in so much that David regarded it not that Saul was a most
wicked and naughty king, but only that God had made him a king. Thereupon
Saint Ambrose says, and that very well, that according unto the example of
David, thou ought not to look unto the malice with the which thy enemy
entreats thee, but unto the unction wherewith he is made a Christian: and
whether he be a christian or not, thou art not the judge of this business, but
he who is thy God and his, who is to punish the injury which thou have done
unto him, and in him the reuengement which thou have taken on thee. Coming
then unto our purpose: The words which David spoke unto Saul, that is, Let our
Lord be a judge betwixt me and thee, the Son of God may say unto the
Synagogue, and unto all her children; and that he alone shall be the judge
betwixt them, as well of all the good which Christ did unto the Synagogue, as
of the hurt he has received by her. Which of all the Angels if he would come
down unto us, which of the dead if he could rise again, what man, were he
never so wise, were able to number the multitude of benefits which were ceiued
by him, and the incredible torments which they gave him? Let our Lord be a
judge betwixt me and thee, O Synagogue (for no other can be) how much more
greater my love was, with the which I redeemed thee, than the torments which in
my passion thou gave me, and that how thy hatred was far greater than all the
cruelties thou use toward me. Therefore I call thee into judgment, O
Synagogue, before God, not to the end that he should chastise thee, but only
to judge betwixt me and thee, how that there is no work of pity and mercy
which I left undone for thee, and how there was no cruelty of torment which
thou did not assay against me. Speaking then more particularly of the pardon
which the son of God gave the Hebrews, it were reason to show what they did
to deserve it, and what moved Christ to give it; for by so much the more
excellent and bountiful is the pardon, by how much the lesser the occasions
were to give it. The Jews did Christ five notorious injuries at the time of
his death, the least of all which, if it had been thoroughly punished, had
deserved not only not to be pardoned, but also condemned into eternal fire.
For (says Hilarious) what punishment worthy of their desert can be given unto
them, who take away life from him which is the giver of life? The first wrong
which they did unto Christ was, that they crucified him through malice, not
finding any fault in him at al: which appears plainly by that that they did
let go Barrabas the manslaier, and condemned the son of God; judging him to
be an honester man who killed those which lived, the^ that great Prophet which
raised up those which were dead. Christ was a giver of alms, and Barrabas was a
thief; Christ was quiet and a peacemaker, and Barrabas a sower of sedition;
Christ a great preacher, and Barrabas a great robber and assailer of men by the
high way; Christ a master of all good men, and Barrabas a captain of all
scandalous men: and yet notwithstanding all this they condemned Christ to be
put immediately to death, and sent Barrabas home unto his house. O how wicked a
dema^d made you O ye Jews and perverse petition, in asking that he may live
which kills those which are alive, and that he should die who raises to
life those which were dead! Who is there in your city, who can heal the sick
and diseased, or raise the dead unto life, if this Prophet die? So great was
the hatred which they bare unto the son of God, that to hear him once named
they were much troubled, and in Barrabas name they much reioiced; which they
showed manifestly when they cried al with one voice that Pilate should deliver
them Barrabas, and crucify Christ. O what a happy man should I be, if my love
toward thee were so great as their hatred was toward thee: for by that means
as they took a wrong course in choosing Barrabas for themselves, so I should
do aright in making choice of thee for my self. It had not ben to have been
marvelled at if they had erred in their choice, if Pilat had given the^ their
choice betwixt two thieves, or two mankillers, or other two strangers unto
them: but giving the^ the choice betwixt an assailing thief, and a most holy
Prophet, and they presently to choose the wicked one, and use injustice against
the good one, it could not be but they did it through great want of wisdom
and greater abundance of malice. The second injury was, that if they had put
the son of God to death in some mean village, it would not have been so great
an infamy and reproach unto him: but the excommunicated Jews the better to
revenge themselves upon Christ and to put him to the greater shame, put him to
death in the great city of Jerusalem, where he was very well known by his
preaching, and allied unto many honorable Persons by consanguinity. What wrong
like unto this was ever done unto any man, or what reproach comparable unto
this, that is, to lead him to be crucified at the Mount of Caluary, through
the same streets which he was wont to pass through to the Temple to preach?
Seneca says, That it is a greater grief then death it self to a man that is
shamefast and of a valiant courage, to see himself trodden down where he has been honored, and contumeliously handled, where he has been highly esteemed:
for he feels the present torment and grief, and he greeueth and perceives
that, which his enemies speak. Because the son of God was mighty in doing
miracles, fair and amiable in his countenance, profitable in his doctrine, and
a friend unto the weal public, he was beloved of all, and envied of many;
by reason whereof he grieved much at the open dishonor they did him, and that
publicly they took his life from him. What grief could he be free from,
seeing himself carried openly, and condemned unto the death of the cross, and
that his friends accompanied him weeping, and his enemies scorning and mocking
him? The third was, that although they could have put him to death secretly in
his chamber, or in some dark night, yet they never meant once to do it; but
they brought him forth at one of the clock, they condemned him at three, they
crucified him at six, and they murdered him at nine. It was not for want of
diligence, but through abundance of malice that they chose that hour, because
the^ the sun shows his beams most brightest, and most people pass through
the streets. Chrysostom upon S. Matthew says, That the Jews would not put
Christ to death in the morning because all men were not up, nor in the night
because all were at their rest, nor yet late in the evening, because many had
withdrawn themselves to their lodgings: but they remembered to kill him in the
day time betwixt three and four of the clock, because that at that time al men
go abroad to walk in the market place. It was an old plague of the Synagogues
to embrue and flesh themselves in the blood of the prophets and holy men, as of
Esaias who^ they sawed in pieces; Jeremy who^ they drowned in a well; Micheas
whom they buffeted to death, Zachary whom they stoned to death, and Ezechiel
whom they imprisoned: and because the curse of their predecessors should reach
unto those which were the^ alive, they be thought themselves to take Christ's
life from him, and blemish his good name and credit. Damasce^ says, that when
the Jews crucified Christ, they chose a bright and a fair day without cloud and
darkness, because Christ should be seen of al me^, and not unknown of any,
because their purpose and intent was as well to discredit him as to kill him. For
when the Evangelist says, that when Christ gave up the ghost, the sun was
dar^^ed, it is an infallible argument that it was a bright and a clear day; but
the sun waxed dark upon the sudden, because he would with his shadow have
covered him who^ the Jews had put to open shame. S. Ciprian says, That when
the Jews put Christ to death, they were not content only to make choice of a
bright day and clear, but also they would have a long day (as commonly the
days are the 25 of March) because they might have time in one day to accuse
him, give judgment on him, and crucify him. The 4. point was, that although
they could have put him to death alone, yet they would not do it without
company; and the company they gave him was not of honest me^, but of two arrand
thieves. It is to be weighed, that the Jews never gave Christ the prehemine^ce
or highest room but only upon the cross and gibbet, where they crucified him
betwixt two thieves, and they put him in the midst as if he had been the
greatest thief among the^ al, and the most notorious offender. Albertus says,
That the Jews hanged our good Jesus betwixt two malefactors, as if he had been a
captain and a ringleader of the^, to make us think thereby how bad a person that
Prophet was, seeing that in comparison of him the thieves were of a better
life. Put the case, says S. Ierom, that all the testimonies which they brought
against Christ had been true, and that they had proved by sufficient witness
those crimes which they laid against him, yet notwithstanding he deserved not
that kind of punishment, nor to be executed with such infamous thieves, because
the Imperial laws do command such only to be partakers of equal punishment
which were confederates in the offense. If the son of God drew sinners unto
him and received them, truly it was not for that he would help them or further
them in sin, but to draw the^ to good life, in so much that by his blessed
company they were not perverted but much more converted. The fifth wrong was,
that although they might have put him to another kind of death, which was not
so scandalous to hear of, nor so cruel to be endured as the death of the
cross, yet they would put him to no other death but that, because he should
end his life with great cruelty and smart. For the torment of the cross was
holden to be the terriblest that was to suffer, and the least pitiful to give,
and therefore they crucified none unless it were such a one as without
amendment did break the law, or such a one as durst be a traitor to the king.
Was he pardie a breaker of the law, who said openly Non veni soluere legem sed
adimplere: I came not to break the law, but to fulfill the law? Is he pardy a
traitor who said openly, Reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, Give that which is
Caesar's unto Caesar, and that which is Christ's unto Christ? They and not the
son of God were breakers of the law, they were Traitors unto the king, they
caused sedition among the people, yea they stole away the sacrifices: in so
much that against all order of justice, those transgressors murdered him which
was holy, the Traitors put to death him who was loiall, the guilty crucified
the innocent, and the thieves crucified their judge. Chrysostom says, That as
the hatred which they bare unto Christ did pass al other hatred in the world,
and as the envy they bare Christ was far greater then any other which could
sink into man's heart, so also they would that the death which they gave
Christ, should exceed the deaths which all other men did suffer. Who doubts
but if a worser death they could have invented, a worser death he should have
had? It is to be weighed, that being an old custom, that the judges which give
sentence and not which accuse, should appoint the manner of death which the
party which offends should endure: yet the Jews would not leave Christ's
death unto Pilates arbiterment, but they themselves would presently design and
appoint what death he should die. Tell me I pray you, what death did they appoint
him, or what torment did they choose out for him? Barrabas the thief being
loused, and let free by the common consent and agreement of them al, Pilat
asking the^ what they would do by Jesus of Nazareth, they cried all aloud with
one voice, Crucify, crucify him, because he is guilty of death, with few
words they condemn Christ unto many cruel and terrible torments, that is, that
he should die quickly, seeing they say that he is guilty of death, that he
should die upon the cross seeing they said crucify him; and that he should
be twice crucified, considering that they say crucify, crucify him. As
touching the first, they entreat Pilat to put Christ to death, and Pilat said,
that he found no cause in him why he should die: but in fine, his resistance
prevailed not so much as their importunity. The Jews did not request of Pilat
that he would whip Christ or banish him, or object any reproachful crime
against him, but that he would immediately put him to death, and that because
the holy doctrine which he preached, and the evil life which they led were
imcompatible the one with the other. And as for the second, the forsaken Jews
were not content to demand of Pilat that Christ should be put to death, and
with that death which they themselves desired, but that they should immediately
crucify him on a cross, which kind of punishment was never given but unto
very naughty and wicked persons, and for very heinous and enormious saults. S.
August. upon S. John notes, that the Jews were not content to cry unto Pilat
once that he would crucify him, but they doubled their cry, and said crucify
him, crucify him, to let us understand that they meant as well to crucify his
fame and credit, as they did crucify his person. Origin says, That by
entreating Pilate twice to crucify him, saying, crucifige, crucifige, was to
persuade him that he would crucify him with his hands, and that they would
crucify him with their hearts. They crucified him with their hearts, when with
their hearts they hated and detested him, and then they hated him with their
hearts, when they diffamed his person, and discredited his doctrine, in so much
that it was not without cause that they cried twice crucify, crucify him,
seeing that at one time they took away his life, and blemished his credit. And
although Pilate should have been determined to put him to death, either by
cutting his throat, or casting him into a well, or by hanging him, which are
easier deaths to suffer, and less infamous to endure, yet the doggish Jews
would not leave it unto Pilates arbitrament and free will, for fear least he
would have been too pitiful in the manner of his death. When certain words are
doubled in holy scripture, it is a great sign of love or hatred in those which
use them, as when Christ said, Desiderio desideraui, I have desired with
desire, and when he said Martha, Martha, in which words he showed the love and
affection which he bare unto his disciples, and what tender love he bare to
Martha, who guested him in her house. The Jews also by iterating of those
words, showed the great hatred which they bare unto Christ, and let us
understand with what heart and good will they crucified him. Behold the^ their
deeds toward Christ, and behold also the deserts which were found to be in
them. Yet notwithstanding all this, in recompense of the cruel death which they
gave him, and the great shame and infamy they put him to, he says with a loud
voice, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

CHAP. IX. How that Christ's mercy was far greater toward the Synagogue, then
their naughtiness toward him; seeing he pardoned her, though she desired no
pardon.
FRons meretricis facta est tibi, and noluisti erubescere, tamen reuertere ad
me and dic pater meus es tu. God spoke these words by the mouth of the Prophet
Jeremy, complaining unto him of the enormious and great sins the Jewish
nation had committed against him. And they are as if he should say; O wicked
and unfortunate people of the Jews, which art come unto that boldness of
sinning, that like unto a public whore, thou have no shame in doing naught.
Turn therefore unto me O sinful Jerusalem, turn thy self unto me thou
unfortunate Synagogue; for I can do no less when thou do ask any thing of
me like as of a father, but I must grant it unto thee like a son. S. Jerome
upon these words says. O what an infinite goodness and mercy is this, O my God
and Lord, that seeing thou have tanted and condemned Jerusalem as one which was
full of sin, and without shame, yea and have compared her unto a public
strumpet, yet thou do entreat her to amend, and give her license to call
thee Father. Whom will thou cast from thee, and deny to be thy son, seeing
thou do vouchsafe to be a father unto a strumpet? If thou do admit public
lewd women into thy company, is it like that thou will cast from thee the
honest and virtuous ones of thy house? If thou love those which are sinful and
shameless, who is a greater sinner, or less bashful, or more lewd then this
my wicked soul? If the remedy of my soul consist in nothing else but in
calling thee Father, from this time forward I do call thee Father; and if thou
do require nothing else of me, but that I should turn unto thee, O good
Jesus I turn unto thee, and ask thee forgiveness of all my sins, and
seeing I do turn unto thee as unto my Lord, and confess my self before thee
to be a great sinner, I beseech thee most humbly, that thou would not cast
me from before thy face, and that thou would not take thy holy spirit from
me: for if thy holy grace forsake me, my soul is turned unto that that she was
before, that is unto a shameless and lewd woman. It is much to be noted here,
that God does not complain of the Jews that they were envious, angry, or
gluttennous, but that they were bold and without shame; which wants not a
high mystery, because there is no greater sign in all the world that a man's
conscience is very corrupt, then when to sin he has no shame at al. I have a
great hope (says S. Augustine) that that sinner will amend his life which
sins secretly, and is ashamed of it; which hope I have not of him, who is
resolute in his speech, and dissolute in sin, because that that man does
either very late or never amend his manners, who by long use has hardened his
conscience. To come then unto our purpose, with very great reason and for just
occasion God called the synagogue a shameless and dissolute strumpet, seeing
that in the death of his son she showed not only her malice, but also her
impudency, in killing him in the open day, not being sorrowful for it at all.
Christ knew very well that which his father had promised unto the Jews, that
is, that if they would call him Father, he would forgive them as his children.
By reason whereof Christ our God began his prayer with Father forgive them,
giving thereby to understand, that seeing he called him Father, he should be
heard like a son. If it seem unto you my loving brethren (says S. Ambrose)
that the Jews had no occasion to put Christ their Lord to death, neither did he
see in the^ any condition whereby he should pardon the^: and touching this
merciful pardon I can tell you, that I do not so much marvel of the pardon
which he gives on the cross, as I do of the circumstances with the which
he does give it. The Jews showed their naughtiness toward Christ in many
things, but the son of God showed his mercy and clemency toward the^ in many
more things: for there is no man in this life able to commit so great an
offense, but Gods mercy can go beyond it. The first thing wherein he showed his
mercy toward the^, was in the petition which he made upon the cross for them,
that is, pardon and remission of their sins being his enemies; preferring them
before his blessed mother, which brought him into the world, and his well-beloved
disciple which followed him, and before Mary Magdalen whom he so much loved.
What charity (says Remigius) should have burned in his divine bowels, who at
the very instant of his own death, reme^breth first to relieve his enemies,
the^ comfort his friends? what means this O good Jesus, what means this;
do thou first remember those who openly blaspheme thee, the^ those which
stand at the foot of the cross weeping for thee? O infinite charity! O
inspeakable goodness, what heart could do that which thou do. S. Barnard says,
that it was in manner of a contention whether were greater the sighs of the
faithful, the tears which issued out of his mothers eyes, or the blood which
gushed out of Christ vains, or the blasphemies which the wicked Jews uttered
with their mouth: but yet our holy and meek Jesus did first pardon the
injuries, before he was mindful of the tears. O good Jesus, O redeemer of my
soul (says Anselmus, as thou do say, Father forgive the^, why do thou not
say, dry the eyes of my sorrowful mother, stanch the blood of my tender vains,
and heal the wounds of my gentle flesh, and have pity and compassion of these
faithful women which here weep for my sake? as thou did say in thy last
supper (says Ciprian) Mandatu^ nouu^ do vobis, I give you a new commandment,
so may thou now say upon the cross, I give you a new example, seeing that
never any before thee has taught us so perfect a manner how to love, nor so
lively an example how to pardon, and it was a strange and a new kind of goodness
which Jesus used in asking pardon first for those which crucified him, rather
then for those which followed him, and for his mother which accompanied him:
for without comparison the grief which he had to see the souls of his enemies
perish, was far greater unto him, the^ to see his mothers eyes run down with
tears. Let no man the^ wonder, nor marvel that our good Jesus did remember
himself first of the people which murdered him before his mother which bare
him, because he came not into the world to dry men's eyes from weeping, but to
sauesoules from perishing. Secondly, the son of God showed his mercy in asking
pardon for his enemies with kind and sweet words: that is, not by calling him
God, or Lord, or creator, but only father, which is a word answerable unto
mercy and pity, and contrariwise this word God, or Lord, does always signify
justice. When Christ said, Father forgive them, he would have said, Lord
forgive them, or my God forgive them, it would have seemed that he would have
had the pardon according unto the rigor of justice: the which if he had
required or his father granted, there is no doubt at al, but before the son of
God should have yielded up his ghost, the ground would have opened and
swallowed the^ up. When the son of God would ask any great thing of his father,
he began his prayer always with Father; as when he said, I confess unto thee
O father, and when he said Father into thy hands I commend my spirit. What
means this O redecmer of my soul, what means this? Is thy pity so great
toward us, and thy mercy so abundant, that thou do pray for thy enemies
with the same words, as thou do pray for thy own affairs? S. Chrysostom. upon
S. Matthew notes, That the excommunicated Jews did always change their style
and manner of speech when they spoke unto Christ: for once they said, Benedictus
qui venit in nomine domini, and anon after they said, Vah qui destruis
te^plu^: but as for the son of God, as his mind was sincere and clear inwardly,
so his words were holy outwardly: were not think you his words holy, and his
thoughts pure and clear, when he said unto his Father, Father forgive them,
seeing he prayed with his tongue, and pardoned with his heart? S. Barnard
cries out, O sweet Jesus, O redeemer of my soul, what could thou have
said, or what should thou have done more for thy enemies, tha^ pardon them
with all thy heart, and make intercession for the^ with such sweet and loving
words? Thirdly Christ showed his goodness and mercy, in asking pardon in the
presence of such as were there, that is, in the presence of his sorrowful
mother, of his well-beloved disciple, his deer friend Mary Magdalen, his cousins
and kindred, showing that as all men were by him redeemed, so also all should
be by him pardoned. Vbertinus to this purpose says, O good Jesus in the death
which thou did suffer, and in the pardon which thou did give to thy
enemies, thou did not only help thy self there with thy tongue, but also
with thy heart, seeing thou did entreat thy father with thy tongue that he
would have pity on them, and did also beseech thy mother with thy heart
that she would forgive them. Rabanus upon S. Matthew says, That it was not
without a high mystery and hidden sacrament, that the son of God when he died
would have his mother and his kindred there; and the reason was, because they
should all be witnesses of his pardon, as they were of his passion: for our
holy Lord had a greater desire that his blood should benefit his enemies, than
that his kindred should entreat at his death for him. Wherefore O good Jesus
(says Anselmus) wherefore did thou bring thy mother and all thy family to the
foot of the cross, but only because as thou did suffer in thy flesh, so they
should also fuffer in their hearts; and as thou did forgive the^ thy death,
they should also forgive the^ their injuries and wrongs done by the^?
Bonauenture says, that as the son of God said father forgive the^ openly, so
he said mother forgine the^ insecret, in so much that as the hangme^ did
martirize the son, so the son martirized the mother, leaving her bound to
weep his death, but not licensed to revenge it. O my Jesus, O my souls health,
I beseech thee, that as thou did get pardon of thy father and mother for thy
enemies, so thou would get me pardon for my sins, saying, Father forgive,
mother forgive him, seeing I am hateful unto thy father by reason of the sins
which I commit against him, and ungrateful unto thy mother for the benefits
which I have received of her. O happy and holy day in which thou did die,
seeing that on that day the Father forgave his injury, the son pardoned his
death, the mother pardoned her martyrdom, Saint John pardoned his reproach and
peril, Mary Magdalen her anguish and distress, and the good thief was
pardoned of his sin. How was it possible that the Father should not forgive
the world of their sins, seeing that on one day in one hour, and at one time
they said, Father forgive them; the son by letting his blood stream from his
veins, the mother by suffering her tears flow from her eyes, and the sad
family by piercing the heaven with their sighs? Because (says Ciprian) the
office of the son of God was, to put together that which was broken, and
reconcile those which disagreed, he would not depart out of this world, before
he had made an atonement betwixt his friends and his foes, beseeching his
father to forgive the^, and commanding his mother not to accuse the^. The
sorrowful mother had great reason to challenge the Jews for the life which they
took from her son, and also the father for the wrongful death which they put
him to: and therefore our most merciful redeemer, besought of his father that
he would not co^demn the^ into everlasting damnation, and obtained with his
mother that she should not challe^ge hisdeath before any justice. But what
justice could she ask of those malefactors, seeing they had been already
pardoned of her son? Anselmus says, That when Jesus gave up the ghost upon
the cross, he left no death for his mother to revenge, nor injury to forgive,
but only a bitter passion to weep and bewail, which should be great enough to
rend her bowels in sunder, and dry up the tears of her eyes. The 4. goodness
which Christ showed the Jews, was in that he gave pardon to his enemies which
did not dema^d it, and yielded that unto his crucifiers which they would not
have. For how is it possible for those men to seek for pardon, which will not
acknowledge themselves culpable? And how should they acknowledge themselves
culpable which cast all the fault upon him which deserved it not? The Jews were
so fleshed in the blood of Christ, and so far out of their wits, that they did
not not only procure and ask pardon for their offense, but rather hindered it
and put it from the^ when it was offered the^, taking delight in the hurt which
they did unto Christ, and grief that they were not able to do him more. When
they led the innocent lamb to be crucified, for very joy they said, O thou
which do destroy the Temple of God. And when Pilat would have deferred his
crucifying, with great envy they said, If thou let this man go, thou art not a
friend unto Caesar: in so much that if they did show themselves grieved and
sorry, it was not for that they thought themselves culpable of any crime, but
because they had deferred and prolonged Christ's life so long time. The
wickedness of the Jews was not content in not having pardon of God for their
offenses, but they demanded openly vengeance for them, when they said unto
Pilat, Let his blood fall upon us and upon our children; and therefore by these
dreadful words they desire to be punished of God, and at no time pardoned at
his hands. O wicked Synagogue, O impious saying. Let his blood be upon us. Tell
me, I pray thee, why do thou desire that the blood of Christ which he shed
for to redeem thee, be ^urned to condemn thee? The son of God appealeth
from these words which they speak, and he will not stand unto that agreement
which the Jews made with Pilat; he will not agree that his blood should be
shed against them, but for them: and therefore as they said, Let his blood fall
upon us; so contrariwise he said, Father forgive them. O wicked Synagogue, O
unfortunate Jewish nation (says Remigius) who has led you unto such great
folly and madness, that you should more esteem of the blood of kine (which
your priests shed in the Temple) than of the blood which Christ shed in the
mount of Caluarie? Saint Jerome says, On the altar of the cross the Prophecy
of Simeon was fulfilled, who said, that Christ's coming into the world was to
some men's good and to others hurt, seeing that we do pray that the blood
which he sheddeth should be in the remission of our sins, and the Jews do
entreat that it turn unto their condemnation, and upon their children. It is
much to be noted, that we see it often times fall out, that one enemy hurts
not another, and that a good Christian does pardon another of his offense when
he repents, we see it also by experience; likewise we see it fulfilled that
a perfect man does love his enemy: but yet we never saw that ever any but
Christ pardoned him which would not be pardoned. And how would they be pardoned
who pardoned Barrabas and condemned the son of God? What contrition of their
sins have they, who desired of Pilat that the curse of God should light upon
them and upon their children? O infinite goodness! O unspeakable charity! did
they say pardy with king David, Tibi soli peccaui, To thee alone have I sinned:
or with the thief, Domine memento mei, Lord remember me; to the end that he
should say, God be merciful unto you, Misereatur vestri? What wit is able to
conceive, or what heart able to acknowledge such great mercy, when thou said,
Forgive them, in stead of their sanguis eius, His blood light upon us? O my
good Jesus, O my souls health, who is he who dare say, that he has enemies
now, seeing that thou do make clean the unclean, set those at liberty
which will not be free, loosest those which will be bound, vnburdenest those
which will be burdened, and above all give pardon unto those which will not
be pardoned? If thou do pardon that people which would not be pardoned, will thou not with a better will pardon him who has repented him of his sins, and
whom it grieueth with all his heart to have offended thee? Saint Augustine
upon S. John says, Will not he who meant to meet them who came to apprehend
him in the garden of Gethsemani, come out to receive and embrace those who go
to serve him? Will not he who defended the adulterous woman from outrage, and
pardoned the wicked people not being thereunto asked, pardon and defend that
sinner whom he sees amended, and has been of him with many tears
thereunto entreated?

CHAP. X. How it is meet for us to conform our wills unto Christ's will, to the
end that we may know how to love him and serve him.
COr tuum numquid est rectum cum cord meo, sicut cor meum est rectum cum cord
tuo? We read in the fourth book of the Kings that a certain king of Israel
called Iehu going from Samaria to kill the children of Achab and the priests
of Baal, met on the way with Ionadab, unto whom he spoke these words: Tell me,
I pray thee, Ionadab, is thy heart and mind so faithful and upright with mine,
as my heart is with thine? Ionadab answered him unto these words, Know thou, O
king Iehu, that my heart is conformable unto thine. Iehu replied and said,
Seeing it is true that thy heart is agreeing unto mine, give me thy hand, and
come to me into this chariot, where we will talk and communicate of things
profitable for us both. This is a wonderful figure and worthy of great
attention and consideration, seeing that our Lord does teach us by it, the
great good turns which he does unto us, and that which in recompense thereof
we are to do unto him again. Who is that king Iehu who takes his journey
from Judea unto Samaria to kill and to take vengeance upon the wicked men which
were there, but only the son of God, who came down from heaven above to
destroy our sins? Assure me (says Saint Augustine) that there be no sinners
in the world, and I will assure thee that there be no naughty men in the world;
for as in heaven there is no sin remitted, nor any wicked man there suffered,
and as contrariwise there is nothing but sin and wickedness in hell, so also
there is nothing but naughty and wicked men. We are much more bound unto our
Christ, than Samaria unto their king Iehu, because that that king did only rid
Samaria of naughty men, but the son of God made clean and purged all the
earth from sin. Who are the children of Achab whose heads king Iehu cut off,
and who are the priests of Baal which the also slew, but Idolatry which he
took away from the Gentiles, and the Mosaicall law which he took from the
Jews? What is the chariot which the son of God went up into to accomplish
such high and strange things, but only the cross upon the which our holy Lord
attained such and so many great victories? It is to be noted that the king Iehu
did not ask Ionadab whether their apparel were alike or neat of one fashion,
but if they loved one another alike; to let us understand, that without
comparison our Lord does much more regard the love which we bear him, than
the services which we do him. Saint Basil upon the Prophet which says,
Bonorum meorum non eges, Thou want not of my goods, says, I see well, my
God, I see well, that how much the more need I have of thee, the less thou
have of me; and if thou have need of me, it is not in respect of the goods of
fortune, but the love of my mind. Note also that the king of Israel and no
other took Ionadab by the hand to lift him up into the chariot; whereby we
are to understand, that only the son of God and no other Saint of heaven, is
able to give us grace to love him, and give us strength to follow him. Who is
able to follow thee, or has power to imitate thee, O redeemer of the world,
if thou do not first stretch out thy hand unto him? who is able to lift
himself up unto the chariot where thou do triumph, or unto the cross
whither thou go to die, if thou do not take us by the arm to lift us up,
and if thou do not hold us by the hand least we fall? How had it been
possible for Mary Magdalen to have forsaken her profane life, or Matthew his
renting of custom, or Paul his persecution, or the thief his assailing of men
by the high way, if the son of God had not taken them by the hand, and
lifted them up unto the cross with him? When in the holy scripture by the feet
are understood good purposes and desires, and by the hands good works, what
means he by giving Ionadab his hands and not his feet for to mount into the
chariot, but that our good Lord does rather take hold of the good works which
we do, then of the good purposes which we have? Gregory in his Register
says; If thou will get up upon the chariot of the cross with thy captain
Ionadab, thou must not get up with thy tongue, which are good words, nor with
thy feet, which are good wishes and purposes, but with thy hand which are good
deeds, because S. John does not say, Veeba^ecoru^, Their words, nor Desideria
coru^, Their desires, but Opera little sequuntur illes, Their works follow the^,
It is also to be noted, that the king of Israel would not suffer the captain
Ionudab to go up into the chariot to him, until he had certified and assured
him that he was his true friend, in so much that they united their hearts
before they joined their hands. After the ^^itation of these two friends, we
must have amity and love with Christ, if we will have him to help us up into
the chariot: and the amity and friendship which we ought to have with him, is
to love him as he loves us: for Christ our Lord will first be loved of us,
then served by us. S. Basil says, That if any man did labor in the church of
God, and take pains, and forgets to love, we may well say of such a one,
that he shall not only not be accepted, but that God will think him also
importunate and troublesome, because God will not be served by men of
greatstrength, and such as are forcible, but of such as are free of heart. And
further the king of Israel was not content to ask Ionadabs heart, but that he
should give it him upright, sincere and entire; which Christ also demands of
us, because the son of God will never take him for his friend, who has his
heart crooked, sinister, and not upright. And who has his heart upright and
sincere, but the servant of our Lord, and he which has no other thing in this
world, nor seeks after any thing but only Jesus Christ? Who is he who has
his heart crooked and awry, but he who is without life, who has care neither
of Christ, neither of himself, but goes every hour more and more sinking,
and as it were drowned in the world? David knew this very well, when he said,
Cor mundum crea in me deus, and spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus meis, as
if he would say; O great God of Israel, O great Lord of the house of Jacob, I
beseech thee that thou would create a new heart in me, and favor me with
the gift of a new spirit which may be both right and true: for the heart which
I brought from the womb of my mother, is such a one, as I dare not offer it
unto thee, nor he dares not appear in thy presence, because it is unclean with
sin, and laden with thoughts and care. O good Jesus, O my souls hope, what
better prayer can I make unto thee, or what iuster petition can I make unto
thee, then that thou would create a new heart in me. That is, that you
would give me a clean heart, with the which I may praise thee, and a new
spirit with the which I may love thee. Give me O good Lord, give me a new
spirit, because mine is old and unpleasant unto thee, give me a clean and a
chaste heart, because mine is foul and stinking before thy face: for if thou do
not, no prayer of mine can be acceptable unto thee, nor no work that I do
can be meritorious unto thee. Cassiodorus notes, That king David was not
content that he was noble in blood, a Prophet by office, a king in degree, and
in surname and calling of a royal tribe, but he asks of God above all
things, that he would give him a clean heart, and pour the holy ghost into
him; to let us understand that it does little avail us to be grateful unto
the world, if withal we be hateful unto God. Then we are hateful unto God
and out of his savor, when our hearts be unclean and laden with many
spirits, and then we have many spirits, when we please others better then
we please God. Which the Prophet likes not, but prays unto God that it
would please him to give him a clean heart to believe in him, and an upright
to serve him. Why would thou O my soul have more then one heart, seeing
thou art to love but one Christ only? And why also would thou have more
then one holy spirit, considering that it is the Devil which pours many
spirits into one body, and our God for all bodies has but one only spirit? S.
Barnard upon the passion of our Lord says; If we will ascend with Christ to
the cross, it is necessary for us to do that with our hearts that he did
with his; that is, with the heart of God he took the heart of a man, and with
the heart of a spirit he took a heart of flesh, and with a high heart he
took a low heart, and with a heart of revenge he took a heart of pity and
mercy. Take good Lord a new heart to come down from heaven into the world, and
do not renew thy heart to ascend from the world to heaven.

The end of the first word which Christ our redeemer spoke on the cross.
Here begins the second word which Christ our redeemer spoke upon the
Cross, when he forgave the good thief, vz. Amen dico tibi, hodie mecum eris
in Paradiso. Truly I say unto thee, that this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.
CHAP. I. Of the conversion of the good thief, and of the great wonders which
our Lord did unto him in this case.
DOmine memento mei dum veneris in regnum tuum, said the good thief which was
crucified on the right hand of Christ, and speaking unto Christ himself: and
it is as if he had said; O maker of all things and redeemer of all mankind, I
beseech thee, that ^s thou would take me for a companion unto thee upon
this tree, so also thou would vouchsafe to remember me above in thy
kingdom. If we mark curiously this speech, we shall find, that there was
never prayer made with like circumstances as this was. For he who made it
was a thief, the place where he made it was on the cross, he unto whom he
made it a man crucified, that which he asks is a kingdom, and the time
when he asks it, is when he was almost dead: in so much that at the very
time when he should die, he desired that Christ would let him reign. I have
of a long time commended unto my memory, and singularly well liked of that
speech of Boethius which says, Quod nihil ex omniparte beatum, as if he would
say; There is nothing so perfect in this life, which does neither want, nor
abound in somewhat, insomuch that either we have need of scissers to clip off
that which is superfluous, or a needle and a thimble to ad that which wants.
Seneca in his book of Clemency says; It is an hundred and twelve years ago
since I was borne in Cordua a town in Spain, and it is threescore and eight
years ago since I came to dwell in the court of Rome, and yet in all this time
I never saw any thing so perfect, which was even when it came to be measured,
or of just weight in the balance when it came to be peised, or satisfied the
eye when it came to be seen, or contented men's minds when it came to be
enioied. And it is easily perceived that there is nothing, Ex omni part
beatum, because there has never been any Prince in the world so famous and
renowned, no Philosopher so wise, no captain so valorous, no personage so
worthy who wanted not somewhat worthy of commendation, and in whom there was
not found somewhat worthy of reprehension. Who doubts that there is nothing
every way perfect, seeing there is no man alive who has not wept, who has not
erred, who has not sinned, who has not sighed, and who has not ben
persecuted? How can we say that there is any man happy on earth, seeing he
does a thousand things whereof he has cause to repent, and scarce one thing
worthy of praise? Only our Lord and no other is, ex omni part beatuis, in all
respects happy seeing that of him and of no other, the Prophet says, lustus es
domine and rectum iudicium tuum, as if he should say; Our Lord is very just in
himself, and upright in all which he does. It had been but a small honor
unto God to say that he was just, unless it had been also said that he did
justice; and it is a small matter to say that he did justice, unless we say
also that he is very just, because there are many which are just, and yet do
no justice; and very many which do justice, and yet are not just. S. Augustine
says, That it is so high and heroical a virtue to hit aright in all things,
and not to be able to miss in any, that God reserved this point only unto
himself, and participated it with none but unto his son and unto his mother.
Irenaeus upon the Psalms says. That it is a small matter to say of our Lord
that he is just, seeing he is justice it self, and to say that he is upright,
seeing that he is righteousness it self, and to say that he is holy, seeing
that he is holiness it self: because there is no other righteousness but
that which he has, no holiness but that which he gives, nor justice but
that which he does. Who is so blind who sees not plainly that our Lord is
just and his judgment right, seeing there is no other goodness but that which
is himself, nor other justice but that which he does in his own house? Who
is so just as thou (says Hierome) in that which thou do, and so upright in
that which he judges as thou art, O great God of Israel; seeing that in thy
judgments and sentences neither ignorance deceives thee, nor entreaty boweth
thee, nor rewards corrupt thee, nor threatenings fear thee? To come then unto
our purpose, seeing that thou art just O good Lord, and that thy judgment is
rightful, how fell it out that thou did send Judas from the cross into
hell, and tookest the thief from thence with thee to Paradise? Thief for
thief, naught for naught, sinner for sinner, ungrateful for ungrateful, and
both alike: it seems unto man's judgment that he should as well have bestowed
his kingdom upon Judas which followed him three years, as upon the thief
which accompanied him three hours. When our Lord took from Cain the right of
his first birth or inheritance and gave it unto Abel, took it from Ismaell and
gave it unto Isaac, took it from Esau and gave it to Jacob, from Ruben and
gave it to Judah, from Saul and gave it to David, the reason was for that he
found in those great demerite, whereby they lost it; and in the others great
merit with the which they deserved it. If Christ should take a kingdom from a
naughty man and bestow it upon a good man, it would be but just: but yet it
would scome a hard point to take it from one thief and give it to another,
because that that is very ill bestowed which is given unto one which is
unworthy of it. Was not the one as great a thief as the other, seeing that
when the one went robbing by the high way, the other being with Christ stole
away the alms? But we answer unto this and say, that neither in this nor in
any other God is to be called in question, nor yet holy Jesus to be
reprehended, considering that justly he sent the Traitor Judas into hell, and
justly likewise he carried the thief with him to Paradise; because the one did
deserve it because he was a confessor, and the other lost it because he was a
Traitor. Let us not be proud or stout (says Cyrillus) for any thing that God
does, nor be moved at any thing that God provides: for we judge a man only
by the apparel which he wears, but he judges him not but by the merits
which he does. Damascen says, That before the high Tribunal seat of Christ,
they do injury unto no man, they deny no man justice, they are moved with no
man, neither do they any thing there without reason, because there the rod of
justice is never bowed, nor the measure of mercy ever falsified. For the wise
man says, Thou have done all things good Lord by weight and measure, speaking
of Gods government, as if he would say; O great God of Israel, O mighty God of
the house of Jacob, how just thou art in thy deeds, and how rightful in thy
justice, because that thou do make al things even by the line and plummet
which thou do, and do heap up all things which thou do give, because
they shall be of full weight. When does our Lord (says Saint Ambrose) not
do all things by measure and weight, but when he measures our merits with his
rod of justice, and with the poise of his great mercy give us that which we
deserve? Gregory upon Ezechiel says, That when our Lord does pardon some and
not othersome, chastise these and not those, exalt this man and pull down that
man, he does all this in weight and measure, and not by hap without justice;
and if at any time his work breed any admiration in us, it is not because God
has erred in doing it, but because we are not able with our understanding to
attain unto it. Abraham would willingly that God would have given him
presently the land of promise which he had promised him, but he gave it him
not until three hundred years after, expecting until the Cananeans should
fully be unworthy of it, and the Jews deserve ^t. After that king Saul fell
from the favor of God, and good king David was chosen king of Israel, yet
there passed forty years before they took the crown from the one, and placed
the other in the throne of the king: all which time God looked that Saul would
grow worse and worse, and that the good king David should become better and
better. I marvel at nothing that thou do O my Lord (says Anselmus:) for
although it be hidden from me, yet it wants not reason with thee. If our Lord
be determined to accept of the sacrifice which Abel offered him, and mock at
that which his brother Cain offered, if his will be to convert Nabugodonoser,
and suffer king Pharao to persist in his obstinacy, and if he let Judas cast
away himself, and yet save the thief, what are we to ask him an account of
this: yea and although he would give it us, who is able to understand it? We
read in the Prophet Daniell, that when God took away the kingdom from king
Baltaser, that first he reckoned and compared his demerites with the merits
of the Chaldeans, by measuring those of the one, and weighing those of the
other; and in the end he found by justice, that the Chaldeans deserved to
reign, and Baltaser worthy to lose his life and estate. Seeing there is
always (says Chrysostom) in the house of God weight and measure, Quia omnia
fecisti in pondere and mensura, how is it possible that it should be euilly
governed? If our Lord give us troubles and vexations, it is to exercise us; if
he give us rest, it is because we should praise him; if he give us poverty,
it is because we should merit, if he give us abundance, it is because we
should serve him, and if he chastise us, it is because we should amend our
selves; in so much that he gives us all things measured by his justice, and
ruled with his mercy. If our Lord sent Judas to hell, certainly he did it not
at a venture; and if he gave the thief Paradise, he did it not without
right; because Judas his demerites were very great, and the thieves merits
were not small. And because we may not seem to speak at random, and that God
does nothing but by his justice, we will declare how justly Judas was
condemned, and how rightly the good thief was pardoned.

CHAP. II. How Judas Iscarioth was a great thief; and of the thefts which he
committed; and how he fell from the apostleship.
FVrerat, and locules habebat, and non erat ei cura de egenis; says S. John,
chap. 12, speaking of wicked Judas. In the holy College of Christ there was a
Disciple called Judas Iscarioth, who was a wicked thief; he carried the purse,
and he had little purses within it, and he made no reckoning of the poor which
were in necessity. Under a few brief words, the Scripture accuses Judas of
very enormious and grievous faults, considering that it calls him an open
thief, and says, that he had little purses where he kept that which he had
stolen, and that he had no compassion or pity upon any. It is a carelessness
for a man to be naught alone, to be naught in the company of naughty men is
weakness, but to be naught in the company of good men is malice and
wickedness; because it is better reason that one follow many, then that many
follow one. The unhappy Judas had no occasion, nor any reason to give himself
as he did to sin, nor yet to dare to steal as he did: for if we well
consider all circumstances, we shall find, that in the house where he remained
there was poverty; in the company he went with, there was patience; in the
mother which he served there was humility; and in the master which he had
there reigned charity. O how well the Apostle said, Qui se existimat stare,
videat^ne cadat, He that thinks to stand, let him take heed least he fall,
seeing that poor Judas got such great wickedness in the house of holiness.
How should it be possible for him to be good in the company of the devil,
which was naught in the company of Christ? If the infamous Judas was a thief
and a Traitor, covetous and ambitious, living in the company of so many good,
what do thou then hope for brother (says Cyprian) which art compassed on
every side with so many naughty men? Irenaus says, That Judas began to play
the Apostatae immeadiately after that he entered into the Apostleship, and
that Christ's goodness did much shine upon him in looking so long for his
amendment, which Judas never did, nor never forsook his theeuing. The first
thing that the Scripture accuses Judas of, was, that he was a murmurer and a
detractor: saying, Vt quid perditio haec, etc. as if he would say, If it be
so that Christ my master has made profession of a virtuous man, and preaches
poverty unto all the world, and also reprehendeth sharply all such as spend
any thing wastfully; it would be better for him (because he might conform his
life unto his doctrine, to command this ointment to be sold for a great deal
of money, and divide it afterward among the poor and needy. Here Judas does
murmr notoriously, seeing he murmureth at the ointment which was shed, and
how euilly it was bestowed, and at Mary Magdalen which shed it, and he
murmureth at Christ upon whom it was cast. When excommunicated Judas said, Ad
quid perditio haec, he iniuried the other Apostles, which would not murmr as
he did, he scandalized Simon the leaper, in hearing such things spoken of
his master, he iniuried Mary Magdalen in finding fault with her for spending
of the ointment, and he rebuked Christ, and noted him to be a curious and a
dainty man in suffering it to be spent upon himself. Anselmus talking unto
Judas says, Tell me I pray thee Judas, if the shedding of the ointment upon
thy master was a good work, why do thou not like of it as the rest of the
Apostles do? If pardy it were done scandalously, was not S. Peter there to
have reprehended it, who was thy ancient, and was not S. John there also to
have hindered it, and counseled him, who was more familiar with him than thou
wast? O wicked Judas what justice is it to sell thy master for money, and yet
to hold it for an evil thing to anoint him with ointments? Do thou make a
conscience of it, that they should anoint Christ his tender flesh, and do
thou make it no scruple at all to steal away the alms? O blessed Magdalen, O
happy woman! O happy had he ben which had been worthy to have been there at that
hour when thou did anoint thy master and my God, and happy had I been
when thou did anoint him with holy ointment, if I could have tempered and
mixed it with my tears, and as thou did anoint him with an ointment, I
could have washed him with my tears. I do not so much meruell at the malice of
Judas, as I do at the patience of Magdalen, for not regarding what Judas did,
the more he murmured, the more have she made in anointing him. O what a
number of murmurers there be now adays (says S. Jerome in an epistle) which
say with Judas, Vt quid perditio haec, What needs this loss, condemning and
finding fault at all that which is not done according unto their will and
pleasure, in so much that the murmurer thinks nothing well done unless it be
done as he will. Hilarious says, Many murmurers do murmr at the sumptuosity
of churches, and at the riches of holy places, saying with Judas, Vt quid
perditio haec, all which when they murmr, it is not so much because they see
it in the churches, but because they have it not in their own houses. Because
the son of God does represent all holy and virtuous men (says Origin,) what
other thing is meant, when he suffered Magdalen to anoint him and refresh his
body, but that he would be well pleased, that we should serve all holy and
good men, and well content that we should use all courtesy toward them? Why
do thou murmr, O thou murmurer, if thou do see thy brother ease his body
of continual pain and travel, and recreate somewhat and refresh his bones,
seeing thereby thou art not prejudiced at al? he which judges in evil part of
the recreation which his neighbor takes, murmureth at Christ with Judas,
seeing that the perfection of great personages does not so much consist in
having their bodies broken, as it does in having their hearts pure and clean.
Put the case (says S. Chrysostom) That there were a fault in that unction,
yet without comparison Judas did far more sin in murmuring at it, then Mary
Magdalen in doing it, or Christ in consenting unto it. Let no man judge his
neighbor (says Barnard) Let no man find fault at another man's doing, because
that murmuring is so odious in Gods sight, that oftentime he which murmureth
at another doing, sins more then he which does the thing. The second
accusation in scripture against this traitor Judas was, that he was a notonous
thief; which was a vice by God in the old law straightly forbidden, and with
grievous punishments chastised. Ea quae mittebantur portabat Judas, says S.
John, chap. 12. As if he would say: The office which Judas Iscarioth had in
Christ's house was to receive and take charge over all the alms which denout
persons did send unto Christ, and to bestow them, and divide them to Christ's
use and his Apostles. S. John's words are to be noted, when he says, That
Judas carried those things which were sent them: wherein he notes the great
perfection of Christ, and of his College, considering that he asked nothing
from door to door, but did eat only of the alms which were sent them unto their
house. The son of God (says Damasceu) nor those of his holy college, were not
of those poor which were troublesome and importunate, because he busied
himself more in preaching than in begging: for if they had no alms sent unto
them, they did eat the ears of the come and the herbs of the fields. We do
not read in the course of the whole Gospel, that Christ commanded or commended
any other matter unto Judas his disciple, but the gathering of the alms and
the charge of those temporal matters; in so much that were it much or little
which they did send unto Christ, Judas did both receive it and divide it, and
withal steal the best part of it. Chrysostom says thus, If we mark it
well, our Lord commended his holy soul unto his Father, his blessed mother
unto Saint John, his holy Church unto Saint Peter, his glorious body to
Nicodemus, and his poor substance and wealth unto Judas; in so much that he
committed the goods of this life unto the wickedest man that was the^ alive. It
is not to be thought that it is a good sign if our Lord give any great
abundance of temporal wealth in this world, seeing that naughty Judas
^^charioth had more wealth lone than Christ's whole company and college all
together. It is much to be noted, that seeing Christ had neither house, nor
vineyard, nor land, not other rent, but only the alms which they gave him in
the commonwealth: and also it is to be thought religiously, that that which
Judas stole from Christ could not be much, nor that which he detained from
the alms which was given him. If it be so then, that Christ had but little,
and that that which Judas stole was not much, why does the scripture with open
mouth call him a thief? wicked ^udas was a thief and that a great thief,
because that that which he stole was a holy thing, and a holy alms, and in a
holy house, and did belong unto a holy person; and therefore according unto the
law of God, that cannot be a small theft which is done in a holy and sacred
place. Saint August. says, that as the two mites which the poor old woman
offered in the Temple were more acceptable unto God than all the treasures of
the people, so our Lord is more offended with a little which is taken out of
the Temple, than with a great deal stolen in the world. Benauenture says,
that Judas did not condemn himself for the great quantity which he stole,
but because it was a holy place from whence he stole it, and thereupon it is,
my religious brother, that thou may offend more in taking a small thing out
of thy monastery, then a secular man in taking a greater out of the market. Why
should any man meruell, that the Scripture calls unhappy Judas a thief,
seeing he stole away the life and goods from the king of glory? Judas sold
Christ's life for many, he put Christ's fame and credit to pledge with the
wicked, and he put Christ's wealth into his purses: in so much that if Christ
more had had, more this thief would have robbed. O good Jesus, O redeemer of
my soul, if I were Judas, or Judas were as I am, I would never have pledged
thy honor and credit, nor have sold thy life: that which I would have stolen
should have been the humility the which thou did live with, the patience
which thou did speak with, and the charity which thou did forgive with,
and the zeal which thou did preach with. O what a happy thief should I be
if I could rob all these virtues from thee, seeing that in stead of these
thefts heaven gates would be open unto me. The third accusation is, that wicked
Judas Habebat loculos, that is, had a purse with little purses in it to hide the
pence which he had stolen. Rich covetous men are wont to put their double
ducats in one purse, the single in another, shillings in another, and their
small money in another, because they may find them quickly, and count them
easily. Wherein says Seneca does the felicity of covetous men consist, but in
seeing every hour their purse, counting their money, always hoording up
somewhat, and in studieng how they may lessen their ordinary charges? Aymon
notes, That the Scripture says not, that Judas had purses, but little purses,
whereby is gathered Christ's and his colleges great poverty, seeing that all
which that thief stole was but small base money which might well be contained
in small purses. Saint Cyprian notes, That there was so little money in
Christ's family, that there was not enough to stuff a little purse, much less
many purses: and when the Scripture says, that Judas had many purses, it was
because he had one common purse to spend of, and another secretly to steal
with. O happy time, O golden age of the primitive Church in the which there was
but one purse among them all: but now alas that not among worldlings, but
also among them which profess a monastical life, there is scarce any one
which has not with Judas his small purses to keep his own money in. And he
says further, tell me traitorous Monk, tell me thou Monk which have
property in things, what difference is betwixt thee which stealest the
revenues of thy Monastery, and the Traitor Judas which stole the alms from
Christ? Anselmus says, That as all perfect men are more bound unto straight
uses, than all other worldlings, I dare affirm that he has secret purses
hidden with Judas, which in his cell fostereth disordinate and superfluous
appetites. Saint Basil in his Rule says, As it is a greater perfection in a
religious person to want his own will, than to want any kind of money, yet we
may say of such a one that it is more dangerous for him to be mutinous
against his superior, then to have his purse full of money. Now thou art to
understand my religious brother, that Judas did not so much damn himself for
the money which he carried, as he did because he did what he lusted. It is an
evil thing to bear the purse, but it is far worse to be wedded unto a man's
own will: it is a bad thing to carry purses with money, but far worse to
fulfill a man's own appetites, because there is no sin which burns so much in
hell as the sin of a man's own proper will.

CHAP. III. Here are reckoned many other great offenses which Judas committed,
and diverse treasons which he did against Christ.
IVstificationes tuas custodiam, non mederelinquas vsquequaque, said the
Prophet David in his 118 Psalm; as if he would say, O great God of Israel, O
great God of the house of Jacob, I beseech thee with all humility, that seeing
I bind my self to keep thy commandments all the days of my life, that thou
would not forsake me until my death. This is a high prayer which the
Prophet makes, considering that he does capitulate and agree with God, and
God with him, that he will serve our Lord, and that our Lord will have charge
over him. It is much to be noted with Cassiodorus upon the Psalms, that the
Prophet does not only say, Do not forsake me, but he adds also Vsquequaque,
that is, that he would not forsake him all his life, and also that he would
give him his helping hand in all that he shall go about. O good Jesus, O the
love of my soul, I beseech thee, that if thou do suffer me to fall into any
sin, yet that thou would not forsake me, Vsquequaque, Always or
continually, and let me commit all sin, for if thou do not hold me with thy
merciful hand, where shall I stop but in the pains of hell? Our Lord has held
many with his hands, as Cain, Heli, Saul, and Manasses; but he did not hold
them Vsquequaque, that is still, and all in all until the end; considering
that the one slew his brother, the other lost his Priesthood, the other was
deprived of his kingdom, and the other died a Pagan. He did also forsake
David in his adultery, S. Peter when he denied him, Paul when he persecuted
him; but he did not forsake them, Vsquequaque, that is, until death; for of
great sinners they became very holy and chosen men. O what a singular favor,
says S. Basil upon the Psalms, our Lord does unto those whom he does not
utterly forsake, as he never does his best friends; the which although they be
euilly handled, and suffer much, yet he does it rather to exercise them, then
to forsake them. The unhappy and unfortunate Judas cannot say truly unto our
Lord, leave me not for ever, because his sins were so great and his offenses
so grievous, that he was forsaken of Gods hands utterly, and he made himself
wholly unworthy of Gods mercy and clemency. Was not the traitor Judas utterly
forsaken think you, seeing that he sold our Lord and master upon the
Wednesday, and upon the Friday after he hanged himself upon a tree? Do not
forsake me O good Jesus, do not forsake me Vsquequaque, for ever: but if thou will forsake me for a time, and withdraw thy helping hand from me, forget me
no longer then thou did forget S. Peter, which was until he wept; and do
not forget me as thou did Judas, until he hanged himself. The scripture
accuses Judas that he had noregard unto the needy and poor, but that he was
more careful to steal somewhat from the alms which was given unto Christ, then
to be pitiful upon the poor and necessities which were among the people.
Suspirabam, ligatus sum non cathenis ferreis, sed me a praua voluntate, says
Saint Augustine in the eighth of his Confessions, as if he would say; O how
many times did I pierce the heavens with sighs, and watered the fields with my
tears, seeing my self taken and bound in yrons, and yet not with fetters and
cheines, but with my own proper wicked will: and that which I cannot speak
without vveping is, that I yielded my own will unto the enemy, and with my
will he does that which is not my will. Who ever uttered such pitiful words
until this day? O with what great reason this holy man speaks this, and
with what greatreason he vveepeth for giving our will unto the devil,
seeing he makes of our will that which we will not: for if we give the
enemy once an entrance into our soul, he rebelleth presently with the chiefest
force he has, Judas gave principally his will unto the devil, and he in
lieu of his will, taught him to murmr, and having taught him to murmr he
used him to steal, and having used to steal he began to have purses, and that
being done he came to sell Christ for covetousness. What would the Prophet
say when he says, abyssus abissum inuocat, One depth calls another, but
that the quality of one sin is to call another unto him. August. upon the
Psalms says; King David says very well that one sin entiseth another,
considering that of idleness comes looking, of looking desiring, of desiring
consenting, of consenting doing, of doing perseuering, of perseuering damning
himself, in so much that we go from sin unto sin in post have, until we
be benighted in hell. Iucundus home qui miseretur, and commodat, etc. says
David in his hundred and eleventh Psalm, as if he would say. O how happy is
that man who is pitiful with the weak, a giver of alms unto the poor, and
modest in that which he speaks: for although God suffer such a one to be
tempted, yet he suffers him not to be overcome. S. Jerome upon these words
says, If thou mark it well, there is no man called pleasant and fair in
Scripture, but he which uses pity, and gives alms, and he who mea^reth
his words before he vtterthem; for such a one is in favor with God, and
esteemed among men. Who has been merciful unto his brother in this world, unto
whom God has not been the like in the other? who has imparted his goods unto
the poor, unto whom God has not imparted his glory? who has brideled his
tongue, who has not benregarded and respected for it? What greater reward
would he have which uses mercy, or he which gives alms of his substance or he
who hurts no man with his tongue, then that oath and promise which the Prophet
speaks of, Quod in aternum non commouebitur, that although he be never so
much vexed and beaten with temptations, yet our Lord will not suffer him to be
ouerthrown. S. Barnard says upon Qui habitat, O good Jesus, O the glory of my
soul, if my heart be assured by thee that he shall not be moved for ever, what
do I weigh it if pride beat me, if anger move me, if envy molest me, yea and
the flesh disquiet me? when our Lord asks of us that we would be merciful,
and alms giuers, and fair spoken, it is a very small matter that he asks of
us, considering that which he does promise for it: for for to be assured, that
neither in adversity which may come unto him, nor prosperity which he may
happen unto, Quod in aeternu^, that his heart shall never be moved, is such a
great matter that it can neither be bought with the weight of tears, nor
deserved by heroical deeds. The contrary unto all this was found in wicked
Judas: for in steed of pity he was cruel, considering how he had no regard
upon the poor, and in stead of almes-giuing he stole the alms from Christ, and
instead of brideling his tongue he sold his God and Lord unto the Synagogue;
and how could Judas the thief have pity on the poor which begged among the
people, seeing he stole the alms which they gave unto Christ? If it be a sin to
steal from a rich man, yea that which he abounds with; shall it not be a
sin and a wicked sacrilege to steal from the poor that which they have
necessity of? when those of Christ's holy college did eat the ears of corn for
pure hunger, they would rather have earen bread and meat if they had had money
to buy it. If Judas did see Christ divide the apostles alms to the needy poor,
he should nor only not have taken it as a reproachful thing and dishonest, but
rather he should have been thankful and glad for it, because there is no work
of mercy which is not in this world commended, and in the other rewarded. It is
a certain thing that the eues wish not well unto the poor, because a thief
will never come to him whom he thinks will ask something of him, but unto
those from whom they imagine they can steal somewhat away. Fulgentius says
in a sermon; If sorrowful Judas had been loiall unto his master, merciful
unto the poor, friendly with the Apostles, disciplinable in his manners, and
not desirous of other men's goods, our Lord would never have left him to have
gone out of his college, nor he ever have committed treason. Who made thee O
Judas stumble and fall into such enormious and grievous sins, but thy small or
rather no pity? When the scripture accuses the traitor Judas that he had no
care of the needy, it is a matter both to make us afeard, and also to wonder
at; because that in the sight of our Lord, the alms which we do unto the
poor are much more accepted, than the sacrifice and incense which we offer
him. Judas is also accused of that which he did in the parlar where he
supped, when Christ said. Ecce manus tradentis me, as if he would say; O my
disciples, O my only sons and companions, truly I open and discover one thing
unto you: that is, that one of you which are here with me, has sold me by
treason, and which is worst of all, he does eat with me at my table and at my
own dish. Christ complains that Judas sold him unto the Synagogue, and that
he sat at his table with him, and that he did eat with one hand only, and
that he was ashamed neither of the one nor of the other: and there is none of
this spoken without a great mystery. Confundimini and crubescite super viis
vestris o domus Israel, said God by Ezechiel, chap. 6, as if he would say: O
house of Israel, O ye people of Judah, be now ashamed of the filthy works which
you do, and of the wicked steps ye walk in. For I am much more offended to
see how little you esteem of me, then of the offenses which you commit against
me. A man which is of a noble and stour courage, and of a shamefast
countenance, although he have been offended and wounded by another, yet he
does not so much feel the injury which is done, as he greeueth to see his
enemy walk before his house; because the brabble proceeded of anger, but the
going about his house comes from malice. Gregory upon Ezechiel says thus,
Our Lord had great reason to complain of the house of Israel, and of the
kingdom of Judah, and that not so much for the wickedness they committed, as
for the small shame they had in committing it; because that he will either late
or never amend, which is not ashamed at all to have offended. It is to be noted
that the Prophet says, Erubescite de vijs vestris, that is, that we should be
ashamed to walk our ways, because to walk unto the flesh and the world there
are many ways, which are all of vanity: but to walk unto heaven there is but
one way, which is of charity. What are our ways but only our disordinate and
naughty desires? Whither do our desires lead us, but unto vices, and from
vices unto sins, and from sins unto hell? Then be ashamed to sin or to have
sinned: for as S. Ambrose says, The first step to repentance is to be ashamed
of the sin committed. What says the son of God, when he says, Behold the
hand of him which betraieth me: what else does he say tha^, behold the Traitor,
behold wicked Judas, who is not content to have sold me unto the synagogue, but
also sits and eats at my table without any shame at all. The son of God
could not have spoken a word of greater injury to Judas than to call him
Traitor: for after a man has committed treason against another, there is
never after any hope to be had of him, nor trust to be put in him. Judas was a
Traitor in selling Christ unto those unto whom he did sell him: that is, unto
his mortal enemies, who bought him not because he should serve them, but
because they would be revenged on him. Judas was a traitor, for selling Christ
for so base and vile a price, because a lusty and an able young man, as Christ
was, was more worth if it had been but to make a slave of. Judas was a Traitor
in selling him unto them, because in doing of it he showed great malice, and
exceeding avarice, seeing he agreed with his enemies for him at the first
word, and he never replied nor hucked one word upon the sale. Judas was also a
traitor, because he went of his own voluntary will to sell Christ, not being
asked nor induced unto it by any, wherein he showed his infamous condition and
wicked treason. For by so much the more sins are offensive, by how much the
occasions were less which caused us to commit them. Judas was also a Traitor
in sitting with Christ at his table, as though he had offended him in nothing:
wherein he showed his small conscience and great impudency; for having as he
had the money in his purse, for the which he sold Christ, it was not reason he
should have eaten with him in his dish. Remigius exclaimeth in an epistle: O
unto how many may Christ say now adays, behold the hand of him which betraieth
me is at the table with me, all which like unto Judas either by usury, or by
symony dare sell Christ, and after eat with him at the same mess, profaning
and wasting church-goods, as though they had cost Christ nothing! S. August.
upon S. John says, That there supped but one Traitor in the parlar with
Christ, but now adays in the table of his church there dineth and suppeth an
infinite number of Traitors: and that which cannot be spoken without tears is,
that never serving nor benefiting the catholic church at all, they eat and
take away the fruit which Christ got us with his precious blood. Tell me my
brother, tell me I pray thee, what difference is there betwixt thee which
sells Christ for sins, and Judas which sold him for money? Is it not
think thou a greater sin to sell Christ for other sins, then for Judas
to sell him for thirty pieces of money? The difference which I find betwixt
thee who art a sinner, and wicked Judas who was a Traitor is, that he sold
Christ but once, and thou sellest him every day and hour: and in so grievous
an offense there can be nothing more just, that seeing thy treason is greater
than his, that thy condemnation also should be greater than his. It is also to
be weighed that Christ does not say that Judas did eat with him with both
hands, but with one only; for he says: Ecce manum tradentis me; Behold the
hand of him who betraieth me, which he spoke not without a secret mystery. S.
Jerome says thus, He who could have seen Judas in the parlar, should have
seen how his heart was given to the devil, his body unto the world, his word
unto the Synagogue, his left hand upon his purse, and with his right hand he
did eat with Christ. Vbertinus says, That he does eat with the Traitor Judas
at the table with one hand, who lives in a monastery, not with a purpose to
follow Christ, but with an intention to flee the perils of the world, and coker
himself with the goods of the monastery. Bonauenture says, That then the
religious man eats with one handwith Judas at Christ's table, when he lives
in the monastery by necessity, and not voluntarily, insomuch that his body is
in his cell, and his heart in the market place. Thus then you have had recited
unto you the heinous offenses, which the Traitor Judas committed, and how
justly our Lord condemned him: so that now there remains only to tell you of
the perfections which were in the good thief which died with Christ, and how
justly Christ took him to heaven with him.

CHAP. IIII. Of the great virtues which the good thief had which died with
Christ, and how he believed: and of that which the Prophet Jeremy speaks to
this purpose.
TOnde capillum tuum and proijce, and sum indirectum planctum, quiae perijt
fides and ablata est de ore eorum, said God unto the Prophet Jeremy in the 7.
chap, as if he would say. O Jeremy my friend and Prophet, poule the hair of
thy head, and then cast it under thy feet, and weep and bewail the Synagogue,
because now there is no truth in her mouth, and the faith of her Commonwealth
is utterly lost. Men did never poule their heads in holy scripture, nor rent
their garments, nor shed many tears, but for very great disasters, or pitiful
accidents; as for the death of Jobs children, and with all the loss of all his
goods; for what cause holy Job shaued his hair, rent his garments, and cried
out with loud cries. It is much here to be noted, and also necessary to be
known, that seeing the scripture says, that the soul which commits the
sin, that the selfsame shall endure the punishment, why God commanded Jeremy to
weep with his eyes, and poule his hair, for the sins which others have
committed? If Israel do offend and fall into the sin of idolatry, how is the
good Prophet Jeremy to be blamed, and why is he commanded to poule his hair for
it and cast it under feet? Has not every man think you inoughto do to weep for
his own sins, without weeping for other men's sorrows? Hugo de sancto victore
answers unto this doubt upon those words, Defecerunt prae lachrimis oculi
mei, Thren. 1. and says that there is nothing more natural unto good me^ the^
to weep for the sins of the wicked. The charity of the good is so great, and
the carelesnes ossinners so idle, that the just me^ dofirst weep for the sins
of the wicked, then they do weep for themselves. O how many sinners do we see
in these days, sporting and laughing in the world, for whose sins the just do
weep and give themselves discipline? O that it would please the God of heaven,
that the heart of him who sins would receive such grief as the just in
seeing him sin? I swear by the law of a good man, that none would go to rest
at night with sin, nor rise in the morning without grace. Is there any day
(says Cyrillus upon Leuit.) in which a good man does not better himself, or
any moment wherein he does not merit, considering that he does imitate the good
in that which they do, and weep for the wicked in that they commit? King David
did weep for the death of his dear son Absolon, and not only because he
was his son, but because he saw him die in that evil estate. The son of God
wept over the city of Jerusalem, not only because they would there kill him, but
because they would never amend the^ of their wickedness. The Prophet Jeremy did
weep very much for the captivity of his people, not so much because they were
in captivity in Babilo^, as because they would not neither for that punishment
or any thing else leave their idolatry: the great captain Joshua with all the
nobles of Israel wept, not because of his own life, which was not long, but
because they saw how ungrateful the synagogue was to god. The Prophet Samuel
wept when king Saul came from the conquest of Amelech, not so much because God
had deprived him of a kingdom, but because he had fallen into such a great
sin. Saint Augustine in his Confessions says thus! We do not see good men so
much occupied in any thing as in drawing evil men to good life, and when they
can neither by entreaty: nor threatening convert them, then they betake
themselves to weep bitterly for them. When Jeremy said, Defecerunt prae
lachrimis oculi mei, and when David said, Exitus aquarum, etc. what else would
they say, but that the eyes of the one of them were failed for weeping for the
pains which the people endured, and that the eyes of the other were made a sea
of tears for the great wickedness which he saw in Israel. Anselmus in his
meditations says thus. O sweet Jesus, O my good Lord, if good men should not
aid me with their holy prayers, and if holy men should not help me to weep
for my grievous offenses, what would become of me wicked and wretched
creature? O what infinite charity, O what unspeakable mercy, says Jerome upon
Jeremy, had our Lord upon the wicked Synagogue, and always has upon every
sinful soul, considering that he commanded the Prophet Jeremy to weep for the
sins committed by her, as though they were his own. Wherefore think thou,
does our Lord command holy and just men to weep for our sins, but because he
knows better then we our selves, that if we have power to fall into sins, yet
that we cannot lift ourselves out of them without his grace and license? Who
then is able to obtain us this grace, but he who is in state of grace? It is
to be noted, that in Ieremies weeping, our Lord commanded him first to poule
his he are, then cast it and tread it under his feet, and that then he should
weep over them: of all which things there is none which wants a secret and
a mystery. What other things are the superfluou: hears in the head, but the
vain and light cogitations which are in the mind? When he says, That the
oftener our hear is pouled and shaued, the more they increase and grow, what
means he else, but that filthy and unclean thoughts the more they are
suppressed and kept under, the faster they grow upon us? What does he else mean
when he commands Jeremy not to pull up his hear by the root, but only poule
it; but only that if we be able to resist unclean thoughts, yet we are not
able wholly to subdue them and pull them up. The roots of the hear remain
always in the head, and the roots of vain desires continue always in the
soul; and if our Lord does permit this, it is because we should have matter
whereupon to exercise our self in, and occasion to merit the more. Then we do
p^^^ up our evil cogitations, when we throw them out of our hearts; then we
spurn the^ with our feet, when we return no more to think upon them, and then
we weep with all our heart, when we repent that ever we consented unto them.
O how happy should I be, if I could shave the superfluous thoughts of my heart,
and could kick at the disordinate desires of my mind, and could weep the times
which I have euilly spent! for in the latter day we shall give as strait an
account of the times which we have euilly spent, as of the offenses which we
have committed. Speaking more particularly, seeing that God commanded the
Prophet Jeremy to poul his head, as if he had been a simple man, and kick at
that which he had pouled, and weep many tears, it is convenient now that we
know whether he commanded him to do these things for the sins which he has
committed, or for sins which he has seen in the Judicial people. Who ever
saw Christ weep or command any man to weep, but he had occasion to doir, and
reason to command it? The reason why Jeremy weepeth is, Quid ablata est fides
de ore little, Because there is now no faith in the house of Jacob, and because
the goodness and truth of Israel is perished. Behold how God does not complain
here of us, for that we do not offer sacrifice, nor because we pay not our
tithes, nor because we break the holy fasting days, nor because they are
couerous, nor because they are carnal and glurtons: because nature inuiteth
and inclines us to all these, car^lesnesse and humane frailty excuses us.
That which our Lord co^plaineth of is, that they are faithless in heart and
idolaters, and that they can speak nothing with their mouth but lies, which
two vices are perrillous for us to be saved with, and very hard to amend.
Ciprian upon the Creed says; Although the Apostle says, that faith without
works is dead, yet I had rather do sinful works being a faithful Christian,
the^ virtuous works being a faithless Pagan; because that our Lord does
easilier lighten him which believes that which he commands, the^ him which
blasphemeth him and his church. Damascen says, That the devil dare never tempt
mightily any, but such as he perceives to be weak in faith, and in that case
he cares not much to te^pt him hardly with other vices, if he see him weak
and cold in faith; because the devil is better at ease to see a man doubtful
and waver in faith, the^ to see him commit all other sins in the world. What
does the devil watch at, or ouerwatch, but to see whether thou be doubtful
in the faith of Christ? what have thou if thou have not true faith? what
want thou, if thou want not the true faith of Christ? O good Jesus, O the
light of my soul, I beseech thee that thou would not deprive me of thy
faith, that thou would not cast me out of thy church, that thou would not
take thy mercy from me: for if thou will not suffer me to fall from thy faith,
I shall always have a hope that in the end I shall be saved. To come the^ unto
our principal purpose, who made unhappy Judas hang himself, and what was the
cause the good thief was saved, but only the great faith the thief had, and
the sinful infidelity which the other fell into? because Judas would not believe
that Christ was our maker, and because the good thief believed that Christ was
our redeemer: Judas sold Christ, and the other believed in Christ: insomuch
that in believing and knowing little, men come to offend much. So much (says
Gregory) the faith of a good Christian is more meritorious, by how much the
fewer arguments and reasons it is grounded on, because the merit of the
catholic faith does not consist on that which we see with our eie^, but in
that which we believe with our hearts. If we compare the faith of the good
thief with the faith of the old fathers, we shall find it to be true, that he
did so far exceed the^ in faithfully believing, as they did go beyond him in
good living. How should not. Abraham believe in God, considering how God spoke
unto him from heaven above, and used him as if he had been his particular
friend? The thecues faith was greater tha^ his, because that Christ never spoke
unto him one word of belief, neither did he ever see him in heaven, but only
hanged upon the cross. The Prophet Esaias did believe in God, when he saw him
sit on high in his throne, beset with thousands of Seraphins; but the the eues
faith was greater, because he never saw Christ but crucified, and accompanied
with thieves. The Prophet Maises had faith when he saw the God of Israel
speak unto him out of a bush, and that the bush wasted nor burnt not; but the
faith of the good thief was greater than this, considering that he saw Christ
laden with thorns, which burnt nor in show, but in troth pierced his brain.
S. Peter had faith, when he saw Christ go upon the waters; but the good
theefes faith was greater, considering he saw Christ not spurn the waters, but
saw him bathed in blood from the feet to the head. Mary Magdalen had faith when
she saw him raise her brother Lazarus from death to life who had been four
days dead; but the good thief had greater faith then this, considering how he
never saw Christ raise the dead, but only saw himself die upon the cross like
a malefactor. S. John the Evangelist had faith when he had ssept upon our Lords
breast, after he had supped with him in the parlar; but the theefes faith was
greater then this, seeing that he believed in the son of God, not sleeping
upon stis breast, but suffering with him by his side upon the cross. S. James
had faith when he savv Christ transfigured in the hill Tabor and the Fathers
of the old law adore him; but the good theefes faith was greater then this,
considering he saw not the son of God transfigured but disfigured, he saw
not his face shine, but his body torn in pieces. O happy and glorious thief,
who but thou has stoine the faith from the synagogue which of old she was
wont to have, and stolen Christ from them in whom then they believed not?
Impart and divide unto me part of the faith which thou did steal from the
Synagogue, and Christ which thou did rob away on the Mount of Caluary: for
although I was not thy companion in suffering, yet now I will be in believing.
That which I would have thee impart unto me is, the entire faith which thou
have, the holy words which thou speak, the abundance of blood which thou
sheddest, the true confession which of God thou make, and the Christian
charity with the which thou do correct the other thief. O that this thief
has a happy inheritance, seeing that with the theft of worldly things he
easily got the gallows, and with the theft which he stole upon the cross he
got glory. Chrysostom of the praise of the thief says thus; In whom O good
Jesus, in whom did thy holy faith remain when thou did depart out of this
life, but in thy sorrowful mother, who wept at the foot of the cross, and in
that holy thief who suffered on thy side? O good Jesus, O redeemer of my soul
(says Barnard) what a small number of friends thou had with thee on the
cross, and what a multitude of enemies about thee, considering that thou had
there but two faithful Christians, that is, thy blessed mother which did
believe in thee with her heart, and that just thief which did confess thee
with his mouth. Seeing it was nothing else to be a Christian, but to believe in
Christ, and serve Christ, it is to be believed that this thief was a
Christian, and that he died a Christian: for if he had not ben one, he would
never have commended himself unto Christ, as we do our selves unto God,
unless he had also believed him to be God. Isichius upon Leuiticus says,
That we do not doubt whether this thief was baptized or not, but how he was
baptized, and where, we know not; but that which we do know in this case is,
that if there wanted water on the cross to baptize him, yet there wanted no
blood to regenerate him. There was but one poole in the temple of Jerusalem to
heal men with, but on the Mount of Caluary there are three fonts to baptize
with; the one was full of our Ladies tears, the other full of the water of our
Lords side, and the third full of the blood of his body. How could this thief
be unbaptized, having such great preparations to baptize him? O my soul, O my
heart, why do you not baptize and wash your sins, why wipe you not away your
wickedness in the tears of the sweet mother, in the water of his grievous side,
and in the blood of her holy son? Ecce nunc in iniquitatibus conceptus sunt,
Behold now I am conceived inherited, or what offenses could I have committed,
which the mothers tears could not wash, and the sons blood could not inake
clean? I will not now go with Judith to the fountain of Modien to wash me;
nor with Naaman to the waters of Iorda^ to bath me, nor to the poole at
Jerusalem with the sick of the palsy to heal me, but I will go only unto
the holy fonts of the Mount of Caluary to baptize me, which are full of the
blood which my God shed, and of the water which issued out of his side. To
conclude then, when Christ was baptized, there was none present but S. John:
but in the baptism of this thief there was Christ, and his mother, S. John
and Mary Magdalen, insomuch that in the house of God they give more honor to
good thieves, then unto those which are naughty-Emperours.

CHAP. V. How three hours in which the good thief was with Christ upon the
cross, did profit him more than the three years profited Judas in the which
he followed Christ: and how some steal until they come to the gallews, and
how this thief stole upon the gallows.
ET^nunc domine deus Israel, da seruo tuo cor docile, vt discernere possit
inter bonum and malum, said the great king Solomon in a prayer which he made
unto God, Reg. 4. chap. 3. as if he would say; O great God of Israel, O great
God of the house of Israel, I pray thee and beseech thee that it would please
thee to give me from thy hands a heart willing to do all that thou do command
me, and believe all that thou do counsel me. Who is able to govern so rich a
country, if thou in teaching him do not give him an understanding to discern
betwixt the good and the evil? This petition of Salomo^s was very grateful unto
God, because he asked him no more kingdoms to enlarge his dominions, nor
riches to live deliciously with, nor many years to live long with, nor favor
and might to be reue^ged of his enemies. To have much, to possess much, to
live long to be of great might, are they nor the things we desire most of al
with all our hearts, and for the which we do most of al sweat for and sigh? when
Solomon asked a heart apt to learn, what did he ask else, but a mind which
would suffer it self to be instructed and to be counseled by wise men, which
few men are wont to ask, and much lesle to do; because every man thinks
himself wise, and that he needs no man's co^unsell at all. What better prayer
could that happy king have demanded at Gods hands; tha^ a heart well
iustructed, and ready to hear counsel? Plato in his Timaeo says, that he
never saw any man do amiss which followed counsel, but he saw many cast
themselves away by following their own will, Seneca to Lucilths says that the
commodity of a mind well taught, and of a man well counseled is, that if he hit
aright in that which he does, al men give him the glory of it, and if he err
in his enterprise, al men cast the blame upon him which counseled him. When
Christ took counsel upon the sea ding of the hungry companies, did he not take
it trowy you of 8. Phillip, which was one of the^ which could d^^least and knew
least? S. Paul writes to his disciple Philemon, Sine tuo consilio nihil
facium, that is, I will do nothing without thy counsel: without his advise and
opinion he would not determine either to go to Rome, or stay and preach in
Asia. King David was a for greater Prophet the^ Nathan, yet he consulted with
the good king, whether he himself should make the holy (...), or command his
son to make it. If Christ then being God, and S. Paul being an Apostle, and
king David being a Prophet, would not trust their own judgment, why should
any man refuse another counsel and opinion? Foris vastauit eos gladius; and
intus pauor, quia gens estabsque consilio and prudentia^, said God unto Moses,
complaining upon the people of Israel; as if he would say, O Moises thou have
it in thy choice, which thou have made of people to serve me upon those which
have neither wisdom to govern themselves, neither do ask counsel of that
which they ought to do, by reason whereof they shall go al their life time sore
feared with the enemies knife, and always bear fearful hearts. God
complains of the Synagogue, that she had little wit and great folly, and that
she despised counsel and was guided by her own wit, which are two things
dangerous to a Common wealth, and hurtful unto every particular person.
Chrysostom says, That God does that man great favor unto whom he gives a
heart apt to learn, and easy to be counseled, and not hard to be entreated;
because there are some men so unpleasant in their conditions, so proud in their
conversation, that they are hated of all men, and liked of none. It is to be
noted, that the wise man says not only unto God give me a heart, but he
adds, a heart easy to be instructed; because God gives hearts unto many,
which are rather hearts of beasts then of men, with the which they neither know
that which they should, nor choose that which they ought, nor keep that which
they have, nor keep secret that which they know. S. Barnard expounding these
words, Abii post vestigia gregum tuarum, says, That it is a word of great
injury and grief which wounds the mind, when God commanded any to go after
beasts, seeing that man is lord over beasts; which our Lord does sometime
command, because he is a greater beast the^ a beast which has the use of
reason and yet does not follow reason. The end why the wise man did ask for a
heart easy to be instructed, was because he might know how to choose what
was convenient, and eschew that which was hurtful: for if a man cannot do
this, a brute beast can do that which a man cannot do; because we see by
experience that he eats every day of one food for his sustenance, and of
others he eats at times for a purgation. S. August. de verbis Apostoli,
says, That it is so great a gift to have a mind apt to learn in this world
what is good and what is bad, that he gives it but unto very few; for this
being known, there is nothing else to be known. To come then unto our purpose,
had not this good thief a heart easy to be taught, what was good, what
evil, and that far better than the other thief his companion, seeing he
said unto our Lord Remember me, commending himself unto Christ; and the other
said blaspheming Christ, if thou be Christ, save thy self and us? Origin upon
Matthew says, Care not my brother for being a thief, in hope to save thy
self, as the good thief did to save him: for God gave him not heaven so
lightly, but that he paid somewhat for it, FOr if he gave him the kingdom of
heaven, it was because he did confess him, when al denied him, praised him
when all men blasphemed him, accompanied him when all men forsook him, and
defended him when all men accused him. O high judgments of God, O inscrutable
secrets of Gods divine providence! which of the Saints deserve to understand
them, or which of the Seraphins is able to attain unto the^? Let all the
wise men of the world come together, let all the Hierarchies and holy
principalities assemble themselves: what count can they yield, or what reason
can they allege, why three hours only, in the which the good thief was
upon the cross with Christ, did profit him more than Judas three whole years
continually that he went with Christ? Agreeable unto the saying of the
Apostle, what avails it the gardener if he labor in his garden, plant
lettise, and water them with the water of the morning, if our Lord do not
visit it with his grace? Chrysostom de laudibus latr^nis, says, The thief
stole, and Judas gave alms; the thief filled his belly, and Judas fasted; the
thief stole, and Judas prayed; the thief followed the world, and Judas served
Christ, and yet notwithstanding all this, the thief is saved, and Judas
condemned. What does it avail us to serve, if it please not the son of God?
God looked first upon Abel, then upon his sacrifices: in the world they look
first unto the gift, although he who gives it be naught, but in the house of
God they regard more the merit of him who gives, tha^ the value of the thing
which he gives. The merits of this thief were very great, considering he
served Christ neither years nor months, nor weeks, but hours, and those
very few, but he employed them so well, that if he sinned a long time, he
repented suddenly, amended with speed, and saved himself in a short space.
Vbertinus says, That it is to be noted, that the scripture passes with
silence who this thief was, from whence he was, what age he was of, what law
he observed, of what stock he descended, because that Pilate being a Roman
judge, could as well crucify the Gentiles, as hang the Jews. The scripture kept
close the secret of this secret to let us understand, that for our salvation it
makes little to the purpose, whether we be noble men or mean men, rich or
poor, well spoken of or infamous, but only that we hold Christ for our Lord
and king, and that we keep faithfully his holy law. S. Basil upon the Psalms
says, That all the things of this world suffer an excuse, but those things
which touch the good of our conscience, and the service of the catholic church
do admit none at all. And that there is no excuse to be admitted in the service
of God, let us look unto the good thief which suffered on the cross with
Christ, who for to ask pardon of his error, and to repent him of his sins,
was not hindered at all by being infamous, nor condemned, nor crucified, nor of
base lineage, nor yet that he had so small time to repent. How great sins so
ever we have, or how late soever we come unto the cross, let us not distrust
to be heard, nor despair to be admitted: for we do not read of this
thief, that he was baptized, or confessed, yea or that he had repented until
he was put upon the cross Cyrillus cries out; O great mercy, O infinite
goodness, what sweats did that thief endure for thee, what discipline did he
give his flesh, what number of years did he serve thee, in what holy
pilgrimages did he bestow his time, that thou should within three hours
pardon his offenses, and no other but thou thy self take him to glory? Barnard
says, O who could become a thief with the good thief, seeing that one fight
of thee made him a Christian, and one word brought him to heaven? We see daily
that some steal in their childhood, some in their youth, some at man's estate,
some in their old age, and some even unto the gallows: but yet to steal upon
the gallows, of whom do we read it, but of this holy thief? There was never
any famous thief, that ever did so famous a robbery before he came to the
gallows, as this good thief did even upon the gallows, considering that
before all their faces he stole away the kingdom of heaven. O that this was a
happy theft which the thief stole upon the cross, considering that he stole
the son from his father, their Lord from the Angels, and their creator from
the Jews, and their redeemer from the Christians. Who ever saw any thing like
unto this, who ever heard any thing like unto this, or who ever read any thing
like unto this? Thy feet nailed, thy arms crucified, thy hands bound, all thy
body disiointed, and withal hanging upon the cross, and yielding up the ghost,
yet do thou steal from others? When other men ask pardon of the people, say
their belief, restore things taken away, as all other thieves do, at that
time thou do go about to steal anew. O good Jesus, O the comfort of my
soul, will thou not give me license to rob and steal with this thief? That
which I would steal, should be the blood which thou did shed, the love
which thou did die with, and the charity which caused thee to die, and the
cross on which thou did die: but woe and alas if I would steal all
this, I should first crucify my self. O my soul, O my heart if you will
steal and rob with this thief, suffer your selves to be taken, then to be
bound, then to be dismembered and crucified: for as in the world when we are
at liberty money is stolen, so upon the cross when we lose our liberty, the
heavens are stolen. Adams was but a small theft, seeing of all Paradise he
stole but one apple. But this good thief was not content with the apples of
Paradise, unless he stole all Paradise. It was a vain and a light theft which
fair Rachel committed against her father Laban, and this of the thief was an
honorable theft, because he did not abase himself to steal idols made of
wood, but he stole the very true God. The theft which king David committed was
a bold theft, when he stole the bottle of water and the spear from king Saul's
boulster: but the good thieves theft was more solemn, who stole not a lance
from a boulster, nor a bottle of water, but he stole Christ's body dry and
without blood, and his side which was pierced with a lance. Moises spies were
crafty and subtle thieves, which stole away the bunch of grapes of the land
of promise: but the good thief was far more subtiler, seeing he stole from
those who had stolen, not a bunch of grapes which hanged, but Christ
crucified. Let all the thieves that are, come forth (says Cyprian) and be
compared with this thief, and they shall find for a truth, that he is the
greatest of all, and the most famous of them all: seeing that if other do
steal they lose their life, but this in stealing recovered life.

CHAP. VI. How the good thief had nothing remaining on the cross, but his
heart and his tongue: and that by these two he gained glory: and there are
curious points uttered touching the heart.
OMni custodia custodi cor tuum, quia ex ipso vitaprocedit, said Solomon the
wise, speaking with his son Roboam, in the fourth chap. of his Proverbs; as
if he would say, I counsel thee my son Roboam, as a thing that does very much
import thee, that thou keep thy heart with all care and watching, because
from him proceeds all the good of thy life. It does behooue us very much that
we believe this that the wise man says, and also keep it, seeing he
vvriteth it with such high words, and persuadeth it with such deep
reasons. I confess for my own part, that amongst all the things which I have
read, or have heard wise men speak of, there is none that has taken such deep
root in my memory, nor has satisfied my judgment like unto this counsel of
the wise man. For the better commending of which speech I wish I had Homers
understanding, Platoes wit, Diogenes phrase, Eschines art of Oratory, and
Ciceroes tongue. After this saying, and in comparison of it, there is nothing
more to be thought, nothing more to be sought, nothing more to be said, nor
nothing more to be commended: for under this speech is comprehended, all the
goodness that has been written until this day, and all that which is necessary
for thy salvation. This is a high doctrine, a wonderful saying, worthy to be
heard, and true to be believed, just to be taught, and wholly to be observed.
S. Jerome says thus of it: when the wise man says, Omni custodia, Keep thy
heart with all watching, it is to say plainly, keep, keep, watch, watch, be
advised, be advised, shut shut the gates and entrance of thy heart: for it is
he in whom our Lord desires to delight in, and that is he whom the devil
also would willingly possess. S. Augustine in a sermon says, The wise man
says not without cause, keep thy heart with a careful watch, considering
that God and the devil, and the devil and God strive not who shall possess
the eyes we do see with, or the tongue which we speak with, but only which of
the^ both shall house and shut himself as in a castle in our hearts which we
bear: insomuch that in the guard and keeping of the heart consists our
salvation or perdition. Origin says, That when the wise man says, Omni
custodia cor tuu^ custodi, he does forwarne us and advise us, that we put
dilligent watch and ward over our fugitive heart, because the flesh may not
defile him, the world move him, the devil deceive him, the enemy steal him
and possess him. What else does he say when he bids thee watch and ward thy
heart, but only that so much interest we have in Christ, how much he himself
has in our hearts. If God has little in thee, thou have little in God: if thou
have much in God, god has much in thee: and seeing thou would have nothing
of God but thy salvation, and God would have nothing of thee but thy heart,
thou ought highly to keep it, and trust it and commit it to none but unto
him. S. Gregory in his Morals says, The counsel of the wise man is very
deep, and his advise very divine, when he says, Keep thy heart with all
watching, and the reason is, that because all that which God gives us, and all that which we offer unto him is worth nothing if it be not kept in the heart,
and proceed from the heart: and therefore it is a very wholesome thing that our
hearts be always full of good desires, and very far from vain thoughts. Tell
me I pray thee, why the wise man was not content to say, that we ought to
keep the heart, but he added that we should keep him with all watching and
guarding, and put him in very great safety? What other thing is it to keep it
with all guard, but only that we should not give place for any vanity or folly
to enter in? Seneca says in an Epistle, We see that the eyes are defended
with the eye lids, the mouth with the lips, the ears with a cotton, the bands
with gloves, the corn in the garner, and money in chests: but no man is able to
take away vain desires from the ambitious and mutinous heart, nor cut off his
light cogitations. Tell me I pray thee what treasure is there in man's heart,
because he should be gorged with so many guards? O my brother if thou did
know what a great treasure that is which God has left in keeping in the heart
of the just man, I assure thee, and swear unto thee, that thou would keep
thy heart with a strong guard, and would not consent that any but God should
enter into it. is it not think thou great reason that thy heart be well
guarded, seeing God will not have it for any other but for himself? In the
he^^t of man there is the reasonable power, with the which he governs
himself, the irascible power with the which he defends himself, and
co^cupiscible with the which he provides for things necessary; and in the
keeping of these three powers, the salvation of the soul consists, and the
rest and quietness of the life. The devil trauelleth much like unto another
Ioab, to give us three fierce wounds in these three noble powers, because our
sorrowful heart should faint and be dismayed, and not know how to govern
himself in prosperity, nor help himself in adversity. S. Barnard upon Qui
habitat says, O what guards and double guards, O what watches and double
watches me^ should put to their poor heart, that is, Liberality against the
world which does compass us with riches, Chastity against the flesh, which
does enuiron us with pleasures, Charity against the devil who does vex us with
malice. If we had as great a care in guarding our hearts, as the devil has in
fighting with it, he should never bring us into such great disquietnes, nor
could never put us in such danger and peril. If thou will hear me tell thee the
order of thy perdition, thou shall perceive clearly, that it rises for want of
putting a guard over thy heart: insomuch, that at the same instant in which we
withdraw the guard from our heart, presently our conscience runs to
perdition. The^ the order of our disorder is, that the sight breeds thought,
thought breeds delight, delight breeds consent, consent breeds work, the
work breeds custom, custom breeds obstinatio^, obstinatio^ breeds
desperatio^, and desperatio^ damnation. Would it not be just to keep a heart
manacled and fettered, which brings forth such children and nephews? who
holds you O my soul laden with scrupulosities, who holds you O my body
tormented with trauails, but only the towers of wind which my heart breeds,
and a thousand dangers into which he casts himself? It is very convenient
says Anselmus, that we keep our heart in work, because that which we shall do
may be good, and keep our tongue very well, because that which we shall speak
may be just, and keep well our thought, because that which we shall think may be
clean and pure, because our hearts shall be such as our works are. Audi popule
stulte, audiqui non babes cor, said God by the Prophet Jeremy in the 5. chap:
as if he would say, Hear my foolish and cursed people, hear me people
without heart, which art come to such perdition, that thou want reason, and
have no heart. God could not have iested at the people of Israel, nor given
the^ a greater scoff than call them fools without a heart. For seeing that
the life of the body is the heart, as it is, and the life of the heart the
soul, and God the life of the soul, and that the life of God is God himself;
what other thing is it to be without a heart, than to be naught and without a
soul? Origin upon ^eremy says, That God speaks not of the heart of flesh
which is in the breast, for this heart no Jew vvanted; but God speaks of holy
and spiritual hearts, with the which we serve our Lord, and save our souls:
and in this sense if any one want a heart, he wants also reason. And if this
be true as true it is, that the heart is nothing else but reason, what loses
he who loses his heart, and what has he who has not his heart? And
therefore there are not any put into the house of innocents, or into Bedlem,
because they wanted a heart to live with; but because they want reason to
govern themselves with: and for this cause is not he a verier fool who lives
not according to reason, tha^ he who has his heart molested and troubled.
Plato says in his Timaeo; If a man does lose his eyes, or feet, or hands, or
his wealth, we may say of such a one, that if he lose, he loses somewhat; but
he who loses his heart and reason loses all: for in the womb of our mother
the first thing which is engendered is the heart, and the last thing which dies
is the same heart. Because we have great need of patience in the trauails
which we do endure, and constancy in the good works which we do take in hand,
God does us a principal favor in making us a stout heart, and it is also a
great punishment of him to make us of a faint heart. Anselmus in his meditations
says, O good Jesus, O the glory of my soul, stop I pray thee, stop my ears,
that I hear not, make my eyes blind that I see not, cut off my hands that I
steal not, with condition that thou would leave me a will to serve thee, and
a heart to love thee. How is it possible that I should love thee, and serve thee
with all my heart, if thou O sweet Jesus do let my heart lose it self? seeing
thou art the God in whom I believe, the Lord whom I serve, and life with which
I live, and the heart which I most love, what other thing is it for me to be
without a heart, than to be deprived of thee O my good Jesus? Vae duplici
cord, and labijs scelestis, etc, said the wise man, as if he would say; Woe
be unto that man which has two hearts to think ill with, two tongues to
murmr much with, and two hands to steal more with, and goes two ways to
lose himself. No man has two hearts, but he who is malicious, no man has
two tongues but he who cannot rule his tongue, no man has two hands but the
covetous man, no man goes two ways but the ambitious man, who for to have
more, and prevail more, leaves no way not gone, nor any estate not shot at or
shaken. It is sure a new thing and not heard of before, that the wise man dare
say, that some man has two tongues to murmr much with, and some two hearts
to think much with, and in this case we dare well say that it is as monstrous a
thing to have two hearts, as to want one. Remigius upon these words says, In
things which do hinder the one the other, to undo them is to win the^, to
separate the^ is to fly from the^, and to cut the^ asunder is to sow the^, and
to diminish the^ is to increase them, and to wast them is to better the^. the
example of all this may be given in trees which have many boughs, and in a
vine which has many branches, whose superfluity if we do cut off, we make
them grow, and the pruning of the vine makes it fructify. The Prophet Jeremy
accuses Israel, because he has no heart at all; and Solomon reprehendeth the
malicious man, because he has two hearts: what mean shall we keep then to
complie with the one, and satisfy the other? Hugo de arra anima, answers and
says, Seeing our love ought to be but one, and he on whom we ought to bestow
our love should be but one, in like manner the heart with whom we should
engage our love, should be but one, because that cannot be called true love
which is scattered into many hearts. If we should be permitted by the law of
Christ to have many loves, we should also be suffered to have many hearts:
but seeing it is not permitted to have more than one love, why would we have
more than one heart? He in an Order of religion is said to have many hearts,
who remains with his body in the monastery, and with his will and mind
wandereth in the world, and so he lives with pain by reason of the one, and
casts out sighs by reason of the other. The dissembling hypocrite has also
two hearts, who with the one desires to be in low degree, and with the other
labors to be exalted; with the one he speaks fair, and with the other he
bireth secretly; with the one he proclaims conscience, and with the other he
maintains malice; and which is worst of all, with the one he does forward
concord, and with the other he stirs up war. Woe therefore be unto him who
has two hearts: for if he had but one, either he would be wholly good or
wholly bad; but having two hearts, he cannot in religion do that which he
ought, nor in the world do that which he would. He has also two hearts, who
has good words and naughty works, he which cries the spirit, and is al
flesh, he who lives wickedly and hops well, he who is rigorous with
other men, and mild unto himself, strait unto his brothers, and liberal unto
himself. Has not he think you two hearts, who promises much and performs
little, he who swears that he loves, and yet in the end loves not, but
deceives? To come then unto our purpose, all that which I have spoken, is to
let you know how vvisely and warily the good thief kept his heart, and how
highly he did employ it, seeing he denied it the devil, and offered it unto
Christ. Christ and the devil were at a great variance which of the^ should
carry away the thieves heart, because the devil alleged that he did belong
unto him, because he was a ringleader of thieves; and Christ said that he did
belong unto him, because he was the father of sinners. But when the thief
said, Lord remember me, the devil fled, and Christ defended the thief.
Chrysostom says, That Cain offered corn unto God, Abel lambs, Noe Weathers,
Abraham doves, Melchisedech wine, David gold, Iepthe his daughter, and Anna
her son. If all these men did offer much unto God, that which the good
thief did offer was much more: for all that which they offered were
external things, and not their own; but that which the good thief offered
was his own, and in this case there is great difference betwixt offering
that which a man possesses and keeps in his house, and offering of his
own proper person. If any man ask thee what that is that the thief offered
Christ, let him first answer what that was that he kept for himself for
giving as he did, all which he had vnro Christ, he was not seen to reserve
any thing for himself. Seneca says in an Epistle, Who is he who gives
another all which he can, who does not give him also his vvil and all that he
has? The good thief gave Christ all that he could, all that he was vvorth,
all his power, all that he possessed, and also al his might and will, at
what time he acknowledged himself a sinner upon the altar of the cross, and
Jesus Christ to be his redeemer. O good sinner, O glorious confessor; vvilt
thou not tell us what thou did offer unto thy God, seeing thou did obtain
such grace by it? The thief offered not his eyes because they were covered,
neither his money because the iailor had it, nor his coat because the hangman
had it, nor his body because it was crucified; he had only left his tongue,
with the which he confessed Christ, and his heart with the which he believed
in him. If he would have given Christ his honor, he knevv not where it
was, if he would have served Christ with his life, it was now at an end,
if he would have bestovved his goods upon him, he had none left: for he lost
his honor and credit by his theft, his life Pilat commanded to be taken from
him, and all his goods the office of the Fiskall possessed. O high my stery
(says Origin) O divine example, who being put upon the tree, had nothing left
but his heart, and with that he believed in Christ, and his tongue, and with
that he commended himself unto God. It is to be believed, that if this good
thief had had any thing else left but his tongue and his heart, that with more
he would have served Christ: insomuch, that we cannot co^demn his offering
for a mean and miserable gift, seeing he offered God al which he had: For what
does he not offer who offers his heart? what does he not divide who
deuideth his heart? O my tongue, O my heart, why do you not take for your
companion this thief crucified upon the tree, because he may teach you how
sins are bewailed, and the heavens stolen away? Irenaeus says, I think I shall
never be condemned, but I have a great hope I shall be saved, seeing that the
good thief being alone, and crucified upon the cross, by no other means but
by offering his heart and tongue unto God in less than half an hour, went
into glory. S. Barnard says, O good Jesus, O the hope of my soul, why should
I torment my self and be sorrowful, if I want feet to go to glory, or have
no ears to hear sermons, nor have no riches to give alms, nor jewels to
offer in the temples? Seeing that I hold it for certain, that with one holy
wish I shall content thee O sweet Jesus. Moses sister was scabby, noble Lia
was blearecied, good Moises stutted in his speech, holy Tobias was blind,
Mimphiboseth was lame: yet notwithstanding al these defects and imperfections,
nothing hindered them from being virtuous and holy. If our hearts be clean and
whole, what cares God if our members be rotten? The great Patriarch Jacob
blessed his sons being blind, dogs licked the wounds of holy Lazarus legs,
patient Job did wipe and shave off the worms of his flesh with a tile stone,
holy Tobias saw nothing but what his children directed him unto, but none of
all these things hindered them from serving their Lord and God, and from
helping their neighbors and brothers to save themselves. Remigius says, Behold
O my soul, behold, the good thief had sentence to die upon the cross, with
his ioints severed the one from the other, his eyes covered, his flesh rent and
torn, his blood shed, and yet notwithstanding all this, with his heart which only
lived, he knew how to remedy and save himself. In so few hours, in so short a
space, the penance which the good thief did, could not be great, nor the
sighs which he gave could not be many; yet because he gave them so from his
heart, and with such great devotion, Christ took them in a sort for a just
account; and not only those which the^ he gave, but also those which he had a
will afterward to give, if death had not cut him off.

CHAP. VII. How the naughty thief lost himself only for want of faith: and of
two chalices which the scripture makes mention of, of which both the thieves
drank of.
COnsurge consurge Jerusalem, quiae bibisti calicem irae dei vsque ad faeces,
said the Prophet Esaias speaking with Israel, as if he would say. Rise up O
Jerusalem, rise up O Synagogue, seeing that of mere drunkenesse, thou art
fallen upon the earth, considering that thou have drunk the cup of the anger
of God, unto the very bottom and dregs. The son of God the night before his
passion, being at his prayers in the garden of Gethsemani, when all the
torments which he was afterward to suffer, came unto his mind, and the torment
of the death which he was to endure, said unto his eternal father, Pater
sivis, transeat a me talix iste, as if he would say. My eternal and holy
father, I ask thee as thy son, and beseech thee as thou art my father, that
thou would consent, that all those of my church may also drink of this cup
of bitterness. The doubt now is, that seeing the cup that Israel tasted of, was
from as good a God as the cup that Christ drank of, why the cup that Christ
drank of was approved and liked, and the cup that Jerusalem drank of misliked
and disallowed? The one was a cup, and the other a cup: the one was of
bitterness, and the other was of ire: the one fell to the synagogue, and the
other to the church: the one was of God, and the other was of God, and seeing
it is so, why do they threate^ Israel, for that which he drunk, and praise
Christ for that which he supped up? The better to understand this point, we
must understand that there are two kind of cups or chalices in the holy
scripture. To wit, the one which is called the chalice of bitterness, and the
other which is called the chalice of ire, and the difference betwixt the^ is,
that by drinking the one, we appear betimes in the morning in Paradise, and by
drinking the other we go down at night unto hell. What is the cup of bitterness
full of, but with hunger, cold, thirst, persecution, and temptation; all which
things our Lord gives to drink, unto all those which he has chosen to serve
him, and unto all those whom he has predestined unto salvation. S. Gregory
in his Morals says. That it is a sign that he is predestined to be saved,
unto whom God gives his cup of bitterness to drink; in so much that we cannot
escape grievous hels, unless it be by the cost of great trauails. It is to be
noted, that Christ said not unto his father, that he would not drink of the cup,
neither yet did he offer himself to drink up al, but he prayed him only by
special grace, that others might help him to drink it: for if he should alone
have dronken the cup of bitterness, he alone should have entered into Paradise. O
giver of all goodness, O distributer of al favors, what had thou that thou
did not communicate unto us, or what did thou possess that thou did not
divide amongst us? Thou have given us thy body to eat, thou have given us thy
blood to drink, thou have given us thy law to keep, thou have given us thy heart
to love, thou have given us thy cup to taste, and thou have given us thy glory
to enjoy. Anselmus says, That in the vain palaces of the world, those are
thought to be most familiar, which are most of all made much of by their Lord:
but in the company and house of God, those are best beloved which are worst
handled; insomuch that we will say him to be his familiarest friend, whom we
shall see to drink oftenest of his bitter cup. O high mystery, O divine
Sacrament! when the son of God did weep tears from his eyes in the garden,
and did sweat blood from his body, he did not ask that his chosen flock
might be cockered and made much of, but only that he would let the^ sup some
sup of his bitter cup. What else was S. Peter's cross, S. Andrews cross,
likewise Bartolomewes knife. S. Laurence grediron. S. Steuens stones, but
certain pledges which they received of Christ, and certain bitter sups which
they drank of his chalice? Hilarious upon S. Matthew says, That how many more
sups a man has supped in this life of Christ's cup, so many steps the higher
shall he be in heaven in glory: for what cause we ought to entreat and ask
earnestly, that if we cannot drink al his cup, yet that he would let us at the
least rast of him with his elect. S. Jerome says also, That although the cup
which Christ left his elect, be somewhat bitter in drinking, yet after that it
is drunk, it is sauerous and profitable, because the travels of this world do
not give us so great grief and pain when we suffer them, as they bring us
delight after we have suffered them. It is also to be noted that he says,
Transeat a me calix iste, that is, He would not have his bitter cup turn back
again, but go on forward: whereby he gives us to understand, that the merit
of his passion, and the blood of our redemption, should not be bestowed upon
them which every day go worse and worse until the end, but only upon them
which every day grow better and better. This word of Transeat, Let this cup
pass, is a high word, and worthy to be marked, in the which and by the which
our good Jesus does admonish and warn us, that those shall not drink of his
cup of bitterness, and enter with him into glory, which having been good,
turn in the end to be naught; but only those who being naught, prove to be
good: nor those who when they should go forward from virtue to virtue, turn
backward and persevere in vices, because that among the servants of our Lord he
who does not profit does disprofit. There is no rich man in this world which
does set so much by his wealth, as Christ does by his chalice of bitterness:
and therefore seeing that he commands that his cup should pass further, and
that those should drink of him which do go forward, the servant of our Lord
ought to take pains to make himself better, and to go forward, not in ambition
which does te^pt him, but in devotion which he does want. O good Jesus, O my
souls comfort, Let this cup go, not from me, but to me, because we may taste of
thy pains and travels, feel thy griefs, weep for thy torme^r, enjoy thy love,
and wash away my wickedness; insomuch that when thy cup does pass from thee, it
may light upon me. Let every man make his provision of wines of Illana, of
Candie, of Dania, yet I for my comfort and devotion, do ask of God that all
the days of my life I may deserve to drink of that bitter cup one drop. There
is another cup which is called the cup of the wrath and ire of God, of the
which when I begin to speak, my bowels open, my heart is troubled, and my
soul is sorrowful, my flesh trembles, and my eyes also weep. How is it
possible that my heart should dispose, my pen write, my ink mark, and my
paper suffer me to write, how happy they are who escape the drinking of this
cup; and how unhappy they are which drink of it? With this cup of ire God did
threaten Jerusalem, of this the Synagogue drank, with this wicked Babylon was
drunk, yea and this was the cause why all Judea was lost. S. Augustine in an
Homily says, He drinks of the cursed cup of ire, who through his sin
falls from the estate of grace, which is an evil above all the evils of this
life, because a soul without grace is far more deader than a body without a
soul. When do thou think that God does suffer us to drink of the cup of
his ire, but when he forgets to hold us up with his hand through our
demerite? When shall we see whether we have drunk of the cup of his wrath,
but when God is careless in keeping us from falling, and we slothful in
amending our selves? S. Ambrose upon the Psalms says, O what a difference
there is betwixt the wrath of God, and the wrath of man, for they punish
when they are angry, but God forbeareth to punish when he is angry, in so
much that God is more displeased when he dissembleth a fault than when he
does presently punish. S. Barnard says, That there is no greater temptation
than not to be tempted, nor greater tribulation tha^ not to be afflicted, nor
greater punishment than not to be punished, nor yet a sharper scourge than not
to be scourged. For as there is small hope of the sick man's life whom the
Physician does distrust and despair of, even so in like manner there is great
occasion to suspect the salvation of that man whom our Lord does not punish in
this life. It is also to be noted, that Esaias does not only threaten Jerusalem,
because she dronk of the cup of the ire of God, but because she drunk also the
dregs and lees, until she left none, in so much that if there had been more,
more she would have drunk. We call that properly the dregs of the wine, that
part of the wine which corrupts and marreth, and that which goes to the
bottom, and that which rotteth and stinketh, and that whereof we receive no
profit. What are the dregs which sink unto the bottom, but only wicked
sin which bears us into hell? The dregs of sin cause us to rot, and with
dregs of sin we sink, and by the dregs of sin we are damned, and by the
dregs of sin we are hated of God. I will visit Jerusalem and those men which
are fastened in their dregs, says God by the Prophet Sophonias in the first
chapter, as if he would say, I will visit all the dwellers of Jerusalem, and
I will make no reckoning of other sins and offenses, but of such as I shall
find entangled, and tumbling in the dregs and lees. Who are those which stick
in the mire and are bedurted with the dregs, but those which stand obstinately
in their sins and wickedness? God complains not of those which are defiled
in the dregs, but on those which are fastened and fixed in them: for our Lord
is not so much scandalized to see us fall into sins, as to see us wallow and
delight in their dregs and grounds. O that wicked is the heart which is
fastened, and stands firm in the dregs of sin, because promises cannot
allure and entise him, nor threatenings fear him, nor entreatie convert him,
nor punishment amend him, nor counsel profit him! How badly our Lord likes
of them which are firm in the lees and dregs, he shows plainly, seeing he
threatens such as stand fast in them, and those which drink of the cup unto
the dregs; whereof we may infer that we do not so much condemn our selves
for sinning, as because we will not go out of sin. To drink of the cup unto
the dregs is, as if as there are but seven capital sins they were feuen
thousand, to have a will to offend in them all before we died. To drink unto
the dregs is, that if by deed we commit ten sins every day, in thought we
commit an hundred every hour. To drink the cup unto the dregs is, that if we
omit to commit any sin, it is not because we would not, but because we could
not or durst not. To drink of the cup unto the dregs is, that not being
content to sin, we commend and praise our selves for doing it, as if we had
done our Lord some notable service. To drink the cup unto the dregs is, that
when we have committed all kind of sins, yet we cannot endure to be called
sinners. To drink the cup unto the dregs is, to be so graceless and
shameless in sinning, that we entise and importunately urge others to do the
like. To drink the cup unto the dregs, is to hate our neighbor with our
heart, iuiurie him with words, and hurt him in deeds. Lo thus then have I told
you what is the cup of bitterness which the elect and chosen drink of, and
which is the cup of wrath and ire which the wicked drink of: in so much that
if we would know who shall be saved, or who damned, we are only to mark
what cup he drank of. To come then unto our purpose, we must suppose that
these two thieves drank of both these cups, which are so dreadful and
wonderful; and such as the cup was, of which each of them drank, such was the
reward or punishment which on the cross each of the^ received and carried away.
When the naughty thief said unto Christ, save thy self and us, he drank of
the cup of wrath, and when the good thief said unto Christ, Lord remember me,
he drank of the cup of bitterness, insomuch that the one drank of the pure
wine, seeing he went into heaven, and the other drank of the stinking dregs,
seeing he went into hell. What means this O good Jesus, what means this?
Seeing they were both companions, both the eues, both hanged, both saw Christ,
and both were near unto Christ, why do they give to the one to drink of the
cup of glory, and unto the other the cup of ire? S. Augustine answers unto
this and says. Why God does give light unto one, and not unto another, why he
draws this man and not that man, I pray thee good brother go not about to
seek out the reason, if thou will not be deceived: for all this depends of
Gods high judgments, the which although they be secret, yet notwithstanding
they be not unjust. Origin upon Mark says; As there are many things in the
heart which are not of the heart, and as there are many in war^^ which take no
pay in the war, so the naughty thief was upon the cross, not having the
fruit of the cross: for in stead of asking Christ that he would pardon him, be
asked that he would deliver him and unbind him. If thou be Christ, says the
naughty thief, save thy self and us, as if he would say, If thou be the
Christ which the Jews hope for, deliver thy self from death, and quite us
from pain. Cyprian upon the passion of our Lord says; O that, that is a
wicked word and a detestable prayer which thou O naughty thief do utter
with thy mouth, when thou do persuade the son of God to come down from the
cross: for if he do suffer and die, it is for nothing that touches him, but
for that which touches thee and is most expedient for me. Why do thou ask
him that he would save thee and also himself, seeing that he suffers of his
own accord, and dies for thy naughtiness? The beginning of this naughty
thieves perdition was, when he said, if thou be the son of God, and not, thou
art the son of God: in which words it seemed that he doubted whether he were
the son of God or not; and so he doubted in his faith, and made a scruple,
whether he were the redeemer of the world or not, and so he fell into
infidelity, which is the highest wickedness of all other. Cyrillus upon S.
John says, That the good thief said not, If thou be Christ, neither did S.
Peter say, I believe if thou be Christ; but the one said faithfully, Lord
remember me, and the other likewise said, I believe, because thou art the son
of God, insomuch that no man can be lightened or pardoned which makes any
doubt at all in the faith of Christ. The Apostle says in his canonical
Epistle, if any man want wisdom, let him ask it of God, not doubting in
faith: as if he would say, If any man have need of any great matter, let him
take heed that he do not ask it with a faith that is luke warm: for if our
Lord do not grant us that which we ask him, it is rather because we know not
how to ask him, than because he has not a desire to give it. Damascen says,
If he who asks be not a Pagan, and that which he asks be not unjust, and
he who asks be holy, and the place where he asks be also sacred, and he
for who^ he asks be needy, why should he doubt to obtain it, considering
that of himself he is so merciful? O good Jesus, O my souls pleasure, give
me thy grace that I may say with the blind man in Jeremy, O son of David
have mercy upon me: and keep me from saying with the naughty thief, if
thou be Christ save thy self and me too; seeing that like a true Christian I
confess thy mighty power, and call for thy great mercy. Christostome says,
The naughty these thought, that as Pilate had condemned him for a robber by
the high way, so he had executed justice upon Christ for stirring the people to
sedition, and that Christ did no less esteem of his life, than he did
abhor death: wherein certainly he was much deceived; for he did not so
earnestly desire to live as Christ did desire to die. The Jews persuaded Christ
that he should come down from the cross, and this naughty thief did also
persuade him that he would sly from the cross, that which the son of God
did not love to hear of, nor would not do: for if he had forsaken the cross
all the world should have been crucified. S. Barnard says, I do not desire
thee my good Jesus, that thou come down from the cross, nor that thou sly
from the cross, but that thou would put me there with thee, because it
would be more reasonable that they should give sentence upon me for thee, than
that they should give sentence upon thee for me. It may be gathered of all
that which we have spoken, what great courage we have need of to begin any
good work, and a far greater to finish it: for our enemies are ready always
about to deceive us, the flesh to move us, men to hinder us, and the world to
trouble us.

CHAP. VIII. Of the great charity which the good thief had toward the naughty
thief in correcting him of evil doing, and in aduising him of the good which
he lost.
COmmendat deus omnem charitatem suam in nobis, says the Apostle writing unto
the Romans in the fifth chap. as if he would say. The God and Lord which I
preach unto you O Romans, does commend nothing more unto you than charity, in
loving your neighbors with all your heart: the which love you must show them,
not so much because they love you, as because they serve God. Holy Paul did
preach and teach us many things, whereof some were to make us afeard, some to
give us counsel, some to teach us, some to comfort us, as this matter which we
now handle, the which being well looked into, and read with attention, we shall
find that he gives us as much as he has, and loves us as much as he ought.
For the better understanding of this speech, we must suppose that the love of
God, charity, and grace, go always coupled together, in so much that no man
can have heavenly love without heavenly charity, and no man can have heavenly
charity, but he must have heavenly grace, and he who has heavenly grace,
cannot fail but go to glory. Damascen says, That Love, and Charity, and
Grace, are only one gift, and the greatest which came from heaven; and is
called Grace, because it is given without any price, and it is called Charity
because it is high, and it is called Love because it does join and unite us
with God: in so much that when he recommendeth his Charity unto us, he trusts
his Love with us. When our Lord does commend us his Love, as a thing left to
keep with us, if we mark it well, what else is it but a token, whereby we
should mark with what Love he loves us, and with what Charity he entreats
us? O happy pledge, O luckie trust, when our Lord credited us with his eternal
Love, his infinite Grace, and unspeakable Charity! the which virtues he gave us
because we should not live ingratefully with them, and that in our death we
should buy heaven with the^. When our Lord does give us charge to keep his
Charity, what else is that but to do us the favor to give it us? If he would
not have given it us, he knew well where to keep it, without gi^ing it us to
pledge: but he says that he does commend it unto us to keep, and not give
it us; because we should be very careful in keeping it, and fearful to
lose it, because we cannot be saved without it. Bid upon the Apostle says,
One friend can give to another his jewels of silver and gold, but he cannot
give him the love which he has in his heart; for although he can show it, yet
he cannot pass it unto him: but the son of God did not only show us his
love, but did also give it us. He did show us his great love, when he took
man's flesh upon him, and he does give us his sweet love when he does impart his
grace amongst us, insomuch that with the first love he delivered us from being
slaves, and with the second love, he received us to be his sons. In figure of
all this, the altar of the Synagogue was all hollow, but the altar of the
church is massy and sound, by reason of the fervent love which God bears us,
and great charity and mercy which he does us. It is much to be noted, that
God does not commend unto us, Faith, Hope, Patience, and Chastity, but only
Charity: in which words he gives us to understand, that if we do set much
by that which our Lord gives us, we ought to esteem much more of the love
with the which he does give it us. Isidorus says, That all the courtesies
which our Lord does promise us, and all the persuasions which he uses unto
us, are to no other end, but because we should be thankful unto him, and
because we should be merciful unto our neighbors. What wants he which
wants not Charity; and what has he who has no Charity? The merciful and
pitiful man has God always at his hand, that he fall not from his faith,
that he lose not his hope, that he defile not his chastity, nor despise
humility: for in the high tribunal seat of God, no man need to fear that they
will deal cruelly with him, if he has had any charity in this world. Wherein
do thou think (says S. Jerome) that all Christian charity does consist,
and all the health of thy soul, but only in serving of Christ with all our
heart, and in laboring to profit and benefit our neighbor? What greater good
can I do unto my brother, than put him in the right way if he be out, and
correct him if he be naught? Bid says upon this matter, That true and chaste
love, may be divided betwixt God and our neighbor, so as our neighbor be not
proud and naught: for if he be so, we are to wish his salvation, and fly his
conversation. We have spoken all this, to declare the great charity which this
good thief had, and also used toward the naughty thief, seeing that upon the
cross, he taught him that which was convenient for him, and reprehended him
in that which he spoke. Neque tu times deum, qui in eadem damnatione es? said
the good thief unto the bad: as if he would say, O my friend and companion, I
wonder much at thee, that having been of such a naughty life and conversation,
and being upon the very point to die, I say I marvel that thou dare to
crucify this holy Prophet more with thy tongue, than the hang men do, with
their nails; because the nails do open his vains, but thy evil tongue does
rend his entralls. The good thief used but few words, but they contained many
mysteries, and therefore it is needful that they be read with attention, and
written with gravity. It is to be noted, that although our Lord God be present
in all things with his power, yet he is much more in man's heart, and tongue by
grace; because those are the two parts with the which we do most of all please
or offend God with. S. Aug. says, That the eyes do loath often to see, the ears
to hear, the hands are loath to work, and the feet to go, yea and the body to
sin; but the heart is never weary of thinking, nor the tongue with speaking.
Cor mundum crea in me deus, and pone custodiam ori meo, said the Prophet David:
as if he would say, I beseech thee O good Lord, that thou would renew this
heart within me, and put a watch unto this mytongue, because that all the other
parts of my body can but trouble and offend me, but the heart and tongue can
trouble me and damn me. S. Ambrose says, That it is a certain token, that we
are in Gods favor, when he does give us grace to keep our hearts clean, and our
tongues brideled, because the foundation of all Christian goodness is to believe
our Lord God with all our hearts, and praise him with our tongue. Ego dabo eis
cer nouu^, said God unto Israel, and I will open thy mouth said God unto
Ezechiel; as if he would say, I will lighten thy heart O Israel, to the end
that thou may believe in me, and I will open thy mouth O Ezechiel, to the end
that thou may preach my name: for thou have obtained no small gift, if thou
come to know me, and learn well to set forth my name. To come the^ unto our
purpose, the grace of a new heart which God gave unto Israel, and the gift of
praising his name, which he gave Ezechiel, Christ also gave unto the good thief
which was near unto him, seeing he touched his heart, with the which he
believed in him, and opened his mouth with the which he preached his name.
Vbertinus says, That this good thief was an excellent preacher in the church
of God, who in a sort seemed to go before the Apostles in faithfully
believing, and preaching Christ's might and power. What greater marvel would
thou have the blood of Christ work (says Rabanus) tha^ to make preachers of
thieves and robbers? the pulpit in the which he preached was the cross, the
preacher was the the^f, the holy one of who^ he preached was Christ, the church
where he preached was Caluary, the audience before whom he preached were the
Jews, the Theme upon which he preached, was Neque tu deum times, Neither do
thou fear God: and that which there he preached, was the setting forth of
Christ, and the reprehending of that which his fellow spoke. The office of a
preacher is (says Saint Gregory) Secreta reserarae, vitia extirpare, and
virtutes inserere. The duty of a preacher is, to open the secrets of the
scripture, extirpate vice out of the Commonwealth, and teach how our souls are
to be saved. What greater secret can there be than to confess and preach a
man crucified to be God? Who reprehended vices like unto this thief, seeing
that he confessed himself to be a sinner, and accused the other thief to be
a blasphemer: who did teach the way to heaven better tha^ this thief, seeing
he was almost the first that went thither? The good thief divided his sermon
into four parts: the first was when he rebuked the other thief, when he
said, Neque tu deum times: the second when he accused himself to be naught,
saying, Nos quidem just patimur: The third when he excused Christ: saying, Hic
autem quid mali fecit? The fourth when he craved pardon for his sins, Domine
memento mei, Lord remember me. Seeing then that the preacher is but a new
preacher, and the pulpit new, and the thing that he preaches new, it is reason
that we should hear that which he preaches with attention, and do that
which he counsels with great devotion. Auferetur zelus meus ate and
quiescam, ne irascar amplius, said God by Ezechiel chap. 16: as if he would
say. O thou Synagogue which art hardened, seeing that thou will not believe
that which I tell thee, nor do that which I command thee, I am determined not
to chide thee nor punish thee for any fault that thou shall commit, but as
being incorrigible, I am determined to forsake thee. O sorrowful speech, O
dreadful word: when our Lord says that he will advise us no more what we have
do, nor correct us of that which we do: for if he take his merciful hand
from us, what shall we dare to take in hand? Tell me I pray thee what can we
do, or what do we know of our selves, if we be not guided by the hand of
God, in that which we take in hand, and advertised in that which we do
amiss? S. Gregory says upon Ezechiel. When our Lord says by Ezechiel that he
will be no more angry with us, it is a sign that he is very angry with us,
because it is a property of our Lord never to be so angry as when he is not
angry to see us offend. Barnard says, O good Jesus the light of my soul, I
beseech thee that thou take not thy zeal from me, nor withdraw thy punishing
hand from me; but as I commit a fault, so let thy punishment be ready: for by
this means I shall sooner amend, and live also more warily. When the father of
a company does not punish a perverse servant, it is a sign that he will put
him out of the house; and when they let a sick man eat all things that he
lusts, it is a sign that he will die: and so when God does let us go with the
bridle loose in our own hand after what vices we lust, it is a token that we
go altogether out of the way. O how indurate that man ought to be in sin, and
how he ought to be mired in wickedness, of whom God says, Auferetur zelus
meusate! For when God says that he will not love us any more with realousie,
what does he mean else, but that he will be careless and forgetful of us,
and forsake to punish us? The holy scripture makes mention of two kinds of
zeal; the one is holy and glorious, and it is that which God has toward us;
and the other is common, and is that zeal which we bear toward our
neighbors: and if the one be necessary, the other is more necessary, because
the true zeal and love of our neighbor consists not so much in helping him
to maintain himself, as in directing him to sane his soul. S. Augustine in a
Sermon says, What does it avail thee O my friend, that thou help thy
neighbor in time of necessity with thy money, if thou consent unto him and
he with thee to wallow in vices? O how far a greater good turn thou should
do him in lessening his faults, than by augmenting his wealth, because there
is no greater riches under the heaven, than to have a clean conscience! The
good thief had a great zeal that the other should be saved, seeing he did
rebuke him for being a blasphemer, and persuaded him to be a Christian:
insomuch that for a recompense for helping him to steal, he would also help
him to die well. Chrysistome upon this matter says, These two thieves had kept
company a long time together, and divided equally their prey betwixt them,
because that as there was no difference betwixt them in the fault, so they
would have equal shares in the division. Now the good thief would have
continued his old use, and as he had stolen heaven there upon the cross, so he
would have divided part of it unto his companion, if the Lord of the theft,
which was Christ, would have consented unto it, or if the wretched thief had
deserved it. O how great and unspeakable a charity was this of the good
thieves! for considering that himself was a Christian, he would have made the
other one also, and seeing himself the heir of heaven, he would have taken
the other thither with him, and seeing himself pardoned, he would have gotten
pardon for the other, but that he would neither believe in Christ, nor with
good will give ear unto his companion. It is much to be noted (says
Chrysostom) that the good thief said first unto the bad, Neither thou do
fear God, before he said, Lord remember me. For as I suppose, it helped much
to save the good thief, that Christ saw with what great charity he labored
that his companion should not cast away himself. When he said first in favor of
the other, Neither thou do fear God, before he spoke in the behoof of
himself, Lord remember me; is it not most manifest and clear, that he desired
as much that his companion should be converted, as himself saved? Remigius
says, That among all the services which we can do unto our Lord, there is
none so great, as to help our neighbor to save himself, and contrariwise,
there is none that does more offend him, than to help our neighbor to damn
himself; because it seems that we make small account of the shedding of his
blood, if we help him not to bestow it well. Then we bestow his glorious blood
well, when we cause it to benefit our brothers: for otherwise we may say, that
it was well shed by Christ, but euilly bestowed by us. What greater sacrifice
can I do unto our Lord, than draw my neighbor from sin, who has been
redeemed by his precious blood? The^ I draw my brother out of sin, when I
correct him with my tongue, and help him in his work. For as touching the
offending of our Lord, it is convenient not only to advise and counsel him,
but if we can also punish and chastise him. Cyprian in his book of Martyrs
says, Who dare now adays like unto Phinees thrust through with a poynyard a
bold Jew and a shameless Gentile? Who like unto holy Samuel will weep for the
disobedience of Saul? Who like unto holy Job will rise early in the morning
to offer sacrifices of peace for the sins of his sons? Who like unto the
High priest Aaron will threaten Pharaoh within his own palace, because he
should leave off the service of his God in the Synagogue? Who will lose the
light of his eyes like unto the good Prophet Jeremy in weeping and taking pity
upon those who carried away those of Babilonia captives? Now the zeal of holy
men is lost, now the feruency of good men is at an end, now the punishment of
naughty men is forgotten; for because that in matter of correction, a friend
will rather venture his conscience with his friend, then suffer him to lose his
credit. Certainly it is no credit, but a discredit, no charity but cruelty to
suffer his neighbor to damn himself for want of correcting him: for
oftentimes naughty men would amend themselves of their errors, if their friends
which they have, would advertise them of them. Seeing we cannot avoid it, but
stumble at every foot, nor give over sinning more or less, why have we
friends and companions, but because they should keep us up with one hand from
falling, and lift us up with the other, if they see us down? S. Barnard in an
Epistle says, Let no man leave off the correcting of his neighbor and friend,
because he thinks that by so doing, he does displease him: for after he has
considered of the matter, he shall perceive that he has done a good work;
because that oftentimes the counsel which they give us, is more worth tha^ the
money which they lend us.

CHAP. IX. Why the good thief did not chide with the naughty thief, because
he did not love Christ, as he did chide with him because he did not fear
God: there are many notable things brought touching the fear of our Lord.
ECclesia quidem magis quotidie aedificabatur, ambulans in timore domini, and
consolatione spiritus sancti, says S. Luke in the ninth chap. of the Acts of
the Apostles; as if he would say, After that S. Steven was stoned to death, and
the Apostle Saint Paul was converted, by so much the more the church of God
increased in building, by how much the more she was founded upon the fear of
our Lord, and the church did receive no comfort but such as the holy ghost did
send her. Bid upon this place says, That the scripture does advise us with a
high style, how much it does import us that we fear our Lord and keep his
commandments, because the primitive church never began to increase and
flourish, until that Commonwealths began to fear the Lord, and seek for the
consolation of the holy Ghost. S. Augustine upon the words of our Lord says,
That in the triumphant church love without fear works; but in the militant
church, love and fear go together: and a sign of this is that the greater
love I bear my friend, the greater fear I have to displease him. Cyrillus
upon S. John says, Although the son of God said, Ignem veni mittere in terram,
which was as much as to say, that he builded his church upon love, yet he took
not his fear from her: because that seeing that there is both mercy and
justice in God, we are bound as well to fear his rightful justice, as we are
to love his mercy. When God gave Moises the old law, he gave it him with great
thunders and terrible lightnings, and with all mixed it with many threats, and
ordained it with many punishments: because the Jews should determine with
themselves to keep it, and not in any wise to break it. King Pharaoh
commanded all the midwiues of the kingdom of Egypt to slay all the male
children of the Jews at the time of their birth: and because they would not do
it for fear of the Lord, the Lord gave them great riches in their houses. The
scripture commends very much a steward which the king Achab had, whose name
was Abdias, the which seeing the cursed Queen Iezabel cut the throats of the
Prophets of Israel, did hide some number of the^ until all the butchery was
past: the which the good Abdias did not so much for the love which he bore
unto the Prophets, as for the fear which he bore unto God. When king Iosaphat
constituted judges in all the cities of Judea, he gave them no other
instruction, but that they should fear God, and be very mindful of the good
of their Commonwealth, because that by this means they should be well liked
both of God and of all the people. The scripture reports of holy Tobias, that
he began at the same time to weane his son, and fear the God of Israel, and
that he contracted friendship with none nor none with him, unless he knew
that he feared God. S. Ierom upon the Prophets says, Al holy men and of great
perfection, do not only love the Lord, and fear him as their Lord and God,
but do also refuse to converse with those which will not fear our Lord: and
for that cause Abraham went from the Caldeans, and holy Lot fled from the
Sodomites. We must entise and flatter the virtuous man with love, and fear the
wicked and perverse man with threats, because that of tentimes the wicked man
does rather amend his life for sear of hell, than for the desire which he
has to go to heaven. Irenaeus in an Homily says, That if as God made
Paradise, he would not have made also an hell, few there would have been,
which would have served our Lord, and very many which would have offended
him. Because that if an evil man might enjoy the world, he would little care if
heaven were taken from him. A vain worldly man engraued in a medall of gold
the words of the Psalm, Caelum caeli domino, terram autem dedit filijs
hominum, The heaven of heaven unto our Lord, he gave the earth unto the sons of
men: and he wrote for a posie, take thou Lord heaven for thee, upon condition
that thou would leave the earth unto me. O cursed tongue, and wicked
speech! what an ungodly mouth was that, which durst utter such horrible
blasphemy? for by the rigor of justice, he may justly be carried into hell, who
renounceth to go to heaven, and is well pleased to hue in the word. Anselmus
says, O what a great favor God does unto that man who^ God does not exclude
from his love, and does not leave him without fear for the man which has both
love and fear in him, although he want other perfections, neither ought to
fear, least he should be damned, nor distrust at all to be saved. We have
spoken all this in the commendation of the good thief, and of his piety and
charity, who did not rebuke the other thief his co^pamon, for that he was
proud or envious, but only because he did not fear God, saying Neque tu times
deum, Neither do thou fear God: Giving us to understand by this, that he
went down right into hell, for no other cause, but because he made small
reckoning of Christ. And it is much tobe noted why the good thief did not
rebuke the other for that, that he did not love Christ; as he did reprehend
him, for that he did not fear Christ. Hilarious answers this doubt and says,
That because love does belong unto those which are perfect, and fear unto
such as are not so perfect, the good thief did not persuade the other that he
should love, but that he should fear, because the duty and office of loving,
is of such high quality, that although many go about it, yet few attain unto
it. Glorious Saint Peter did persuade himself that he had loved Christ, as
he ought to have loved him; and thereupon to take away his vaineglory, Christ
asked him three times whether he loved human which deinand, Chirst gave us to
understand, that the merit of loved oath not consist in loving with all our
heart, but if good Jesus do accept it, that the^ it is perfect. The will which
we have to serve our Lord, is rather, baslard will, than a lawful will; for
to tell the troth, my brother, we have more skill in sinning than in loving.
The good thief would not so plainly teach the evil thief the art of love,
as he did the duty of fear, partly because the time was too short to learn
so high a matter, as then being in great torment, and near unto death, and
partly because the quality of man's mind is easily induced to fear, and very
slowly to love. O unto how many may we say now adays that which the good
thief said unto the other, that is, neither thou do fear God; letting them
to understand by these words, that they neither fear God, nor love God, nor
serve God, nor yet remember whether there be a God, considering they let no
sin undone, unless it be because they dare not, or because they cannot.
What friend is there in this world, which gives his brother such brotherly
correction? What friend dare tell his friend, take heed brother, for thou art
proud, or ill-tongued, or a babbler, badly beloved, and every man marketh thy
doings? S. Barnard upon those words of Jeremy, Omnes amici eius spreuerunt eum,
etc, says, Woe be unto me O my good Jesus, woe be unto me, because that all
the holy masters which brought me up, are now dead, all my faithful friends,
which were wont to give me counsel are now gone; and if I have any left, they
rather cover my faults than correct them. There are few good thieves left to
correct me, and many naughty friends to hide my faults, and (which cannot be
said without tears,) which art not content only to hide my sins, but also
are ready to entise me to sin. A certain man of Athens asking Plato wherein
he should show his friendship unto him, answered him; Thou shall advise me of
all that I shall speak amiss, and help me in all that I shall do amiss;
because the duty which I require of my friend is, that he would help me to be
virtuous, and hinder me from being vicious. There are but few friends which do
this, and very few which ask this of their friends: for there are few which
will have those for their friends, which may and will correct them for the
enormities they do, but defend them in the vices they commit. What does it
avail me if my friend deliver me from my enemies which lay wait for me, if he
deliver me unto vices which kill me? We see that one thief does correct
another from the cross, and yet one Christian will not correct another, but
will rather be vicious betwixt themselves, than break the friendship which is
betwixt them. Nonne qui oderunt te domine oderam, and inimici facti sunt mihi?
said David in the 138 Psalm: as if he would say, O great God of Israel, and
mighty Lord of the house of Jacob, one of the duties which I have done for thy
service, is, that all the days of my life I have hated those which love not
thee, I have utterly disliked those which followed not thee, I went from them
which loved not thee, yea I did fly from him which served thee not. Cassio
dorus upon these words says, Thou have great reason in that which thou say,
and greater in that which thou do, O renowned and gracious king Dauide for
if naughty men had no companions to help them, and wanted friends to bandy for
them, in short time we should see them ended or amended. That one friend do
not help another in matters touching his wealth it may be born, but not to
counsel him in things concerning his conscience may not be endured: for if the
matter do offend God and endanger our conscience, we should neither suffer our
father who engendered us, nor yet consent with friend or brother who loves us.
Nathan did rebuke David, Samuel Saul, Micheas Achab, Helias Iezabel, S. John
Herod, and S. Paul S. Peter, not for any thing that they had done against
themselves, but for that which they had committed against God: because we
should know that we ought to hold him for an enemy, who is not beloved of God.
How will thou have God for thy Lord and friend, if thou be a friend unto that
that he detesteth? We have great need to say with the Prophet. Did I not hate
those which did hate thee, and they are become my enemies? For to tell thee the
truth, my brother; thou can neues rightly Jove virtue and virtuous men,
unless thou do first detest vice and vicious men. For as Seneca says, He
shall never or very late be good, who will have a naughty man for his friend.
S. Augustine upon S. John says, What greater maruails would thou see or
hear, tha^ those which the son of God did at his death, where preachers
became thieves, and thieves turned to be preachers? Wicked Judas was a
preacher, and he became a thief; and he who suffered with Christ was a
thief, and he became a preacher: and as they took new offices, so they ended
in diverse effects; for the one sold Christ in the temple, and the other excused
Christ upon the cross. Who was the last thief of the Synagogue, and the first
preacher in the church, but that holy thief which suffered by Christ? Who made
a Sermon of greater weight than this thief did, considering that in the
presence of all men, and against them all he accused himself and excused
Christ? Hic autem quid malifecit? These are the words, not of a Pagan, but of a
Christian: as if he would have said, Who ever being God made himself a man,
eternal made himself temporal, and being infinite limited his power, and
being a judge suffered himself to be judged? What hurt did he; Who taught
those which knew little, who set those aright which went astray; who did
comfort those which wept, and who did pardon those which did offend. What hurt
did he; He who did restore the deaf unto their hearing, fed the hungry, gave
sight unto the blind, and raised the dead to life? What hurt did he; He who
preached unto the Samaritane woman, defended the woman taken in adultery, and
he who helped the Cananean, and forgave Mary Magdalen? What hurt did he; He
who preached the faith, taught the law, opened the Prophets, and he who put up
a school throughout all the world? Quid mali fecit, what harm had he done. He
who made us a pathway to walk in, a truth to hold by, a life to live by, and
glory for us to enjoy? What hurt did he; He who endured hunger, because I might
eat, took great iournies because I should take rest, and who suffered because I
should not be endangered, and he who died because I should live. What hurt
did he? O cursed Israelites, O forsaken Jews, what hurt has he done unto
your Synagogue, who never cease to do good unto all the world? If he could
have been accused to have done any hurt, it was because he had done so much
good unto your nation, because there is nothing worse bestowed than that which
is done unto an ungrateful people. Anselmus says, That it cannot be
understood nor compassed with man's wit, that all the wisest of the law should
be at the Mount of Caluary to accuse Christ, and one only thief to defend
him. When ^as that Prophecy accomplished, Perdam sapientiam sapientum, and
prudentiam prudentium, I will lose the wisdom of the wise. But when on the
altar of the cross all the synagogue did accuse thee, and one only thief
excuse thee, do thou find no sufficienter surely and witness to preach thy
patience to extol thy mercy to praise thy liberality, and to defend thy
innocence, than a thief ready to be hanged? That which thou do, thou do
very well O my good Jesus, because no man can give abetter testimony of thy
charity and clemency, tha^ rich Zachaeus whom thou did visit, and the
Publicane Matthew whom thou did receive, and the infamous Samaritane whom
thou did convert, and the adulterous woman whom thou did defend, and
the good thief whom thou did dest pardon. Considering that thou did come
into the world for sinners, did eat with sinners, converse with sinners,
and did die for sinners, who can be a better surety or witness for thee
than sinners? The good thief did not only excuse Christ, and entreat for him,
but did also accuse himself, saying, Nos quidem inste patimur: as if he would
say, Thou and I, I and thou, my companion, if we suffer any thing, we suffer
it worthily, because they have given us our torment according to our offense.
There are very few which make a more glorious confession than this, because it
is so much against our nature to suffer a reproach, that we will rather suffer
torment than confess our fault. Our first father being asked by God, why he
had transgressed his commandment, did cast the blame upon the wom^^ who had
deceived him and she being asked why she did deceive him, made answer that the
serpent was importunate with her, and did persuade her; and so in stead of
confessing, they began to excuse themselves. S. Augustine upon the Apostles
words says, Woe be unto me, woe be unto me: for I do inherit sin from my
father, an excuse from my mother, lying from the devil, folly of the world, to
make much of my self of the flesh, and pride of my self; insomuch that I am
not content to be might, but I would also be counted good. Seneca writing unto
his friend says thus, Our nowes from hence are these, the walls of Rome are
ruined, the Temples not visited, the Priests fled, the treasure robbed, old men
are dead, young men are wicked and mad, and vices are lords of all. O my good
friend Eucilius, if these seem great faults, there are other greater than
these in Rome: and they are, that no man does confess himself culpable of
any of these things; but the Dictator lays the blame upon the Consul, the
Consul upon the Censor, the Censor upon the Prae^^r, the Praetor upon the
Aedile, and the Aedile upon the Quaestor; insomuch that because no man does
confess his fault, we never hope to have an amend me^t of it. O my soul
(says Anselmus) O my heart, why do thou confess us, but because thou
should amend us. Woe be unto me, woe be vntome, there is no sin that
Peommit, for the which I have not an excuse; that is, the devil deceived me,
my friend entreated me, I was weak and feeble, the world drew me on, I took
not heed, insomuch that I am more faulty in my excuse, than in committing the
offense. Iustus prior est accusator sut, said the wise man in his Proverbs,
The greatest token that a man is just and honest is, that he knows not how
to accuse another of any thing that he sees, nor excuse himself of any thing
that he does. When the Angel rebuked the children of Israel in Galgalos, they
did presently break down their Idols, cloth themselves with fackclothes: by
reason whereof when the Lord saw that they began to confess their fault, and
not excuse it, he did not only pardon them, but did also comfort them. When
king David took away Bersabe unto his house, and sent her husband unto the
wars, when the Prophet Nathan sent from God did reprehend him for it, he did
there presently confess his fault, and was there presently absolved for it.
When Achab the murderer was rebuked by the Prophet Helias for stoning Naboth to
death, because he denied him his Vineyard, he wept immediately and fasted,
and repented him of that which he had done, and therefore he was absolved of his
fault before the Prophet went out of the threshold of his door. Who ever has
confessed with his heart, which has not ben pardoned at Gods hands? Why do
thou think that the thief obtained pardon so quickly at Gods hands, but
because he excused Christ, instructed his fellow, and accused himself? This
was a glorious confession, and a fault worthy of pardon, seeing that on the
Mount of Caluary, and not in the Temple, upon the tree and not in place of
confession, publicly and not secretly, aloud and not in muttering wise, he
confessed the son of God to be our redeemer, and himself a sinner. O holy
thief (says Chrysostom) Why do thou not ask that they would unloose the
cords which thou art bound with, or pull out the nails which thou art nailed
with, or look unto thy house and family, because thou art now going out of
this world, or that they would bury thy sorrowful body? Truly that seems to
be an exceeding great love which thou did bear unto Christ, seeing thou
did forget thy self, and remember him, excuse his innocence, and proclaim
thine own offenses. It would not hurt us at all, to confess that which thou
did confess, saying, Nos quidem just patimur, We do justly suffer. For
if our faults were put in a balance on one side, and our punishment on the
other, without comparison our Lord does dissemble much more than he does
punish. For if our Lord would punish all our offenses according to their
desert, we could live but a small time.

CHAP. X. How the son of God was more grateful unto the good thief, which
bare him company on the cross, than Pharoahs cupbearer was to Joseph who
accompanied him in prison.
MEmen to mei, cum been tibi fuerit, vt suggeras Pharaoni vt educas me de isto
carcere, quia huc innocens missus sum. These are the words of holy Joseph,
speaking unto Phareahs chief cupbearer: as if he would say, For a reward of
interpreting thy dream, and for letting thee understand, that thou should
upon the morrow return again to the palace, and use thy old office of the
cupbearer, I beseech thee that thou would be mindful of me, and entreat
the king that he would let me out of this dungeon, where I have been two
years without cause or desert at all. There were in prison at one time with
^oseph Pharoahs baker and cupbearer, who having dreamed each of them sundry
dreams, and not knowing what they meaned, Joseph did interpret them unto
them, telling them that after three days they would hang the baker, and return
the cup bearer unto the palace: al which came to pass as Joseph had told
them. After that chaste Joseph had been two years in prison because he would not
sin with his masters wife, he entreated the kings cupbearer very earnestly
that he would speak unto the king for him: but he was so ungrateful, that he
never thought of him any more, of whom he had received such good news. God
does not well like of such persons which are not thankful for the benefits
bestowed upon the^. Which is easily perceived: for although Pharaohs cupbearer
had forgotten to do that which good Joseph requested him to do, yet the
scripture does not forget to accuse him for a thanklesse and an ungrateful
man. Rich Laban was ungrateful unto his son in law Jacob, who although he
had served him forty years continually for his shepherd, yet he paid him
very unthankfully for all that service: for over and besides, that he gave him
one daughter for another at the time of his marriage, he deceived him also in
parting of his goods. Saul was also ungrateful unto his good son in law
David, who having slain in his service that great Philistian, and oftentimes
delivered all the people of Israel from the enemies, yet Saul lanched a dart
at him at dinner time, where David had ended his life, if he had not defended
himself speedily from him. The young Prince Amon was ungrateful unto the good
king David, who having sent to comfort him for the death of his father, the
young youth cut off a piece of king David's Ambassadors coats, and shaued half
their beards, saying: that they went not to comfort him, but to be a spy over
him. King Ioas was ungrateful unto the High Priest Ioiada, who having brought
him up from his childhood, and done him great services, yet Ioas commanded his
son to be slame, not because he had been a Traitor, but because he had
rebuked the king to be a sinner, and a trangressor of the law. King Demetrius
was ungrateful unto the good captain Ionathas, who after he had sent to
succor king Demetrius being in great distress, and to levy the siege being
besieged, yet good Ionathas had no greater adversary afterward than the king
Demetrius. Cognouit bes possessorem suum, and asinus praesepe domini suit
Israel autem non cognouit me, said God by the Prophet Isay in the first
chapter: as if he would say, What means this, people of Israel, what means
this? The ox knows the laboring man which does yoke him, and the ass
knows him which gives him meat, in the stable, and thou Israel do neither
know me for thy Lord and master, neither remember thy self of the good turns
which I have made unto thee. Isidorus upon these words says, That God
compares a thank less and an ungrateful man as it were in an anger, unto an
ox which is a heavy beast, and unto to an ass which is a foolish beast:
because that to say the troth no man omitteth to be thankful for the
benefits received, unless he be a waiward and sluggish man in conversation,
or a fool in condition. Is not think you an ungrateful man a fool, and a
very fool, seeing he makes himself unworthy of an other benefit, by not
being thankful for that which he has received? There is no vice in the world
which has not his seat rather in one kingdom than in another, as pride among
the Babilonians, envy among the Jews, anger among the Thebanes, covetousness
among the Thirians, gluttony among the Sidonians, and the magical art among
the Egyptians. But there is no man which will receive ingratitude in his house,
no man willingly give him a seat to sit in. For although I be ungrateful to
thee, yet I would not have thee be ungrateful unto me. Seneca in his book
of Anger says, That it is not only a grief, but also a perilous thing to
have to do with an ungrateful man: for when he purposes not to pay that
which he owes, he hates him whom he ought not; and by that means for
having been his friend, ^^e^ turns to be thy enemy. Cicero in his Books De
Legibus reports, that Bisias the Grecian, Osiges the Lacedemonian, Bracaras
the Thebane, and Scipio the Roman counted it a lesser hurt to be banished into
strange countries, than to live in their own countries with those which were
ungrateful for their seruiuices. Plautus says very well in a Comedy, That it
is the property of a base mind, and of an impudent man to give every man leave
to serve him, and be ungrateful unto all men for their service: and thereupon
it is, that he which serves an ungrateful man serves no body, and he which
does any thing for an ungrateful man, does for no man. Eschines the Philosopher
says, that although the cities of Thebes and Athens be full of naughty men, yet
there are not so many of any sort, as of ungrateful men: and the reason of this
great mischief is, because we take those to be our friends which are not
expedient for us to take, and give our gifts unto those which know not how to
be thankful for them. Whereof think thou does it proceed, that no men be
thankful for that which thou do bestow upon them, nor acknowledge the favors
thou do the^, but because thou do admit those to be thy familiars, which
ought not to be taken for thy neighbors? If thou do any good (says
Ciprian) unto those which deserve it, I assure thee that he will be grateful
for it: but if thou give unto him who is strait unto himself, how would
thou have him liberal unto thee? To come then unto the purpose, although King
Pharaohs cup bearer was ungrateful unto holy Joseph, yet certainly Christ was
not so unto the good thief, seeing that upon the cross he did more for him
than he deserved, and also gave him more there than he asked. And therefore
seeing we have told you what the thief demanded of Christ, it is convenient
now that we tell you what Christ gave the thief, and thereby we shall
plainly perceive, that our Lord is more liberal in giving, than we are in
asking. Amen dico tibi hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, said Christ unto the
thief: as if he would say, O thou thief, my friend and companion, do thou
think that I have forgotten the service that thou have done me in honoring me
and keeping me company until this my last hour? I promise thee as I am God,
and swear unto thee as I am man, that this day thou shall be with me in
Paradise. O this was a glorious answer, and a happy legacy, which the divine
wisdom gave unto this good thief, because that in old time God reco^penced
all the services done unto him by increasing their wealth, or prolonging their
days, or delivering them from war, or saving them from plague. O happy
speech, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, because that all which
God gave from the beginning of the world, was as it were from the tiles of our
house downwards: but that which he gives now is from the heavens upward, that
is, such a gift as no tongue is able to express; Do tibi partem vnam extra
fratres tuos, said Jacob unto his son Joseph when he was at the point of
death: as if he would say, For the troubles which thou have endured with (...)
this mystery was, that when the children of Israel saw the sea before them,
which they could not pass over, and the Egyptians behind them, who came with
intent to sley them, they began to complain of Moises, and in his prefence
cry out aloud, why he had brought them out of Egypt, where they had their
sepulchers, and lead them into the deserts where they should be eaten up of
wild beasts. Moses seeing himself in such a narrow strait, spoke not one word
unto our Lord, but began to weep, and with his heart only to pray unto God and
commend himself unto him: which prayer was of such great force and efficacy,
that it seemed to move God greatly to condescend unto that which he had asked
him. Good Moises did pray, and yet did not cry; he wept and yet spoke not; he
sighed and made no noise; he desired and entreated not; and he hoped, and yet
he did not importunately urge. This was a high kind of importuning, by not
importuning; and a high kind of asking in not asking: for to obtain that which
we desire at Gods hands, sighing is better than crying out, and more is gotten
by offering unto him tears, than by speaking many words. S. Gregory in his
Morals says, That God did not bear false witness against Moises, in saying
that he did importune him, in not importuning him; and that he astonished him by
crying, he not crying at all: because there is no higher kind of asking than by
praying, nor any sweeter manner of speaking with God, than by weeping. Barnard
says, How is he not busy who is busy with his heart, and what does not he
obtain who asks with tears? S. Augustine upon the Apostles words says, That
our Lord does oftentimes hear the heart when he prays, although the tongue
do not speak outwardly: but he never hears the tongue which speaks
outwardly, if the heart do not pray inwardly: because our Lord is nearer unto
the heart with the which we love him, than unto the tongue with the which we
speak unto him. Our Lord had great reason to say unto M^ises, Quid clamas ad
me, What do thou cry unto me for? Because he had more respect unto the tears
which Moises wept, than unto the cries which the people made; and so he
regarded more that which Moises desired with silence, than that which the
people demanded with a noise. What means this O great God of Israel, what
means this? Do thou not answer one word to the people which call upon
thee, and do thou answer Moises which does not speak one word unto thee?
Do thou hold thy peace when the Jews and torturers speak unto thee at the
foot of the cross, and do thou answer the thief for speaking once unto
thee? There is no such great difference betwixt torturers and thieves, and
thieves and torturers, that the one should be heard, and the other repulsed:
for if torturers and hangmen take their lives from such as are hanged, so do
great thieves also take away men's riches and apparel by the high way. The
wicked Jews did not deserve an answer at Christ's hands, seeing they said,
come down from the cross; because no man should be so bold as to bid him
come down, but go up: because such as are to go into hell, go down, and
those which are to go to heaven go upward. The hangmen did not deserve to be
answered of Christ, which said Thou who do destroy the temple of God, because
he came not into the world to take away the stones of Salamons Temple, but to
win souls unto his father which is in heaven. For it auailed Christ very
little to that which he pretended, whether the temple stood or were fallen
down. Neither did the naughty thief deserve an answer who said unto Christ,
Save thy self and us, because there was no man able by any force to put Christ
upon the cross, unless he had gone up of his own will, and that not to fly
from it, but to redeem the world upon it. Why should the son of God answer so
naughty a thief, seeing he demanded nothing, but to have his life saved, not
making any mention at all of his soul? When the naughty thief said unto
Christ, save thy self and save me too, what else did he pretend or dema^d, but
that by some miracle, or by some words of enchantment he should deliver them
from the crosses, and put them in safety? Irenaeus in a sermon says thus,
According unto the great love, that Christ died with, and according unto the
great quantity of blood which issued out of his body, it had been but a small
enterprise for Christ to have loosed the thief, and have sent him to keep his
Easter in his own house, because he came not into the world to set thieves at
liberty, but to save sinners. Cyprian says, That if as that naughty thief did
ask Christ that he would pull out those nails, and slacken those cords, and
deliver him from those torturers, and assuage his torments, he would have asked
somewhat touching his soul, or that he would have had mercy showed upon him,
our gracious Lord would not have refused to answer him to that which he said,
nor have denied him that which he demanded. O what a thief he is (says
Haymo) and a thieves fellow, who can ask nothing of Christ, but honor to get
him credit, power to defend himself, and might to offend others, riches to
enjoy, liberty to command, and health to live only in this world! Such as dare
to ask these things of our Lord, be either Christians without souls, or
thieves without shame, of whom I do now prophecy, that if they be not hanged
like thieves, they shall be condemned like sinners. Let us take example by
this dreadfulll example, that we do not ask with the naughty thief, that
our Lord would take us from the cross, but that he would keep us on the
cross; nor let us not ask of him that he would give us a long life, but that
he would amend our consciences. For look how willing our Lord is, to give us
things necessary to save us, so is he unwilling to give us that which we do
ask of him to cocker us.

CHAP. XI. Of these words Domine memento mei, Lord remember me, which the good
thief spoke unto Christ: the which words are devoutly and deeply expounded.
QVia patiens est dominus, indulgentiam fusis lachrimis postulemus ab eo, said
the holy woman Judith speaking to the inhabitants of Bethulia in the eight
chapter of her book: as if she would say, It seems best unto me O ye
citizens of Bethulia that we kneel down upon our knees, our hands joined
together, and our eyes full of tears, and crave pardon of our Lord for our
sins, and that it would please him to deliver us from our enemies. Holofernes
the Tyrant had so narrowly besieged the city of Bethulia, that within five
days they would have delivered themselves unto the enemy, if the siege had
not been raised, or some new succor come unto the^. There was in the same city
a widow named Judith, who was beautiful in her countenance, chaste in her
body, rich in estate, and of great fame and credit among the people. This holy
Judith perceiving that the captains of the city were dismayed on one side, and
the neighbors dispaired on the other, said unto them as follows: Who are you
which dare tempt the great God of Israel, and will give your selves to be
slaves, if he do not deliver you from the Assyrians within five days? Will you
prescribe five days to the infinite mercy of the Lord, who has neither
beginning nor ending? Do you not know that such a promise and vow made against
our Lord, does rather stir him to indignation, than appease his anger? Care
not then to load your selves with arms, but with larmes: care you not to make
provision of victuals, but to weep for your sins: because you should be more
afraid of your sins, than of your enemies. The war which you endure, and the
hunger which you suffer, the God of heaven, and not Holofernes makes against
you, and with no other weapons but with your own offenses: and you must
learn, that the enemies who besiege you, are rather executioners of Gods
divine justice, than enemies of your Commonwealth. All the time that our
forefathers were at peace with our Lord, they did well; and when they neglected
their duty unto him, it went not well with them: and as it fared then with
them, so does it now with us; in so much that all our pains and travels come
from the hands of God, either to punish us, or for to make us merit. Tell me
(says David) what are we able to do, what are we able to perform, or what
do we know if we be not guided by the hand of God? If the^ our ableness
must come from God to do any thing, and our strength from him to be able to
perform any thing, and our knowledge from him if we will guess aright at any
thing, in whose hands should we put our hope, but in the hands of his divine
mercy? Let it be so then, that there be a proclamation made throughout all
Bethulia, that the old men fast, the young me^ give themselves discipline, the
Priests pray, and all weep together, that it would please God to keep and
deliver not the walls from enemies, but our hearts from sins. All the citizens
were very much amazed at that that holy Judith counseled them, and all
accepted her counsel, by reason whereof, within five days Holofernes was
beheaded, he and his defeated, the city unburdened, and the country pacified.
To return then fitly unto our purpose, agreeablie unto this advise our thief
behaved himself on the cross with Christ: for first, he desired our redeemer
of the world to forgive him his sins, before he asked him that it would
please him to take him with him unto the kingdom of heaven. This thief did not
say unto Christ, When thou come into thy kingdom, Lord remember me, for so
he might have seemed to ask for heaven before he had asked for the remission
of sins; but he said Domine memento mei, Lord remember me when thou shall
come into thy kingdom. In which words he first made his confession, and then
formed his petition. What does it avail thee to ask of Christ, if he be
angry with thee: first make Christ thy friend, then ask favor at his hands.
For it is the manner and condition of our Lord, that first thou give thy self
unto him, and then for him to give himself unto thee. Vbertinus says, That it
is greatly to be noted, that the good thief did not say unto Christ, take me
from this cross, help to unloose me, give me life, restore my credit; but he
said, Lord remember me, seeing that thou know better what to give me, than
I. to ask of thee. S. Ambrose upon S. Luke says, That this thief was very
happy and glorious, seeing he taught the church how to pray, as he had taught
the Synagogue how to steal, considering he said nothing in his petition, but
Lord remember me: the which prayer although it were short, yet it was full of
mystery, because that we need not to be very importunate with God to win his
favor, but remember him of our business with Domine memento mei. What say
thou good thief, what say thou? Domine memento mei dum veneris in regnum
tuum: as if he would say, O holy Prophet, O Jesus of Galily, by the blood which
thou sheddest, I beseech thee, and by the love with the which thou did shed
it, I pray thee, that thou would be mindful of me, when thou shall come
into thy own proper kingdom. If we will reckon the five words, they are
these: Domine the first, memento the second, mei the third, dum veneris the
fourth, in regnum tuum the fifth. Now it is to be noted, who spoke these words,
that is a thief, unto whom he spoke them, which was Christ, where he spoke
them, which was upon the cross, and when he spoke them, and it was when he
was ready to die: insomuch that if they be easy to be counted, they are hard
to be understood. He does begin his prayer like a curious Orator with this
word Domine, Lord, wherein it seems that he does confess in Christ, his
Deity and divinity, his essence and power, his authority and rule, his justice
and liberality. Origin says, If the good thief should believe that Christ was
a mighty and great king, yet would he ask him no less than a whole kingdom?
This word Lord is a high beginning of a petition: for if he who asks do not
believe that all things are under his mighty hand, he could not think that he
should obtain any thing. O glorious thief (says Anselmus) and happy martyr,
what do thou see in this Lord which is crucified, what do thou see in him
on the cross, why thou should commend thy self unto him? Who ever saw or
heard the like, that one which was bound should commend himself unto another,
which was also bound; and one which was crucified unto another in the same
case? Do thou ask that those confederacies and friendships which end in
death, should begin with Christ and thee in death? Seeing he who should be a
Lord, should be at liberty and in freedom, why do thou call him Lord,
which is fastened to the cross, and crucified like thy self? Seeing that he
who should be a Lord, ought to be mighty and rich, why do thou call him
Lord, who was poor in his life time, and naked in his death? But this Prophet
who^ I call upon, and unto whom I commend and commit my self, is a mighty
Lord, and a king of great power, seeing the son lost his light for compassion,
the stones broke with grief, the veil rent in sunder for a mystery, the
graves opened with fear, and the Centurion confessed him to be Christ. O great
God of Israel, O great Lord of the house of Iacob^, for this cause thy name is
admirable, and worshipped in all the circuit of the earth, because thy power
and dominion is doubled and redoubled, more than any man's in the world.
Cassiodorus notes upon this matter, That the holy scripture does never call
any twice Lord, Lord, but Christ alone; because he alone, and none with him, is
Lord of heaven and earth, of life and death, body and soul, and of peace and
war. We cannot call Hector the Trojan, Anchises the Grecian, Alexander the
Macedonian, and Caesar the Roman, Lord, more than once, because they were
kings only of their own kingdoms: but unto the son of God, we say twice
Domine domine noster, Lord our Lord, because his siegnory is so great, that no
man is able to limit it, nor set any bonds unto it. Every other Prince has his
kingdom limited and set with bonds, either to the top of a steeple or covering
of a house; and if it be not so, let him send a post from thence upward, and
he shall perceive that his kingdom reaches no higher: which cannot be said
to be true of the son of Gods Empire, seeing it goes from one end of the
world until the other, and reaches up unto the highest heaven. Considering
that David calls Christ, Lord Lord twice, why does he call him only once
Lord. The mystery of this mystery is, that David called him Lord, Lord twice,
because he should keep his body from his enemies, and carry his soul unto
those which are blessed: but the good thief did call him but once Lord,
because his intention was not that Christ should keep his life, but only that
he would vouchsafe to save his soul. Why do thou think (says S. Basil
upon the Psalm) that David said unto our Lord, Lord calling him twife Lord,
but because he was Lord of the truth, and of the figure, of the church and of
the synagogue, of the Prophets and of the Apostles, and of the old Testament
and of the new? The good thief would not call Christ Lord twice, because he
would let us understand, that the figure is fulfilled, and the truth come; that
the church is come and the synagogue ended; that the Prophets are dead, and the
Apostles succeeded in their place; that the old law is buried, and the Gospel
proclaimed. Why, think you, does the good thief call Christ Lord but once, but
because we have but one Lord to believe, and one redeemer to worship? To say
once Christ remember me, was to say, that he would have him and no other for a
master to serve, for God in who^ he would believe, for his Lord whom he would
obey, for a friend whom he would trust unto, and for an advocate in whose
hands he would put himself into. The second word which the thief said unto
Christ was Remember me: as if he would say, Seeing that I do confess thee
here before all men to be my Lord, and upon this cross acknowledge thee to be
my redeemer, have me in remembrance, my good Lord, seeing I have remembered
thee, and turned unto thee. Remember me O sweet Jesus: seeing thou have created
me, remember me; seeing thou have redeemed me, remember me; and seeing thou
have lightened me, remember me; and seeing thou have chosen me, remember me:
for it would avail me very little, that thou should give me light to know
thee, if withal thou should not give me grace to serve thee. Remember me O
good Jesus, because I am hard by thy side, remember me because I believe in
thee, remember me because I trust in thee, remember me because I hope in none
but in thee; and seeing I have offered my self for to be thy perpetual
servant, remember I beseech thee to accept me for thine. Remember me because
thou have raised me from the dust, remember me because thou have made me a
Christian, remember me to make me good, and remember me to give me heaven,
and above all things I beseech thee that seeing thou have given thy life for
me, remember me that I lose not my soul. O good Jesus giver of life, with my
tongue I beseech thee, and with my heart I ask it of thee, that seeing thou
do shed thy precious blood upon the cross for me, remember me that it be
not euilly bestowed on me: and when shall thy blood be euilly bestowed on me,
but when it is not by thee accepted for me? Seeing thou have sweat often for me,
suffered most grievous pains for me, endured inspeakable persecutions for me,
and have dissembled my abominable offenses; what do thou gain O good Jesus,
what do thou gain, if I lose my soul, and thou the fruit of thy precious
blood? Remember me O Lord, seeing that in pardoning my fault, and by saving my
soul, thou shall make a Christian, people heaven the more, enrich thy church,
spread abroad thy fame, and exalt thy mercy. Remember the sabbath day, said God
in the law, remember the days past said Moses unto God, remember because my
life is a wind said holy Job, remember how I have walked before theesaid king
Ezechias when he was sick, and remember me said good Joseph when he was in
prison, and remember me when thou come into thy kingdom, I say unto thee
here now crucified upon the cross. What should I say, O the light of my life?
What do thou ask me that I have not given thee, and what do I possess
that is not thine? I have already given my money to the iailor, my coats to the
hang man, I have salne out with my companion who iniuried thee, I have made the
best answer that I could for thy honor, and therefore I can do nothing more,
but say, Lord remember me, Domine memento mei: and seeing I offer thee the
confession of Miserere, and that upon my knees, and my eyes washed with tears,
why should thou shut the gates of thy mercy against me, my confession being
thus just, being condemned for a naughty person as thou art, my members
disiointed the one from the other like thine, crucified upon the cross like
thy self, I believe faithfully in thee, and commend my self wholly unto thee
saying, Lord remember me, Lord-remember me: and I beseech thee have pity on
me, seeing that in suffering I am like unto thee. I die for being a thief, and
thou for the same cause; they put me to death on the Mount of Caluary, and on
the Mount of Caluary they kill thee, at high noone days they execute me, and
at the same hour they execute thee, thou art as near the end of thy life, as
I am near to death; and therefore Lord remember me: thus as we depart both
together out of this world so also we may both together go into heaven. What
reason does permit it, or what justice does suffer, O my good Lord, that thou
should take me for thy companion, to suffer on the cross with thee; and
when thou do go into heaven, to leave me here behind thee? Seeing thou will
depart out of this world to death, and that through such a narrow passage and
long way, whom can thou take with thee better than the thief, which was thy
fellow upon the tree? It is necessary that thy poor mother live, thou have
left thy John thy cousin to his own custody, Peter thy Disciple has denied
thee, Judas thy steward has sold thee, all the Jews have been ungrateful
unto thee; and therefore seeing that thou do see no body near thee, who does
confess and acknowledge thee but my self alone, who am here alone with thee,
Lord remember me, and either give me somewhat in thy Testament, or take me
with thee to Paradise. O holy Nazarean and blessed Prophet, seeing that thou
did hear Jonas out of the Whales belly, Daniel out of the lake of
Babilonia, Joseph out of the dungeon of Egypt, Jeremy out of the dark well,
and did hear David when he said, Tibi soli peccaui, I have sinned unto
thee only, why do thou not heare-mee, when I cry Lord remember me, Domine
memento mei? Behold O my good Lord, behold O my good companion, now my eyes do
break, now my last hour is come, now my sight fails me, and my speech is
troubled, and my soul is pulled out of my body, and therefore in this narrow
passing and doubtful way, unto whom should I say better than unto thee, Lord
remember me, yea and all the whole Psalm of Miserere? Iosue was a thief,
seeing he stole grapes fron Chanaan, David was a thief, seeing he stole the
bottle of water from Saul, Rachael was a thief, seeing she stole the idols
from her father, Ionathas was a thief, seeing he stole honey from the hiue,
Iosaba was a thief, seeing he stole the infant Jonas, and yet thou did not
command any one of all these to be hanged, nor send them from thy houseuf this
be so, and if thou did forgive those which stole thy goods, will thou not
forgive me poor thief, who turn for thy honors sake, and keep thee
company in this place? Seeing that of old time, thou art accustomed to forgive
very famous thieves, and dissemble very notorious thefts, why do thou not
forgive me among them, and absolve me of my sins? If thou will have tears for
the thefts which I have done, thou see that they run down my cheeks; if
thou do content thy self to see blood, thou see that there is no drop
left in me, if thou will have me whip my self, I am already bowelled, if
thou will have me repent, I say unto thee Soli peccaui, if thou will have me
make entire satisfaction, how can thou have me to do it, not having half an
hour to live? Lord Jesus remember me, and be my surety unto thy father in
the other world, and put me with thy chosen flock, write me in thy book,
and place me in thy glory, seeing that the faith of which thou art, does
flourish only in thy mother, and remains in my heart. Remember me O good
Jesus, and if thou will depart out of this sorrowful life into the other
before me, I beseech thee, leave me the step of thy foor to tread in, and a
pathway to follow thee: for if I acknowledge thee for my God, and receive thee
for my God, and believe in thee for my God, being as thou art dismembered and
crucified, shall not I serve thee, and praise thee far better when I shall
see thee glorified? Dare thou trust me with thy cross, because I should
worship it, and with thy body because I should accompany thee, and with thy
mother to comfort her, and with thy honor to defend it, and with thy church to
augment it, and with thy faith to maintain it, and will thou not put thy glory
into my hands, that I may always praise thee in it? When they condemned thee
to be crucified, and brought me to be executed, I heard thee say there
before Pilate, That thy kingdom was not of this world: and then seeing thou
art a king, and have a kingdom, remember me and take me with thee, and I will
tell thy father what thou have suffered to serve him, and all the favors which
thou have done for me. Now that the good thief has made his prayer unto God,
and recommended himself unto him, it is reason now that the naughty thief
have license to speak, which is my naughty and perverse heart; because the
thief which hanged on the left hand of God, did blaspheme Christ but once, but
thou, my soul, do blaspheme him every day. Remember me O sweet Jesus, and
have mercy on me, O my souls glory, to the end that the shedding of thy
precious blood, be not euilly bestowed in me: for at the time when thou
did shed it, thou did not feeele so grievously the want of it in thy
body, as thou did feel the ungratefulness of the whole world. And when
is thy precious blood unthankfully shed for me, but when I yield unto that
which my Sensuality dem^ndeth of me, and not unto that which thy Gospel
counsels me? What is all that worth which I would, if thou will not? If
thou go to seek out thieves, and if thou do hunt after sinners; why
do thou seek for any more than for me; because there is no thief who has
committed greater robberies than I, nor any sinners who has done more grievous
sins than I? O patient and benigue Lord, if the wickedness of my heart, and
the offenses which I have committed, in secret were known notoriously unto the
judges of the world, as they are known unto thee, I should many years ago
have been hanged, and in the other world condemned. I will not say with the
Prophet David, Where be thy old mercies, seeing that I see them enter every day
into my gates, because I do not make more have to sin, than thou to pardon
me. The pardon which thou did give unto the good thief, does give us also
great hope to obtain pardon at thy hands: for he being come to the gibbet,
condemned for his offense, went away sanctified with thy Grace. If thou do give
thieves and robbers kingdoms, what will thou do and give unto the^ whom thou
do love; and are chosen of thy father? If thou did give the kingdom of
heaven to a rouer and a these for speaking one only word unto thee, and
serving thee one half hour, what will thou give unto him O good Jesus who
loves thee with all his heart, and praises thee with his tongue, and emploieth
all his might and power in thy service.

CHAP. XII. How our Lord heard the thieves prayer upon the cross, and how
Christ answered him seven words for five which he spoke unto Christ.
DOminus exaudiuit vocempueri de loco in quo est, Genesis 21. said the Angel
unto Ismael his mother: as if he would say, Take no care O Agar, take no care:
for although thou have lost thy way, and art banished in this desert, fear no
peril, because our Lord has heard the prayer of the youth thy son, because
he has prayed where he has prayed. The Patriarch Abraham had a bastard child
by Agar his maid and slave, both which were thrown out of doors after that he
had a lawful child borne unto him, and these two went up a mountain alone in
great despair, and our Lord sent unto them an Angel to comfort them, and to
give them drink. Origin says, That if we look well into the scripture, we
shall neither read, that the mother did pray unto the Lord, neither is it made
mention that the son did commend himself unto God: but that Gods great mercy
is so great, that by seeing the youth Ismael weep, and the sorrowful mother
lament and cry, our Lord was moved to comfort them by word, and also releive
them in deed. Plato in his Timao says, That it does smally benefit the grieved
and comfortless to visit them seldom, and speak much unto them, and give
the^ no comfort at all, unless that comfort be wrapped in some remedy and
relief. Seneca says, That if a friend do visit his friend, and find him
heavy and sad, and so leave him, if he find him poor and so leave him, if he
find him weeping, and leave him weeping, we will say of such a one, that he
goes rather to jest, than to visit and comfort: because a comfortless heart,
is much better appeased with that which we give him with our hands, than with
that which we speak unto him with our tongue. S. Ambrose in his Exameron
says, That to the end a work of mercy may be perfect and more acceptable
unto our Lord, it ought neither to be asked of any, nor craved, but
voluntarily and liberally be bestowed, because there is nothing more dear in
this world, than that which is bought with entreaty. O that he buieth very
dearly, who buieth by the change and price of his shame; because that
shamefast men and of liberal hearts, do without comparison grieve more when
they uncover and show their face, than when they untie their purse. Cicero to
Atticus says, That there is nothing wherein a Gentlemanlike man takes more
delight than in giving, and greater grief than in asking; because that in
giving, he makes himself Lord of him unto whom he gives, and in taking he
makes himself a slave to him of who^ he receives. Hilarious says, That to
deal with God, there need no words but tears, nor many entreaties but many
sighs: for when we pray unto our Lord, he has greater regard unto the heart
which desires, than unto all that which the tongue speaks. Agar the slave,
and Ismael her son, spoke no word unto God, nor yet made any petition unto
him, but each of them being set down under a several oak, the son did never
fill himself with weeping, and the mother never ceased from sighing, the
which holy tears were not unpaid, nor sighs vnaccepted. To come then unto
our purpose, if our Lord did hear Ismaels tears, which was in the desert,
will he not also hear the memento mei, which the thief spoke unto him in the
Mount of Caluary? Let no man marvel that we compare the thief with Ismael,
and Ismael with the thief: for as the one was brought up in the mountains a
hunting, so the other went by the high ways a robbing, and as Ismael had one
very virtuous brother, so also this thief had a blasphemer to his companion.
Is^^ael was young, for he was not above three years of age, the thief was
also young, for he had not been as yet three hours a Christian, because that
before our Lord, the years when we are borne, are not reckoned, but the time
from whence we are baptized. After Christ's resurrection, he called his
disciples children and yonglings, not respecting that some of them were old,
and had gray hairs, but that they had not ben long baptized, that is, when he
washed their feet in the parlar, and ordained them Priests after his supper. If
Ismael did weep at the foot of the oak in the desert, so did the good thief
weep also upon the cross on Caluary: and that which is more excellent is,
that if he gave the one water whereof he should drink, he gave the other his
blood, wherewith he should be saved. As Abraham had one lawful child, which
was Isaac, and another a bastard which was Ismael, so God the father had or
lawful child, which was Christ, and the other a bastard, which was the thief;
and of these two, the one was borne in the church, and the other in the
Synagogue. The blessing which fell unto Ismael, was that he should be against
all men and all men against him: the which blessing also the good thief had,
who being upon the cross, and all purposing to kill and crucify Christ, he
against all [though all against him] defended him and excused him. Ismael was a
father of many barbarous people, and the good thief was an example of many
great sinners, but not that they should live wickedly as he had done, but that
they should turn unto our Lord as he did. Agar the mother could not see
Ismael her son die, neither could the son of God see his companion the
thief be condemned: and therefore as the tears of the one were grateful
unto him, even so the words of the other were pleasing unto him; to wit, when
he said on the cross, Lord remember me, and O good Jesus have mercy upon me.
With great reason, and for good occasion the son of God did give care unto all
that the good thief would speak unto him, and unto all that which he did
request of him, because he used such measure and discretion in his petition,
that he asked nothing which should be for his comfort, but for his salvation.
If he would have asked any thing for his comfort, he would have asked that
the cudgels which winded his cords should have been slackened, or that they
would have pulled out the nails, or healed his wounds, or that they would pull
him down from the cross, or that they would give him longer life: but he
asked none of all this, but only that Christ would have his soul in
remembrance, not mentioning his person at all. Our Lord could not deny him so
reasonable a petition, nor delay him, but he answered him immediately: for even
as he said, Domine memento moi, Christ said presently unto him, Hodie mecum
eris in Paradiso, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. The naughty
thief did not deserve to have an answer at Christ's hands neither soon nor
late, partly because it was the son of Gods custom, not to answer those
which did injury him, nor esteem of those which bare false witness against
him, and partly to advise us, that it is a point of great discretion, not to
set by injurious words. Vbertinus says, Why should Christ hear what the
naughty thief would ask him, or make account of it, seeing that he knew very
well that if he would have been loosed, it was to steal again, and in
stealing again, they would hang him again? In that that Christ would not
answer unto the naughty thief, nor yield unto his petition, he used a new
kind of clemency toward him; to wit, that he hindered him from sinning any
more, and from augmenting his damnation: for if Christ should have taken him
from the cross, and he have returned again into the world, by how much the
more he would have augme^ted his sin, by so much the more he should have
increased his punishment. S. Augustine upon S. John says, That our Lord showed
his mercy and pity toward both the thieves; unto the good one in giving him
glory, to the naughty one in denying him life: for if he had lived longer, he
would have sinned more, and according to the measure of his offenses, his
torments should have been given him. S. Gregory says, That if our Lord do
for us that which we ask, we ought to rejoice; and if he deny us that which
we ask him, we must not complain: for if our Lord would have given the
sons of Zebedet the kingdom which they required, and unto the naughty thief
the life which he craved, it had been unto their great confusion and also
damnation. And because that in these words, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, there
are contained seven words, as we have noted heretofore; it shall not be
amiss, if that upon every word we speak one word, because the curious Reader
may see how wisely the thief dealt, and how profoundly Christ did answer him.
The first word which Christ spoke unto the thief was Amen, that is, I swear
to thee in truth: which word Amen was in the old Testament very famous, and
much set by, and in the mouth of the son of God much used, insomuch that the
Synagogue did profit herself with that word to confirm that which she swear,
and Christ used the same word to swear that which he spoke. In monte Hebal
stabunt, Ruben, Gad, Asser, Zabulon, Dan and Nepthalim, ad maledice^dum
populum, and respondebit omnts pepulus, Amen, said the Lord unto Moises in the
28 chapter of Genesis: as if he would say, It is my will and pleasure O Moses
that six Princes of Israel, that is, Ruben and Gad, and Asser and Zabulon, and
Dan and Nepthalim; go up unto the highest of the hill Hebal, and from thence
they shall begin aloud to curse all the transgressors of my law, and in the end
of every curse, all the people shall answer, Amen. When the six princes were
come to the top of the hill Hebal, they began to curse those which brake the
law in this manner. Accursed be that man which dare make strange Gods to
worship and give honor unto them, although they be of gold and silver, and let
all the people say Amen. Cursed be the son or daughter which will not honor
his father and his mother, and let all men say Amen. Cursed be that man which
jesting at a blind man, shall put his foot before him to make him fall, and
shall set him out of the way to make him err, and let all the people say Amen.
Cursed be the man which will take money to kill his neighbor by treason and
craft, and let all say Amen. Cursed be the judge, who either through hatred or
gain which he may pretend, gives a wrong judgment against a widow, and
oppress the orphane, and not ease a stranger, and let all the people say Amen.
You may then see that this word Amen was a word of fear and of great rigor,
seeing that it was used to confirm their curses, which they did cast upon the
people, and not the blessings which they gave them. It is to be noted, that
God commanded Moses the same day to go up unto the top of the hill Garisim
with six Princes with him, to bless all those which would keep his
commandments: but he did not command them in the end of their blessing to say
Amen, as he did in the end of his curse. The synagogue was not worthy of this
privilege, because God kept it for his church, which is seen by the promise
which Christ made unto the good thief, when he said, Amen I say unto thee this
day thou shall be with me in Paradise, in so much that Christ began to bless
the chosen of his church, with the same word that the synagogue ended her curse
against the transgressors of the law. This word Amen (says Vbertinus) which
did serve in the synagogue for a curse, does serve now in the universal Church
for a blessing: the which word the son of God had always in his mouth, when
he promised any great matter, or spoke any high secret. Christ did so well
like this word Amen, truly, that his Evangelists and Chroniclers do affirm,
that he used it fifty and five times, and S. Paul in his Epistles eighteen
times, and it is used in the Apocalips also five times, and in the canonical
Epistle three times. S. August, upon S. John says, That the son of God was
not content to say once Amen, but he did oftentimes double the word, saying
Amen, Amen, truly, truly; giving us thereby to understand, that he did not only
speak the truth in that which he spoke, but also that he was the truth it
self. There is no Angel nor man (says Remigius) which can say Amen, Amen:
for although they speak the truth in all that they speak, yet it does not
follow that they be the truth it self, because God did not impart this high
privilege unto any, but his only son, who by special grace said, Ego sum
via and veritas and vita, I am the way and the truth and life. Christ did not
say, I know which way the way goes, but said I am the way: for in troth he who
is not guided by Christ shall miss the way to heaven. Nor Christ said not, I
give life, but said I am the life, because that in the house of God, they call
it not to live, unless they live well, neither do they say that man to live,
which is not a good man; nor Chirst did not say, I speak the truth in that
which I say, but said I am the very truth: for even as the devil is a bottom
without bottom, from whence all lies do proceed, so the son of God is a
fountain from whence all truths do spring. Benedictio and honor and gloria,
and potestas in secula seculorum, and quatuor animalia dicebant Amen, Apocalips
5. said the Angels in praise of our Lord: as if they would say, Let honor,
glory, power and blessing, be given unto our God, and unto the lamb his son,
for ever and ever, and the four beasts answered Amen. Also S. John said in the
7. chapter, That he saw a company of Saints before God, which were so many in
number, that they could not be numbered, and so many Angels also that they
could not be numbered, clothed with stoles and palms in their hands and
prostrate upon the ground, which said no other thing in the praise of God but
Amen, Amen, Amen. O what great mysteries and deep secrets are contained under
this holy word Amen, seeing we find it in the old Testament, and that Christ
used it, and the Angels in heaven praise Christ with it, and the church also
does every where profit her self with it! Does she not profit her self
with it, seeing that in the end of every prayer, she does confirm it with
Amen? Unto World without end, we answer Amen, unto Who lives and reigns,
we answer Amen: with this holy word the son of God began to pardon, and
with the same word the church ends her prayer. Rupert upon the Apocalips
says, That this word Ame^, is neither Greek, nor Latin, nor Chaldey, but
Hebrew: and although this word might have been turned as other words were,
yet the church did not think it convenient, but as Christ said Amen, so does
the church say likewise Amen. Why did the son of God (says Chrisost.) begin
the pardon, which he gave the good thief, with this word Amen dico tibi, but
only to assure him, that he would fulfill all which he promised him? Seeing
that it is a custom first to promise that which we will give or do, and then
to swear and affirm it, why did the son of God do the contrary, and swear
before he promised the thief Paradise? For when Christ said unto the thief,
Amen dico tibi, it was as much as to say, I swear in truth: and why would God
swear that which he promised, and would not be believed at his word? Cyprian
upon the Passion says, That because that which Christ promised was such a
great matter, to wit Paradise, and he unto whom he promised such a grievous
sinner, who was a thief, and he who promised, of such small credit, who was a
man crucified, and the place where he promised so infamous which was the
cross, and the people before whom he promised so vile, who were the Jews, the
son of God would swear first before he promised. If Christ did swear it was
not because there was any want in his word, but because the synagogue should
the better believe him. August. upon S. John says, That if the son of God
would not have sworn the performance of so great a gift, it would have seemed
unto the Jews, that he had promised it him in a mockage; and so much the
rather, because that until that very instant, in which Christ said on the
cross, Hodie mecum eris in Paradise, he never gave it unto Saint, nor promised
it in scripture. If Christ had not sworn that which he promised, who would not
have thought that he had iested in promising credit and honor unto him who had
lost his credit, to promise life unto him who was dead, liberty unto him who
was bound, riches unto him who was poor, and glory unto him who was infamous?
Because the Jews obstinacy was so great, and the good thieves faith but young
and weak, good Jesus would swear before he promised that which he meant to
promise; and because al men might be certain, that he who at the point of
death, confirmed any thing by oath, ought never to deceive.

CHAP XIII. How the son of God never used this word Paradise, until he
promised it unto the good thief: and of many learned expositions of this
saying, Hodie mecum eris in Paradiso, This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.
NOn frustra dixi semini Jacob, quaerite me, quia ego sum dominus loquens
iustitias, and annunciansrecte, said God by Esaias, chap. 48, as if he would
say, I said not in vain unto old honorable Jacob, that he should speak with me
alone and believe in no other, because I am the Lord who can say nothing but
that which is just, nor demand nothing but that which is holy. As God is just
(says Jerome) he says nothing but that which is just, and as he is holy, he
speaks nothing but holy things; because other men besides him, neither tell
us aright what we have to do, nor advise us in time of that which we are to
avoid. All out friends and counselors, when they do advertise us of any
thing, do seem rather to go by guess, than be sure of that which they say:
and by that means they give us counsel after we have received hurt, and teach
us the way after that we have gone astray. God says very well, that Jacob
heard him not in vain, neither did Israel that in vain which he commanded
him, seeing that he gave him the right of the first birth, due to Esau, and
made him son in law unto Laban, and gave him Lia and Rachel for his wives,
and made him father of twelve children, and Prince over twelve tribes. O how
true it is (says Origin) when our Lord says that he speaks nothing but
that which is just, and teaches nothing but that which is right, seeing he
makes those just who deal with him, and makes those holy who do converse
with him. And if he say that the obstinate men and naughty be his, yet he will
not say, that he is one of their number. What can the children of vanity tell
us but vain things, and what can the children of lies tell us but lies? Who is
loiall and faithful unto him whom he hareth, or whom commodity draws awry?
It is our Lord only who gives us our sight to see with, and teaches us which
way we should go, and takes away the stones least we stumble at them, and
gives us counsel in all that we have to do. Our Lord says very well, that
he is the Lord who speaks justice and righteousness: for there has been no
man saved until this day, whom he has not counseled, nor no man lost whom
he has not deceived. King Roboam who was nephew unto David, and son unto
Solomon, of twelve kingdoms which he inherited from his predecessors, lost
ten of them, for no other reason, but because he believed not our Lord in that
which he counseled him, and by following other young men's humors, which
pleased his fancy. Jeroboam and Assa, and Iozias, and Achab, and Benedab, and
Manasses, which were famous kings of Israel, what could they do to get credit,
what could they do against their enemies, or wherein could they help their
friends, or how could they deal in their own affairs, because they believed
not in God, nor followed his counsels? And therefore seeing he says, I am the
Lord who speaks justice, whom should we give ear unto but unto him, whose
doing should we credit but his, and especially, seeing that be alone and no
other, sees that which is present, and knows all that is past, understands
that which is doubtful, teaches unto that that is secret, knows things to
come, and withal most of all others desires that which is good for us? Why
should I believe in man, and not in God, seeing that of that which is past, he
knows nothing but that which he has heard; of that which heeseeth not, he
knows nothing but that which has been told him; of secret things he knows
no more tha^ has been revealed unto him; of things which are present, he
knows no more than that which he sees, and of things to come he knows no
more than what he can guess at. S. Barnard in an Epistle says, That it is
not without cause that God said by Esaias, I am the Lord which speaks justice
and righteousness, because that the counsels which me^ give us, are but
conjectures and no certainties, but the counsels which God gives us cannot
fail but be as he has ordained. God said unto Jacob, non frustra dixi,
quaerite me, that is, That he had not given him that counsel in vain, neither
did it repent Jacob at any time to have followed it: but few men can say this,
nor few counsels can be praised in this sort: for oftentimes it were better
give a counselor his fee, not to follow his counsel, than to follow it. He
gives me counsel in vain, who makes me more passionate than already I am,
and makes me enter into more suits than I have already begun, because it is
the duty of a good friend to put him in his way who is out of it, lift him
up who is down, comfort him who is afflicted, and quiet his mind who is
moved with passions. Upon those words of the Psalm, Audiam quid loquetur
in me dominus deus, Basil the great says, O how willingly I will hear all
that thou vvilt say unto me O good Jesus, because thou art eloquent in
speaking, wise in counselling, pitiful in pardoning, just in succouring,
mighty in commanding, bountiful in giving, and true in accomplishing all that
thou do promise. What did ever good man ask of thee, but thou have
commanded it to be given him, and what have thou commanded but he has
obtained? What can a man give but that which he has, and what can a man say,
but that which he knows? Seneca unto this purpose says, That if we find a
man eloquent in speaking, we shall find him weak in wit, to put that in
execution which he speaks; insomuch that if it be a pleasure to hear him, it
is daugerous to believe him. If we find a man that is just in releeuing him
who is oppressed, we shall find him very hard in forgiving his own enemy;
insomuch that if he be just in other men's injuries, he is very vindicatiue of
his own. It is the property of a man, that if he have much temporal goods at
his commandment, he has no will to spend them with any; so that if by the
request of friends, or importunity of neighbors, he do part with any thing,
he does vveep before he does leave it. It is the property of man, although not
of a wise man, to desire to be heard, although he cannot speak, to be feared
although he have no authority, and well beloved although he cannot love, and be
believed although he speak not true, and he will be served although he have
no need. What tongue can speak it, and what heart can suffer and endure to
talk with a fool, to love an ungrateful man, to ask and crave of a
niggard, deal with a liar, and serve a proud man? He who forgets God,
and deals with man, cumbereth himself with all these inconveniences, and
binds himself unto all these obligations, and the rather because there is no
man who trusts long another man, but in the end is paid for it. To come
then unto our purpose, the good thief was most happy in worshipping Christ
alone, and believing in him only: for reward whereof Christ said unto him
alone and no other, This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. It is a great
pity to see how many Levites and Priests, Lawyers and ancients, neighbors,
and acquaintance of Christ were about the cross, looking how he suffered, and
watching how he died; unto none of all which he said, Hedie me cum eris in
Paradiso, as he did unto the good thief; in so much that they heard the words,
but vvanted the promise. Seeing our good Jesus (says Chrysostom) was
determined to give the good thief glory, why did he not give it him, and
hold his peace? And seeing he did not send him word by a third person, why
did he not tell it him in secret, and in his ear? And seeing he would not
tell him in secret, but publicly, why did he not defer the reward? And yet if
he would not defer the reward, why did he not send him to heaven alone, but
would take him to Paradise with himself? All these are such high mysteries
and such deep secrets, that there is no wit able to understand them, nor
tongue able to set them forth, nor hand able to write them, and therefore it is
necessary for us to crave for the grace of our Lord to direct us in it, and the
holy Ghost to lighten us. When Christ said unto the thief, This day thou shall
be with me in Paradise, it is as if he had said: O thou thief my friend and
fellow, seeing that I know with whom I speak, it is also reason, that thou
do know who speaks: and therefore I let thee understand, that I am the
creator of heaven, I am the redeemer of the world, I am the Prophet which is
desired, I am the Messiah promised, I am the giver of the Gospel, and I am
also the Lord of Paradise. Let all men bear witness with me, and therefore I
speak it openly, that I bequeath my eternal Paradise unto this thief by this
Will and Testament, because that all such which shall succeed me in my church,
may know how well I recompense those which serve me, and how well I deal with
those which follow me. Anselmus cries out and says, O glorious thief, O
happy thief, how fortunate and lucky wast thou, seeing thou did nothing but
that which did content our good Jesus, nor saidest nothing but that which well
liked him! Thy feet with the which thou did follow him were happy, the eyes
with the which thou did suffer with him was happy, the tongue with the which
thou did confess him was happy, and the heart with the which thou did
believe in him was happy. S. Chrisost. notes, That God did send Moises as an
Ambassador to Pharaoh, Nathan the Prophet unto David, the great Prophet Esaias
unto Manasses, his holy Prophet Jeremy unto King Ozias, the Prophet Daniel unto
Balthazar, and the Satiricall Prophet Helias unto king Achab. The son of God
sent a greater imbasie and greater Ambassadors unto the thief, than God the
father did unto the Kings, seeing that unto the thief which was crucified on
the cross with him, he sent no other ambassador than himself, and so by this
means, the embasie and the Ambassador, were all one thing. Was it not think
you the selfsame thing, seeing that it was Christ which sent the message, and
the selfsame Christ which carried it? Origin in an Homily says thus, The
greatest message that ever came from heaven into the world was that of the
incarnation, and the next unto it was that which Christ did unto the good
thief, insomuch that by the coming of the son of God the gate of glory was
opened, and in the promise made unto the good thief the possession of it was
taken. The embasie which John Baptist brought us, was that the kingdom of
heaven was at hand, but the good thief says not that he is near unto heaven,
but that he is within heaven, S. John's was a great embasie, when he said,
Behold the lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world: but that of
the thieves was better when he said, Behold him here who has already redeemed
the world. The embasie that Samuel brought unto David was good, when as of a
shepherd he anointed him king but the embasie which Christ did unto the good
thief was far better, because that there passed almost forty years betwixt
the time that the kingdom was promised unto David, and the time that it was
delivered unto him, but the thief had his kingdom promised him at two of the
clock in the afternoon, and was given him presently toward night. The reward
for bringing thee news of such a great embasie as that of Christ's was, that is,
the promise of glory, he would let no man have but he would win it himself;
insomuch he who promised glory and gave glory, was the glory it self. O good
Jesus, redeemer of my soul, and do thou well see that in promising glory and
Paradise that thou do promise nothing but thy self? what means this O good
Jesus, what means this? Do thou trust malefactors, co^me^d thy self
vntorouers, offer thyself unto sinners, commit thy self unto thieves? If thou
think thy self ouercharged with this thief, give him the Province of
Achaia, give him part of Assyria, give him the kingdom of Palestine, give him
the monarchy of Asia: for in giving him as thou do give him thy self, if
thou were not God as thou art, it would seem that thou should prejudice
many. Is there any other Paradise but to enjoy thee, is there any other glory
than to see thy face, is there any greater contentment than to be in thy
company, is there any goodness but that which comes from thy hands? This day
thou shall be with me in Paradise, where thou shall see me face to face, enjoy
my essence, dwell with my person, have the fruition of my glory, thy death
shall die, and thy life shall rise again. This day thou shall be with me in
Paradise, where thou shall be always mine, and I will be thine, where thou
shall serve me, and where I will love thee without end, where thou shall leave
sinning, and I never cease to do thee good. This day thou shall be with me
in Paradise, where thou shall see joy without sorrow, health withour grief,
life without death, light without darkness, company without suspicion,
plenty without want, and glory without end. This day thou shall be with me
in Paradise, where youth does never wax old, old age does never appear,
beauty never fades, health never decaieth, joy never waxes less, grief is
never felt, no vvailing ever heard, nosorrow euerseene, and death fears nor.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, where thou shall go from the
goulfe to the ^^auen, from the battle to the triumph, from the stream to the
spring, from darkness unto light, from vva^^ to wealth, from a dream unto
the truth, from faith to hope, from cold love to perfect and seruent Charity.
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise, where thou shall not know how
to weep but laugh, not complain but be ^oifull, nor ask but g^^e, not
blaspheme but bless, not sigh but sing, not hate but love, not mislike but
praise, not die but live. This day thou shall be ^^th me in Paradise, where
thy hands shall touch that which they desiced, thy eyes see that th^^ they
looked for, thy ears hear that which they loved and thy heart possess that
which he groned for. This day thou shall be with me in Parachse, where
thou shall nor fear the deceits of the Devil, the cockering of the flesh, the
vanity of the world, the ambushes of thy enemies, the sudden passions which
fall out every day, the necessity of every hour, nor yet the anxiety and grief
of mind. This day thou shall be with me in Paradise; where there is no
night which is dark, nor day which decreaseth; no rough Winter, nor
troublesome Summer, no cold to freeze thee, no heat to distemper thee, no
famine to weaken thee, no thirst to make thee dry, no death to make thee
afraid, nor life which shall have any end. O my soul, O my heart, will thou
not tell me what thou do think upon, or what thou do contemplate on,
seeing thou hear not this which is spoken: do thou not mark who
speaks it, nor unto whom he speaks it, nor do thou regard where it is
spoken? He who speaks is the son of God, he with whom he speaks is
a thief, that which he says is that he promises Paradise, the place where
he speaks is the Mount of Caluary, the hour when he speaks is at the
point of death, and those before whom he speaks is the whole Synagogue. Is
it possible that an imbasie accompanied with these many circumstances, should
not be new and heard? For in Scripture there is nothing necessary, that is not
full (...) mystery. Certainly this was a very new thing, seeing that Christ
never had this word Paradise in his mouth not from the time of his incarnation,
until the last hour that he departed out of this world, and then having no
other there but the thief which bare him company at that time he promised him
Paradise. O my soul, if thou will have part in Paradise, behold what a one
the son of God is who gives it, and behold what he does unto the thief
unto whom he gave it; and as thou did see what they do, so do thou
force thy self to do the like. O my soul, O my heart, do thou not see
that our Lord who gives Paradise is upon the cross, and that the thief unto
whom heaven (...) given, is also upon the cross, and therefore that the
crucified does nor give the reward of Paradise but unto another crucified.
Saint Barnard upon the Passion says, for mine own part I think not my self
deceived, but I know that the naked gives not his kingdom but unto another
naked, he whose ioints are unloosed, unto another whose ioints are also loosed
one from an other, he that is covered with blood, unto another covered with
blood also, and the crucified unto another crucified. Thou that sit
sporting thy self what do thou ask of him who suffers on the cross?
Thou that art clothed and reclothed, what do thou crave of him who is
bowelled upon the cross? Thou that art fair and fat, what do thou ask of
him who is on the cross, one member rent from one another? Thou that art at
freedom and liberty, what do thou ask of him who is nailed and fastened
upon the cross? If thou will hear (says Anselmus) O my soul, Hodie mecum
eris in Paradiso, Lift up thy affections from the earth, let thy heart be free
from all passions, let thy flesh keep watch and ward over her inclinations,
crucify thy liberty on the cross, let blood thy fancy of all presumptions,
and bury thy affections that they may not appear. If thou will ascend as high
as heaven, it is necessary, that with the thief thou take the cross for thy
ladder to steal it: for otherwise although thou be a companion with him in
sinning, yet for all that thou shall not so be in reigning.

CHAP. XIIII. Why the son of God did not say upon the cross unto all men,
Amen dico vobis, as he did say unto the thief Amen dico tibi: aad how he was
the first martyr which died with Christ, and the first Saint which he canonized.
LOquetur ad eos in ira sua, and in furore suo conturbabit eos, said king David
in the second Psalm: as if he would say, when the great God of Israel shall
be angry and troubled, he will speak unto the wicked men with anger, and
when he shall trouble their judgments, it shall be with great anger. Our
Lord does threaten the wicked whom he means to punish, with two grievous
scourges, that is, that he will speak in anger to fear them, and trouble
their judgment that they shall not be able to guess at any thing aright. If
our Lord speak unto us with anger, it may be borne with, but if he trouble
our judgment, it is a thing much to be lamented: for in this wicked world, if
he do not lighten our steps to see where we go, we shall fall down upon
our face. Barnard cries out and says: What shall become of thee, O my soul,
if he who should lead me put me out of the way, if he who should succor me
forsake me, if he who should pardon me accuse me, and he who should quit me
condemn me, and he who should give me sight make me blind? Saint Augustine
De verbis Apostoli says, When it is said in Scripture, that God speaks unto
us with anger, it is meant that he does not speak with mercy, and when it is
said that he does trouble us with fury, it is to say that he does not lighten
us with his divine grace, because there cannot happen unto us greater hurt in
this world, than for God to withdraw his hand from doing us good. There is no
anger in God, as there is in man, with the which he does trouble himself, nor
fury to move him withal; and when we say that he is angry, it is because he
uses that punishment which in others is done with anger, and if we say that he
is in fury, it is because he uses rigorous punishment toward us, or else
because he does not punish at all in this world: for wherein can our Lord show
greater anger, than by not using his accustomed clemency? Our Lords wrath is
appeased when he punishes presently after the offense committed, and he is
very angry when he deferreth the punishment unto hell. S. Ambrose says, That
in the house of God, not to punish is to punish, to dissemble is to be angry
with, not to speak is to chide, to pardon is to threaten, to suffer is to let
it putrify, and to defer is to revenge the more. Is there, think you, any
greater punishment, than not to be punished in this world? When does our Lord
speak unto us with anger, but when we fall from his grace into sin by our
fault? God spoke with anger unto our first father, when he said unto him thou
shall eat thy bread in the sweat of thy face, as if he would say, Because thou
have fallen from my grace, and eaten of the apple which I did forbid thee to
eat of, for a perpetual punishment, thou shall eat and drink always with
care in thy mind, sweat on thy face, and travail of thy body, insomuch that at
the best morsel thou shall give over eating, and fall to sighing. God spoke
also with anger unto the murderer Cain, when he said unto him, behold the
blood of thy brother Abel does cry from the earth unto me: as if he would say
Because thou have flaine thy brother Abel through malice and envy, I cannot but
do justice upon thee, because his blood cries aloud for it of me; and thy
punishment shall be, that thou shall wander to and fro all the days of thy
life, and thy head shall never cease shaking. God spoke with anger unto the
great king Nabugodonoser when he said, Eijciam te ab hominibus, as if he would
say, Because thou have robbed my temples of their treasures, and led away my
people of the Jews captive, thou shall be thrown out from the conversation of
men, and shall live with beasts on the mountains, thou shall eat hay like
oxen, and be clothed like wild savages with hair, until thou do
acknowledge me for to be thy Lord, and thy self to be a sinner. God spoke
with anger unto the great Priest Heli, when he said, Ego praecidam brachium
tuum, etc, as if he would say, Because thou did not punish thy children
when they stole away the sacrifices, and behaved themselves dishonestly with
women in the Tabernacle, I will take thy Priesthood from thee, I will kill thy
steward, and will make that no old man come into thy house, in so much that
thou shall have no children in thy stock to inherit after thee, nor ancient
men to counsel thee. To come then unto our purpose, God used this kind of
speech unto the Synagogue, but now speaks otherwise unto the church, as is
easily seen in the death of Christ, when he said unto the thief, Hodie mecum
eris in Paradise. We do not read that Christ did ever use this word of anger
so often as he has done the word of mercy, the which he has used often, as
Per viscera misericordiae dei nostra, said holy Zachary in his song: as if he
would say, The son of God came down from the highest of heaven into the
earth, moved thereunto by the bowels of his mercy. The holy Prophet does in
this open a high mystery unto us, whereby he gives us to understand, how
entirely our Lord does love us, seeing that he does visit us with the
bowels of his mercy. There be many which have this word Mercy in their mouth,
but not in their hands, and those be such as are fair in speech, but cruel
in deeds, and such use sweet speech to take men, and flattery to kill them.
Others there be which have mercy in their hands, and nor in their tongues,
the which are rough in words, but mild and gentle in deeds, and those offer
blows but strike not, they fear but kill not. Only our sweet Jesus has mercy
and pity in his mouth, seeing he does so much commend it unto us, and in his
deeds seeing he does use it so much, and also in his bowels because he
does love us so much. S. Barnard says unto this purpose, Our Lord would not
place mercy in the eyes, least they should make him blind, he would not place
it in the ears, for fear they should make him deaffe, he would not place it
in the hands, for fear it should be lost, he would not put it to keep in
the body for fear least it should grow old, neither yet in the tongue for
fear he should be dumb: But our good Jesus put it to keep in his heart to
bestow it upon those whom he loves, and keeps it within his bowels, because
that all that which is loved with the heart is kept within the heart. O good
Jesus, O the life of my soul, I beseech thee by the bowels of thy mercy, that
thou would take pity on my sinful soul, and seeing I have no other Lord in
my bowels but thy self, on whom would thou better bestow the mercy which
thou have within thine, than upon me! Thou did speak with the bowels of
thy mercy, unto the good thief, when thou wast not content only to say: Amen,
Truly I say, but thou did add tibi to thee, letting us understand, that
thou did speak unto him alone, and promise Paradise unto him alone and
unto no other. Vbertinus says, That if when Christ said Amen dico, he had not
added tibi, his mother who brought forth his humanity, and the other thief
which had lost his liberty, might have thought that he had spoken unto them, I
say if he had not turned himself unto the good thief, and said tibi. What
means this O good Jesus, what means this, do thou speak unto the
thief, and forget thy mother? Do thou not speak unto thy mother who bare
thee nine months in her bowels, and do thou speak unto the thief who had
known thee but three hours? Do thou promise presently Paradise unto the
thief which spoke but three words, and do thou make no reckoning of thy
mother, who bought thee with her tears? Do thou bestow thy precious blood,
first upon a thief which knew not how to do any thing else but shed blood by
the high ways, before thou do bestow it upon thy mother? Would it not be
reason to pay thy mother now with the blood that runs from thy side, for the
milk which thou did suck of her breast? What more heroical and divine
exchange could there be made in the world betwixt the son and the mother,
the mother and the son than blood for milk, and milk for blood? If thou
do look O good Jesus that she should speak unto thee as the thief did,
do thou not see that for wearines she cannot help thee, for grief she
cannot look upon thee, for fear she cannot comfort thee, and for being
astonished she cannot speak unto thee? I beseech thee Per viscera misericordia,
that thou would say, Amen dico vobis, as thou do say, Amen dico tibi: For
by that means thou should comfort thy mother, satisfy the thief, vanquishe
Hell, help the world, and withal I should have hope to be pardoned. If thou
do die for all and not for one, why do thou not say, Verily I say unto
you, as thou do say, Truly I say unto thee? O sweet Jesus, and love of my
soul, seeing that upon my knees, and my face bathed in tears, I say unto
thee, Tibi soli peccaui, I have sinned unto thee alone, do not I deserve to
hear from thy mouth these words, Amen dico tibi, Truly I say unto thee?
Anselmus says, That it was too timely to give Paradise unto his mother, and
the other thief had not deserved it, and the great Centurion was not yet
become a Christian, and the Jews were hardened in their hearts, and therefore
it was not without cause that he said unto the thief, Amen dico tibi, and not
Amen dico vobis. It was a great word which God spoke unto the first man, that
is, dominamini piscibus maris, and volatilibus cali: but that which he spoke
unto the good thief was far greater, because it is far better to be
companions unto the Angels in heaven, than kings over beasts upon earth. It was
a great word that God spoke unto Noe, that is, I found thee just in my sight:
but this which he spoke unto the thief was far greater, because it is better
to be just and receive the reward of being just, tha^ to be simply just. That
was a favorable speech which he used unto king David, I have found a man
according unto my heart: but this which he spoke unto the good thief was far
more favorable, because that David was but near unto his heart, but the
thief was in his heart. And it did appear easily, that David was but near Gods
heart, seeing he did sin afterward, and it does well appear that he had
the thief within his heart, seeing he suffered him to sin nor steal no
more. That was a favorable speech which God used unto Abraham, that is, Number
celare potero qua gesturus sum Abraham. But that which was used toward the
thief was more favorable, because the greatest secret that God revealed unto
Abraham was, that the son of God should come into the world, but he did not
only reveal, but also show this unto the good thief. Christ did trust the
good thief better tha^ he did trust Abraham, because he was the first sinner
who saw the redemption of the world with his eyes, and he was he upon whom
the blood of Christ was first bestowed. The precious blood of the son of God
was then otherwise shed toward the thief, who was upon the cross, than
toward his mother who was by the cross; because it dropped down upon the
garment of his sorrowful mother, but it went to the soul of the thief to
save him, and thereupon the holy thief went immediately to Paradise, but his
sorrowful mother stayed weeping on the Mount of Caluary. O holy blood, O
heavenly blame, why do thou take such pity on the thief, and do defer
to give thy mother the kingdom of heaven which thou do give presently unto
the thief? Do thou defer it to her who brought forth Christ, and take pity
on him who bare him company on the cross, seeing thou do augme^t tears in
her, and diminish offenses in him? It was a word of great favor which he did
use unto Mary Magdalen, that Remissa tibi peccata multa, Many sins are forgiven
thee: but yet that was greater which he did use to the good thief, because he
used greater liberty with him tha^ with her: for if he loved her and pardoned
her, he loved the thief like a friend, pardoned him like a Christian, and
rewarded him lika a just man. Barnard says unto this purpose, That it is a
sign of great love to pardon, but a greater sign to give and pardon; because
that pardon is sometime given by force, but a gift never comes but of free
will. Orige^ upon Matthew cries out, O deep mystery, O divine sacrament! who
ever heard or saw the like unto this, that is, betwixt the sun rising and the
sun setting, the thief was condemned by Pilat, shamed by the criers,
iusticied by the hangmen, confessed by his own mouth, by Christ pardoned and
also brought unto Paradise. What means this O good Jesus, what means this?
Who is able to reach unto the reason why Abel with his innocence, Nee with his
justice, Abraham with his faith, David with his charity, Moses with his
meekness, I^b with his patience, Tobias with his franknesse, Lazarus with
his poverty should so long desire to see Christ, and the thief presently enjoy
him!

S. Ambrose says, That Christ received in a new kind of martyrdom all the
torments which were given the thief as a naughty man from the hour and
moment that he defended Christ, and confessed with Christ: insomuch that if he
began to suffer like a thief and a rouer, he ended and died like a glorious
martyr. This happy thief was a very glorious martyr, seeing he suffered near
Christ, and with Christ, and where Christ suffered, and in the same manner that
Christ suffered, and which is most of all, he was the first martyr after
Christ's passion, and the first Saint which the son of God did canonize after
his death. S. Stouen was the first martyr after Christ's ascension, but from
Christ's death until he ascended into heaven there was no other Mattyr in the
world but the thief, whose conversion Christ caused, whose tears he
accepted, whose martyrdom he approved, whose passion he canonized, and whose
soul he glorified. S. Augustine says, O good Jesus, O my souls delight,
considering that thou do save him who accuses his own faults, and him who
excuses thy innocence, the maintainer of thy credit, the confessor of thy
essence, the companion of thy person, will thou not save also this sinful
soul of mine? For so great a battle as thou have won this day, for so great
a victory as thou have obtained, and also for so much blood as has issued from
thee, it is a small prize to carry away with thee but one thief only, because
that by so much the greater the triumph is, by how many more prisoners the
triumpher is followed with all. And if it will not please thee to take me
thither with thee, tarry thou here with me O good Jesus, for I desire no other
glory of thee in this miserable world, but that thou would let me have
always a good conscience. Origin says in an Homily, that it is much to be
noted, and a thing to be wondered at, that Christ did not say unto the thief,
Amen dico vobis, although there were many more there: but he said, Amen dico
tibi, to let us understand that by forgiving him alone he showed his mercy,
and by not pardoning others he showed his great justice. There were store of
sinners about the cross as well as he, which peradventure would have been
pardoned as well as he; but amongst them all the thief only deserved to hear
his pardon: but by this he makes us know, that there is no man which has
cause to despair of pardon, seeing he forgave him; and yet that we presume
not too much of pardon, seeing he forgave him alone. Let the conclusion of all
this be, that we remember before we sin, that our Lord did not pardon the
multitude that was there present; and after we have sinned, let us remember
that he pardoned the thief which suffered with him: and in so doing we shall
fear his justice, and remember his mercy: the which I humbly beseech him that
it would please him to use here with grace, and afterward with glory, Amen,
Amen.

The end of the second word which Christ our redeemer spoke upon the Cross.
Here begins the third word which the son of God spoke upon the Cross
unto his blessed mother. Mulier ecce filius tuus, Woman behold here thy son.
CHAP. I. That the love which the mother of God had, did exceed the love of all
other men, and also the love of Angels.
SIcut water (...), it a ag^ te diligeba^^, these are the words of holy David,
2. Reg. chap^^^ 1. when (...) brought him that king Saul his enemy, and Prince
Ionathas his great friend, were slain in a battle which they had with the
Philistims. The Jews gave this battle to the (...) the wild mountains of
G^^boe, and when the sorrowful news came to king David that king Saul had
lost the battle, he began aloud to cry, and shed many grievous tears, and
said as follows in doleful wise. O famous and renowned Israel, why do
thou not weep for the loss of so many excellent men, which this day they have
slain thee, and noble Princes which this day are perished within thee? How is
it possible that the strongest of Israel have fallen down so ignominiously,
and the most famous of Judah have ended their life by sword? O how well king
Saul and Ionathas should have loved one the other when they were alive, seeing
that they left not the one the other in death, and although the cruel sword
was able to take away their lives from them, yet certainly it was not able to
take away their hearts from them with the which they loved one the other. What
sword durst wound their hearts, or what lance durst touch their flesh,
considering that Saul and Ionathas were in running more light than eagles, and
in sight more strong than lions? Ionathas arrow was never shot but he hit, and
Saul's sword drawn but he stroke. Weep then O ye daughters of Israel, weep upon
the death of your king Saul, who clothed you in scarlet in your passover, and
gave you jewels of gold in your weddings. O ye mountains, O ye mountains of
Gilboe, I curse from henceforth and anathematize you for ever, to the end that
it never reign water upon you by day, nor any dew fall upon you by night, seeing
that you consented that the enemies of Israel should there kill Saul, and slay
my good friend Ionathas in the same place. O my faithful and old friend
Ionathas, why did thou go to the battle, not calling me with thee, and
why did thou die not taking me with thee? My heart can receive no comfort,
nor my eyes cease from weeping, when I remember how much I was bound unto thee,
and call to mind the great love that passed betwixt us, because that the love
which passed betwixt thee and me, was of like quality, as the love which a
mother has when she has but one child only. It is now to be noted, that for
this last word we have brought all this story, whereby we may well gather and
infer, that the love which a mother bears unto her only son, exceeds
all other humane love. For if David could have found any greater love, unto a
greater he would have compared his. King David was a very holy man, and his
son Absalon a very bold young youth, but in the end when news came unto him
that Ioab had thrust him through, and that he was hanged upon an oak, the
poor old man made such pitiful complaint, and did show such grief for it,
that every man did perceive plainly, that he wished himself rather dead tha^
his son lose his life. The which he openly said when he cried aloud, My son
Absalon, my son Absalon, where truly he would willingly have gone to his
grave if his son might have lived. God had no better experience to prove the
love which the Patriarch Abraham bare him, but to command him to kill his only
son, which he had in his house, and when the old man had lifted up his sword
to slay the young youth, the Angel took him by the arm, and commanded him to
be quiet: for now our Lord was satisfied, to see that he loved him better than
his own son. When news was brought to holy Job, how the wise men had robbed him
of five hundred yoke of oxen, and that a flash of lightning from heaven had
burnt him seven thousand sheep, and that the Chaldeans had taken from him
three thousand Camels, and had put to the sword all the shepherds of his
flock, the good man was not grieved at all with it, nor uttered any sorrowful
word forir. But when the fourth post came to bring him news, how they had
slain his six sons, and three daughters in his eldest sons house, the man
of God could not dissemble his great grief, and did show it more by deed than
by word, by rending his garments in sunder, and cutting his hair from his
head, and wallowing oftentimes upon the ground. We do not read that the great
Patriarch Jacob did weep in all peregrinations, or complain in all his
tribulations, until he heard that the wolves in the desert had eaten his
well-beloved son Joseph, the which evil news did strike him so near the heart,
that he said before his other children, that he would die and go into hell,
because he might have space and time enough to bewail his son. Sunamites
the Inn keeper of Samaria, and hos^esse unto Heliseus did so much grieve at
the death of her son which God had given her by the prayer of Heliseus, that
she went weeping like a fool about the fields, in such manner that neither
her husband could bring her in, nor the Prophet comfort her. The great Priest
Heli was so grieved when it was told him that the Philistims had overcome the
Jews, and taken the Arc and killed his two sons Obni and Phinees, that he
fell from his seat, and immediately yielded up the ghost. The wife of old
Tobias, and mother unto young Tobias, did weep beyond all measure, and went
almost beside her self only at the long tarrying which her son made in Rages
a city of the Medes, whether his father had sent him, to take up certain
money, and this her grief was so excessive that she never ceased to pray unto
God for to keep him, nor she never left off weeping until she saw him with
her eyes. I have thought it expedient to rehearse all these examples, the
better to prove and extol the love which fathers and mothers bear unto their
children, and how it is not to be compared with any other love, and how
bitterly the Parents weep not only for the death of their children, but also
for their absence. Horace says, That to the loss of a child, and that of the
only child, there can be no loss comparable unto it, because that causes
grief at the heart, which is loved from the heart. Anselmus says to this
purpose, that this fatherly love is not found only in men which are
reasonable: but also in brute beasts, for we see the Hen fight with the Kite,
the Storke with the Goshauke, the Mare with the Wolf, the Lioness with the
Ounce, the Eliphant with the Rinoceront, the Gander with the dog, and the Pie
with the Cuckoo: the which fight is not only because they be enemies, but
because they steal away their young ones. S. Ambrose in his Exameron says,
That the love of the father is so great and so excessive, that oftentimes we
see brute beasts follow men which have taken away their young ones, wherein they
let us understand that they had rather be taken themselves, than see their
little ones taken captives. If a br^te beast show this grief for his little
oues, what shall a reasonable man do? When Demosthenes wept bitterly the death
of one of his sons, and another replied unto him and said that he was a
Philosopher; it seems well said he that thou have never been a father; nor
what the love of a son is, because that to have a son is the greatest of
all loves, and to lose him, the greatest grief of all griefs. To come at the
last unto our porpose, what woman did ever love her son, as the mother of God
did love hers? Ipsum solum tenet matter sua, and pater eius tenere diligit eum,
said the Patriarch Judas unto the Patriarch Joseph his brother: as if he would
say, O most renowned Prince Joseph, I and my brothers, and my brothers and I,
do humbly beseech thee upon our knees, and request thee with many tears, that
thou would forgive our younger brother Benjamin, the taking away of the
golden flask which was found in his bag, because his doleful mother has no
other son, and his old father loves him with most tender love. These words may
better be spoken of the virgin and of her son, than of Benjamin, and his
mother Rachel, who had more than one son, although she knew it not, seeing
that Joseph Beniamins brother was alive, and the most richest and mightiest of
all Egypt. The eternal father had no other son but this alone, and the
immaculate virgin had no other but Christ only: for the father never engendered
other natural son but this, and the mother never brought forth other son but
this. We may very well say of the father, that he did love his son tenderly,
seeing he gave him all his nature, all his wisdom, all his power, all his
will, and also all his might and authority. What being had the father which the
son had not, what knew the father which the son knew not, what could the
father do that the son could not do, what had the father that the son
also had not? What is it to say, that he loved him tenderly, but that the
father loved him with most entire love, insomuch that he denied him nothing
which he had, nor hid nothing from him of that he did know? Let us leave off
the love of the Father, and let us speak somewhat of the love of the mother,
who loved her precious son with a tender heart, and wept for him with tender
bowels. O most sacred Virgin, how should thou not love thy blessed son
very tenderly, seeing that when thou did bring him into the world, thou
vvast young and tender? When the Virgin that brings forth a child is
tender, the child which she brings forth is tender; the time also young and
tender, why should not the love with which she loves it be also tender? If
Jacob who had twelve children, loved one of them with tender and sweet love, is
it to be thought that the mother of God having but one only son, would not
love it with most tender and sweet love? and so much the rather because Jacobs
love was divided into the love of many sons, but our blessed Ladies love was
wholly drawn to the love of one only. S. Barnard upon Missus est says, That
there is no love upon earth which may not be waighed and measured, excepted
only the love which the son of God bare unto his mother, and the mother unto
her son; the which was such, that all the Angels could not measure it, nor
yet all the saints weigh it. Anselmus says, That those which are fathers, and
those which are called mothers cannot love their children, as much as the
Virgin did love hers, nor yet they are not bound unto so great love; because
they are bound to love their neighbors as themselves, their brothers as
themselves, and their God more than themselves. Love which is divided into so
many parts, cannot possibly be equal with that love which the Virgin bare
her son. Love that is pure and not fained, cannot be spread abroad, but
gathered in one, not in many but in one, not divided but entire, not stricken
but heaped up, not for a time but for ever, not finding excuses or faults but
suffering, not suspicious but confident and trusting. And he who observes not
these laws, has no cause to say that he loves. These causes ought neither
to want in him who loves, nor in him which is beloved: for if they do, we
should not call them lovers but acquaintance, for under the law of love there
is neither a defect admitted, nor a complaint suffered. There is no defect
admitted because love makes all whole: there is no complaint suffered, because
love makes all gentle and mild: there is no injury done because love
dissembleth all, there is no sloth in love, because heis watchful, he is not a
niggard because he can deny nothing. O glorious Queen, O the light of my
felicity, who did ever better keep these high bonds of love like unto thee?
The blessed mother of God, Tenere diligebat filium suum. For being as he was
flesh of her flesh, bones of her bones, blood of her blood, bowels of her
bowels, how should she love him, but like unto her own entrals? Tenere
diligebat filium suum, She loved her son tenderly, seeing she loved him as
her son, she loved him with the zeal due to a bride groom, served him as
her husband, used him as her brother, reverenced him like a father, worshipped
him as a God. She loved him tenderly, seeing she went to Bethelem, and with
the teat in his mouth she carried him into Egypt, and being a child of twelve
years she brought him into the Temple, and never forsook him all the time that
he went a preaching, and that which is most of all to be noted, she wept for
all his trauails and vexations, and with her fingers ends supplied all his
necessities. And how did she supply them but by watching in the night, and
weauing in the day? She loved him tenderly, seeing she adored him in his
presence, she contemplated on him in his absence, she succored him in his
necessities, she followed him in his iournies, and comforted him in his
adversities. What would the child that the mother would not likewise, and what
did the mother ask that the son did not give her? They lived in one house,
they did eat at one table, and that which she gained with her fingers was
common betwixt them, and that which was given to him for preaching, they spent
together. What should I say more? they prayed for all sins together, and they
wept for all sins together.

CHAP. II. How that if the love which the mother bare unto her son was great,
so likewise the love which the son bare his mother was no less: and to prove
this there is expounded asaying of the Canticles.
INtroduxit me rex in cellam vinariam, and ordinauit in me charitatem, said the
espoused of her espouse and bridegroom, talking of rich jewels which he gave
her: and it is as if she would say, The light of my eyes and joy of my heart,
took me by the hand, and led me into the wineseller and told me the order of
true love. S. Barnard says, O well-beloved bride, why do thou tell it abroad,
that thy bridgroom carried thee to drink into the wineseller, and taught thee
how to be farther in love, seeing thou should be angry to have it spoken
of, and to do it thou should be ashamed? Other brides are wont to go to
the meddowes to gather flowers, to gardens to cut fruits, to shops to buy
gowns, to the common places of recreation, to visit their friends, and do
thou go to the winesellers among the cups? Do thou not know that the noble
and fine dame is noted of Incontinency, if she smell of nothing but of wine? So
strange a matter wine ought to be unto thee O thou bride of the Lord, for to
think of it would be imputed unto thee for a curiosity, to ask for it an
evil example, to smell of it a fault, to drink it a scandal, and to be
drunk a sacrilege. Plato says, That in the glorious times and golden age of
the world, kinsmen kissed their kinswomen for no other reason, but for to know
whether they had drunk any wine for if they had they either were put to death
for it, or banished into some island. If Plutarch do not deceive us, it was an
inviolable law in Rome, that if any Matron of Rome had any necessity to drink
wine, either because she was weak, or because she was sick, the Senate
only should give license unto her, and she notwithstanding drink it out of
Rome. Macrobius says. That two Senators chiding in Rome, the one told the
other that his wife was an Adulteress, and the other replied and told him that
his was a drunkard: and being debated in the Senate which of the two was most
iniuried, it was agreed on by them al, that it was a greater infamy for a woman
to be a drunkard than an adulteress. If this be so, as true it is, why did
this chosen dame and dainty bride not only drink wine, but go also to the
seller for it? Why does she go to fet it, and if she for it, why does she
drink of it, and if she drink of it, yet why is she drunk with it? What do I
say that she is drunk with it, seeing she does inuit all men to drink of it?
The spouse which says openly, Bibite amici and inebriamini charissimi, what
else does she say, but drink my friends, and you my dearest of all be drunk?
Thou my sweet love say that in tauerns and sellers where the wisest are wont
to lose their wit and sense, the greatest love is shown. How do thou say,
Quod ordinauit in me charitatem, seeing a tau^rn is the place where patience is
lost, anger kindled, lying has the upper hand, gluttony fills it self, and
virtue weakened? Marvel not my brother, marvel not to hear me say, that he
brought me into the winesellers: for into the seller whither my dear
bridegroom brought me, there enter none but such as are predestined, and
none but the chosen drink of those wines. Barnard says, That the divine
seller whither this bridgroom brought his bride is the sacred and holy
scripture, in which the vessels are also the holy scriptures, and the wine
within those vessels was the son of God promised in the old law, and that wine
began to be sold, when good Jesus began to preach. Why did the master of the
feast keep that wine to drink of in the end of the marriage, but only to let us
understand that the cups and mysteries of holy scripture were to be opened in
the end of the old law? When Christ said unto his Apostles, Other me^ have
taken pains and you are entered into their labors, in these words he would say
that the Fathers of the old Testament, have planted and pruned the vines, and
gathered the grapes, but yet the Apostles only drank of the wine, seeing they
did reach unto the secret mysteries of holy scripture. Our Lord did put all the
twelve Princes of the church in this seller, when in the parler he made them
drunk with the grace of the holy ghost, by reason of which drunkenness there
was no secret which they did not reach unto, nor mystery which they did not
understand. O precious wine, O happy drunkenness! considering that at that very
hour, when the Princes of the church entered into that seller, of fearful me^
they became stout, of simple men learned, of dull men very wise, and being
without devotion became very fervent, and of dumb me^ very eloquent, and of
fishers preachers. In that holy seller, pride lifts not up it self, they
call for no envy, no gluttony comes near the^, they know no wantonness of
the flesh, there enters in no sloth, nor they know not what malice is. In the
seller of God the gate is humility, patience the gouernes, charity commands,
abstinence rules, diligence watches, and devotion triumphs. Who would not
drink of such wine as this is, and who would not enter into so blessed a
buttery? Origin upon the Canticles says, That the seller of wine unto the
which the bridegroom brought his bride, is no other thing tha^ this holy
catholic church, where the cups are the sacraments, and the wine which is kept
in the^ are the seven gifts of the holy ghost, by whose means the church can
never err, and without the^ no man can ever be saved. What should become of the
child new born, who has neither faith nor hope, if he were not put presently
into that glorious shop? What are the cups which we drink in, but only his
great benefits and favors through his mere mercy and free liberality bestowed
upon us? When we be baptized we drink of his cup, when we are strengthened by
his divine power against the inward enemy we drink of his cup, when we receive
grace to repent us of our sins, we drink of his cup, and when we pass out of
this life in his love and sorowfulnesse for our sins, we drink also of his cup.
Behold then how this wine is kept, and how the last cup ends with our life,
and our life with the last cup. This grape out of the which this precious wine
came out of, was first formed in Nazareth, borne in Bethelem, brought up in
Palestine, the vintage made on the Mount of Caluary, pressed upon the cross,
where all the blood which ran from the son of God, was turned into wine for
to drink of in his catholic church. It is a common Proverb used by one
friend unto another, that he will give him all that he asks, yea also his
blood; which offer we see made, but fulfilled of none. Why do thou offer
thy friend that thou will shed thy blood for him, if he require it at thy
hands, and afterward if he ask thee any thing, thou turnest thy face from
him? The son of God is none of these certainly, who saying and doing, gave us
his body to eat, and his blood to drink, with the which we were redeemed, and
by the which all the elect are saved. O good Jesus, with what wine do thou
make the soul of thy best beloved drunk, but with the wine of thy precious
blood? Vidi mulierem ebriam, etc, I saw a woman drunk with the blood of the
saints, says S. John in his Apocalips chap. 17, as if he would say, Being in
banishment in the Isle of Pathmos, among other visions which I saw there, I saw
a woman which was drunk, but not with the wine, which was made of grapes, but
with blood which issued out of vains. We see men drunk with wine every day:
for with this kind of drunkenness the good Patriarch Noe was drunk, and the
covetous Nabal, Cornelius, and the proud captain Holofernes. We see men drunk
with anger also every day, and with this kind of drunkenness king Iehu was
drunk when he slew in one day seventy of king Achabs children, and when the
captain Ioab slew the captain Abner. We see many drunk with envy every day,
as Joseph's brethren when they sold him for envy, and the wicked Pharasies which
put Christ to death for envy. We see many drunk with love, as Hemor was with
Dia^ Jacobs daughter, and Jacob with Rachel Labans daughter, and good king
David with his neighbor Bersabe, and young Amon with Tamar his sister. See
then how some are drunk with wine, some with vain love, some with anger, some
with envy, some with the wine of wicked Ambition, the which are so far out
of their wits and senses, that for to better their honor a little, they care
little to lose their credit, and also to damn their souls. We have read of
no drunkards, we have seen no drunkards, nor yet heard of any drunkards, which
have made themselves such only with pure blood: for although barbarous men
love to shed blood, yet they love not to drink it. The catholic church has
no ^ewell comparable unto this, nor no greater riches in her holy shop than the
blood of the Saint of all Saints, and with the which she heals us, when
we are sick, she vpholdeth us when we fall, makes us clean when we
finne, and justifies us when we die. The Apostles were drunk with this
kind of drunkenness, when they said, We must rather obey God than man, and S.
Peter was drunk in this sort, when he said, Let us make three Tabernacles in
this place, and S. Paul when he said, I am not ready only to be bound, but
also to die, and S. Laurence when he said, it is broiled enough, turn it now
and eat of it. The more pure wine S. Steven had drunk of, the more impatiently
he would have felt the stones which he was stoned with, and S. Laurence
the coals, and S. Bartholomew his sword: but after they had entered into this
holy seller, and drunk of this holy blood, he suffered the stones as if they
had been roses, and the coals as if they had been lillies. And therefore the
bride had great reason to commend, and not to be angry with her love, for
bringing her into this divine seller, where she slept without being awaked,
and vvatched and yet sat not up all night, and entered into it without infamy,
and lived with change, and did eat without paying for the shot. O good Jesus, O
the glory of my soul, will thou not let me go into this holy tavern, to
drink there if I lust one drop? Give me leave O good Jesus, give me leave,
because I may know thy grace, and taste of thy precious blood: for of all other
drinks in the world, the more I drink of them, the greater thirst I feel of
all the drops of blood which thou have shed most freely, will thou not give me
one to assuage the thirst of this sinful soul? It is also to be noted, that
the bride does not only boast that her bridegroom did bring her to the tavern
to drink, but did also teach her there the order which she should keep in
loving, in so much that of a plain maid, he taught her to be a curious lover.
This that the bride said, Ordinauit in me charitatem, is worthy of great heed,
seeing that by that the Scripture will let us understand, that there is no love
firm and stable, if there be not an order in the manner of loving. If there be
(says Ovid) an order in fishing, in fouling, fighting, shall there not be also
in loving? And he says further that all which fish love not, nor all which
hunt love not, nor al which fight love not: but al which love, fish, hunt, and
fight, because he fisheth well who fisheth for others good will, and he hunteth
well who hunteth after others bowels, and fights well who fights for
another heart. S. Barnard says, Take heed O my soul, take heed, that that do
not happen unto thee, that happens in vain worldly love, where often those
which love chide, and those disagree which love well, not so much for any
treason which the one has done to the other, as for want of order in loving.
He who is not wise in his love, is not my friend but my enemy, he does not
love me but diffame me. Origin upon these words says, That when there is no
order in love, al ends in disorder: for love ends in hatred, well-willing
in detesting, serving in offending, praising into diffaming, speaking into not
hearing, care into forgetfulness, diligence into sloth, often visiting into
long absence, and sighing into co^plaining. S. August says, O how well the
bride says, he has set charity in me in good order, because that by how much
the more fervent the zeal is, and the spirit vehement, and the love sudden, by
so much the more it is convenient, that he who loves be wise, because that the
zeal may be printed in him, and the spirit moderated in him, and charity set
in order. Anselmus says also. O how well my good Jesus has set charity in
good order in me, when he gives me his holy grace to love our Lord only for
himself, and in himself, and by himself, and gives me also grace to love my
neighbor only for God, and in God, and because he is the house of God. Cyprian
upon the Creed says, He cannot be said with truth, that Ordinauit in me
charitatem, who loves God not because he is good, but because he should give
him Paradise, and he who forsakes sin not because it is naught, but for
fear of hell, and if he love his neighbor it is not because he is a
Christian, but because he is his friend, in so much that such a one would
neither love God, nor his neighbor, but in hope to get some profit by it. This
kind of love the Devil had in the beginning, who when he should have loved
God in God, and for God, loved himself in himself, and for himself; insomuch
that when he went about to climb above himself, he fell lower than himself.
Then God does ordain all things in charity (says Remigius) when he sets
me in the right way, and does lighten me, and when my love begins in him,
continues in him, and ends in him: because that cannot be called true love,
which is not grounded in God for God and by God. Irenaeus in an Homily says, I
will say the^ with the bride that he has ordained charity in me, when he has
set such order to my eyes, that they see no vain thing, and when he stops
my ears that they hear no profane things, and bridle my tongue that he speak
no superfluous things, and shut up my heart that he desire no forbidden thing.
S. Gregory upon Job says, That seeing there is nothing bad but that which our
Lord has forbidden, we dare say boldly, that no man ought to desire that which
is not lawful for him to get. S. Jerome to Priscilla says, O with what
great truth, he may say with the bride, Ordinauit in me charitatem, who
holds himself for a sinner, and others for just, and he who acknowledges a
fault in himself, and preaches innocence in others! for otherwise it should
be no Christian charity, neither is it permitted in the law of God to love
goodness in my neighbor, and retain naughtiness in my self. To come at the
last unto our purpose, who in this life has or shall enter so far into the
shop and storehouse of our Lord, as the mother of our Lord, and that without
spot? No man went so far into the selle^ of our Lord, nor no man drunk off
so many wines as she did, because she left no cup untasted of, neither was
there any grace of the holy ghost, which she was not replenished with. Saint
Ierom^ says, That grace was given unto all other Virgins, by weight and
measure, but unto the mother of God, it was not given by weight and measure,
but heaped up. The Angels in heaven, neither yet the holy men departed did not
reach unto so many secrets of God, as the mother of God did: because it is to
be believed, that he who did trust and credit her, would hide nothing from
her. O mother of my redeemer, tell me what could thou not do, what had
thou not, or what did thou not know when thou had my God in thy womb? O
Virgin blessed and beloved of the Lord, thou may well say, Dilectus meus
mihi, and ego illi, seeing that if he has placed thee in his eternal
storehouse, thou did put him in thy virgins womb, where thou did teach
him to know what it was to be a man, and he taught thee what it was to be
the mother of God. As Jobs sons went sporting themselves from house to house,
so the mother of God and the son of God went from seller to seller recreating
themselves, and the mother told the son what he should have in this world,
and the son told the mother how they should rest in heaven: the which speeches
the holy Orders of heaven were not worthy to hear. O (says S. Barnard) how
content the son of God was of the wineseller, where his mother kept him: for
without comparison he took more pleasure in the chaste cogitations which he
saw in his mothers womb than in the milk which he sucked at her breasts.
Anselmus also says, O what a thing it had been to see in that virgins womb,
the sons life within the mothers life, and the sons body within the
mothers body; and which is most of all, though their bodies were separated the
one from the other at the time of his birth, yet their hearts were never
separated at all.

CHAP. III. Of the first and second word which holy Simeon spoke unto our
Lady: and how many fall from the law of Christ, without his fault.
ECce hic positus est in ruinam, and resurrectionem multorum in Israel, Luke
the second chapter. The great Chronicler S. Luke says, That the first time
that the mother of our Lord went abroad, the mother and Joseph her and were in
a maze, and wondered at that that Simeon said of the child, and of that which
the holy woman Anna Phanuel prophesied of him before them all. S. Cyprian upon
this place says. If the great wonders which Simeon spoke of Jesus the child,
did make the mother ioifull, so likewise they put the Angels in a wonder and
marvel, because they said of him, that he should be the light of the Gentiles,
the glory of the Jews, and the redeemer of all Nations. And Simeon not
contented with that which he had said, although he were very ioifull of that
which he had seen, said further that he desired not to live any longer in
this world but die presently, seeing that he had already seen with his eyes
that which his heart had so long time wished for. It is a natural condition of
the heart which has long wished for any thing, if at any time he has that
before his eyes which he bought with many sighs rather to desire to die, than
to be separated from the same. Origin upon Luke says, That all the praises
which Simeon spoke of the son of God, moved the mother to further love: for
if he said that her son was the light, she knew that she first of all
received light; if he said that her son was honor, she knew that he had
first of all honored her; insomuch that the Virgin did already possess all
that which was promised unto others. S. Augustine says in a Sermon. That
Simeon did very well say, that the child Jesus was the light of the Gentiles,
considering that he brought them unto this holy faith; and that he was the
glory of the Jews, seeing that there never came any one out of their stock
like unto him, which is easily seen in that that for their further honor and
fame, he made of a Synagogue a church, of a figure the truth, of Prophets
Apostles, and of sacrifices Sacraments. It is here to be noted, that Simeon
did not say simply, Thou shall be the glory of the people of Israel, but he
added more and said, thou shall be the glory of thy people of Israel: the
which he said for the wicked and perverse of the Synagogue who although they
were in the people of the Jews, yet they were not of the people of Israel.
Abel, Seth, Noe, Sem, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, and David, and all the Prophets
were of the people of God, of all whom the son of God was the honor and
glory, seeing they believed in him, before that he came into the world, and
were saved in the faith in which they lived. Cain and Cham, Ismael and Esau,
Roboam and Athalia, Iesabel, Annas and Cayphas did all dwell among the people of
God, but they were not of the elect number of the people of God, because that
no man can be called a neighbor of the children of God, but he who believes
steadfastly in God. Let me (says Chrysostom) be of the number of the people of
God, because I may be lightened with thy light, and glorified with thy glory,
seeing that no man can be lightened but whom thou do lighten, nor
glorified, but whom thou do glorify. O how many there be at this day in
the church that be not of the church, and how many in religion, which be not
of the religion! Because that our perfection and salvation does not consist in
the names we bear, nor in the places we have, but in the good or evil lives
which we lead. What does it avail me to be called a Christian, if I lead the
life of a Pagan, or what does it help me to be called a religious man if I
live like a worldling? As the son of God came into the world not to the
honor of those which were in the people, but of those which were of the
people, so thou my brother should be of the number of the religious, and
not in the number: for otherwise thou shall be as Saul was among the Prophets,
and as Satan was amongst the children of God. Origin says, That when Simeon
did divide Christ's gifts, he gave light unto the church: saying, Lumen ad
reuelationem gentium, A light to the revelation of the Gentiles: and he gave
the Jews honor and glory, saying, Ad gloriam plebis tuae Israel, which honor
and glory they deserved to lose when they went about by all the means they
could to dishonor the son of God upon the cross. The son of God gave great
honor and glory unto the Synagogue, if the Jews could have known it; and that
is, in that he vouchsafed to descend of them, and be borne amongst them, and
in that he would converse among them, and preach among them, and do so many
miracles to the^: but because they knew him not, nor were not grateful unto
him for it, all that glory and fame is turned into their dishonor and infamy.
The light which happened unto the Gentiles, of which our holy mother the church
is descended, was never taken from them, as the honor was taken from the
sorrowful Jews: for since that the holy Ghost was sent upon the holy
Apostles, we never saw the church of God err nor go astray. O what inspeakable
joy the mother of God received at that time, when she saw her precious son
presented unto the temple, offered to holy Simeon, praised of Anna the
Prophetess, and the usual offering offered up for him! His mother reioiced
much to have him in her arms, to look on him with her eyes, to give him suck
with her breasts, to offer sacrifices for him, and to hear those marvelous
things which the old men spoke of him. The Virgin then being very ioifull to
hear Simeon, and much more of that which she saw in her son, the good old
Simeon turned himself unto our Lady, and did behold her saying, Ecce hic
positus est in ruinam, as if he would say, I have often told thee, my
daughter, that this my Lord and thy son should be the light of the Gentiles,
and the glory of the Jews: but now I tell thee also, that he shall be a
stumbling block for many to fall by, and a help for many to rise by again,
and he shall be as it were the white in a butt, which very many shall shoot
at, but few at all hit. David in his Psalm spoke of Christ, that which was
not unlike unto that that Simeon spoke of Christ; that is, Cadent in retitulo
eius omnes peceatores, as if he would say, All the sinners of the world shall
fall into his nets, my self excepted who am saved by special privilege. And
it is much to be noted, that the Prophet does not say, that there is not any
one constrained to fall into the net, but they will fall into it of their own
voluntary will, and entangle themselves; and so we may say that there is no
fault of the masters net, if he making and arming his net to take fish, yet
men will fall, into it. Neither did Simeon say, when he spoke of Christ, that
he should be the fall of many; but he said, Positus est in ruinam, Because
there is very great difference if I make you fall, although you would not
fall, or to fall or stumble on me without my making you fall. Remigius upon S.
Luke says, That notwithstanding that David does say that all sinners shall fall
into his net, and that Simeon does say that he is put a stumbling block, I
say that notwithstanding all this, we should bear false witness against the
son of God, if we should say that he has been the cause that any man has
fallen from the faith: for it cannot be spoken of the self same person, that
he is come to redeem us, and that he is the cause of our damnation. If I make
a bridge over the which all men may go over a strong and a dangerous river,
what fault am I in, if you cast your self down from it into the river, seeing
that I made it to the end that you might go over safely, and you would needs
throw your selves headlong into the water? When the sun does cast his
morning beams over all the world, what fault is he in, if through his heat and
brightness the dirt be hardened, and wax made soft? If there be a stone put
to pass over a quagmire or durtie place, and you fall and beray your self,
what fault is the stone in, seeing that you could not stand upon it? The son
of God was nothing else in this world, but a bridge for us to pass over, and a
sun with the which we should have lightened our selves, and a stone upon
which we should tread on, and a sword with the which we should have defended
our selves: and shall he then be in any fault, if we turn that into poison,
which he gave us for triacle? Cassiodorus upon the Psalm says, That all the
sinners of the earth shall fall into his net without any fault at al in the son
of God: for seeing he came into the world, preached unto the world, amended the
world, taught the world, and redeemed the world, what fault is there in him, if
a man damn himself, considering that he will not keep the law which is
given him by God? Christ's holy law is not an occasion for us to fall, nor
suspicious to be believed in, nor obscure to be understood, nor hard to be
kept, in so much that the danger is not in that which he commands us, but in
that that we do disobey his commandment. Then when old Simeon does say of
Jesus the child, that he is put for a stumbling block unto many, he will not
say that the son of God should be a cause that many should be cast away in
his church, but that many would fall from his holy law, and especially more
perfideous Jews than of others, who when they should have been blowers abroad
of his holy doctrine, were hangmen of his holy life. Saint Augustine says,
That all Gentiles have fallen into his net which know him not, all Jews by
not receiving him, all Tyrants by persecuting his Martyrs, all Heretics by
falsifieng scriptures, and all naughty men fall daily by blaspheming his name.
Of the same flowr that the Be gathers honny, the spider makes poison:
rattes bane to poison with, and triacle to help men with, is made of the same
thing: the rose which smells sweet, and the adder which biteth deadly, is
often bred in the same bush, and of the same wood men do often cut timber to
cover a church, and to make a gibbet. Good judgments by these examples may
easily perceive that which I have said to be true without further trial.
What fault may be imputed unto the son of God if of the same holy law the
Jew gather poison, and the Christian honny; the infidel gathers gall, and
the faithful man honny, the naughty man adders, the good man roses, the just
man finds a church to save him in, and the tyrant makes a gallows to damn
himself on. It is also to be noted, that sinners will fall not into a net,
but they will fall into reticulo a small net: for if we will well look unto it,
Christ has put before us more reasons to save our selves, than the Devil has
set occasions before us to damn us. They are but small nets which the devil
does set before us to fall into, but they are very great and large nets, which
God puts to catch us; but yet alas if there fall ten into Christ's net,
there fall ten thousand into the devils small net. Cyrillus upon S. John
says, That according unto the prophecy of Simeon and of Daniell, the son of
God came for the fall of the Babilonians, Egyptians, Chaldeans, Persians and
Medes, Greeks and those of Palestine, because the law of the Gospel has been
preached and received in those places. Chrysostom says, That the son of God
came to take flesh for the fall of the Temple of Solomon, the city of
Jerusalem, the sacrifices of Judah, the ceremonies of Israel, and of the old
Mosaicall law, and of the pride of all the Synagogue, which was all ended and
gave up the ghost with this word, Consummatum est. The son of God came into
the world for the overthrow of all sins: for if he was, as he was, the
truth it self, he was a great enemy of lies, and because he highly loved
charity he hated cruelty, and because he highly commended humility, he
persecuted envy, which was the cause that no man did ever reprehend vice more
sharplier than he, nor no man did ever extol virtue like unto him. The son
of God came into the world, to the utter ruin of the famous city of
Jerusalem, seeing there was not one tower in the city which was not
thrown down, no wall which was not broken, no house which was not barnt,
no Temple which was not beaten to the ground, no treasury which was not
robbed, nor orchard which was not spoiled, no Virgin which was not
violated, no woman which was not forced, no man which was not either slain or
taken captive. The son of God came into the world for the overthrow of the
Synagogue, seeing he left them no kingdom whither to go unto, no city where
to dwell, no king to rule them, no Patriarch to honor, no Prophet to give them
counsel, no army to defend them, no captain to fight for them. The soune of
God came into the world in ruinam the overthrow of the Pharisees and Sadduces,
considering that he took away their hypocrisy from the^ by which they
prevailed, their authority by which they commanded, their doctrine with which
they deceived, their covetousness with the which they robbed, and their Symony
with the which they made themselves rich.

CHAP. IIII. Of the third word which old Simeon spoke unto the Virgin in the
Temple: and of three authorities touching this purpose.
IN resurrectionem multorum in Israel, and in signum cui contradicetur, said
holy Simeon unto the blessed Virgin, that day when she presented the child
Jesus in the Temple: as if he would say, I have told thee my daughter Mary,
how this thy son and my Lord shall be a stumbling block to many, and an
occasion that many which are fallen shall rise again, and many which go
astray converted, and he shall be a mark and a sign which shall be spoken
against by many. Origin says, That it does well appear, that holy Simeon spoke
by the mouth of the holy Ghost, when he said that the son of God was come into
the world, not only for all naughty and wicked men to stumble at, but also
because that al goodness and good men should be raised up by him, because it
is the duty of a good Physician not only to purge the humor which offends,
but also to strengthen it. What fruit should we receive by his coming into the
world, if he should only throw down the wicked, and not raise up the good?
When our Lord says by Jeremy, Consolabor me de inimicis meis, he would with a
far better will forgive us, rather tha^ punish us: but because all that is in
God, is God himself, he cannot do less than use his justice, giving
notwithstanding always place unto his mercy. When he says, Woe be unto me,
vvoe be unto me, I must revenge me of my enemies, what can be spoken with a
more tender heart, or what justice can be done with greater mercy, seeing
that he first weepeth for the sinner before he punish the sin, and first
shed many tears, before he show discipline upon the malefactors? In the
judgment seat of vvorldly judges, they punish sins without justice, and then
mock at the sinners: but in the house of God they first weep for the
sinners, and then they punish the sin, because there is nothing more strange
to God than revenge, nor nothing more grateful unto him than mercy. Perditio
tua ex te Israel, ex me autem saluatio, said God by the Prophet osee: as if he
would say, O what pains I take with thee, O Israel! for if thou lose thy
way, I put thee into it again, if thou stumble I hold thee up, if thou see not
I direct thee, if thou fall I lift thee up, if thou defile thy self I make
thee clean, if thou be blind I give thee light, if thou doubt I counsel
thee. This speech of the Prophet is worthy to be noted and also wept, and to
be bewailed with many tears, seeing that he tells us and admonishes us
by it, how little we are able to do of our selves, how little we are worth,
how little we possess, how little we know, seeing that it is in our own
power to fall, but we are not able to rise without the help of God. Thou
say very well O great Simeon, that the soune of God is come In
resurrectionem multorum: for after we are fallen and defiled, if he do not
give us his hand, who is able to lift us from the ground? What had become of
the people of Israel when they were captive in Egypt, if our Lord had not
delivered them from thence with his mighty hand? What would have become of
good King David when he slew innocent Vrias, and committed adultery with his
wife Bersabee, if God had not given him counsel by the mouth of the Prophet
Nathan, and lightened his heart? What had become of king Ezechias when our Lord
condemned him to death, and that unto a sudden death, if our Lord had not
visited him by the hands of the Prophet Esaias, and accepted his tears? What had
become of the Apostle Saint Peter, when he denied Christ three times, if our
Lord when he was tied to a pillar had not looked upon him, and provoked him to
tears? What had become of S. Paul when he went to the city of Damasco to
apprehend all such which called upon the name of Christ, if our Lord had not
spoken unto him by the way, and of Saul would not have made him Paul, and of a
persecutor of Christ had not made him a preacher of the Gospel? What would
become of thee and me, and of all the sinners of the world, if good Jesus
should not give us light, because we should not stumble, and give us his hand
to rise again? S. Barnard to this purpose says, It may be said better of me
than of any, O my good Jesus, That thy perdition is of thy self Israel, and
thy salvation of me. For if I hit aright in any thing, it is only through thy
grace, and if I err it is through my own malice: and therefore my own sin
is able to make me fall, but to rise again I have need of thy mercy. Anselmus
in his Meditations says, What greater weakness of maine can there be, or
what greater mishap, than that if I defile my self, I cannot make my self
clean again, if I be sick I cannot make my self whole again, if I ray my
self I cannot wash my self again, yea and if I sin I cannot repent of my
self; if our Lord do not first give me his light, as he did the good thief
on the cross, and if he do not first look upon me, as he did look upon
S. Peter, from the pillar. Heal me good Lord, and I shall be made whole,
Save me and I shall be saved, says king David, as if he would say, No man is
able to heal me O my good Lord, if thou do it not, nor no man is able to
save me, if thou do not save me, O my redeemer, because no man knows my
wound but thou, nor my felicity consists in none but in thee. Cassiodorus
upon the Psalm says, That we should note how that the Prophet does first ask
of our Lord that he would make him whole before he save him: for if our Lord
do not first wash the fault from us, it is in vain to think that he should
give us his glory. S. Basil upon this place, Sana me domine says, That if thou
do not go with me, nor I with thee, the more I go about to heal my self,
the sicker I grow, when I think to go forward I turn backward, when I
imagine that I go straight, then I find my self most out of the way, when I
labor to go most clean and neat, I find my self then most of all unclean:
and that which is the worst of all is, that I know not wherein I do best,
nor cannot guess when I do amiss. Anselmus upon the same place, Heal me
good Lord, and I shall be whole, says: Who but thou O my sweet Jesus, can
cure me, and give me any temedy, to such hidden wounds, and such manifest
offenses, to faults of such quality as mine are, to such careless care, such
unclean thoughts, such wicked crimes, such damnable bowels, and such
inconsiderate speeches? Heal me good Lord, and I shall be made whole: for
it avails me very little, to use help and not be made whole, to fight and
kill my self, to swim and drown my self, (...) to study and not profit,
to take a journey and never come to the end, to ask and never have any thing
given me, to serve and never deserve any thing. Heal me good Lord, and I
shall be made whole of the pride which overthrows me, of the envy which
rotteth in me, of the anger which vvasteth me, of the gluttony which
disquieteth me, of sloth which dulleth me, of covetousness which makes me
cruel, and of all sensuality which never leaves me. Heal me Lord, and I
shall be free, from the world which deceives me, from the devil which
tempts me, from the flesh which pampereth me, from my enemies which
persecute me, from my friends which importune me, from my evil thoughts which
torment me, and from malicious men which diffame me. Heal me good Lord, and I
shall be healed, not of a scab but of a sin, not of blindness but of filthiness,
not of the members of my body, but of my thoughts, not of my body but
wickedness, not of swollen feet, but of disordinate appetites. Heal me Lord,
and I shall be healed, of my unruly desires, of the wantonness of my eyes, of
my overmuch speaking, of the coldness of my works, of the stealth of my hands,
of the malice of my thoughts, and of the worm of my covetousness. O good Jesus,
my only trust, heal my soul, because I have offended thee in thought, I have
offended thee in delight, I have offended thee in omission. I have offended
thee in consent, and I have offended thee in deed, and therefore unto thee my
fault I confess, and therefore good Jesus take pity upon me. Sprinckle me with
isope, and I shall be made clean, Lauabis me and super niue^ dealbabor says the
Psalmist, as if he would say, When it shall please thee, and when thy son shall
come into the world, thou shall sprinckle me with holy Isope, and wash me with
thy precious hand, by which sprinckling and washing I shall not only be clean
and without fault, but I shall remain whiter than all the snow of the highest
mountains. Who is he (says Aymon) who commands us to wash our selves, but
only the eternal father, and who is he who washes us, but only his precious
son, and with what does he wash us, but with his holy blood, and who be those
which he does wash, but such as are of his holy church? O glorious Isope, and
happy washing place, in the which the Angels if they had license to come down,
and the heavenly powers if they durst, would wash themselves in? There were
many rivers in Samaria, but Naaman was healed in none but in the river of
Jordan: there were many cesterns and pooles in Jerusalem, but the diseased were
helped only in the Probatica. There were many fountains in Palestine, but
David could never slacke^ his thirst, but in the fountain of Bethelem. We will
infer of all this, that there has been very much blood shed in the world,
but none could ever make us clean, but only the blood of Christ. All water
washes not, every fish poole makes not clean, every fountain fills not,
neither does all blood make whole: a beasts blood hurts, man's blood defiles,
but the blood of Christ does make whole, does wash, does fill, and content. If
we look curiously into the Scripture, and especially into the Apocalips, thou
shall find it to be true, that S. John did not see any Saint of heaven wash
himself in the water which did run in the river, but only in the blood which
did run from the lamb. O of what great virtue this holy blood is of, seeing
that for to wash us and bath us in it we need no great quantity, but a very
small deal! which is easily seen in that the Prophet does not ask, that he
would make him a pole of blood to wash him in, but that it would please him to
sprinckle him with a little Isope dipped in it. A very little is sufficient, O
my good Jesus, and it suffices to be sprinkled with it, and not washed,
seeing that one drop of thy precious blood, suffices to fill thy glory with
many, and to people thy church with many good men. It is much to be noted, that
he uses this word Sprinckle me with Isope, and I shall be made clean: for by
casting water with Isope, one drop falls here, and another there, this man is
wet with it, and that man is dry: even so it falls out in the bestowing of
Christ's holy blood: for although it were shed for all the world, yet
notwithstanding it was not employed upon all men. The blood of the son of God
is sprinkled with Isope, seeing that the Christian is saved with it, and the
Pagan condemned, the inst is made clean, and the naughty man continues
unclean, the virtuous man is bedewed with it, and the vicious man remains
dry, and that which is more to be lamented, some do there wash away their
offenses, and some have not one drop of it. The Priest in the Leuiticall law
did cleanse such as were infected with a leprosy if they came unto him, and if
they brought those things which the law prescribed, and if they were sprinkled
seven times with the blood of the bird: but if they refused to do any of these
things, the Priest was in no fault, and their uncleanness was imputed unto
themselves. The High priest the son of God, did die for all men, and shed his
blood for all men: but if thou Infidel or Heretic, wilt not enter into the
Catholic church, if thou sinner or naughty man wilt at the time, when it is
distributed turn thy face from it, what fault is in Christ if his precious
blood work no virtue in thee? O how happy that soul is, upon whom there
falls one drop not of the blood which the priest sprinkled, but this
precious blood which the son of God sheddeth! for being washed in so deep a
poolshe will go beyond the snow in whitenes, and exceed the son in clearnes. It
is time now for us to come unto our first purpose, and apply all this unto that
which holy Simeon spoke of Christ. When Simeon says of Christ, that he is put
to help up many, and when the Prophet says O Israel thy perdition comes of
thy self, and thy salvation of me, and when David says, Heal me Lord and I
shall be made whole, and on the other side Sprinckle me Lord with Isope, and I
shall be made clean, he lets us understand plainly, that if we be not
made clean by the mighty hand of the son of God, no man else has the power to
do it. Wherefore says Irenaeus did the redeemer of the world come into the
world, but because wickedness and wicked men should fall down, and because
virtue and virtuous men should rise? By his coming into the world, idolatry
fell down, and the true faith was set up; Hypocrisy was beaten down, and
truth lifted up; tyranny fell down, and justice lifted up; malice fell down,
and innocence lifted up; reuengement fell down, and mercy lifted up. If thou
do come into the world (says Vbertinus) because that all naughtiness and
naughty men should fall, who in all the world is so wicked as my self, or who
fallen so low? What greater fall than to be fallen from thy grace? Come the^
sweet Jesus, come to the lifting up of my virtues, and come to the fall of my
vices: for if thou do not make my vices first to fall, my virtues can never
rise. Note (says Remigius) that Simeon first said of Christ, that he was come
in ruinam, before he said that he was in resurrectionem, because it is
impossible that humility should rise in me before that my pride be
overthrown, neither can patience rise in me, if my anger first fall not,
neither my abstinence rise in me, before my gluttony fall, and therefore I must
first suffer my self to die, and the^ I shall rise again with Christ,
Chrysostom says, That in the house of God, there is never no rising of
virtues, if there be not first in her a fall of vices: whereof it follows,
that if thou will have wholesome virtues to grow in thee, thou must first of
necessity pull all superfluous passions out of thee. S. Barnard says, That the
son of God came into the world for the fall and rising of many, seeing that
pride fell with his humility, covetousness with his poverty, anger with his
patience, the flesh with his chastity, gluttony with his abstinence, and also
ignorance fell with his doctrine. Chrysostom. says, That the son of God came
into the world, in ruinam and resurrectione^, when the proud man becomes
humble, the covetous man pitiful, the furious man meek, the carnal man chaste,
the gluttonous abstinent, and the cold man devout, in so much that there is in
the same man a fall of vices, and a rising of virtues.

CHAP. V. How Solomon did inherit the kingdom of his father David's pleasures:
and how Christ did inherit the kingdom of trauails.
IN tuam ipsius animam doloris gladius pertransibit, Luke 2. These be the
words which Simeon used to the holy Virgin, as if he would say, I have told
thee Mary what shall happen unto this thy son: I will tell thee now what shall
fall unto thy self, that is, that the same sword shall end his life, and
pierce thy soul. What thing more strange, or what more grievous news can be
told a holy and virtuous woman, than to tell her from God that her sons sword
shall part her heart in two? Abraham took a knife for his son Isaac, but he
killed him not. Balaam met with an Angel which had a knife, but he stroke him
not: Iosue saw another Angel with a drawn sword, but he did not set upon him,
and Salamon took a knife to cut a child in two, but in the end he did not part
him in two. What means this mother of God, what means this? Abraham's knife
did not hurt his son, and thy sons sword wounds thy heart. Balaam did not
hurt his Ass with his sword, and does not thy sons sword favor thy heart?
Iosue his sword does offer and threaten but hurts not, and does thy sons
sword wound but not threaten? Had Salamons knife pity on the strumpets child,
and had not thy sons knife pity on his own mother? He placed a Cherubin
before Paradise, and a fiery sword to keep the way of the tree, says the holy
Scripture in the fourth chapter of Genesis. After that our first Parents had
transgressed the commandment of God, our Lord put there presently a fiery
sword to keep Paradise, because no man should enter in, to eat of the tree
which was forbidden. S. Augustine upon this place says, That there was neither
sword nor knife in the house of God, before that man knew what sin was, but
at the same hour that he fell from grace to sin, our Lord put both sword and
gibbet in his house. Before that man sinned, there was no door to shut in the
house of god, nor Cherubin to watchit, nor sword to defend it: but immediately
after man sinned, the gate was shut, and the key was lost. What is the sword
which we speak of here, but only the son of God in whom we believe? The
son of God is called a sword in the Apocalips, and a sword which cutteth on
both sides, because he alone and no other punishes the bad and defends the
good, kills those which are alive, and raises those which are dead. It was
in the hands of the Cherubine to let us enter in or not, into the terrestrial
Paradise: and it is in the hands of the son of God, whether we shall enter
into the celestial Paradise or not. We have a greater and a better watch in
our Paradise, than Adam had in his, because that the Cherubin did but stand at
the gate, but the son of God is the gate it self. When he said I am the
gate, what did he mean else, but that he was the key with the which we should
open, he was the gate through the which we should enter in, and he the guide
which should direct us, and he the Paradise which we should enjoy. It is also
to be noted that the sword with the which the Cherubin kept Paradise, was
neither of silver nor gold, nor iron, but was of pure fire, which is a new and
an unusual thing which no man would believe if it were not in Scripture. It is
a thing often tried for iron to have fire in it, and for iron to be in fire:
but that a fire should be called a sword, is never read but of that sword
which kept Paradise. To apply the^ the figure unto the thing figured, al me^
are as it were iron ouercast with rust, that is, fallen into original sin,
or actual great or small, the sword of the living God excepted, in vvho^ there
was never found any sin, nor the rust of any fault, but was always like unto a
sword of fire, made in the forge of the holy Ghost. What was the sword which
kept Paradise but only Jesus which suffered on the cross? When thou did
say. O my sweet Jesus, I come to put fire on the earth, art not thou happily
all fire, seeing that thou do come to put all the world on fire? O how much
better the sword is which the church has, than that which the synagogue
used! Because her sword did let no man enter into Paradise, but ours does open
the gates unto us. What shall I say more, but that her sword was of fire,
which did burn, and ours is but of Love which gives comfort? O sword of holy
love, my sweet Jesus, how happy I should be if I were dead with thy knife,
because that that killing should be a rising from death, that bowelling of me
a letting of blood, my end a new beginning, and my dying a living. Our Lords
mercy is such, that he says not, Ego mortifico, but he says I do give life:
nor he says not I will strike, but he says I will make whole, in so much,
that if he kill us it is to raise us to life again and if he^ wound us it is
to make us whole again. Then our Lord does mortify us, when he kills our
inclinations in us, and the^ we are stricken with his hand, when we are punished
with his great mercy, and like a good surgeon he never seareth the quick
flesh, but the rotten member which infecteth the rest. And because Simeon
says, that the dolours and the sword of her son went through the mothers
heart, it is expedient for us to stay somewhat in declaring the greifes which
Christ suffered, because that thereby we shall know them, which he imparted
unto his mother. Cum esset David in spelumca^ Obdollam, conuenernat ad eum
omnes qui erant in angustia, and oppressi aere alieno, says the Scripture 1.
Reg. 22. as if he would say, When king David hid himself in the den of
Obdolla, there came unto him all such as were banished by the order of justice,
or fled for debts; of all which sorrowful David was the Prince and captain,
for of all the afflicted he was the most afflicted. This is a high figure, and
deep mystery, worthy of great consideration, because in it is figured very
much by David, and namely the great griefs which Christ endured. O that it
were far better for me poor sinner which write this, that my soul did taste
of them, than for my fingers to write them! Because that the doctrine which the
son of God teaches is of that quality, that although it be very good to
preach it, yet it is far better to follow it. There were many figures of
Christ in the old law, but none so lively as David was: in proof whereof, they
did not call Christ the son of Adam, nor the son of Moses, but the son
of David, partly because he was of his princely Tribe, partly because he was
not so lively figured in any as in him. God said unto David by special
privilege, I have found a man according unto my own heart, and the Father said
of Christ only, this is my well-beloved son, in so much, that that love which
God bare in times past unto David, was figured afterward in the love which he
bare to his dear beloved son. David was also a figure of the son of God in
that, that as David was persecuted by his master the king of Israel without
cause, even so Christ was persecuted of the Israelites, not having offended
them at all: insomuch that if Saul did persecute David of pure envy, the Jews
did persecute Christ of pure malice. David was also a figure of Christ in the
den of Obdollam, where if Christ had been, David had never been the captain
and prince of all the afflicted, and banished men, but the son of God had been
their ringleader, as having endured more grief and vexation than all they,
because he did exceed all heathenish gods in power, and all the Angels in
merit, and all the Martyrs in suffering. King David was badly handeled by his
brothers defied and challenged by Golias, banished by Saul, skoffed at by
Michol, stoned by Simei, persecuted by Absalon, robbed by the Amalechites,
vvarred by the Philistims, watched by the Ceilitas, and iniuried by the
Ammonites. But notwithstanding, that king David suffered many griefs and
troubles, yet they may be numbered. But what shall we say of those which good
Jesus endured, which were so many in number, that no man is able to reckon
them, nor yet at all follow them? Being a verified matter that king David had
ten kinds of people which did persecute him, and that he had twelve tribes
or kingdoms which did obey him, it is now to be known who was his son who
inherited his kingdoms, and who was his son who succeeded him in all
vexations and griefs. Solomon son unto Bersabee and David, succeeded him in
the inheritance of his twelve kingdoms, with whom his father left him no
wars to maintain, no enemies to resist him, no succeeds to contend with him,
no factions to pacify, nor debts to pay. What did not the good old man leave
his son, considering that he left him al his kingdoms in peace, and great
treasures laid up for him? But when forgetful Solomon saw that his father,
had left him great store of wealth and no vvarres, he bestowed all that in
vices which he should have bestowed against his enemies. King Solomon
inherited kingdoms and vices, vices and kingdoms, seeing he had threescore
Queens crowned to his wives, and seven hundred concubines. Solomon did
inherit vices and all other daintiness, seeing he himself does commend
himself, that his eyes coueted nothing which was denied him, nor his heart
desired nothing which he did not obtain; in so much that he did not live
according unto that which reason did prescribe him, but according unto that the
flesh did lead him unto. He waste his fathers treasures, which he did
inherit, in building stately houses to dwell in, and strong castles to retire
himself unto, large orchards to recreate himself in, great pooles to fish in,
cunning musicians to sing to him, sweet instruments to play upon, and nimble
young maids to dance in his hall. King Solomon did inherit great peace and
concord from his father David, considering that in fifty years which he
reigned, he was never challenged by any king, he never saw enemy in his
kingdom, he never placed army in field, there never went banner out of his
palace, never captain had pay of him, no drum ever brake his sleep. Solomon
did inherit great riches from his father, seeing that he covered the Temples
with gold, he inherited great power, seeing that all the kings of the earth did
serve him, he inherited great wisdom, seeing he never erred in matter of
justice, he inherited e^xceeding great knowledge, seeing that men came to see
him as a miracle. Solomon did inherit from his father more delights and
dainties than kingdoms, seeing it is not read, that ever he was sick, that
ever he endured any necessity, that any enmity did disquiet him, that any
persecution did afflict him, that any grief did trouble him, that any king
durst offend him, that any kingdom rebelled against him, or subject disobeied
him. To conclude, we say that David's successor in his kingdoms was his son
Solomon, whom by excellency they called the rich, the wise, and quiet,
because that in all his life time, he never put hand to sword, nor never shed
man's blood. Now that we have told you who succeeded David in his delights and
kingdoms, it is also needful that we prove unto you who was his son which
succeeded him in his injuries and greifes: for seeing we have reioiced with
the prosperous, it is reason that we suffer somewhat with the afflicted. David
was twice made a Prince, once in the city of Ebron, where he was anointed
king of the twelve Tribes, and secondly in the den of Obdollam where he was
made chief of those which were in tribulation: and from hence it grows, that
when the time came when he should divide these two kingdoms betwixt his two
sons, he gave Solomon his rich and flourishing kingdom, and Jesus Christ his
poor afflicted one. Our Lord will give him his father David's seat, said the
Angel unto the Virgin, as if he would say, Thou art to understand O high
Virgin, that the pledge and dowry which the eternal father will give his
eternal son, shall be the seat of his old father David, the seat I say, not
of judgment, but to be judged, nor the seat of commanding, but of obeying, not
of weal but of woe, not of honor but of poverty, not of pleasure but of
pain. O how the Iudaical nation was deceived in thinking that Christ's kingdom
should be a temporal kingdom, and that he should deliver them out of their
captivity! For seeing that he inherited but one seat of his father David, how
was it possible that he should deliver the synagogue by force of arms? If the
Messiah promised in the old law, should be David's son, and rich and mighty,
why did they not receive king Solomon for their Messiah, seeing that he
inherited from his father arms to deliver them, power to defend them, treasure
to enrich them, and great wisdom to govern them? How is it possible that the
son of God who inherited nothing of David but a poor seat, should make war
unto any, and deliver them from servitude? The son of God succeeded his
father David in the seat of obedience, which he had with those who obeyed him,
in the seat of charity which he had with the diseased, in the seat of mercy
which he had with the afflicted, the seat of humility which he had with the
proud, and the seat of patience which he had among the ouertrauelled. Christ
did only inherit the principality of the afflicted and comfortless, and was
content withal with it, seeing that he was banished by Herod, sold by Iuda^,
denied by Saint Peter, accused of the Jews, and sentence given on him by
Pilate, and mocked of his servants. If all the troubles and vexations of the
world should be put on one heap, and those which Christ alone suffered on
another, all men would give him the prime, and to none of the rest, because
that of all other men be they never so holy, there is no man that feels more
than his own grief and pain; but the son of God did feel his own, and
those of his elect. When the Apostle says that the son of God, Factus est
omnia nobis, is made all things for us, what else does he say, but that he
does suffer with him who suffers, weepeth with him who weepeth, and dies
with him who dies? Because he is the father of us al, he feels all our
griefs, and because we cost him much he is grieved that we suffer much; and
therefore being a Prince and a captain of the afflicted, he does help us to
weep our greif^, and remedy the excess. For he says in his Sermon, Ve^ite and
m^ omnes qui laboratis and ^nerati estis, and ego reficiam vas: as if he would
say, Come unto me al you which are laden and I will unlade you, and come unto
^ee all you which labor, and I will comfort you. O glorious captain, and
happy proclamation which Christ makes throughout the world, seeing that he
binds himself to unload those which are burdened, comfort those which are
afflicted, turn to those which are persecuted, refresh those which are hungry,
lift up those which are trodden down, and b^e a father of all which be father
less. If such as were in tribulation and necessity, and fled unto king David
were sad and sorrowful, sad and sorrowful they returned again, if they were
banished, banished they returned again, if they were in debt, indebted they
returned again, and if they were discontent, discontented they returned, in so
much that good king David could neither comfort them, nor relieve them. He who
is persecuted with Jesus cannot for a certain say so, nor he who is banished
with our banished Lord, because none comes unto him comfortless who
returns not comforted, nor no man comes unto him indebted, whose debt he
paieth nor. O this, this is a happy calling, Come you unto me al you which are
laden, seeing that the son of God does let us understand thereby, that he has
a school for the ignorant, an exchange for the needy, an hospital for the
diseased, a tower for such as are fled, a pantry for the hungry, and a safe
conduct for the banished. S. Barnard says, The God of all creatures, and the
Lord of the heavenly gouernements is the true Physician of my griefs and
sorrows, because all other men have power only to hear the^, but no skill to
remedy them. Irenaeus says, If I be a cold, he who wishes me well, can bring
me to the fire, if I be hungry, give me a little bread, if I be thirsty give
me a cup of water, if I be naked give me a shirt, but if my soul be sad
and comfortless, what comfort can he give me, but only bid me have patience?
S. Augustine to the Hermites says, He who will comfort the soul, ought to be
in the soul, and he who will remedy the heart should dwell in the heart, but
because no man has his abiding there but only the son of the living God, of
him and of no other our remedy and ease must proceed. Cicero in an Epistle
says, O how he is deceived which says and thinks, that the griefs of the
heart are lenified and eased by seeing fair meddowes, vvalking by fresh
rivers, eating dainty meats, hearing pleasant music? For all these things can
but suspend my griefs for an hour or two, but they cannot root them out, and
much less remedy them. Tell me I pray thee, how can the instruments which
found in my ears, remedy my griefs which are enclosed in my bowels? How can
the pleasures and ioies which my eyes receive in beholding meddowes and
forests, give ease to my pains which lie in my bones? What does dainty fair
mitigate the anxiety of mind? What comfort can an a^^licted mind take, if they
give him no other remedy but bid him have patience? What cares my sorrowful
heart for my friends words, if when they are gone from me, my sorrows
remain? Seeing that all the pleasures and ioies of the world reach no further
than unto the five senses, it is a certain thing, that as pleasures are seated
in those senses, so likewise griefs are rooted in the heart. Plato says, That
griefs and delights are great enemies, and that they dwell far one from
another, and thereupon it happens, that there is no delight and pleasure
which ent^reth into the inward part of the heart, nor no grief which comes
out further than the heart. Cassiodorus says, That as we seek for an expert
Pilote to sail with, and a skillful Physician to cure us with, so for to
comfort our griefs and heaviness, we should seek out cunning men in them,
because that no man can take more pity on another, than he who has been
wearied and iniuried by suffering. When the son of God came into the world, he
came not to learn to read, nor to write, nor to swim, nor to preach: for all
this is but dross and mire in comparison of that which he knew before he
came into the world. That which he came hither to learn by experience, was
that which he knew before only by science, that is, to accustom himself to
suffer corporal passions and vexations, because he might have the more
compassion upon the afflicted. Chrysostom says, That the son of God came to
traffic in this world like unto a rich and wealthy merchant, that is, by
carrying to heaven that which there wanted, and by bringing from thence that
which wanted here: for there there wanted me^, and therefore took some thither
with him, and here there wanted merits, and therefore left store behind him.
The son of God came into the world, because there wanted men in heaven, to
enjoy his glory, and because we wanted grace to deserve it, and so we gave him
humane flesh to suffer with, and he gave us his holy grace whereby we might
merit. O holy and glorious exchange, seeing that he changed with us, quietness
for travel, innocence for infamy, spirit for flesh, life for death, and glory
for pain^^ Now that (...) have declared how the son of God came into the
world to learn vexations and troubles, the better to have compassion on them
in others, it is convenient that we declare now, how that the mother of God
did inherit her sons sword of sorrows, as he did inherit his father David's
seat of griefs and trauails.

CHAP. VI. Of the sword of grief which killed the son of God, and went
through his blessed mother.
ETtuam ipsius animam doloris gladius pertransibit, said Simeon to the Virgin
in the second chapter of S. Luke: as if he would say, The sword of the passion
of this thy son, shall be so cruel, O high Virgin, that at one stroke it
shall take his life from him, and pierce thy soul. The like prophecy was never
heard of in times past, nor read in any book, nor any so sorrowful a
prophecy ever spoken of, as this was which the Virgin newly delivered hears
this day, which the good old Simeon utters unto her: for what says the
prophecy, but that at one time, in the selfsame day, in the same hour, and
with the selfsame sword, they will do justice upon the sons flesh, and upon
the mothers bowels? There are found swords commonly to cut off a theefes ear,
to behead a murderer, to quarter a traitor, to cut a blasphemous tongue, but a
sword that can pierce the soul, and mind, there is no other to be found, but
this sword of Christ's. The sword which Cain killed his brother with, the sword
which Moses killed the Egyptian with, and the sword which king David slew the
Philistime with, and Helias sword with the which he slew the Idolaters, and
Phi^^es sword with the which he slew the Ammonites, did all wound the body, but
alas Simeons sword bruised the flesh of the son, and did not favor the bowels
of the mother. Vbertinus notes, that Simeon does not say, that a sword of
sorrow shall strike thee, but Pertransibit, that is, that that sword will not
be content only to wound, but as it were with a mortal thrust shall pierce
thy blessed soul, from one side unto the other. And then that deadly sword
peirced her from one side unto the other, when all the sorrows and griefs
which the sons flesh endured did load the heart of the dolorous mother with
grief. The words of Auegratia plena which the Angel used, and those which
Simeon spoke, doloris gladius pertransibit went together, and were of equal
force: for even as the Virgins soul was so full of grace, that she could
receive no more, so her heart was so full of grief, that she could endure no
more. There could not a greater grief be spoken of than that which the mother
was to suffer, which was uttered in saying that a sword should pierce her heart
from one side unto the other: and indeed as old Simeon had prophesied, so it
came to pass, because there was never Martyr which suffered more torment in
the martyring of his body, than the blessed Virgin suffered in seeing her son
martyred. And this speech tuam ipsius animam, is very much to be noted: for
although other holy men were grieved at the death of Christ, yet none so much
as his holy mother: for in other men the grief was as it were a blow, but in
the Virgins heart a thrust. Simeon does threaten none that the sword of grief
shall pierce, but only the mother of Christ, to let us understand, that as she
was the creature unto whom Christ imparted most of his comfort, so it was she
unto whom he gave most of his dolors, insomuch that as she did most deserve, so
she did most suffer. O great Simeon why do thou threaten the mother only,
with the sons sword, seeing that not only the martyrs did feel his death and
passion, but it seems also that the Angels themselves did lament and weep
for it? For what martyr is there in heaven O sweet Jesus, which did not feel
thy death, and die for thy holy law? It is therefore said that the holy Virgin
did by a special grace and privilege feel more grievously the death of her
son, than any other creature of the world, because it is a property of our
Lord to impart most bitter feeling of his passion unto those souls whom he
does most tenderly love. When Simeon said that she should feel her sons
passion more than any other, it was to say, that Christ would leave his
passion and torment in keeping with her above others, to the end that they
might be known afterward unto the world: in so much that it was unto thee,
blessed Virgin, unto whom the son of God bestowed his greatest love on earth,
and unto whom he imparted most of his sorrows. Unto whom then should we run
for a true sufferer of his sorrows, but unto thee O mother of God now full of
joy and consolation, though then full of sorrows and passion? O that thy soul
is glorious, and thy heart most happy blessed Lady, seeing thou was not
martyred with the Emperor Neroes sword as the Apostle Saint Paul was, but
with the selfsame that thy son was; in so much that as in the incarnation
love coupled you together, so in his passion dolor separated you one from the
other. Flebat Anna matter Tobiae irremediabilibus lachrymis: Tobie chapter 10,
as if he would say, The honorable. Matrone Anna, old Tobias wife, and young
Tobias mother, wept the absence of her well-beloved son with remediless
tears, saying, Woe be unto me, vvoe be unto me, my son and my heart,
what will become of me without thee, or is it possible for me to take any
rest in thy absence? Whither art thou gone from me, where have thou absented
thy self, the light of my cies, and staff of my old age, comfort of my life,
and hope of my house? How is it possible that thy father could obtain of
himself or of me, to send thee to recover a little money so far from us?
What greater disaster could fall unto us, than to lose our son for the
recovering of a little coin? I would to God that that money ha^ never been
due unto my house: for, for the ease of my heart there is no treasure like, as
to have thee with me O my dear son. O my son, O my heart, how
unfortunately did I consent that thou should depart out of my sight,
considering that it was most certain, that having thee with me, I vvanted
nothing! What shall my sorrowful eyes do now, seeing they cannot see thee but
fill themselves with weeping for thee? Such sorrowful words and grievous
complaints, could not be uttered, but of a tender heart, nor could not be
spoken but of a child deerly beloved. Mimus the Philosopher says, That
because, the tongue is a crier and a publisher of that which is in the heart,
it is most certain, that if there be love in the heart, that he cries Love;
and if there be nothing but sorrow and grief in the heart, he publishes also
nothing but sorrow. For the better understanding of this dolorous figure, it is
to be noted, that as Isaac was the figure of Christ in that which he was
to suffer, so Tobias mother was the figure of that that the immaculate Virgin
was to weep: insomuch that the virgins glorious martyrdom was prophesied by
Simeon, and figured in holy Anna. The mystery did well answer unto the
Sacrament, seeing the blessed virgin was a mother, and Anna a mother, the one
wept and the other wept, the one had but one only son, and the other had but
one only son, the Virgins son went a far journey, and Annas son went a far
journey, Tobias mother wept remediless tears, and the mother of Gods tears
were also without remedy. Young Tobias took his journey at his fathers
commandment, and the son of God was incarnate by his fathers commandment: and
if Tobias went to gather up money which his father had lent, Christ also came
to recover souls which his father had lost. What shall I say more, but that
Christ and Tobias, and Tobias and Christ, were sent by their own fathers, and
lamented by their own mothers? O that the Virgin had better reason to weep
for her son with remediless tears than Tobias mother had, because her
sighs and reares found remedy and comfort, but the mother of God found no
remedy nor comfort. O sorrowful woman and comfortless mother! for what
comfort could thy tears find, seeing thou did see him end his life in one
day upon the cross, whom thou wast thirty years a bringing up? O
comforelesse mother, and mother of discomfort, thou art she which should weep
with remediless tears, and not the mother of young Tobias; because her son
came home well married, but thy precious son remained dead upon the cross. O
honorable Anne, and blessed old woman, it is an Angel which led him, an
Angel which accompanied him, an Angel which married him, and an Angel which
guarded him, and an Angel which brought him back again. Therefore leave thy
tears for her, who is the mother of him which is crucified, considering that a
traitor sold her son, a sinner denied him, a tyrant condemned him, and a
wicked people put him to death. Our Lady wept with remediless tears, seeing
that she and not Tobias his mother did lose the staff which did support her,
the glass which she looked in, the light with which she saw, the rest wherein
she took joy, her only hope and that which she most of all loved. Seneca to
this purpose says, That the grief is not so great, when things are lost by
little and by little, as when they are lost all at once: and therefore it is a
great matter for a man to be accustomed to endure, and hardened in suffering.
Who does doubt at all but that the sudden losses which fall unto us, are more
grievous than those which come not all together? if they had apprehended the
son of God in one day, accused him on another, given sentence on him the
other, and executed him on the other, although the grief could not but have
been great, yet it had been tolerable; but to see that in four and twenty
hours they apprehended him, accused him, gave sentence on him, and put him to
death, what heart is able to suffer it, or what eyes can weep and bewail it
sufficiently? Venient tibi has vna die sterilitas and viduitas, said God by the
Prophet Esaias, chapter sixteen: as if he would say, When thou shall least
think upon it, there shall happen two great mishaps unto thee O Synagogue,
that is, thou shall be made a widow, and also barren without a son. The
space of three thousand years in which God was married unto the Synagogue,
he raised Patriarchs and Prophets continually in her: but when the son of God
was put to death, she was put from him like a naughty woman, and the Church
admitted in her place, in so much that from good Friday forward when he died
on the cross, she never after was great with any gifts or graces, nor never
brought forth any holy man. Our blessed Lord was his mothers bridegroom, and
dear son also, and he was so certainly her bridegroom, that Joseph was
not more hers when he was betrothed unto her: and thereupon it is, that
when Joseph died she was not fully a widow, but when the son of God
died she was fully a widow. Why does the Prophet call her a widow, but by
reason of her son which she lost, and why does he call her barren, but by
reason that she had no comfort and consolation? O that the Prophet does
rightly call thee barren, seeing that in one day, and in one hour, thou
did lose thy husband and vvast bereaved of thy son! But yet thou may
comfort thy self with one thing, O glorious Virgin, that is, that thou
need not wear a mourning weed, though thou be a widow, because thee
very stones have broken in sunder, and the heavens have mourned for pure
compassion. Magna velut mare est contritio tua; quis medebitur tibi? Says
Jeremy in his Lamentations: as if he would say, thy grief does so much
exceed all other griefs, as the sea does exceed all other waters; because all
men can take pity on thee, but no man remedy thee. Jeremy does highly set
forth the dolours which the sorrowful mother suffered on the Mount of Caluary
by comparing her unto the sea water; because that as there is no drop of water
in the sea which is not salt, even so there was no part of the Virgins heart
which did not feel grief and pain. He calls the Virgins dolor
Contrition, that is, a kind of brusing or breaking: he calls it great, and
he calls it a sea which is bitter, in so much that as there is nothing which
can be compared to the sea in greatness, even so there is no grief which can
be compared unto the grief which the Virgin suffered. There are some griefs
and sorrows, the which if they be bitter, yet they are not great, and if they
be great, yet they are not bitter: but the Virgins dolor was the greatest
in the world, for it was so bitter, that there could be none so bitter, and so
great that none could be greater. What could be more bitter, seeing it went
to her heart, what longer seeing it continued all her life time? O that thy
contrition was great like unto the sea: for as there is in the sea both calm
and tempest, so was there in thy heart at one time joy and sorrow; joy in
seeing thy son redeem the world, and sorrow in seeing thy son die without
justice. What sorrow do thou think should that heart feel, in the which at
one time there did strive sensuality and reason, love and fear, liking and
dissiking, willing and nilling? What sea can be compared in depth, or what
water in bitterness, unto the heart in the which is forged at one time, a will
to redeem all the world, and a will that her son should not suffer? For as
the sea is deep, and large, so the Virgins grief was deep, because it
reaches unto the heart, and great because it was of a great matter, and
bitter because it was the greatest grief in the world. Barnard says, That as
in the sea one wave follows another, and when they are come to the bank,
they break against it: even so in the Virgins mind one sorrow ouertaketh
another, and one grief ouerreacheth another, the which both together break
against the Virgins bowels. And she suffered all these anxieties and sorrows
alone, because there was none who might take part of them with her, nor any man
able to give her remedy for them. Quis medibitur tibi? as if Jeremy would say,
O sorrowful mother, and comfortless Lady, what Physician is able to cure thy
wounds, having them, as thou have them, so far within thy heart? Who shall
cure thee O thou of all other the most comfortless, because the griefs of the
heart are such, that although they are easy to be reckoned, yet they are hard
to be cured? Who shall heal thee O blessed Lady, seeing thy careful love is
of such quality, and the wounds of thy sorrow so great, that no man can guess
at the curing of them, but he alone who was the cause of them? Who shall ease
thee of all others the most desolate, seeing that the Physician which cured the
dolours of the heart, is now crucified among thieves and malefactors? Who shall
cure thee O blessed Virgin, or who shall make whole thy sorrowful heart, but
he only in whom thou have put it, seeing we know that although Gallen and
Hypocrates can purge the humors, and let the veins blood, yet they cannot cure
the griefs of the mind? Who shall ease thy sighs but only he for whom we
sigh for? Who shall heal thee O my good Lady, seeing that he is dead on the
altar of the cross, for whom thou do weep, and he has yielded up the
ghost for whom thou do sigh? Who shall heal thee O my sinful soul, if
thou have lost Christ and fallen from grace? Thou must now know, that thou have
no recompense for so great a loss. Join therefore O my soul with our Lady
and weep with her, she for her son, and thou for thy loss, because that
after his resurrection he may comfort her and help thee.

(...) would have bestowed them all in seeking, looking upon, in hearing and in
loving, and serving her son? O who could have seen thee in that lamentable
hour on foot, and not sitting hard by the cross, and not far off, looking
upon him with thy sorrowful eyes, kissing his feet with thy mouth, and
receiving the drops of blood upon thy head! The scripture does not say only,
that she did stand hard by the cross, but adds further, iuxta crucem Jesus,
by the cross of Christ, to distinguish the cross of Christ from the cross of
thieves: for it had been no matter whether a man had been on foot, or sitting
by those crosses. Who should come to the cross of Christ crucified, but he who
is also crucified? And he who will come to the cross, must live like unto
them that are on the cross, upon which they know nothing but how to suffer,
hear blasphemies, consent to have themselves nailed, see themselves crucified,
suffer themselves to be pierced with a spear, yea and not resist to die. Who
be they which sit by the thieves crosses, but other thieves? By the crosses of
thieves do sit impatient men chiding, covetous men a deceiving, gluttons a
eating, libidenous men a playing the adulterers, malicious men a lying, and
slothful men a taking their ease. It was a cross by which Christ's poor
family stood, and they were crosses by which soldiers of the devil stood, to
let us understand, that they suffer more crosses and pains which go to hell,
than those which go to heaven. S. Augustine says, That if thou will see who
they are which do save themselves, and what multitude they be, which condemn
themselves, thou may see it by that, that by the cross of Christ there
stood but a few persons; and by the crosses of the thieves there were a
thousand people and more, in so much that it is in thy choice either to go
weeping a foot to heaven, or go sitting and laughing to hell. Anselmus upon
the mystery of the cross says, On the Mount of Caluary there were very many
which looked on the cross of Christ a far off, but very few which stood
near unto it: and the reason is, because that by the cross of Christ it is
not permitted that any should sin, and by the crosses of the thieves, it is
lawful for every man to steal and sin. O my soul, and O my heart, why
do thou not melt, and yield up the ghost, seeing the drops of blood which
descend upon our Lady, and the sighs of our Lady which ascend unto our Lord?
Do thou not mark O my soul, do thou not mark how the sorrowful mother
is bathed with the blood which runs from her son, and how the earth is
watered with the tears which fall from her eyes? Barnard says, What offenses
can there be so great in the world, which the blood of the son cannot
remedy, and the tears of the mother cannot wash away? Behold O my heart says
Bonauenture, and thou shall see the son upon the cross, and the mother at
the foot of the cross, she is on foot, and he lifted up, she holds her
peace, and he speaks no word, and that which is most of all, they look upon
one the other with their eyes, and understand one another with their hearts. O
my fingers and you my pens, give over vvriting I pray you, because I may
meditate the better how the mother saw her son shed drops of blood, and the
son saw the mother shed tears from her heart. What hearts should they have
which had such eyes? Who can write this and not sigh, and who can read it, and
not be heavy for it, that is, how the mothers heart was full of grief for that
which she saw, and the sons heartful of love for that which he suffered? And
by that means there was a cruel debate betwixt the sorrow of the mother and
the love of the son. Note well (says Vbertinus) that he who was upon the
cross, and those which were near the cross, they were all standing, and
none sitting, which is to give us understanding of the sweet taste of the
cross, and of the high mysteries contained in him, whereof he did impart none
unto those which leaned or sat at their ease, but unto those which stood on
their feet. Non coques haedum in lacte matris, Deutronomy, chap. 24. as if he
would say, Let no man be so bold as to sees the flesh of the kid in the milk
of his damme, but let them eat the goats milk by it self, and eat the kid by
himself, and the law did permit the damme to be milked, and the kid to be
killed. If there were no other mystery in this, what did God care whether the
kid were sod in his mothers milk or not? Origin says, If it be well noted, the
law does forbid the kid to be sod in the milk of the goat, but the law did
not forbid to sees the goat in the blood of the kid. In which mystery he did
let us understand, that the holy mother the church was to be sod, and saved in
the blood of Christ, and not Christ in the blood of the church. On that dismal
and unlucky day, upon the high Mount of Caluary, the goat and the kid met
together, which were Christ and his mother, in which place against all reason
and law, they did at one time sees the son in the mothers milk, and the
mother in the sons blood. From whence issued out the blood, but out of the
veins of the son, and from whence came the milk, but from the mothers eyes?
O goodness never hard of before, O unspeakable sorrow! who did ever see or
hear of a mother who shed so many tears, as were enough to bath her son in
them, or of a son from whom came so much blood, as was enough to sees his
mother in? It appears well, that they used themselves like mother and child,
and that they loved like bride and bridegroom, seeing she gave him distilled
tears, and he gave her strained blood. Barnard in an Homily says, O of all
women most blessed, O mother of my dolours, what son had ever such a mother
as he had, or what mother had ever such a son as thou have, seeing thou
did conceive him being a Virgin, broughtest him forth with joy, broughtest
him up with milk, followedst him with sweats, and buriedst him with tears?
What could she do more for him, than follow him with infinite travel and
pains, and bury him with remediless tears? And what could he do more for
her, than choose her for his mother, and redeem her with his blood? Anselmus
upon the Conception says, That from the beginning of the world until this
day, there was never milk better paid for, than that which Christ sucked of
his mother: for if she gave him milk out of her precious breasts, he gave
her blood out of his holy members. Who ever heard before, or saw blood paid
for milk, or milk for blood? Who can estimate or set a price on the blood
which streamed from the son, or of the tears which ran from the mother? O
good Jesus, O redeemer of my soul, had it not been better for thee, and
lesser grief for thy mother to have sod thee in the milk of her breasts,
rather than in the tears of her eyes? What can thou ask more of her, or what
has she more to give thee, seeing she gave thee milk when thou wast borne,
griefs and sweating all thy life time, and tears when thou did die? It
had been lesser hurt for her, and lesser grief unto thee to have given thee
rather milk than tears, because the milk comes running from the veins,
and the tears come strained from the heart. For who weepeth but weepeth from
the heart? Seneca says, That a man may talk and do his business being at
quiet: but only a grieved and troubled heart weeepeth, because there are none
more certainer witnesses of the sorrows which we suffer, than the tears which
we weep with our cies.

CHAP. VIII. Why Christ took his mother with him to see him die, seeing that
she was not to help him to redeem us.
QVi inuenerit auiculam eubantem cum pullis suis, tollat filios and dimittat
matrem, Deutronomy 22. God spoke these words unto the Jews which were
hunters; as if he would say, If any man go to the fields a hunting, and by
chance meet with a Sparrowes nest, he may take the young ones, so as he let the
old one go, in so much that he should neither take her, nor much less kill
her. What other thing is it to go a hunting for Sparrowes nests, but to seek
out divine books? Origin says, Who or what is the nest but the book, what
the Sparrow but the letter, and which the young ones but the senses, and who
the hunter but the Christian which occupies himself in holy Scripture? When
God commands the hunter to lean the mother, and take the young ones, he
does plainly advise us, that we should leave the letter in the nest of the
holy Scripture, and take the meaning. He does leave the Sparrow in the nest
which cares not for that which the letter sounds, but for that which the
holy Gospel says, Because there be some such obscure phrases in scripture,
that they are not only not to be taken as they sound, but also that not to be
done which the very letter commands. When Christ says, If thy eye do
scandalize thee, it was not his meaning that we should pull out our corporal
eyes which we see with, but the spiritual with the which we damn our selves;
for Christ's sweet law does command no man to tear his own members, but to pull
out sins by the root. When we love a child well, we say that we love him
like our own eyes, and thereupon Christ says, if any of thy eyes do scandale
thee, pull him out. Saint Augustine says, That all the Synagogues perdition
consists, because that in the nest of the Scripture, they take the mother,
and leave the young ones, that is, they take the letter as it sounds, and
take not the sense which is hidden under it, making more account of the dry
bark, then of the tender marrow. When the Apostle says, that the letter
kills, and that it is the spirit which does give life, what else does he say,
but that we should take heed of taking the old Sparrow, and that we should
take the young ones which was the sense? When the son of God says, Search
the scriptures, he means not that we should read the books only, but that
we should seek out the true sense thereof. If wicked Arrius had searched out
the meaning of those words, My father is greater than I am, and of those other
words, That they may be one as I and my Father are one, there should never so
many good men have been persecuted, nor so many scandales have risen in the
church by it. Seeing that all living beasts are created for man's uses and
service, if our Lord had meaned no other matter in the sparrowes nests, then
the letter speaks of, he would never have bidden us eat of the one, and not
touch the other. It had been a greater loss to the Commonwealth to kill five
or six young ones, than one old one: but because the giver of the law did
intend rather the mystery, which was signified in the sparrowes, than the
prohibition which he made when he commanded the young ones to be taken, and
the old one to be let louse. Conformably then unto that which our Lord
commands, let the curious Reader leave the letter and take the true sense:
otherwise it were better for him not to read the Scripture, than understand it
as the Synagogue does. To come then unto our purpose, what is the nest but the
holy cross of Christ? Who the sparrow but our blessed Lady? And who the young
one but her precious son? Ezechiel saw a nest put upon a high tree, in which
nest every bird laid an egg, and in the nest of the cross of Christ, all the
Saints lay their eggs, that is, then good desires, of which the son of God
like a good Hen, of every one gathers his good work. According unto the
old law the young sparrowes might be taken and killed, and so they did by
Christ: and wherefore then was his poor mother so grievously tormented there,
who was figured in the sparrow, seeing she was exempted by law? O wicked
Jerusalem, and cursed Synagogue! seeing that in the nest of the cross, thou
did find the old bird and the young, why art thou not content to kill the
young one, but do also torment the mother? O holy tree, O precious nest, O
blessed son, O comfortless mother, what heart could destroy that holy nest,
in the which all the holy Trinity was enclosed? In the high nest of the
cross, the father was he who commanded the son to suffer, the holyghost
which assisted, the flesh which died, the foul which gave life, and the blood
which redeemed us. All this nest was overthrown by the Synagogue, when his
blood lay upon the ground, his carcass on the cross, his flesh in the
sepulcher, his soul in joy, and his divinity united to all. What shall we say
of his sorrowful mother, of whose heart there was one piece on the ground with
his blood, another on the cross with his skin, another in the sepulcher with
his body, and another in hell whither Christ went with his soul, and another
on the Mount of Caluary with those of her family which wept? What else shall I
say O my soul, but that into how many parts her son was scattered, the
sorrowful mothers heart into so many was divided? Vbertinus says, That the
doleful mothers heart was scattered and divided and divided again; because that
loving her son as she did better than her self, she kept the least part of
her heart unto her self. Why do I say that she kept some part of her heart
unto her self, seeing that all her heart lived and died with her son? If the
heart do run to desire that which the cies behold, and if whither the heart
goes there goes also the very bowels to continue, where was all the Virgins
heart, but in her son whom she best beloved? Because the doleful mother had
no other son but him, all her love was fixed in him, and because the Jews
found the Sparrow and her young one in the nest of the Cross, they crucified
the flesh of Christ, and tormented the mothers heart. Saint Barnard says, That
if the Virgins breasts had been opened in that sorrowful hour and lamentable
day, it is religiously to be thought, they might have found her heart of
flesh, but not the force and vigor of a heart, because her vital spirits had
mortified it, and her true love buried it with her son. O mighty Redeemer,
and supreme Creator, who is able to tell the secret, or reach unto this, that
is to say, why thou did take the mother with thee thither, to see thee die
in that great and high day of thy passion, and leave all thy other disciples
behind thee, because they might not see thee suffer? In so great a conflict,
and so narrow a straight as this was upon the Mount of Caluary, why would
thou have rather women with thee to weep, tha^ me^ to defend thee? Who but thou
O good Jesus (says S. Barnard) who but thou did ever go into the field to
fight against his enemies without weapons, and accompanied with tears? The
mother wept, the son wept, the kinsman wept, the disciple wept, the aunt
wept, all the family wept, so that Moses did drown his enemies in waters, and
the son of God his with tears. Anselmus says, That he that could have
been at the death of Christ upon good Friday should have seen the Jews make
an outcry, the Pharisees blaspheme, the hangmen lay on, the heavens wax
dark, and all the faithful weep, in so much that there was nothing in the
synagogue but blasphemies, and nothing in the church but tears. Non
immolabitur vna die ouis cum filio fuo, said God in Leuiticus, chap. 22. As if
he would say, Let those take heed which will offer to the Tabernacle, that they
do not kill the lamb and the ewe the same day. Origin says, That because our
Lord is merciful, he would have his disciples be so likewise, and therefore
he did forbid them any thing that might tend unto cruelty, or induce them unto
it. What can be more cruel than to take the lamb and the owe at one time? Who
is the ewe which has brought forth the lamb, but only the mother of Christ,
and who the lamb but her precious son? God did warn the synagogue often that
they would take heed unto the Lamb and ewe, and especially that if they would
touch the son, that they would pardon the mother. God had no greater wealth
nor any equal neither in heaven nor in earth, unto that lamb and sheep, of
whom he himself had a care, and in whose service and guard all the powers of
heaven were by him employed. This commandment was broken on the Mount of
Caluary, where they at one time, killed the innocent lamb, and spared not the
sorrowful mother. What cruelty and inhumanitie like unto this was ever seen or
heard of, haung but one sheep in the Synagogue, and the church having but one
lamb, to kill the lamb in the presence of his mother, and torment the ewe in
the sight of the Lamb? What equal torment could there be to the mother than
to kill her son before her face, or what greater martyrdom could the son
suffer, than to sacrifice his mother in his sight? O how glorious and happy
should I be if my soul would turn to be such an ewe, and my heart such a
lamb, because I might be sacrificed on the Mount of Caluary with the true
Lamb! O sweet Jesus (says Vbertinus) O merciful Lord, seeing that all laws
do speak in favor of thy precious mother, why would thou break them,
seeing thou art the judge of them all? Is not the law made in the favor of thy
mother, which commands that the lamb should not be sod in the milk of his
damme? Is not that law made in the favor of thy mother, which commands to
take the young Sparrows, and let the old one go? The law which commands not to
kill the Lamb and the ewe at one time, is it not made in favor of thy mother?
Thou then, that art the giver of the law, do not break the law; which thou
do, if thou sacrifice thy self which art the lamb, and thy mother which is
the ewe. There is blood enough in the blood of the lamb, and there needs not
the blood of the mother: for if it be necessary for the son to die to redeem
us, the mothers life is also necessary to comfort us. Bonauenture, Anselmus,
and Vbertinus, cannot wonder enough what should be the reason why the son
would take his mother with him to the foot of the cross, seeing that she
could not help him in his death, nor he had no need of her to redeem us. It
is not to be thought that he brought her thither without cause, neither that
she did go thither without some mystery, because that all things done
betwixt the son and his mother should be esteemed as a mystery of mysteries,
like unto Salomons Canticles, which are songs of songs. The reason why our good
Jesus would take his mother with him, was (as Anselmus says) Because he would
leave her his only inheritrize, as being the next of kindred. O my singers, O
my heart, how is it possible for you to be able to write, or my tongue able to
speak of the wealth which the son leaves, or of the inheritance which the
mother does inherit? But what could he leave unto his mother who was borne in
Bethelem among beasts, and died on the Mount of Caluary betwixt thieves? What
can his sorrowful mother inherit of him who shrowdeth himself in a borrowed
shroud, and burieth himself in another man's sepulcher? What could he bequeath
by Testament, who having two coats, gave one to the hangmen which crucified
him, and the other to the knights which kept him? What could he leave who
never had a foorme to set down on, nor a boulster to lay his head on? The
inheritance then which she did there inherit from her son, was the blood
which there he shed, and the dolours which he there suffered for all men, so
that with the blood which came down from the cross, he watered her body, and
with the dolours which he suffered, he martyred her soul. Saint Barnard De
passione domini says, That in so great and high a work as this was, and in so
narrow a strait as this which Christ was in, it was very necessary that the
Virgin should be there, and give her son part of all that was in her, not
only to have compassion on him, but also to suffer with him. S. Augustine upon
the passion of our Lord says, That because the great prophecy of Simeon was
not as yet accomplished, it was done by the permisson and counsel of the holy
ghost, that the mother should be with the son on the Mount of Caluary, where
at one time the sword of grief bereaved the son of his life, and pierced the
mothers soul. As it was not reason (says Anselmus) that the mother of God
should want the crown and reward of martyrdom, so was it not reason that she
should be put into tyrants hands, and therefore it was given her as a mean,
that because she had served her son with excessive love, her own son
should martyr her with his inspeakable griefs. Who ever saw or heard, that as
it were at one sound and after one measure, the hangmen should martyrize the
son, and the son martyrize his mother. S. Barnard upon those words, Mayor est
iniquitas mea, which Cain spoke, says thus: O good Jesus that, that charity is
greater which thou did use, than that which thou did command me O
redeemer of my soul, seeing that on the Mount of Caluary, the Friday which
thou did suffer upon the cross, thou did not only put thy own life
for us, but also thy blessed mothers. When did thou condemn thy self to
die, and not pardon thy mother, but when the knife of thy passion did take away
thy own life from thee, and pierce thy mothers soul? The greatest matter that
the sorrowful mother could inherit was some thorn fallen from thee, or some
of thy blood shed upon her, or some piece of thy flesh which stuck upon the
cross, or some of the hairs of thy head which were cast abroad. She did also
inherit the hatred which the people bare unto her son, because that from
that day forward, she was called the mother of him which was put to death, of
him which was possessed with a devil, of the Southsayer and Publicane. His
sorrowful mother did inherit also all the holy college of the twelve
Apostles. Isichius upon Leuiticus says thus: Christ took his precious mother
to the Mount of Caluary, because she should be a witness of his passion, and
credit her with the blood of our redemption: for to believe and hold for a
certainty, that we are redeemed, it suffices if the Virgin tell us that she
saw her son die. The son of God came into the world, and paid his father the
debt which was due for all the sins of the world, of which payment his will
was that his mother should be a witness, because she might give testimony,
after his death, how his father was paid, the world redeemed, sin at an end,
the heaven already opened, and the devil overcome.

The end of the third word which Christ our redeemer spoke upon the cross.
Here begins the fourth word which the son of God spoke upon the Cross
when he complained upon his father, saying: Deus meus, deus meus, vt quid me
dereliquisti? That is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
CHAP. I. How Christ in this speech more than in all the rest seems to change
his style of speaking.
HEloij beloij lamazabathani? Hoc est: deus, deus meus, quare me dereliquisti?
This is the fourth word which the redeemer of the world spoke on the altar of
the Cross: which speech is no less dreadful than pitiful, nor pitiful
than dreadful: and it is as if he would say, My God, my God, My father, my
father, what have I done irreuerently against thee, that thou should forsake
me in so narrow a strait as this is? There are offered unto us in this divine
speech high mysteries and deep secrets to entreat of, whereof we can give no
reason if we be not favored with Gods divine assistance: whom with tears
we do humbly beseech, that it would please him to lighten us with his grace,
and succor us with his help and aid. The reason is to be known why the
son of God did change his manner of speaking rather in this speech, than in
all the others which he used, as the Evangelists do record it, saying, Heloij,
heloij, lamazabathani. Was it because he should be understood of all men,
seeing that he was crucified for all men? It is also to be known why he
does repeat this word God twice, saying My God, my God, as though God were
deaffe in hearing him. It is also to be weighed why he called him God, and
not Father, seeing he who complained was the son, and he unto whom he
complained was his Father. It is also to be marvelled at, that seeing he did
not call him father, but God, why he did add this word My, saying, My God, my
God, as though his Father were his God only, and not the God of all others. It
is also very much to be noted, why he does rather complain that his Father
had forsaken him, than put him to death: seeing that he knew very well that
Pilate was not of power to take away his life from him, if his eternal father
had not given him license to do it? And although he did complain of his
Father, why did he not say, My Father why do thou forsake me, but My God
why have thou forsaken me, making account of that which he has suffered,
and not of that which then he did suffer? Although all these things are
easily rehearsed, yet they are not easy to be expounded: but because they are
divine secrets, and done betwixt divine persons only they pass man's capacity,
yea the Angels understanding. To come then unto the mysteries, it is first to
be seen who complains, and unto whom he complains, whereof he
complains, and where he complains, and before whom he complains, and
with what words he complains. He who complains is Christ: he unto
whom he complains is his Father: that whereof he complains is because
he had forsaken him: the place where, was on the cross: and he complained
before his mother with these words, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.
These are most pitiful words to hear, and tender to provoke us to weep: for
if we consider how the son of God spoke them being nailed upon the cross,
his body naked, and his enemies round about him, and that upon a dunghill, what
heart is there that would not break to think on it? Seeing we know, believe,
and confess, that Christ was true God, and that his father was also God, and
both were but one God, how can it enter into man's understanding that one who is
God should complain upon him who is also God? If between one God and another
there be complaints, is it any great matter if men sometimes fall at ods? We
see it fall out daily, that the son complains of the Father, and one friend
upon another, yea and one man upon himself, but that Christ who is God should
complain upon his father who is God, it is a thing never heard of before, nor
humane weakness is not able to conceive it. For seeing no man co^plaineth on
another but for some wrong done unto him, what grieuance could the eternal
Father have done unto his son whom he loved so well? For seeing we know that
Christ is the son of God and his only beloved son, and with whom God has
left all his treasures in keeping, how is it possible that God should have
dealt hardly with him, seeing that he deserved it not, neither his father
desired it? According unto that which we have said our reason is good which way
so ever we do wind our selves: for if we say that the father did that unto
his son, which he ought not, we can neither say it nor affirm it: then if
we say that the son complained without occasion, we dare not presume so to
say, in so much that we must deliver the father of all fault, and allow the
sons complaint to be good. To unfold our selves of this business, it is to
be noted that Christ said by the Prophet, Abinfantia creuit mecum miseratio,
Because he began to suffer from his childhood, and yet he never complained
until the time came that he should die. Leo upon the Passion of our Lord
says, That the noble men's children of this world cry our presently when they
see any trouble come upon them, and ask for succor: but never any man saw our
Lord open his mouth to complain, until a quarter of an hour before they
would pull his heart out of his body. S. Chrysostom upon Luke cries out and
says. What news is this O redeemer of the world, what news is this? When
they lay hands on thee, thou take it quietly, when they blaspheme thee thou
make as though thou were deaffe, when they whip thee thou do hold thy
tongue, whon they do crucify thee thou do suffer, when they kill thee thou
do dissemble: and yet do thou open thy mind even as thou art yielding up
thy ghost? Why do thou complain upon thy father alone, having as thou have
so many enemies which have offended thee, that is, Judas who sold thee, Peter
which did deny thee, Pilate which g^ue sentence on thee, Herod who scorned
thee, and all the people which put thee to death? Demosthenes the Philosopher
says, That a man ought never begin that which he cannot bring to an end, nor
say that which he cannot prove, nor ask that which cannot be given him, nor
love that which cannot be gotten, no^ contend with him whom he cannot
revenge, nor yet complain of that which cannot be remedied. Seneca in an
Epistle says, That no man should say that he complains, unless he think
that he shall have remedy against his complaint: for otherwise he does himself
hurt in complaining, and stirs him unto anger of whom he complains. Tell
me then O good Jesus, what remedy have thou for thy complaint, seeing that
thou have not half an hour to live? Do thou make thy request unto thy
Father when thy soul is even now departing from thy body? Who ever heard of,
or ever saw the like, that the end of thy vexitions to be the beginning of thy
complaint: in thirty and three years that thou did converse with us, thou
did never braule with any, thou did never injury any man, nor never
complain of any man, and now being at the very point of death do thou
complain only upon thy Father? O what great mystery and deep secret this thy
complaint does cover, seeing that in such a time, and such a narrow strait,
thou do complain, when all other are wont to pardon their injuries and
reconcile their enmities, and ask pardon for their offenses? Pauper and in
laboribus a iuuentute mea: exaltatus autem, and humiliatus and conturbatus:
these words the Prophet David says in the person of Christ Psalm 88, as if
he would say, I have been brought up in trauails and poverty from my
childhood, and then I was lifted up, and then made low, and afterward troubled
and persecuted. Thy fears have made me afraid; and thy angers have broken upon
me, and thy trauails have compassed me about, and they have compassed me about
altogether as it were a vie, and over and above all this, thou have set my
friend far from me, and have separated him who was my neighbor far from
me. If we do deeply look into the complaints which the son makes in this
place against his eternal Father, we shall find that they are many in number,
great in quality, and in respect incomparable, cruel in their kind, and
unworthy of him unto whom they are sent. Basil upon the Psalm says, That
speaking like a man, it seems in humane reason that the innocence of good
Jesus did not deserve, neither could it be in the clemency of his good Father,
that the divine pity should load upon weak humanity, so many torments
together, and heap so many troubles and vexations. The first complaint which
the son made against his Father is, Quod pauper and in laboribus sum a
iuuentute mea, to wit, That he brought him up poorly from his childhood, he
made him live with hunger, and go like a banished man from place to place.
Cicero says in an Epistle, When a young man does suffer trauails, and endure
poverty, if he be not a fool and an idiot, he bears it with a great
courage, by remembering that his Father was poor in the same manner: but if his
Father had been rich, and now he himself poor, this is such a misfortune,
that there is no patience able to endure it, nor heart which can dissemble it.
What should the son of God think when he remembers what a rich Father he
had, and that he did spend all his treasure upon other men's children, and
suffer him to go poorly, naked and a hungered, and scorned by all men? The
Apostle speaking of Gods riches says, Deus qui dines es in omnibus, as if he
would say, Thou art the God only which does possess great riches, and art the
Lord which has many lordships, because thou should want nothing thy self,
and to impart much of the overplus unto others. Gloria and diuitiae in domo
eius, says the Prophet, his house is full of glory, and there is infinite
wealth in his chamber. If God then have glory for those which are in heaven
with him, and be also a father who has wealth for such as are with him in
this world, what was the cause why he did not impart some of this unto his
son? Ambrose upon this word Pauper and in laboribus says, That most sacred
humanity came in poverty of glory, seeing that his Father did not suffer his
soul to impart somewhat of his glory unto his body, and his person also lived
in poverty, seeing he had nothing proper unto himself in this life, in so
much that as the father was rich in all things, so the son was poor of all
things. Plato in his Timaeo says, That although poverty be no evil thing in
a good man, yet notwithstanding man's nature does much abhor it, because there
can none but he be called very fortunate who is able to give unto others,
neither is there any other very unfortunate, but he who must of necessity ask
of others. It is to be thought that Christ's humanity did feel his poverty,
and necessity which he endured, as well because his father had very much to
bestow upon him, as for that he must oftentimes ask for that which he had
need of. S. Bonauenture says in the life of Christ: Christ had much a do to
maintain himself and those of his College: for sometimes he asked that which
he had need of, and they gave it him not, and at other times he asked not, and
yet they sent him, in so much that there did strive in his tender heart at one
time the hunger which he suffered, and the shame which he had to ask. Hunger
did bid him to ask, and shame did bid him to forbear: in so much that there
passed very few days in the which his stomach was not very hungry, or his
holy face covered with shame. Ginomius the Philosopher being asked what poverty
was, answered. That poverty of his own nature was very euilly conditioned,
because it gives no contentment unto the person in whom it is, no savor at
the table, no taste in the cup, no warmth in the gown, nor any life in the
purse. What contentment can a poor man have, seeing they scorn him before his
face? What savor has he at his table, seeing that oftentimes it is time to
have dined before the fire be made in his house? What taste can he have in his
cup, seeing that sometime he does not send once a week unto the tauern? What
trust can a poor creature have in his purse, seeing that his purse did cost him
more than that which is in it? Christ had great reason to say, that he was
brought up poorly, and with great pain from his infancy, seeing that he was
borne poor, lived poor, and died poor, insomuch that as he was the most
holiest of all holy men, so was he the poorest of all poor men. Exaltatus
autem humiliatus and conturbatus, which is the second complaint which the son
makes of the Father. And it is as if he would say, Besides that my Father has
brought me up in poverty, and great misery, he has remembered to give me
honor, the better afterward to diffame me, and to exalt me to throw me
afterward down, in so much that my fame has been spread abroad throughout
all this kingdom, and my infamy has flowne afterward throughout all the world.
This is a very pitiful complaint, and a very deep speech, and therefore it
is necessary for us to expound it well and read it with great heed. Seneca in
his second book of Anger says, Laetiores reliquit fortuna, quos nunquam
aspexit quam ques aspexit, and postea deseruit, as if he would say, It was
better with them, and they were more merrier which fortune did never exalt, nor
never thought on, than with those whom fortune had once lifted up to great
honor, and afterward thrown down again. Boethius in his first book of Comfort
says, In falicissimum genus infortunij est hominem fuisse faelicem. As if he
would say, There is no torment in the world to be compared unto that, that
when a man does remember that he has been happy in time past, and that he is
fallen from that estate; because such a man's heart does bewail his present
misery, and sigh after the felicity which he was wont to enjoy. What grief
can he take for honor, who never knew what it was? Macrobius in his Saturnales
says, That if we want any thing, all that we can do is to desire it; but if
we do once obtain it, and then lose it, the heart is not content with
desiring it only, but does also lament the loss of it, because it is a far
greater grief to lose that which once we have enioied, than that which we
never had, although we do desire it never so much. The son of God did
complain on his own father, because he had exalted him, and afterward thrown
him down, because there was never son more honored by his father than
Christ, nor never son so much abased as Christ was afterward on the Mount of
Caluary. The better to understand this speech, exaltatus and humiliatus, we
must suppose, that God did never give nor never will give unto any those graces
and preheminences, which he gave unto his well-beloved son, because there is
no creature worthy to receive them, nor any Angel of that capacity, that he is
able to have them imparted unto him. The son was exalted by his Father,
seeing he gave him his own divine essence and power, and in that his flesh
should be united unto that divine nature, and because the holy Ghost was the
maker and framer of all that mystery, and because he should take flesh of a
Virgin, and she remained a Virgin. The son was highly exalted by his
father, considering that he gave him so much power upon earth, as he had
above in heaven. The son of God was highly exalted by his father, considering
that he gave him the most excellent soul that ever was or shall be created,
and gave him power to cast out devils, and authority to raise the dead, and
power over all the elements, and also gave him license to pardon sins. The
son of God was greatly honored, when he gave him, himself for his father,
a pure Virgin for his mother, holy Joseph for his master, the great Baptist
for his ambassador, the great Evangelist for his Secretary, holy Peter and
Saint Paul for his Preachers. Christ was highly honored by his Father,
considering that he made John baptize him in the river of Jordan, and caused
the holy Ghost to be present with him, and his glory to shine there upon him,
and openly acknowledge him to be his well-beloved son. Behold then how the son
of God was exalted and honored by his father: but alas as he ends his
speech with exaltatus, he says presently that he was humiliatus and
conturbatus, that he was thrown down and troubled, so that according unto
this prophecy the end of his honor was the beginning of his infamy. Christ was
abiected and abased by his father, because that from his young tender infancy,
his father began to hold a rigorous hand over him: for in the first three and
thirty years which he lived, he never gave him license to show his power, nor
employ his knowledge, nor set forth his learning, nor win credit and fame in
the world. Christ was abiected and made low by his father, seeing that of God
he made him a man, of eternal temporal, of one that was invisible, visible,
and of one that was immortal, mortal, of one who was strong and mighty,
weak, and of a free man a bonds^aue, according to his humanity. The son of
God was abased and abiected by his father, considering how he suffered the
Pharisees to persecute him by malice, the Priests by envy, the Scribes by
covetousness, the Gentiles through ignorance, and the Synagogue by obstinacy.
Christ was brought low and abased by his father, seeing he gave his enemies
leave to point at him as if he had been an enchanter, diffame him as an
Idolatour, accuse him of blasphemy, rebuke him of sedition, and condemn him
for a Traitor.

CHAP. II. How Christ does complain upon his father, because he does break
all his anger upon his body.
IN me transierunt irae tuae, and terrores tui conturbauerunt me, says David,
as if he would say, Thou was not content O my Father, thou wast not content, to
bring me up in such great misery as thou did, thou wast not content to exalt
me and throw me down again, but now anew thou do break all thy anger
upon me, and do lay upon my back all thy dreadful fears. It is a new
speech and a grievous complaint, to say that the father should break his anger
upon his son, and that he makes his soul afeard. And therefore it is
necessary for us to show what anger is, and how it can be verified that there
is anger in God. Possidonius the Philosopher being asked what anger was,
answered, In my opinion anger is nothing else but a short and a sudden folly.
Aristotle defyning it said, that anger was but a kindeling of the blood, an
alteration and moving of the heart, a forgetting of wit and sense, and a
troubling of the judgment. Eschines being demanded from whence anger
proceeded, said that it proceeded from the heat of the blood, and of the
abundance of choler, and a vapor of the gaul, and fierceness of the heart.
Macrobius says, That no man should chide with one that chideth, nor with him
who is chidden, until the cause be known on both sides: for the cause is not
in the anger which we show in chiding, but in the justice or injustice of the
cause for which we chide. Seneca in his first book of Anger says, That the
conditions of an angry man are, not to believe his friends, to be sodden in
all his business, help himself with his hands, not to respect dangers,
speak suddenly and maliciously, and be angry for a small occasion, and admit
no reason. Chilo the Philosopher says, That if any man ask him what he
thinks of anger, he will answer that it is a thing easy to be written of,
and easy to persuade, and sweet to be counseled against, but very hard to
be bridled. Saint Basil upon the Psalm, Neque in ira tua corripias me says,
That Anger is such a dangetous thing, that if we do give it entrance into our
will, it does afterward make our nill of our will. Then we yield our will unto
anger, when we begin to trouble our selves with small matters, and then anger
does that which is not our will, when in great matters we would not be angry: in
so much that if we do not resist anger in the beginning, we shall never or
late cast it out of our house. We have spoken all this to the end that we
should marvel the more how it should be in God, and how he should be moved
like a man, seeing that as there is no man able to take his eternal being from
him, so there is no man able any way to trouble him. Who should be able to
trouble him, seeing we know that God is a spirit, and has no heart in his
breast, no blood in his veins, no vapor rising from his gaul, no gaul in
his lights, no forgetfulness in his memory, no alteration in his judgment? S.
Jerome upon the Prophet O see says, That God is so wise that no man is able to
deceive him, so mighty that no man is able to resist him, so constant that no
man is able to move him, so invisible that no man is able to touch them, so
just that no man is able to oppress him. Then if it be so, that he cannot
be deceived, oppressed, nor moved, how is it possible that any anger should
reign in him, as it does in a man? When the son says unto the Father, In me
transierunt iraetuae, he says plainly, that he has unloaded his great anger
upon him, and has cast all his griefs upon his shoulders. For the better
understanding of this complaint which Christ makes, it is to be noted, that
for the space of many years God had enmities and hatred, and found himself
agrieued, moved, and disquie^ed: for at the same hour that he created
creatures, the Angels would have been equal with him, man began to disobey
him, sin began to prevail, and also to persecute his friends. God had three
notorious enemies in the world, which are man, the devil, and sin: whereof
man went about to lift up himself in Paradise, the devil to take heaven from
him, and sin to rule and govern the whole world. O that these were
unspeakable griefs which these three enemies caused God to have, and their
disobedience toward him exceeding great, heaping daily sin upon sin,
wickedness upon wickedness, never going about to amend themselves, nor God to
be pacified. Our Lord did dissemble all kind of disobedience, and all manner of
sin, until his son came into the world, upon whose humanity he did so
fully unload and unburden his anger and grief, as though he had been the only
inuenter of sin. Gregory in his Morals says, That the world is a strong
enemy, the devil a stronger, and sin the Traitor the strongest of all: for
if there were no sin in the world, God would not be angry, nor man should
not be condemned, nor the Devil would not go about so diligently, neither
should there be any hell for the wicked. Damascen says thus, It does well
appear that the eternal Father did break all his anger upon his precious
son, and that he did unburden himself and load all his wrath upon his
humanity, seeing that before his son did take flesh, he did nothing but
punish, and after that he died did nothing but pardon. Have you seen since
God has broken his anger upon his son, either the world drowned with
water, as in the flood, or burnt with fire, as in Sodom and Gomorra? Has
there been seen since God brake his anger upon his son, such captiuities as
the people of the Jews were in, or such plagues as were in Egypt, or such
famine as were in David's time, or such wars as were in the Machabees time?
Christ had great reason to say unto his father, In me transierunt irae tuae,
seeing that he broke all his anger, and discharged all his wrath upon him.
Eripuit me de inimicu meis fortissimis, and ab his qui oderunt me, says the
Prophet David speaking under the person of Christ: That is, in recompense that
my Father has unloaded upon me all his wrath and anger, he has delivered me
from my mightiest enemies, and has put from my side such of my enemies which
did hate me exceedingly. What do thou say O sweet Jesus, what do thou
say? do thou die by the hands of thy enemies, and yet do say that thy
father has delivered thee from them? My father has not delivered me from the
devil, seeing that he does tempt me, nor from the Pharisees seeing that they
have accused me, nor from the Scribes seeing that they have diffamed me, nor
from the Gentiles seeing that they have crucified me, but he has delivered me
from sins which are the strongest of all my enemies. Are they not the
strongest of all, seeing they rule and maisterall? Augustine upon the Apostles
words says, Of three enemies which we have, sin is the strongest of them al;
because many holy men, have gone before us in old times, upon whom although the
devil and the world have had no power, yet notwithstanding sin has had a
dwelling place in them, because there did never man live so clean, who knew
not what sin was. Cassiodorus says, I for my part, think sin more
mightier than any other enemy, because the world and the devil can but deceive
me, but wicked sin can hurt me and damn me. For if there were no manner of sin
in the world, we should need neither gallows nor sword. Christ only may say,
he has delivered me from my enemies, because he and no other was free from
sin, because all other creatures knew what sin was, and all knew what
punishment for it was. O how happy a man he should be, who could say with the
Prophet, he has delivered me from my strongest enemies! for it is nothing else
to say that God has delivered him from his enemies, but that our Lord has
delivered him from his sins. The Prophet had great reason to call sin not
only an enemy, but also his strongest enemy, seeing that without other help,
he threw the Angel out of heaven, cast Adam out of Paradise, deprived Judas of
his Apostleship, and condemned all the world to death. Is not sin think you
the mightiest of all other enemies, seeing that he is able and strong enough
to carry me to hell? The power of my visible enemy reaches no further than to
take my life from me, but sin the Traitor is an enemy so strong, that he
is able to take my life from me, deprive me of grace, cast me out of glory,
hurt my soul, and condemn me unto pain. Who had such enemies as the son
of God had; that is, so wicked in their cogitations, so malicious in their
speech, and so cruel in their deeds? Were not the lashes which opened Christ's
shoulders very cruel enemies, the nails which broke his sinews, the thorns
which tore his temples, and the spear which opened his side, and the Synagogue
which took his life from him? Yet Christ called none of all these his enemies,
nor did not handle them like his enemies, but only sins, which he did not only
call enemies, but mighty and strong enemies, giving us thereby to understand,
that we should hold none for our enemy but only sin. When good king David
said, Persequar inimicos meos and comprehendam illos, He spoke it not in
respect of the enemies which persecuted his person, but for sins which did
damnifie his soul. For seeing that good king David did pardon Saul and Simei,
and others his mortal enemies, how could he counsel us that we should
persecute ours? When he says I will persecute my enemies until I destroy
them, he spoke of no other enemies but of his sins, the which it is
convenient for us to persecute, and cast from us. And it is not without a
mystery that he says Persequar and comprehendam, Because that as the enemy
which is offended, if he be not taken, turns again and bids us a more
fierce battle than he did before; even so does the devil and sin deal
with us, the which if we do not drive away utterly from us, and root out from
our hearts, they turn again against us like unto most mighty and strong
enemies. What does it avail the huntsman if he run after the Hare, if he take
her not: what does it is profit thee, if thou run after sin and detest
sin, and speak evil of it, if thou do not overtake sin; and what else
is it to overtake sin, but to overcome and destroy sin utterly? O how many
there be which say, I will persecute my enemies, and how few there be which
say, and I have taken them: for if they cast out sins to day on one side of
their house, they turn again to morrow, and knock at the ring of the door,
and it is opened presently unto them.

CHAP. III. How Christ complains of his Father, because he took all his
friends from him in his passion, and all others which he knew.
ELongasti ame amicum and proximum and notos meos a miseria, These are the
words which the son of God spoke, continuing his former complaint, uttered by
the Prophet David, Psalm 87: as if he would say, Thou should have contented
thy self O my Father, when thou did unload al thy wrath upon my weak body,
and not separate anew my friends from me, and hinder those to come unto me
which were my known acquaintance. Christ co^plaineth in this place of his
Father, that he took his friends from him, seeing that he says, thou have
removed my friends from me, and he complains that he took his kinsmen from
him, and that he took his acquaintance from him, and at that instant when he
was in greatest misery. This is a pitiful complaint which the son of God
now makes, because there is no grief to be compared unto that, nor no hurt
equal unto the taking away of a man's trusty and faithful friend. Horace
asks what he is able to do, or what he has who has no friends? To what
purpose does he live which has no friends? Mimus the Philosopher says, That a
man dies as often as he loses any of his good friends: and says further, that
as the body is made of diverse members, so the heart of friends: and there upon
it is, that as the body cannot live without it have many members, so likewise
the heart cannot live without friends. They killed David's greatest enemy which
was Saul, and his dearest friend who was Ionathas in one day, and he was so
agreeued at the death of his friend, that by turns after he had wept the death
of his friend, he wept his enemies death also. We do not read that our
redeemer did weep for the death of holy Joseph his master, nor for all the
trauails which he eudured in this world; but he wept for the death of Lazarus
his good friend, whose death he could not endure, but immediately did raise
from death again. If Plutarch the great Philosopher do not deceive us, Plato
came from Asia unto Cicilia, for no other cause but to see Phocion the
Philosopher, who was his dear friend. Cicero in his book of Friendship says,
That the Philosophers do commend nothing more unto us, nor wise men did esteem
of no riches more than of the conversation of their friends, because that
without friends it is not lawful for us to live, nor yet very sure to die.
Aristorle being asked what friendship was, answered, That it was nothing else
but one soul which ruled two hearts, and one heart which did dwell in two
bodies. Diogenes says, That seeing there is no greater pain than to deal
with naughty men, nor no greater comfort than to converse with good men; for my
own part I confess and say, that I had rather die with him whom I hold for
my friend, than live with him whom I esteem my enemy. Eschines the
Philosopher being demanded how one friend should be toward another, answered:
betwixt true friends there is but one yea, and one nay, one liking and one
misliking, one agreeing and one disagreeing, one will and one nill, one love and
one hatred. Experience does teach us, that how good soever the bread be yet it
mouldeth, and wine becomes vinegar, and garments tear, and flesh waxes
stale, and years pass away, but friendship alone is that which never wearieth,
and good conversation is that that never does loathe. Pliny in an Epistle
says, If thou will be honored, give honor unto others; If thou will be
succored succor others; If thou will be loved love others. For if thou will
have a friend, thou must either make him or find him: and in that case I say,
that it is better for thee to make him by good turns, than buy him with money.
Peter of Rauenna says in a Sermon of the holy Ghost: O what a sweet thing it
is to have friends to love, and to love to be loved again: for the qualities
of true friendship are, that it fears no sword, it dreadeth no arrow, it
refuses no spear, nor esteems not his life, but embraces death with
cheerfulness, rather than make any default in friendship. Isidorus says,
That the privileges of true friendship are, that it makes prosperous fortune
more pleasant, and adverse more easy, makes doubtful things certain, and
fierceness meek, and makes that light which is grievous and heavy.
Hermogenes says, When thou art in prosperity in this world, thou ought to
suspect all friendship; for thou do not know whether they love that which
thou have, or thy self which do possess it: for true friendship is not
known when thou have much to give, but when thou art in necessity to ask. Is
there (says S. Ambrose) any greater consolation in this miserable world, tha^
to have a faithful friend, with whom thou may open thy breast, communicate
thy secrets, discover thy heart, impart thy pleasures, and give part of thy
griefs? If thou do make a bed to lie in, and build chimnees to warm thee
in, and garners for thy corn, why do thou not seek bowels to hide the
secrets of thy bowels? And thou must know, that thou ought nor to trust the
secrets of thy heart, but unto another who is thy heart. Saint Jerome unto
Ruffinus says, When thou do enter into friendship with any faithful friend
(Ruffinus) learn better how to keep him than thou did keep Jerome: for a
good friend is not found every where the is long a seeking for, and seldom
gotten, he is hardly kept and easily lost, he is recovered very slowly, and the
want of him felt very quickly. Chilo the Philosopher says, I am half of my
friend, and my friend is half of me, in so much that I must seek him in me,
and my self in him, because he is I, and I am he. And he says further, that
when my friend dies in him whom I loved, half of my self died with him, and
half of him remains alive with me, in so much that by my will I should die,
if it were not to keep that part of him which remained in me alive. This
virtue of friendship could not be better praised, than this Philosopher has
done it, seeing he does confess, that half of himself is in the grave with
his friend, and that half of his friend was alive in his soul, and that he
desired to live for no other reason, but because his friend should not die in
him. To come then unto our purpose, if all this be true, we should have great
compassion upon Christ, seeing his Father took his friends from him, separated
his kin from him, and left him no comfort by his acquaintance. It is much to be
noted, that Christ does complain that his Father took but one friend from him,
and one kinsman, but many of his acquaintance; to note unto us, that of
faithful friends there is scarce one to be found, and of virtuous kinsmen
hardly one, but of acquaintance a great number. O that he knows but meanly
what friendship is, who puts a friend, a kinsman, and his acquaintance under
one reckoning, because that I am to call him only my friend who loves me, and
him my kinsma^ who is a good Christian, and all other my neighbors and
companions my acquaintance. To speak properly, Christ had but one friend only
who was his Father, and no other friend like unto him; and one only which was
of his kindred, who was his mother, and none other like unto her: but he had
great acquaintance among the Jews: and in that great conflict which he had in
his passion, his friend forsook him, his kindred did not help him, and his
acquaintaince showed themselves ungrateful. Thou did remove far from me,
my friend, seeing that thou O my Father, would not hear me when I prayed
unto thee in the garden following the inclination of the flesh: and thou
did remove my kin from me, seeing that my mother could not help me on the
Mount of Caluary; and thou did remove my acquaintance from me, seeing that
there I was put to death by them. O in what great danger, and in what a narrow
strait the son of God was at the time of his passion, seeing he complains
that his Father did not hear him, his mother did not help him, and none of
his friends would know him. Thou did say very well O sweet Jesus, that
Elongasti a me amicum and proximum, seeing thy friend who was thy father, could
comfort thee but would not; thy kin who was thy mother, would but could not
help thee; and thy acquaintance who was Judas, neither would nor could
accompany thee, in so much that upon the altar of the cross thou did
abound in torment, and want friends. O that we had a far better friend of
thee, than thou had of us, seeing that Totum belli pondus versum est in
Saul; When as to make an atonement betwixt us and thy Father, he did lay all
the danger of the war upon thy shoulders. Non est qui vtrumque possit
arguere, and ponere manum suam in ambobus, says Job chapter 9. As if he would
say, The one is so strong, and the other so obstinate, that there is no man
able to satisfy the^, nor who dares put his hand between the^. When that holy
man Job says, that he saw two men at a variance, which all the world could not
make friends and set at agreement, and yet did not name the^, it is small doubt
but he understands some great secret and hidden mystery. Of these two which
holy Job speaks of, who is the strong and mighty one, but only our eternal
God, and who the obstinate man, but he who is without comfort? Cyrillus says,
That God and man, and man and God did handle one another very hardly, because
man did nothing but sin, and God did never cease to punish, and thervpo^ it is,
that in those days they called God, Deus vltionu^, deus vltionu^ twice;
because he did neither pardon their bodies of punishment, nor their souls of
the fault. Because God was the highest and chiefest goodness that was, and man
inclined unto wickedness, God did command him to better and amend himself:
unto which he answered that he would be merry and take his pleasure; by reason
whereof man went every day worse and worse, and God more angry and incensed
every day against him. Pope Leo says, That God does not weigh whether we be
weak or strong, in health or sick, rich or poor, simple or wise, but that
which he desires, is that we should be good, and he is angry if we be naught:
and thereupon it is, that he never casts any good man out of his presence,
nor he admits no naughty man into his house. Gregory says, That he could
not suffer one sin in him who was an Angel, and do thou think he will
suffer so many sins in thee who art but a man? And he says further, that
God would rather suffer, that an Angel should take heaven from him, and man
the world, than suffer one only sin either in the one or in the other;
because that to make a new heaven he is of sufficient power, but to like and
approve a sin, neither is his power able to do it, neither can it be
comprehended under his clemency. Seeing then that God is such an enemy unto
sin, and seeing that man does so much covet to sin, how can they be but
contrary the one unto the other, and use one another like enemies? Holy Job
does weep and sigh, saying, Non est qui possit vtrumque arguere, that is,
there was no man who durst be a mediator betwixt them, nor put himself
between them, to the end that man might give over sinning, and God withdraw
his hand from punishing. Damascen says, When God and man, and man and God,
were at strife and variance, and the one always above in heaven, and the other
continually upon the earth, there was no mean to make them meet, nor no court
to agree them in, because there came none down from heaven to us, nor any fit
person went hence from us to heaven. The son of God came the^ into the world,
and put himself a mediator between them both, that is, between God and flesh.
O how much we are bound to Christ for that which he did for us, and much more
for the manner with the which he did it! for the more to bind the one and the
other, he took the divinity of his Father with the which he might pardon us,
and took flesh of man, with the which he might suffer with us. In so much
that because he took his kindred and alliance of both, he was able to make
them both friends. O how costly this friendship and kindred was to the son of
God, and grievous also, seeing that it did cost him his blood which was in him,
and the life which he possessed so far forth, that for to make me friends
with God, he became an enemy unto himself. It is certain that when two
enemies do draw their weapons to fight, if another venture in betwixt them,
that both their blows do light upon him, in so much that he who parreth them
is hurt or slain, and those which were at debate prove afterward good friends.
On the Mount of Caluary, and on the altar of the cross, as God and man, and
man and God, had summoned the one the other to a place of defiance, blessed
Jesus put himself betwixt them both to cut off the strife, because he knew
that if he had not taken away all anger at that place, they would have
remained perpetual enemies. As man threw sins at God, and God punishment
upon man, it fell out that the sin which man fought with, and the punishment
with the which God did chastise, fell all upon the Mediator who had not
deserved it. O good Jesus and glory of my soul, upon whom but upon thee did
thy Father lay his old anger, upon whom but upon thee did man lay his fault?
Do not then vex thy self O holy Job, and say, Non est qui ponat manum suam
in ambobus, seeing he is already come from heaven, and already borne in the
world who has put his hand betwixt God and man, yea and has both his hands
cut off by them? Have not they both trow you cut off his hand, seeing his
Father ordained that he should die, and man put the fault on him for which he
should be crucified? O divine mediator, O holy stickeler! which of the Angels
could do the like, or what man could attempt that which thou have done? That
is willingly, and upon good and long deliberation, thou did offer thy self
to lose thy life, to set God and man in concord and unity. The son of God
then does complain upon his Father with just cause, saying, Why have thou
forsaken me? seeing that he did load all his wrath upon his back, and man
likewise lay all the burden of his sins upon his shoulders, upon him in that
place God did empty all his wrath, and in that place man's sins took their
end. O that this is a glorious time, and a happy age which we of the
Catholic church live in! for having Christ for our Mediator, there can no
sin go up to the Father, but it must first meet with Christ, nor any
punishment come down upon man, but it must also come by him. The son of God
being a mean betwixt his Father and us, who doubts but that he will stop
our sin in himself, that it ascend not to heaven, and also keep back the
punishment of his Father, that it do not descend into the world? As otherwise
it would if Christ should not make himself a mean betwixt us.

CHAP. IIII. How Christ complains on his Father, because he bathed his body
with the blood of his veins, and drowned his heart in waters of distress.
CIrcumdederunt me sicut aqua, tota die circu^dederunt mesimul, Psalm 88. The
son of God spoke these words, continuing his complaint against his Father:
and it is as if he would say, What means this O my Father, what means
this? Wast thou not content to break thy anger upon me, and remove all my
friends from me, but now anew thou will compass me with a great flood of
water, in the which my life is drowned? Christ does set forth at large all his
trauails, and bewaileth the want of friends: for he says that the waters were
great, and he says twice that they besieged him, and that they came all
together upon him, and that they came so ragingly, that they took away all his
forces. First of all, we must examine here of what kind of waters our Lord
speaks in this place, whether they be sea waters, or of a river, or
fountain, or of a lake, because that in all these a man may drown himself,
and lose his life. We read only of two punishments which God has inflicted by
waters, the one in the flood of Noe, in which almost all the world perished,
the other which he used against the people of Egypt in the red sea; the which
two punishments were so famous, that our Lord has not used the like until
this day. The son of God does not complain of this kind of flood, nor we
do not read that he ever was in danger by water: for being Lord of all the
waters, how is it possible that he should be drowned in the waters? The son
of God complains of stronger floods than these, of more raging seas, and more
salter waters, of whose bitterness none tasted so much of as he did, nor no
man went so near the bottom of them as he did. What waters were they then
which compassed the son of God, but only most grievous tribulations, which
passed through his heart, and tormented his body? In Scripture by many waters
is oftentimes understood many tribulations, as when he said elsewhere, Saluum
^^e fac^domine, quia intrauerunt aquae animam meam, as if he would say, Save
me O Lord because I am drowned, help me O my great God, because the waters
ouerflow me, because the waters of distress enter in at my mouth, and drown
my dolorous heart. O in what great anguish of mind he was who spoke these
words! for to say that anguish went to his heart, was nothing else but to be
grieved at the heart. The waters of tribulation, and the flood of vexation
entered into no man's heart so deeply, as into our Saviors: for seeing that we
were the cause of them all, as he did love us from the heart, so he did feel
them from the heart. It is to be noted, that he does not say that the water
did wet him, or bemite him, or make him afraid, for all these things do not
kill, but only put us in fear. All the peril of water is, that a sudden
stream do not carry us away, and that our life does consist in nothing but in
the sudden growing or decreasing of the water. Seneca says, That no man can
be in greater danger in this life, than he who sees himself compassed with
waters, because that at the self same time our soul and life goes out where
the waters go in, and the waters go out where our souls go in. To what
other thing could the son of God better compare his anguish and distress, than
unto one compassed about with waters? It is to be noted that he says,
Circumdederunt me, Have enuitoned me, because the water which raineth does wet
only, the water thrown dasheth only, and that which is drunk fills, but
that which compasses on every side drowneth: and therefore Christ says they
have iuclosed me on every side; and says not they have wet me, because his
blessed heart was drowned in the sea of sorrow, and his sacred body in the
flood of torments. The waters which compassed him about, and the floods which
fell upon him were so great, that my tongue is not able to rehearse them, nor
my heart to think them, nor my fingers to write them, nor my eyes to bewail
them. O good Jesus and my souls delight, how or when did thou see thy
self environed with waters, but when thou saw one member pulled from
another on the Mount of Caluary? O that it is an improper speech to say that
thou wast compassed with water, seeing that thou might with greater reason
have said, that thou did see thy self drowned in blood, because that in
that lamentable day of thy death thou did want water, and flow in blood. It
is nor without a deep mystery and hidden secret, that Christ says, that he
was compassed about with water, although it were true that he was environed
with blood: and the reason is, because there is no man who is so greatly
recreated by drinking a cup of cold water, nor takes so great contentment in
it, as good Jesus did in shedding his blood to redeem the world with it.
Christ says then, they have compassed me about like unto water, because that
if he did look upward, he saw his Father who would not seem to hear him, if
downward he saw but his mother, who could do nothing but weep for him, if he
did look on the left hand he saw but a thief, who would not believe in him,
if on the other hand he saw another thief who could not help him. He was
compassed on every side: for if he should have looked behind, he should have
seen the hangmen watching him, and before him the Jews a mocking him. Christ
says, they have compassed me like unto a water: upon which words S. Barnard
says thus, O good Jesus, O my souls delight, what pity did move thee, what
charity did force thee, being nailed upon the cross, laden with thorns,
beset about with spears, yet thou say that thou art compassed with waters?
Do thou die upon the cross, and that with great thirst, and could not
get a cup of water to drink, and yet do thou say, that thou art compassed
with water? What love has transported thee, or what goodness has made thee
past thy sense, that thou should think the blood which issues from thee,
should be water that runs out of thee? What means this O redeemer of my
soul, what means this? Does thy hard nails, cruel spears, grievous
thorns, seem to be fountains of sweet waters? The love which Christ bare us
in suffering was so infinite, that all things seemed sweet and pleasant unto
him, because it is a privilege of love that nothing seems hard and painful
unto him which loves, but that which he does unwillingly. The son of God
does nothing unwillingly in this world, unless it be when he punishes our
offenses: for although he do many things daily being prayed thereunto, yet he
does nothing being forced. Christ does complain also that they compassed him
with many floods of waters coming together: for he says, Circumde derunt me
simul, which kind of persecution is no less painful than perilous, nor
perilous than painful. Plato to this purpose says, That when griefs and
vexations come by little and by little, they seem to be somewhat tolerable:
but when they come by heaps, they are intolerable; and the reason is, because
man had no time to foresee such dangers, nor place to avoid them. Basil upon
the Psalm says, That griefs and vexations came upon that most blessed
humanity of Christ, like a very great water, and like many enemies which laid
in ambush, the which Christ would not nor did not resist, nor yet fly away
from, but only beseech his Father to give him more strength to endure and abide
them. Bid says in an Homily, O that this thy love which thou did show in
this speech of Quare me dereliquisti was unspeakable, and thy charity
incomparable! for if thou do complain to thy Father, it was not because he
should take away some part of the torment which thou did suffer, but
because he would not give thee longer life to suffer more. Vbertinus says
that Christ said very truly, when he said, that whole floods of many waters had
compassed him round about, because that in the compass of four and twenty
hours he was watched, apprehended, denied, accused, whipped, and received
sentence, spoiled, crucified, and dead; insomuch that if we compare the moments
of times with his torments, we shall see, that the torments which he suffered
were more than the moments and quantities of the time in which he suffered. S.
Ambrose upon the Psalm says, That no man could ever say these words of
Circumdederunt me aquae tota die and simul, with so good reason as Christ;
because on that day which he suffered in, there passed no hour, nor moment,
nor minute of time, in the which he was not either strocke^, or whipped, or
spit upon, or blasphemed: insomuch that those ministers of wickedness were so
busy and hasty in giving him torment, that they themselves had no time to rest
them in, nor Christ to breath in. Pope Leo upon the Passion of our Savior
says, That he had great cause to say, that he was compassed with many
waters, because that all kind of people and all nations conspired in one
against that most sacred humanity, Jews, Gentiles, Priests, Pharisees,
Disciples, Pontifes, Kings, Captains, Soldiers, hangmen, young, old, stranger,
and all others. S. Augustine upon S. John says this: What people were therein
the world which were not at the death of Christ, or what torment was there
invented which he suffered not? In so tempestious a sea, in so dangerous a
flood, in such sudden waves, and in such distresses heaped one upon another,
who would not have the son say unto the Father, Why have thou forsaken me,
seeing he did not speak one word to comfort him, nor left him any one friend
which did favor him?

CHAP. V. How Christ complains of his Father, because he did permit those to
crucify him which were wont to be his friends: and how he calls them
friends.
QVae sunt plagae istae in medie manuum tuarum? His plagatus sum in domo eorum
qui me diligebant, says Esaias, chap. 20. These words were spoken by all the
Angels, unto the Lord of all Angels, who was the son of God, and it is as if
he would say: O son of God, O eternal wisdom, being descended from heaven
into this world alive and whole, how do thou come now from thence with such
a pitiful body, and so wounded in thy hands? If thou will know where, how,
and by whom I have received these wounds and gashes, know thou that I have
received them in the house of such as loved me, and they gave them me who bare
me good will. Look how new and strange this question is, so marvelous is the
answer; and how marvelous the answer, so strange the question: for it is a
very strange thing that God should go to heaven with wounds upon him; and to
say that his friends gave them him, is also a very marvelous thing, because it
is the part of a friend to cure our wounds, and of an enemy to make them. What
is this O good Jesus, what is this? How can he who loves thee vvound thee,
and he who wishes thee well hurt thee, and he who wounds thee take pity
on thee, and he who serves thee offend thee? Anselmus handling this place
says, O eternal goodness of thee my God, and patience never before this time
seen, seeing thou do call them openly thy friends which rent thy flesh,
wrest thy sinews, vnioint thy bones! To say O good Jesus that thou vvast
vvounded in the house of such as loved thee, is a speech which shows thy
clemency, and gives me great confidence: for if thou do call those thy
friends which do wound thee and kill thee, what will thou do by them which
faithfully have served thee? Christ had one house in Jury, which was Jerusalem,
and he had a friend in heaven which was his Father, and he had another friend
upon the earth which was the Synagogue, and in that house he was put to death,
and he was wounded by those two friends: for the Synagogue did crucify him,
and his Father did determine that he should be crucified. If the Gentiles which
were not his friends and acquaintance should have put him to death, it would
have been tolerable: but to see that he was wounded and slain in the city
where he had lived, and by his friends which he had made much of, and by the
will of his Father which begat him, did grieve him very much, although he did
dissemble it. Barnard says, The more I think upon thy works O good Jesus, the
more I wonder; seeing that man having done the deeds of an enemy toward thee,
thou can not call him enemy but friend, considering that thou say, I have
been wounded in the house of such as did love me. By which words he does let
us understand, that he regards more the love which he bears unto the
world, than the offenses which the world does unto him. If as good Jesus said
unto the Angels, my friends have thus wounded me, he would have said unto his
Father that his enemies had done it, what should then have become of the poor
Jews, and what afterward of us all? As when friends in jesting do hurt and
scratch one another, so Christ would make the Angels and his Father believe,
that his enemies had not wounded his sacred hands, but that his friends had
done it as it were in sporting. O how truly we may say with the Prophet David,
Non est deus noster sicut dijeorum, Our God is not like unto their gods, seeing
that here upon earth men take in earnest the words which their friends speak in
jest to them, and if they scratched with a pin, or with ones nail, they make
no less a matter of it, than if it were a thrust with a lance. The which
quality could not sincke into Christ, seeing that before his father, he called
his enemies his friends, his whipping scratching, his deep wound a raising of
the skin, and earnest testing. S. Augustine upon these words, Amice ad quid
venisti, says, this word Enemy, O good Jesus, will not enter into thy mind,
because thou art accustomed to call every man friend: for seeing that thou
did call Judas thy greatest enemy thy friend, whom will thou call enemy?
Osculantes se ad inuicem fleuerunt pariter David and Ionathas; sed David fleuit
amplius. 1. Reg. chap. 20. These holy words are rehearsed in scripture, talking
of the friendship that was betwixt David and Ionathas: and this is their
meaning; As king David was departing out of the kingdom, and going from
Ionathas his faithful friend, at the time of their departure they embraced one
the other, and wept; and although Ionathas did weep much, yet David did weep
more. Mimus the Philosopher says, That the love which one friend bears
another, is never better known than when the one departs from the other; for
if the one want words, the other abounds in tears. Cicero in his book of
Friendship says, That true friendship is known in going the one from the
other, because that in their embracing the one the other, they change their
hearts, in so much that this man's heart goes away with him, and his heart
remains with this man. It seems that David and Ionathas were great
friends, seeing that they did embrace one another so heartily, and wept so
tenderly. David did much more esteem of the friendship of Ionathas, than of the
hatred of his father king Saul: the which was easily seen to be so,
considering that when Saul made a truce between them, David presently departed
out of the kingdom. David with all his wisdom and force durst never abide
the persecution of Saul his enemy, without his friend Ionathas aid: whereby
we may infer, that there is no grief in this life equal to the loss of a
friend. Be he (says Seneca) poor or be he rich, be he great or be he
little, how is it possible for him to live without a friend? Horace says, That
if a man be in prosperous estate, he has need of one to give him counsel, if
in mean to comfort him: for I have heard (says he) my master Menander say,
that a fortunate man has as great need of good counsel to govern himself
by, as the needy man has need of help to lift up himself by. If then the
mighty have need of good counsel, and the poor of help and succor, who can
better give us good counsel, or supply our wants than a friend? Eschines in
an inuectiue against Demosthenes says, That an enemy can do his enemy no
greater vvrong, than take his good friend from him, because he takes away the
secret of his heart, the refuge of his trauails, the remedy of his necessities,
and relief and cherishing of his persecutions. Plutarch makes mention, that
when Denis the Tyrant did scoff at Phocion the Philosopher, for that he was
poor, he made answer thus, I confess unto thee that I am poor, but yet
Denis is poorer: for although he abound in money yet he wants friends, and
I have friends enough but want money. That Philosopher thought it a greater
poverty to want friends, than to want money: wherein he had great reason,
because that in tribulation or sickness, it does ease a man better to see two
or three friends at his beds head, than to have his chests and coffers full of
gold and silver. There are many (says Vbertinus) which are poor of money, and
not of friends, and others which are poor in friends and not in money, and
there are some which are poor in the one and in the other, of which sort
Christ is the chief, seeing that on the cross, he had no man which would
bestow a cup of water upon him, nor any one which would give him one word of
comfort. Christ complains of the Apostles because they fled, complains of
his parents because they did hide themselves, complained on his acquaintance
because they did not stick unto him, because that in all the conflict of his
passion he had no friend which followed him, no kinsman which defended him,
nor acquaintance which backed him. Christ had (says Rabanus) very honorable
and virtuous friends, and valerous acquaintance; but when they saw him weak
in strength, and poor in wealth, all of them left him in his troubles, because
they would not be the partakers of his danger. Saint Barnard cries out and
says, What means this O good Jesus, what means this? There wants not
one in Jerusalem to defend Barrabas, and does there want one before Pilate to
defend thee? Does Barrabas by stealing find friends, and do thou by
preaching get enemies? Does the murderer of the quick find defenders, and does
the raiser of the death find accusers? Do they condemn him who made an
atonement betwixt God and man, and do they set him at liberty who disquieted
all Jerusalem? O unhappy and wicked Jerusalem, will there be always some in
thee to persecute the good, and defend the wicked? Venerable Bede says, That
al those which were Barrabas friends, were Christ's enemies, and all those which
were Christ's friends, were Barrabas enemies: for with the same note and voice
that they cried, do not let go any but Barrabas, they said of Christ,
crucify him. S. Augustine in an Homily says, That because the twife doubling
of a word is the true token of love or hatred, the Jews did well show the love
which they bare unto Barrabas, in desiring Pilute twice to let him loose, and
the hatred which they bare to Christ in saying twice, Crucify, crucify him.
For to say twife Non dimittas nobis nisi ^arrabam, what else was it then to
ask with all their hearts that he would grant that thief his life, and send
him to his house that feast of Easter? And to cry out twice aloud, crucify,
crucify him, what else would they say to Pilate, but that they ask with their
tongues, and entreat with their hearts that he would put Jesus of Nazareth
upon the gibbet, or put him to death upon the cross? Chrysostom says, The
Prince of the Synagogue, and the ruler of Capernaum, Centurio the captain,
Zacheus the rich, and Simeon the leaper, and Lazarus the knight, were not all
these, trow you, Christ's friends and acquaintance, and of the richest and
honourablest among the people? Christ did very much for every one of these,
when he was alive, but there was none of these which did any thing for him when
he died, although he went by their gates to be crucified, and with their eyes
they did see him die. Christ then had great reason to say unto his Father, why
have thou forsaken me, considering that himself had too many enemies, and
Barrabas wanted no friends.

CHAP. VI. How Christ complains unto his father, because they made more
account of Iepthes daughter in the Synagogue, than they do at this day of his
death in the church.
FAc mihi quodcunque pollicitus es, concessa tibi victoria and vltione de
inimicis tuis. chap. 12 of the Judges. The daughter of that famous captain
Iepthe spoke these words unto her father when her father returned from the war
which the people of Israel had against the king of the Ammonites: as though she
would say, Do with me O my Father, do with me what pleases thee. For seeing
that thou do come victorious from the war, it is very just and reasonable
that thou should perform that which thou have promised our Lord. Iepthe had
promised and made a solemn vow, that if God would give him the victory of that
war, that he would offer unto him the first live thing of his house which he
should meet withal; and although it were alive when he should meet it, yet
he would not offer it but killed and dead. Iepthe then returning from the
war with a great victory, his sorrowful fate was, that having but one
only daughter, she went to meet him and receive him coming home singing and
playing on a Taber. Immediately as the sorrowful Father saw his unfortunate
daughter, his eyes were full of water, and his heart brake in two, when he
remembered the vow which he had made in the war, and that he could do no
less than kill his daughter. The father then said unto his daughter, O my
daughter and sole inheritrize, how unfortunate was thy destiny, and how
unlucky was my fortune, in that I must open my mouth, and make that promise to
such great prejudice to thy life, and hurt unto my house? His daughter answered
him and said, If thou have opened thy mouth, my father, to make any vow unto
the great God of Israel, let me be no hinderance for the performance of it:
for I will like it well, only because I see thee victorious over thy enemies.
And she added further and said, only I ask of thee my father, that thou
would give me two months space before thou do sacrifice me in the
Temple, to bewail my Virginity in these sorrowful mountains with others my
companions. And when those two months were past, (the tender virgin bewailing
and weeping the loss of her life and virginity vnbestowed) the Father
performed his vow, and sacrificed his daughter. Because Iephthe that captain
had that famous victory, but yet with vufortunate loss of his only daughter,
all the young maids and virgins of the people of Israel agreed a meeting to
weep and lament the death of Iephthes daughter four days in the year; and
although the people of the Jews did omit things of greater weight than that
was, yet they did never forget to mourn and lament those days. The holy
scripture does promise us many great matters in this figure of Iephthe, worthy
to be known, and hard to expound. Who is understood by the famous captain
Iephthe, but the son of the living God, and redeemer of the world? He who
said, all power is given me in heaven and earth, is more valerous and mighty
than Ieph the was, because that Iephthes authority extended no further than the
land of Jury, but the son of Gods did reach over heaven and earth. The
scripture makes mention, that when Iephthe was a young man, those of his
country put him from his fathers inheritance, and banished him out of the
land, and how that in progress of time he delivered them from their enemies,
and was captain over them all. That which the neighbors of Gilead did to
Iephthe, the inhabitants of Jerusalem did to Christ, whom they banished out of
the Synagogue, and deprived of his Fathers inheritance: and yet nevertheless
he delivered them from their sins, and was the red^emer of them all. The
truth does very well answer to the figure in this place, and the sense unto
the letter. For as they which did banish Iephthe out of all the kingdom, did
afterward entreat him to be their guide and captain: so those which said to
Pilate, crucify, crucify him, did afterward on the Mount of Caluary strike
their breasts and say aloud, Vere hic filius deifuit, This man was truly the
son of God. Who was understood in Iepthes daughter, a virgin fair and young,
but only that flesh and humanity of the Word? S. Ambrose upon those words
Speciosus sorma, says, Who is so beautiful, who is so pure, who so holy, as
that most sacred flesh was and is? The daughter of Iephthe was not known of
any man, and Christ's humanity was also unknown of man, seeing that it was not
conceived by consent of husband, but formed and framed by the vvebe of the holy
ghost. Iephthe did promise to offer in the Temple his only daughter for the
victory which he had obtained against his enemies, and Christ did promise to
offer upon the cross his own flesh for the victory and conquest which he had
against sins; so that Iephthe did offer only the daughter which he had
begotten, and the son of God did offer his own proper body. Is it not think
you a greater matter for a man to offer his own flesh, than that which is
born of his flesh? Iephthe was very loath and grieved to offer his only
daughter, and it was a great corrasiue to the daughters heart, to see her
self sacrificed by her own Father: but in the end she was more joyful and
glad of the victory which her Father received against his enemies, than
grieved that her own life should be sacrificed. O how well one mystery does
answer unto another! for when the flesh said, Let this cup pass from me,
with the daughter of Iephthe he was loath to die: but when he said, Not as
I will, but as thou vvilt, he was glad to suffer: so that that sacred flesh
was very vvilling to be sacrificed, because that the divine Word should
obtain victory over sins. Do thou not think my brother, that one mystery
does very well answer another, and that one secret is very well compated
with another, seeing that that virgin was sacrificed for her fathers honor,
and that divine and sacred flesh also sacrificed for the honor and glory of
his father? Iepthe had a great revenge over his enemies, but Christ a far
greater over sin: and yet it is to be noted, that by how much the greater
those two victories were, so much the more greater were the prices which
they were bought for, because the one did cost his daughters life, and the
other his own. What can be deerer than that which does cost a man's life?
Pellem pro pelle and cuncta dabit home pro animasua, says Job chapter 2. The
Scripture makes mention in Job, that as there appeared before the judgment of
God many wicked men, the devil made one among them: for good men do never
assemble themselves to do good, but Satan is there also to do them some
hurt. Our Lord said unto Satan, from whence do thou come, and vvhither
have thou gone? To this Satan answered, I have gone about all the earth, and
vvalked through it, to see whether I could happen upon any more that were
mine. Our Lord replied, have thou seen my good servant and trusty friend Job,
unto whom no man on the earth may be compared? And do thou not know
Satan that Job is a holy man, sincere in condition, upright in his conscience,
fearful in that which the law commands, without malice, and one who
continues till this day in his innocence? Thou have stirred me up against him,
that I should kill his sons, destroy his sheep and dear, and that his oxen
should be stolen from him, and all his wealth taken from him, and that I
should deprive him of all his honor. Satan answered unto this and said, Know
Lord, that a man will give all his wealth and substance with condition to
save his life. Pellem pro pelle dabit hemo, that is, A man will give al his
sheep skins, and all the cowes hides in the world to keep his own flesh. If
thou vvilt try Lord who thy friend Job is, lay thy hand upon his own person,
and fill his body with a leprosy, and then thou shall see, that he will be
more grieved to see his body plagued, than to see his goods taken from him.
This then was the reasoning and dialogue which passed betwixt God and the
devil touching Jobs tentation: whereof we may infer, how much more that is
to be esteemed which the son of God offered, than Iephthes sacrifice, because
the one offered his daughter, and the other his own proper life. The victory
which Iephthe had, was a costly victory unto him, but Christ's was more costly,
because that Iephthe did overcome and live, but the son of God did overcome
and die, and there is no dearer victory in the world than that which is bought
with the exchange of a man's proper life. Although Iephthe did love his only
daughter well, yet Christ did love his precious flesh better, because it was
united unto the divine eslence, and therefore the better he did love it, the
more was his grief in losing it. Aristotle says, That wise men do love their
lives better than others of the vulgar people, because they see themselves more
necessary unto the Commonwealth, and every common good is to be preferred
before a particular. And according unto this saying of the Philosopher, as the
son of God was wiser than all men, and better than all men, so without doubt
by so much the more he loved his life, by how much it was most profitable to
all men. Satan said well Pellem pro pelle dabit homo, A man will give one skin
for another. For if a man would have asked the captain Iephthe which of these
two things he would rather have done, either have sacrificed his daughter, or
his own person, it is to be thought that he would rather have sacrificed his
daughter twice, than his own person once. Seneca in his book of Clemency
says, That because it is a natural thing unto us to live, and a dreadful and
fearful thing to die, we are much afraid of our own death, and bear
another man's easily. Theophilus says, That it is much to be marvelled that
Christ would die; but it is much more to be wondered at, that he would die
with so good a will, because that without augmenting his glory, yea rather
diminishing it, he offered himself willingly unto them, to the end that they
should take his life from him. The figure says further, that Iephthes
daughter, went two months weeping and wailing her virginity on those solitary
mountains, with other virgins and maids which bare her company. What was the
meaning that that pare virgin, bemoned and bewailed her virginity, but only
that she was sorry that she had not been married, and had a husband, and that
she had no children to mourn for her death, or inherit her goods? It seems
to be a dishonest matter for a virgin to weep, and bewail her own
virginity, if there were no other hidden sense under this letter, because that
in scripture the more obscure a saying is, the more fuller it is of mystery.
We have already said that Christ's sacred flesh is figured by that tender
virgin, and now we say again, that as Iephthes daughter bewailed her own
virginity, so did Christ likewise his: only it is to be noted, that there is a
difference betwixt weeping and weeping, virginity and virginity. The son
then does complain on his father saying, Why have thou forsaken me: which he
uttered because he had not employed his most pure virginity and most holy
innocence as he desired to do: for as he was borne a virgin, a virgin he
died; and if he came innocent into the world, with his innocence he returned
unto heaven again. Let no man think that Christ bewailed and wept his
virginity, because he did inuiolably keep his most holy flesh: for if his
mother did not lose it in bringing him into the world, neither could he lose
it by living in the world. The chastity which the scripture speaks of, and
the virginity which Christ bewaileth with Iephthes daughter, is not the
corruptible virginity, but the incorruptible, not the virginity of the body,
but of the soul, the which does make our Lord great with holy speeches and
divine inspirations; and therefore if he be great with these divine
inspirations, he brings forth afterward holy works. S. Augustine upon those
words, Desponsauit te mihi in fide says, Spiritual and holy men have as
great need to marry their fowls with Christ, as worldlings have to seek
husbands for their daughters: and if I have said as great, now I say more need;
because a maid may be saved without the company of a husband, but a soul
cannot be saved unless she take Christ with her. S. Barnard says, O how far
more higher is the spiritual matrimony, than the corporal! the one is
between the wife and her husband, the other betwixt the soul and Christ; of
the one come children, which sometimes do breed grief and anger, of the other
there do proceed works which do always good. If Iephthes daughter do weep
her departing out of this world a virgin, even so does Christ weep and lament
his virginity, because he has left no greater a spiritual posterity after
him: for he would willingly have left all the hearts in the world great with
child with good and virtuous desires, and all souls delivered of good works.
When God said by the Prophet Esayas, Numquid ego qui alijs generationem tribue,
sterilis ere? That is, Shall I be barren my self and give issue unto others?
he did not speak this for any desire which he had to marry himself with any
woman, but for the great zeal which he had to marry and couple himself with
our souls; because that in all ages and all times the chastity of the body is
a holy thing, and in all ages and all times the barrenness of the soul is
naught and discommendable. What do thou weep for then O good Jesus, what
do thou weep? I weep my virginity with the daughter of Iephthe, because I
have scarce found any in all the world who will marry with my divine grace, nor
who will be great with child with my divine inspirations: and that which I
mislike most of all is, that if I begin to dally and make love with any sinful
soul, she turns her back toward me, and is ready to fly from me. I
bewail my virginity, because that in three and thirty years which I have
lived in the world, with all the sermons which I have preached, and with all the
dead which I have raised unto life, and with all the devils which I have cast
out, and all the sins which I have forgiven, it seems unto me that I have
made small gain, and done little good in respect of the pains which I have
taken. I bewail my virginity, because that being come in person into the
world, having instructed all the people, shed my blood, rent and torn my
flesh, lost my reputation, and bestowed my life, yet I see now that there is
scarce any one found who would benefit himself with my blood, or who is
thankful unto me for my benefits bestowed upon him. I bewail my virginity,
because I have found none to bestow my virginity on, none to give my innocence
unto, none to impart my patience unto, none unto whom I may communicate my
charity, nor any one with whom I may leave my humility in keeping: but if I
came rich and adorned with virtues in the world, so I must return rich again
with the^ to heaven. The figure which we have spoken of, says further, that
all the maids of Sion did meet in Jerusalem to mourn and weep the death of
Iephthes daughter four days one after another, in the which they made great
lamentations, so that no year did pass, in which this solemnity was not
observed. It is here to be noted, that although there have been in the
synagogue many personages, noble in blood, valerous in war, discreet in the
Commonwealth, learned in all sciences, and clean and unspotted in life, yet it
is not read of any of the^, that after they were dead and buried, were mourned
for at any other time. All the kings, Dukes, Patriarks, and Prophets were buried
by their friends and kinsfolks, and forgotten of them, excepted only the
daughter of Iephthe, for whose death all the virgins and maids did mourn and
weep every year once by a special privilege. We speak all this because
that if the daughters of Sion thought it convenient to think upon and weep
for the death of that virgin once every year, should it not be greater
reason that we should weep for the death of Jesus Christ every hour and
every moment of an hour? Those virgins did weep for the death of that young
virgin for no other reason but because she was young, beautiful and virtuous,
so that they were induced to make that solemn lamentation rather through
compassion than reason. What other reason could there be for that solemn
yearly lamentation, seeing that the daughter of Iephthe died not for the
Commonwealth, nor yet had in estimation for any rare virtue above the rest?
Just occasion and reason does inuit us to weep every hour, and every moment
of an hour, for the death of Christ, considering that he died for the
Commonwealth, and paid for our offense. For the son to say unto his father,
Why have thou forsaken me, is to say nothing else, but to complain of us
because we remember not his precious death, as Iephthes daughter was wept for
once a year. Although the sinful soul does not remember the death of Christ,
yet the holy church does not forget nor omit to celebrate his death once at the
end of every year in the holy week. And in steed that the daughters of Sion
did weep for the death of that virgin four times in the year, the church
does represent unto us the passion written four times of the four Evangelists.

CHAP. VII. How Christ complains unto his father, because they did open his
wounds through malice, as they did stop up Isaac his wels through envy.
HAbuit Isaac possession^^ onium, armentorum, and familiam plurimam: ob hoc
inuidentes Palestini obstruxerunt omnes putees eius, implentes humo, Genes. 26.
The Scripture has these words telling us of a great discouresie which the
king of Palestine did unto Isaac the Patriarch: and it is as if he would say,
Isaac was a great and mighty man, and had many flocks of sheep, and many
herds of kine, and many bondslaues both man and woman; by reason of which
prosperity of his, the Palestines did greatly envy him, and did stop up his
wels by casting much earth into every one of them. O that the Apostle said very
true, when he said, all things happen unto them in figura, seeing that all
things that were done in the Synagogue, were nothing else tha^ a figure of that
which should happen in the Catholic church. For if it were not so, there are
many things in Scripture which would seem but a jest to write of, and a
superfluous thing to read. If there should not be some deep mystery and some
hidden secret in this figure, what were it unto us, or what profit should we
receive in knowing that Isaac had many sheep, kine, and slaves? What were it
also unto us, if he had many enemies, and that they did shut up his wels, envy
his riches, have an ere unto his greatness, considering that it is an old
custom, that every rich man is envied? This figure does lead us unto higher
mysteries than the letter does show, and therefore it is needful to have a
high spirit to declare it, and great attention in reading it. To come then unto
the purpose, Isaac in the Hebrew tongue does signify a man full of laughter and
joy: the which ioifull name can agree only unto the son of God, and he only
in this world in a high degree can be called Isaac. When the son of God was
in heaven above, and before he came down into this world, no mortal man knew
any cause to laugh, nor yet durst not laugh: for because that they saw that God
was angrywith all the world, all the world was in a dump and mourned. When God
had said unto Noe the Patriarch, Paenitet me fecisse hominem, that is, I am
sorry and repent that ever I made man, how could any man dare to laugh and be
merry? How durst holy Job laugh, seeing that he said with many tears, Vtinam
de vtero translatus essem ad tumulum: I would to God I had been buried as soon
as ever I was borne. His meaning was this, O great God of Israel, why have thou
brought me out of my mothers womb, and now that thou have brought me out, why
do thou not destroy me, and why did dest thou not carry me presently from
my mothers bowels to my grave? How could the Prophet Helias laugh, seeing that
running and flying away through the mountains from Queen Iezabel, Petiuit
anima sua, vt moreretur? His meaning was: Am I better than my predecessors,
that I should live rather than they? Die then my soul, die, for because that
my life is grievous unto me, and I would see it at an end. How should the
Prophet Jeremy laugh, seeing that he said with deep sighs, Quis dabit capiti
meo lachrimas, and oculis meis fontes lachrimarum, vt plorem interfectos populi
mei? His meaning was, Who can bring to pass with the great God of Israel, that
he would make a sea of water of my head, and change my e^es into fountains of
tears, to sigh by night, and weep by day, for those whom sin has deceived,
and the sword slain? How could old honorable Tobias laugh when he said, Quale
mihi gaudium erit quia in tenebris sedeo, and lumen caeli non video? In those
pitiful words he meant to say this, What joy can there be in my heart, or
what laughter can there be in my mouth, seeing that I find my self poor, and
feel my self aged, blind, and cannot see the light of heaven? Origin upon
Exodus says, That because the old law was a shadow of the new, and that all
those which were of the Synagogue were sad and terrified, therefore they did
use so many kinds of instruments, and such diverse sorts of music, because
that by the^ they might forget the sorrow and sadness which they were in. But
when the fullness of time came, in the which God sent his son into the world,
he brought mirth with him, he brought pleasure with him, he brought the ioies
of heaven with him, where they do nothing else but laugh and rejoice, as we
do nothing else but mourn and weep. Did not trow you our joyful Isaac come
laughing into the world, seeing that when he was borne, the Angels did sing,
Gloria in excelsis Deo, Glory be to God on high? Damascen says, That if the
words which God spoke, and the works which he did be weighed with gravity, they
do all give us joy and comfort, and put us in a great confidence of our
salvation, and take away the distrust of damnation, because he spoke and did
much more in the favor of clemency than he did in the rigor of justice. And
because we may not seem to speak at random, it is reason that we bring
forth some few sentences which he uttered in the favor of mercy and pity.
Christ to the Hebrews said, If any man shall keep my word he shall not die
for ever; that is, His soul shall never perish. Si quis sermonem meum
seruauerit, non morietur in aeternum: It is reason that we mark who spoke
these words, why he spoke them, and unto whom he spoke them. He who spoke
them was our laughing Isaac, and the cause why he sp^ke them was, because he
would make the world re^oice with such good news: and yet for a recompense
for this good news they rewarded him very badly, seeing that because he said
in Pilates house, that there was another world, and that his kingdom was not
of this world, they clothed him with purple in Herod's house as if he had been
a fool. He spoke these words unto the cursed Jews when they called him a
Samaritane, which was as much as to call him an Hererike; and when they said
that he had a devil, which was as much to say, that he was a Nigromancer.
Do thou not think, my good brother, that our merry Isaac was full of
^^ughter, when he answered so sweetly unto such outrageous blasphemy? O sweet
answer, O heavenly speech! who but thou did promise us another life, after
that this was ended? Do thou not think that our Isaac is full of laughter,
seeing that when the Jews do go about to stone him, he putt^th himself
betwixt God and our faults, to the end that they may charge all the blows upon
his back? Did not he laugh, trow you, when as he had cast the Devil out of
them, yet they called him a man possessed with a Devil? When the son of God
said that his yoke was sweet, he did let us understand thereby plainly, that
his holy law vva^ a cheerful law, a gracious law, and a loifull law: and
so truly it is, because all good men keep it cheerfully, and all naughty men
break it with weeping. Secondly the figure above named says, that Isaac
was very rich, and that he had many flocks of sheep, and many herds of
kine, and a great number of bondsl^ues both men and women. To say the truth
the son of God had neither sheep, nor kine, nor bondmen; but he f^^d that
which was signified by them, because his coming into the world was not to
possess sheep and kine, nor to be wealthy in them, but his coming was to
redeem our souls, and to be a mediator for our sins. When the Prophet said,
thou have made all things subject under his feet, sheep and oxen; he spoke it
not only in respect of sheep which went in the stubble, or of kine which fed
in pastures, but in respect of sinners souls which were in their bodies, the
which he did so much esteem, and for the which he did so much, that although
his father did put them under his feet, yet our good Isaac did put them upon
his head. By Isaacs sheep the good people of Israel were understood, which
came unto the knowledge of Christ: such were Lazarus, Nicodemus, Joseph,
Zacheus, the good thief, and many others, all which were of the number of the
elect. By Isaacs oxen and kine which are of the greater sort of beasts, all the
Gentiles, from whom all we which are Christians do descend: for even as a
cow is greater than a sheep, even so the holy mother the church is greater
tha^ the Synagogue. These are the kine which the son of God came to seek,
these are the sheep which our Isaac came to keep: for of the other flock and
heard which old Isaac had, our redeemer of the world never had calse nor lamb.
The figure says also that Isaac had a great family, and many bondwomen which
served him at table, and many men which gathered in his wealth. Our Isaac was a
poor man in this kind of bondmen, and women, as he was of beards and flocks
of cattle and sheep: for his poverty was so great, that no man would live
with him, nor dwell in his house. Christ had another manner of family than
Isaac had: his family was noble, abundant, and holy, because there resorted
unto it the powers of heaven, the fathers which were departed, the just which
reioiced in his coming, and all the good men of the world. What should become
of the just man (says Anselmus) if he had not the son of God for his guide
and captain? What means he when he says, Vbiduo vel tres congregati fuerint
in nomine me^, ibi ego sum, But that wheresoever or howsoever two or three just
men be in Christ's name, that he will be there in the midst of them. O what
great difference there is betwixt old Isaacs family and our Christ's family
because that in Isaacs family they call those of his house youths, servants,
and men, bond slaves; but in our blessed Jesus family, he calls his, his
friends, companions, and brothers. O high mystery and divine Sacrament, why
does Jesus call all, his friends, saying, Amicimeiestis, and another time
Brothers saying, Dic fratribus meis, but only to let us understand that he
had redeemed them with his precious blood, and justified them with his divine
grace? Who would not be glad O good Jesus, who would not be glad to love thee,
serve thee, and follow thee, seeing that thou art so courteous in thy words,
and so grateful in thy deeds? Who would not be glad to dwell in thy house, and
who would not be willingly one of thy family, seeing that thou do call
strangers thy acquaintance, thy enemies thy friends, thy servants thy
companions, and ungrateful men thy brothers? Who did ever take such great care
of his family as thou did O good Jesus, seeing that at the very instant that
thy enemies apprehended thee in the garden, thou did request nothing else at
their hands, but that they would take thee, and set thy family at liberty? In
his last supper, and in his last Sermon, when he said, Pater, Father keep them
which believe in me, and such as will believe in me, he did well show the
love which he bare unto his family, seeing he prayed unto his Father for those
which were already borne, and for those which should be born afterward, for
these which were absent, and for those which were present, and as well for the
dead, as for those which were alive. O happy is that soul, which does dwell
in the family of the son of God, seeing that he loves him before that he
is borne, and when he is borne gives him justice, and after his death glory.
The figure says further, that all those of the kingdom of Palestine did
greatly envy the Patriarch Isaac and all his house, not because he had done
them any hurt or vvrong, but because he was mightier than all they. S^neca in
his book of Anger says, That there is no envy more dangerous than that
which proceeds of another man's prosperity: for as long as the good luck of
the one does last, the others envy and malice is never at an end. All the
intent and purpose of an envious man is, to turn him back which goes
before, beat down him which is on high, throw him down which ^s more
fortunate than himself, discredit him who is in greater honor, and
empouerish him who is richer than himself. H^race says, That the property of
an envious man is, that as another prosperity does increase, so his envy does
also grow, whereof it follows, that because he cannot abide him, he hates
him with his heart, diffameth him with his tongue, iniurieth him with his
hands, and stirs up also others against him Good Isaac did never hurt the
Palestines his neighbors, he did never forray their mountains, nor eat up
their pastures, nor violate their vviues, nor speak evil against them, nor
breed any discord amongst them, but did succor them as if they had been his
brothers, and entreat them as if they had been his children. Yet
notwithstanding all this, being besotted and drunk with envy, and obstinate in
malice, they commanded good Isaac to go out of the land, forsake his wealth,
and break up his household. And further the people of Palestine not content
with all this, agreed by the consent of the people, and by a clattering of a
counsel to stop up his wels which his servants used, and his flocks drank
of. They could not have showed their malice nor bewraied their envy more in
any thing than in demming up Isaacs wels of water, because that without the
element of water, neither men can live, nor beast sustain himself. To come
then unto our purpose, what mortal man has there ever been, is, or shall
be, who has been so much envied as the son of the living God was? What was
the cause of such intolerable envy in the Israelites, but his excellency in
knowledge, his skilfulnesse in learning, his uprightness in justice, and the
purity of his life? The Jews raged, and were ready to hurt themselves to see
Christ utter such great mysteries of Scripture as he did, preach so many
sermons unto the people, do such strange miracles in the city, preach
publicly against vice, and draw unto his company those which were always
accounted honest. The Jews malice against Christ was greater than the
Palestines against Isaac, because they did nothing but command Isaac to go out
of the land; but the Jews did not command Jesus, but they themselves with
their own hands drew him out, and not satisfied with that, they agreed
afterward to crucify him. They did shut up the water where Isaac did drink,
but they did open Jesus hands and side: and therefore comparing hurt with hurt,
and loss with loss, it was a greater loss to take Christ's life from him,
than to take Isaacs water from him. Is it not think you a greater hurt to
open a man's veins of blood with the which he lives, than to shut up a man's
wels whereof he drinks? If men shut up my wels I open others, if I have no
water I drink wine, if they expel me out of this country, I go unto
another; but if they draw my blood from me, who will give me more blood, and
if they break my vains who will lend me others, and if they take my life
from me, who will help me unto another? Christ then was vvorser handled
through envy than Isaac: for if Isaac did live in honor, he went away with
honor, and if he came alive into the land he went away alive: but what shall
we say of holy and blessed Jesus, whose family they did scatter abroad through
envy, whose mother they separated away from him, whose blood they shed,
whose doctrine they contaminated, and whose fame they obscured, and al
through envy and malice? Chrysostom says, As all the riches of man does
consist in his soul, his credit, his life and goods, so the Pharisaicall envy
and malice did leave Christ none of all these: for they took his soul from
him, they discredited him in his fame, they deprived him of his life, and left
him no goods at all. How far think thou did all his goods reach, but only
unto a torn cassocke, and a bare coat? And yet most cursed envy came and took
the garments away from him, and gave the one unto the hangmen which did put him
to death, and the other coat unto the soldiers which kept him. What poverty
then in all the world can be equal unto this which Christ our Lord suffered
hanging upon the cross, seeing they have drawn his soul from him, shed his
blood, bereaved him of his life, and divided his garments! Although the envy
and malice which the Palestines bare to Isaac were great, yet they did never
lay hands upon him, but they did lay hands upon the son of God when they did
apprehend him, they did lay their feet upon him when they did kick him, they
did lay their tongue upon him when they did blaspheme him, and they did lay
their hearts upon him when they did hate him.

The Author continues this matter, and expounds another figure to this
purpose.
TVlit mulier velamen, and expandit super ^s putei, quasi siccans ptisanas, and
sic latuit rex. 2. Reg. chap. 17. For the better understanding of these
words, you must know that there were sent from David's camp two young men
into Jerusalem to know what determination and counsel Absalon and Achitophel
had taken against David, to the intent that Chusi (who was David's true
friend, and Absalons fained friend, and yet dwelling with him) might let David
understand what Absalon purposed to do. And as Chusi did send to these two young
men who were Achimaas and Ionathas, Absalons determination, a certain young
man had spied them near unto Jerusalem, because they durst not enter into the
Town; The which young man gave Absalon intelligence of them presently, who
sent forthwith to apprehend them; and they perceiving that they were
discovered, ran away with all speed, and came very weary to Bahurim, where they
entered into a house, and knowing that they were pursued, went into a well, and
the good wife covered the well with a sheet, and when Absalons people were
come, and inquired after them, she made answer that they came thither very
weary, and drinking a cup of water, they ran away with all speed, and so
Absalons soldiers not having any hope to overtake them, are gone back again
to Jerusalem. And when they were gone away, Achimaas and Ionathas came out of
the well, and went unto David, and did advertise him of the advice which Chusi
did send him. The wisdom of this Inne-keeper was great considering that
through her only wit Achimaas and Ionathas escaped safe, and Absalons scouts
were deceived. Mimus the Philosopher says, That a friends advised and
deliberated counsel is best, and an enemies first counsel to be feared, and a
woman's sodden wit to be followed: for if she have time to think upon that
which she should say, she will direct her vow and voice unto that which her heart
is most inclined unto. It is convenient here to declare what the well is, what
the sheet with the which it was covered, who they were which did hide
themselves in it, and who they were who did seek out those which were hidden in
the well, and who the woman was which saved those which were hidden, and who
they were which were mocked by her. To come unto the first point, what shall
we say the well to be, but the old and new Testament: the which well was high
because it speaks of high matters, and also deep, because it speaks of
profound matters; it is a well because no man can draw it dry and empty it,
and it is of water because it treats of nothing but of most clean and holy
things. Saint Ambrose upon those words, Puteus altus est, says thus, Although
the wels be never so deep with waters, yet the holy Scripture is far
more profounde in deep and hidden mysteries, because the water may be emptied
with a rope, but the mysteries of Scripture cannot be reached unto without
grace. When David the great Prophet said unto God. Da mihi intellectum and
scrutaber mandata tua, Who doubts, that seeing he craved for grace to
understand the scriptures, but that they cannot be understood without grace?
Christ spoke many things unto his Apostles with his own mouth, which they did
not understand for want of grace: and if this be so, how dare any man presume
to say, that he does understand the Scripture without grace, and unless he know
himself lightened with grace? there be many men which die for thirst, because
they will not go for water, and these are Pagans which have no faith: and there
be others which go for water and take not a cord with them, and these are
Heretics which do not understand the Scripture well: others there be which
do take a rope with the^, but do take no vessel to put in, and these are
simple men which can read the Bible, but cannot understand it. He who will draw
water out of this holy well, ought to take the cord of science and knowledge
with him, and a pitcher of conscience, because he shall never or very late
understand the Scripture, who does not study it with a holy purpose and
meaning. What other meaning has it that the well was covered and stopped up,
but that the old Testament was very dark and obscure? This well was covered
with a linen cloth, and Moses face was covered with a linen, and the
Sancta sanctorum was covered with a linen, to let us understand, that all the
old mysteries were dark, hard, and obscure. What other thing did the breaking
and rending of the veil of the Temple at Christ's death signify, but only that
he did open and reucale unto us the mysteries of the old Testament? What does
it mean that the veil of the Temple was rent in two at Christ's death, and that
the veil which Moses had over his face was never rent and broken, but that the
holy catholic church is only lightened, and that the Synagogue lies hidden
until this day with her Moses? According unto that saying of the Apostle,
Adhuc velame^ est super facie^ Moisi, that is, until this present day Moses
face is covered, to wit, the Jews are hardened with him. Much good may it do
unto the Synagogue to keep their Moses with his face covered, but the holy
mother the church has her Christ bare and open upon the cross: for as in
dying he did show us all his holy flesh, so he did discover and open all his
secrets unto us in preaching. To go forward then with this figure, what was
the meaning that there were two messengers or spies hidden in the bottom of
the well, I say messengers of the king and of the Priest, or princely and
priestly authority (for they received the determination which Absalon and Chusi
had made by the means of Abiathar the Priest, and so they represented the
secrets betwixt the royal and Priestly estate) What means I say all this,
but that the humanity of the Word should take upon him the royal and priestly
estate? What is the meaning that the selfsame well was an occasion that some
should escape, and others be mocked, but that one and the self same scripture
is cause that the catholics do save themselves, and the Heretics condemn
themselves? What does it mean that Absalons servants did never meet with the
well, but that the poor Jews have not as yet met with Christ? It is much to
be weighed, that Absalons scouts and spies did look no further than the sheet
which covered the well, and in like manner the people of the Jews do look
no further than the exterior letter of the old Testament does say; under which
Ionathas and Achimaas do lie hidden, that is to say, the humanity of the
word, and the word it self. Remove and take away, O you Jews, take away the
sheet of your ignorance, take away the sheet of your malice, take away the
covering of the letter, and withdraw the veil of your obstinacy: for until
you do forsake your error you shall never meet with Christ shut up in the
well. O what great pity and compassion we should take upon the wicked
Synagogue, seeing that there is nothing betwixt Christ and her but only a
sheet, the which if they would take away, they should meet imediately with
Christ! And what think thou is the sheet, but the evil understanding
which they give of the scripture? Absalons scouts went about the well, and yet
they never did meet with their enemies; and the Jews do go about the bible,
but the mysteries of it are hidden: and the reason is, because they will not
take away the sheet of the letter to see the holy and divine water which is
contained under it. To speak more particularly, what were the wels which
Isaacs predecessors did open, but all the holy books which the Prophets and all
other holy men did writ^? What means the opening of a new well in the
catholic church of God, but to give an high and a true sense and meaning unto
the text? The learned man does open so many wels of water, as he does ways
expound the holy scripture; and the more obscure the scripture is, the more
deeper we will say he fetches his water. I will not deny but he takes pains
who draws water out of a deep well; but the learned man does take greater
pains in expounding a text of holy Scripture, because the one is done by force
of drawing, and the other by pains in studieng. If any man do strive and
contend with thee, my brother, that the labor of the body is greater than the
travel of the spirit, thou may answer him, that he is Tanquam asin^^ ad
lyram, And that he is Saul among the Prophets, and Satan among the children
of God. Now that we have proved that these wels are the holy books of the
Prophets, we will add further and say, that these are the wels which the
blind Jews did fill and stop up: and when did they stop them up, but when they
did deprave and corrupt the holy Scriptures? The Palestines did demme up Isaacs
welswith earth, and the self same do the Jews to the Scriptures, which they
expound of the Synagogue, and not of the church, according unto the letter and
not the fence not according unto the spirit, but according unto their own
will. What other thing is it to demme the water with earth, but to blind the
sense with the letter? Christ left us, which are Christians, the wels of his
church, open, pure, and clear, and not stopped at all: but alas the Jews
through their obstinacy, and Heretics through their malice, labor to deny
them, and trouble them, going about to discredit our faith, by interpreting the
Scriptures after their own fantasy. The son of God does complain unto his
Father upon the cross of all these things, saying, Why have thou forsaken me,
to wit, why do thou suffer them to stop up the wels of my doctrine on one
side, and open my side with a spear on the other.

CHAP. VIII. How the son of God complains of his Father, because they did
load his body with stripes, and his heart with care and anguish.
IN flagella ego paratus sum, and dolor meus in conspectu meo semper, says the
Prophet David speaking in the name of the son of God, and it is as if he would
say, Do by me O good Father, do by me what thou think good: for I am ready
to suffer all the stripes that thou will lay upon me, because I can never
forget nor put out of my mind the grief which I have conceived in knowing that
I must suffer. Such doleful words as these are, do well seem to proceed from
a man which is in great anguish, and from one who sees himself condemned to
die, confessing and protesting that he dies for obedience sake, and that he
takes his death with patience: does not he die for obedience, who offers
himself unto death, and does not he take his death in patience, who knows
not how to co^plain? There are some persons which feel no labor and pain
but of the mind, as great lords; and there are others which feel no pain but
of the body, as laborers; and some which neither feel them in mind nor body
as fools; and some there be which feel them both in the mind and the body, as
virtuous men do. Seneca in his book of Clemency says, That the labor of the
mind does weary a man by night, and is at rest in the day, because then he is
also occupied; and the labor of the body does weary a man by day, and is at
ease in the night, because he is at rest: but he who does labor spiritually
and corporally, does pass the day time in sweating, and all the night in
sighing. Cicero says unto his friend Atti^us, That of all the infelicities of
this world, the greatest is to have his body ouerlaid with labor, and his
heart laden with care. Reason is wont to moderate the anxiety of the mind, and
good cherishing the labor of the body, but what comfort can the body give unto
the mind, or the mind unto the body, when the one sweateth, and the other
sigheth? According unto the litterall sense, good king David did complain of
both these trauails, that is, the travel of the body, when he says, Et ego
in flagella paratus sum, and the travel of the mind, when he says, Et dolor
meus in conspectu meo semper, the which vexations he suffered at the hands of
king Saul, when he wandered like a banished man, and hid himself in
mountains and rocks. David endured great labor of the body, as well for the
iournies which he took, as for the hunger which he suffered: he had great
grief of mind to see himself a stranger in his own land, a sugitiue from his
house, banished out of the kingdom, and in disgrace with his king. Although
this be all true, yet who can better say, Et in flag ella paratus sum, I am
ready to be whipped, than Christ's tender body, or who can say with him, Et
dolor meus in conspecta meo semper, and my grief is always before my eyes, as
his afflicted mind was? We cannot deny, but that David was persecuted, yet we
do not read that he was whipped, the which we may affirm of Christ our
redeemer, who was not only whipped at Pilates pillar, but was also shown unto
the people with Bcce home, Behold the man. If David cannot say of himself, Ego
in flagella paratus sum, neither can he say, Et dolor meus in conspectu meo
semper: But only the son of God can so say, because there was no hour nor
moment of the day in which his body was not traveled, and his heart grieved.
It is long ago since I commended unto my memory that saying of Plato, Quod in
humanis plura sunt quaeterrent quam nocent, as if he would say, In dangers
which happen unto man, and in humane chances, there be many more things which
put us in fear, than that happen unto us in deed: for so many times the heart
is martyred, as he thinks upon danger to come. When any malefactor has
received sentence of death, from the time that the sentence is read until his
head be cut off he does swallow death so many times as he thinks that he
must die; in so much that if the sword does kill him but once in the end, yet
his imagination does kill him a thousand times before. Then to apply this unto
our purpose, what Prophet was there at any time in the old Testament who knew
so much as Christ did? When the son of God did prophecy that there should not
remain one stone upon another in Jerusalem, did he not as well know that
there should not be left in his body one drop of blood with another? When good
Jesus did prophecy unto S. Peter that he should die in his old age upon the
tree, did he not know as well that himself should be crucified upon the
cross? If then the son of God did know that he should die, and that his
death should be, to be crucified upon the cross, what joy or mirth could there
be in him? The son of God had two things always before his eyes, that is,
the cross and the nails with the which they would crucify him, and his
enemies which would crucify him, whose conversation he neither would nor
could eschew, seeing that he came to redeem the^ with his blood, and convert
them with his doctrine. What man is so stout, or who is of that courage, that
can live and converse with him that must take his life from him? O great
goodness and infinite charity! good Jesus, who but thou alone has defended
them who persecuted him, protected those who have accused him, given honor
unto those who have diffamed him, and pardoned their offenses who have taken
his life from him? What will thou do, good Jesus, what vvilt thou do for those
which follow thee, and serve thee, if thou deal thus with those which lay wait
to entrap thy person, impugn thy doctrine, take away thy same, and deprive
thee of thy life? Anselmus says, That the son of God did live among sinners,
not because he did like the^, but because he would amend the^, because no man
ever took greater delight in revenging than he in pardoning. To speak more
particularly, it was not without a high mystery that Christ said, Et ego in
flagella paratus sum, having a greater regard unto the laslies which he was to
endure, tha^ unto the death which they were to give him; because that a noble
and modest man does grieve much more at one lash with a whip given him in open
place, than if they should strike off his head inprison. Men are won in
criminal causes to behead worshipful and free me^, or use some other
punishment upon them, and contrariwise whip, hang, or mark with a h^te iron
bondslaues, so that in the manner of punishment a man's grief is greatly
augmented or diminished. We use to speak it for a great reproach, to say unto
one, g^e thy way, thou have been whiphed: the which words we never use unto
one who (...) because that b^nshment is given only for a (...), but whipping is
g^ue^ for a punishment and an intai^y When the Apostle^nd, Ter virgis caesus
sum, semel lapidatus um, and ter naufr^giumpe tuli, although he make mention of
three kinds of torme^^s, yet if we look well unto it, he makes his thrice
whipping the foundation of his martyrdom. By the law of a noble man, as Christ
was, and by the law of modesty and shamefa^^ouile which he made reckoning of,
it is to be thought that he felt greater grief when they brought him forth
whipped with Ecce homo, than when they brought him to the cross upon the Mount
of Caluary, because the cross took away his life, and the whipping took away
his reputation and credit. The Jews gave Christ three solem^ torments which
they did not use to gave unto other theeue, that is, lashes with a whip, with
the which they opeued his shoulders, the thorns with the which they did raze
his head, and the gau^e and vinegar, wi^h the which they did make his mouth
bitter. In the two thee (...) they purposed nothing but to take then lives from
(...) seemed not mough to take away Christ's life, but they would also take away
his same and good name. If the son of God had not felt the discipline of the
whipp more than any other punishment, he would never have said, Ego in flagella
paratus sum: in which holy words he gave us to understand, that he was ready,
nor only to suffer all kind of punishment, which they should lay upon him, but
also to bear all injury that they would use toward him. O what great reason
good Jesus had, to be more grieved with the whipping than with the other
torments, considering that in other punishments he was only tormented, but in
this he was tormented and shamed: he felt the grief when they did whip him,
and the shame when they put him naked. O good Jesus, O my souls health, being
as thou wast so tender of skin, so smooth and soft, so subtle in blood, and so
quick in thy judgment, what did thou feel when they did whip thee so
cruelly, and unclothe thee so unseemly? If it were not when thou did preach,
that thy face was uncovered, and when thou did travel that thy feet were
without shoes, who ever saw thy precious flesh naked, until they took thy
garments from thee, when thou wast tied unto Pilates pillar? O my good Lord,
unto what did thou offer thy self when thou did say, Ego in fla^ella
paratus sum, because that at Pilates pillar, thou wast turned out of thy
garments, tied, whipped, iniurited, shamed and beaten black and blew at one
time. O redeemer of my soul, O maker of my life, when shall I see the day that
I may see my life so spoiled of faults, and so naked from vices, as thou wast
the^ from garments S. Barnard upon those words of Ecce homo says, Thou art
not content, O good Jesus, thou art not content, to go bound from the garden,
but they carry thee to Annas bound with a cord, thou do go to Jerusalem
also tied with a rope, and thou do return unto Pilate in the same order,
and now thou art content to be spoiled again of thy apparel and whipped in
open place with Ecce homo, Behold the man. One friend may suffer banishment for
another, and be taken for another; yet notwithstanding no man does suffer
himself to be turned naked and whipped for any other, because a friend should
venture his person for his friend, and spend his goods, with condition always
that his credit and honor be conserved and kept. The son of God only was he
who said Ecce ego in flagella paratus sum, seeing that he did suffer himself
publickely to be stripped naked, and bound, and whipped, and so whipped to be
brought unto shame, not respecting the grief which he felt, nor the shame and
reproach which he endured. What else did he mean when he said, I am ready to be
whipped, but that he had as ready a will to receive martyrdom, and such great
love in redeeming the world, that if they would have given him twice as many
lashes more, and doubled his torment, he was ready to receive it? Why did
thou say, O good Jesus, why did thou say, I am ready to be whipped, but
that by force of stripes they should open thy sides, to the end that thy
enemies should see thy loving bowels and heart? When thou do say, Ego in
flagella paratus sum, what other meaning have thou, saving only that the
spear should pierce thy sides, and the lashes cut and open thy shoulders, to
the intent that they might see thy blessed heart, and how that the love, which
thou do die withal, is far greater than the torments which thou do
suffer.

The Author follows this matter, and makes an end of the authorities which
he alleged before.
ETdolor meus in co^spectu meo semper, says Christ in the same Psalm: as if
he would say, Among all the dolours which I suffer, there is one of them of so
evil a condition, that it never departs out of my sight. Although the
complaint which Christ forms in this place, do contain but few words, yet
it is full of many grave sentences: for he complains not of many griefs but
of one, he says not that it is another man's grief but his own, he says
not that it is in an others man's sight but in his own, and he has it not by
fits, but cootinually. If the Prophets do not rise again to tell us, and if
the Angels do not declare it unto us, how can we be able to gueste what
grief it is which lasted so long, and the complaint which has no end. If the
son of God had been diseased of a dropsy, or gout, or palsy, we could have
said that as his infirmity was, such had been his grief: but seeing that we
do not read that he was ever sick who can guesle what his grief should be?
It cannot easily be comectured what this grief was, seeing he calls it but
dolor, one grief: we know not whether it was the grief of his agony, or of
the pillar, or of the piercing of the spear, or the yielding up of his ghost,
because every one of these griefs do breed a fear in us when we think of
the^; how much more to suffer them? When Christ says that my grief is always
in my sight, it is a thing to make us both wonder and fear: for seeing that
Christ's griefs were so many in number, and so cruel in torment, what should
he mean to complain upon one, seeing that they were without number and count?
We cannot deny but that Christ suffered many bitter torments: but there is one
more principal than all the rest, the which is such a one, and so grievous a
one, that until this present day it runs blood in thy presence, and cannot
be taken away whilst this life does last. What grief can be compared unto
this grief, seeing it has his beginning in this world and does not end in the
other? This long grief is the great ungratefulness which is in us for our
redemption and the small c^re which we had that he ^as put upon the crosle for
us; in so much, that the grief whereof he complains unto his father, was
caused neither by the thorns, nor nails which pierced him, but by ungrateful
and unthankful men who did not acknowledge him. S. Barnard speaking of our
dury to God says, If thou will know what God has made thee, look what he
has done for thee: for in thy miserable nature the works of his infinite
benignity do appear. How much the baser thy God made himself in humility, so
much the greater he made thee in goodness, and how much the more viler he
made himself for me, so much the more familiar and like he made me unto him.
Take heed then man, that thou be not proud, seeing that thou art made of dirt,
and see that thou be not unthankful and ungrateful unto God, seeing that
thou art so near coupled unto him, because an ungrateful man was never
pleasant nor acceptable unto God. It is the part of a perverse mind, to seek
occasions and shifts to excuse himself, and not to be grateful for the
benefits which he has received: the which kind of treason and naughtiness is
proper only unto shameless men, and to such as have dead hearts, and as it
were without a soul. Who is he who cannot be thankful for a benefit
received, but he who never knew to do good unto others? All this is S.
Barnards speech. Cassiodorus says in an Epistle, That it is a hard matter to
suffer, and not easy to dissemble, that a wise and discreet man should gather
no fruit of his travail, but that he should rather receive hurt from whence
he hoped for remedy, in so much that he suffers hurt without an offense
given, punishment without a fault, grief without cause, pain without sin,
persecution without an enemy. Naughty men's manners would be much worse than
they are, if there were none to chastise vice and reward virtue. Lactantius
says, That which Imaruell at in men is, that if they be sick they commend
themselves presently unto God, if they have wars they run to God, if they
want water they ask it of God, if they be molested with a plague, they turn
to God, if they go by sea, they offer themselves unto God; but that which
cannot be spoken without grief is, that after God has delivered them out of
those dangers, no man thinks more of God. Do not think it (says Seneca) to
be a small misfortune unto thee, if by chance thou have lighted upon an
ungrateful friend, because that as a benefit or good turn is wont to make
of a foe a friend, so the same benefit is wont to make an enemy of him who was
thy friend. For it is the property of an ungrateful man, that the more that he
is bounden unto any man for any benefit received of him, the more he hates
him of whom he has received it: and the worst of all is, that they would see
him dead of whom they received it, and not be thankful at all for it. Thou
do complain, O my friend Lucilius, that thou have fallen upon more than an
ungrateful man, and that of an old friend he is become thy new enemy, and if
thou would enter into the consideration of this loss, thou should
abstain from ever doing any good turn unto any: which I do not counsel thee
to do, nor yet that thou counsel any man to do it, because it is better that
men accuse the other of ungratefulness, than thy self of covetousness, and
that the benefit be lost in the other, rather than rot in thee. There is no
vice more common among men, than for one man to be ungrateful unto another,
which does proceed oftentimes, hereof, that men know not how to make choice of
their friends, or for that they do not bestow their benefits well: and
therefore oftentimes we have greater reason to complain upon our selves, for
not knowing how to give, rather than of others, because they be ungrateful
for the good turns which they have received of us. Cicero in his third book
of laws says, Clarissimi viri Athenis pulsi carere ingrata ciuitate maluerunt,
quam manner in improba, as if he would say, Many famous men in watres, and
learned in sciences, have been banished from Athens, not for any fault which
they committed, but for malice conceived against them; the which were rather
willing and glad to live in banishment than to dwell in an ungrateful city.
Valerius Maximus says, That the most notablest man that the renowned
Lacedemonia did ever bring forth, was that great Philosopher Lycurgus, because
among all those which lived before his time, and those which succeeded him,
there was none equal unto him in knowledge, nor none which went beyond him in
life. The Oracle of Pithius Apollo, being asked in what reputation he did hold
Lycurgus, made answer, I am very doubtful whether I should put him among the
number of men, or place him among the company of Gods. Notwithstanding that
the Oracle had given this high testimony of Lycurgus, and that he was pure in
his life, eloquent in learning, constant in pains, and very wise in his laws,
yet all these virtues and excellent gifts could not keep him from proouing the
ungratefulness of his thanklesse citizens. And therefore they did not only
injury him in words, but also they did show by cruel deeds the hatred which
they bare him, and the hurt which they wished him: for once they burned his
houses, and another time they followed him with stones, and another time they
dashed out one of his eyes, another time they expelled him from among the
people, and in the end for a recompense and reward of governing that
Commonwealth eight and thirty years, they banished him out of the country, and
so he died. Plautus says, That there is no love worse bestowed than that
which is bestowed upon an ungrateful man, because that man loves nothing at
all who loves an ungrateful man. I have spoken all this against the vice of
ingratitude, and used so many examples, because every man might perceive what
great reason God has to complain upon ungrateful men: for seeing that the
Philosophers do inueigh so bitterly against them, it would be but small reason
that they should be defended by Christians. S. Cyprian says, Christ does
complain of our ingratitude, because that for so great and unspeakable a
benefit as he did for us in dying upon the cross, he did not bind us to
follow him in that kind of death, or that we should die for him by the sword,
but that which good Jesus did bind us unto is, that we should have his blessed
passion in a remembrance, and love him with all our heart. How shall any man
(says Barnard) believe that thou will venture thy life for Christ, and for his
faith, seeing thou do not remember his death in all thy life? If thou will
(says Vbertinus) have the death of Christ help thee in thy last hour,
remember that death of his every day; because the son of God does always
take pity upon those in their last hour, which do remember his passion in
their life time. Christ says, And my grief is always before my eyes, because
that among all the griefs which are, ingratitude is cause of the greatest of
them, and among all the sins and naughtiness which are, this is the
greatest: for if there were no ungrateful men unto God, there should be no
sin at all in the world. Christ does call the sin of ungratefulness dolor
and grief, because that he is always grieved with it: for the grief which
he had of the thorns is past, his whipping had an end, and the pain of the
cross dured no longer than his life did last, but the grief of ingratitude is
renewed in him daily. Christ does also say, that the grief which he does
complain of is his own grief, Dolor meus: by which loving speech he does let
us understand, that he is much more grieved to see us sin, than it grieueth
us to be sinners. Why does Christ say in his complaint, my grief, and not our
grief but only because that we do not feel so great pain and grief when
we are punished by him, as good Jesus feels to think that he must punish us.
I would to God that it would please his divine clemency, that I were so sorry to
commit an offense, as it does grieve him to punish me: for then I think that I
should not know how to sin, nor God should have nothing to punish. He
complains also that he does not only suffer grief, but he says that that
grief is always in his sight; and therefore because we do never give over
sinning, it is certain, that his grief of compassion will never have an end.
Cease then my brother, and give over sinning, and then the pain which thou
do endure, will presently have an end. When thou shall hear us say that God
has any grief or pain, thou must not think that it is a grief or pain
which he suffers, but only a most entire and loving compassion which he
has upon us. When the son of God says upon the cross unto his Father, Why
have thou forsaken me, the chiefest complaint that he forms in that place
is, because he causes him to suffer so cruel a passion for such ungrateful
people.

CHAP. IX. How the son of God complains upon the Synagogue, that having
carried them upon his back, yet they be ungrateful unto him.
AVdite me domus Jacob, and residuum domus Israel, qui portamini ab vtere meo,
vsque ad senectam. God spoke these words by the Prophet Esayas chap. 46, as if
he would say, Hear me now, he are me all you of the house of Jacob, and all you
which have escaped of the house of Israel, give credit unto my words, seeing
that I am the God which carry you upon my shoulders, from the hour of your
birth until your death. Under these few words God does touch very many great
matters: for first he begins to call them, then he bids them give ear,
then he says that it is he who calls them, then he notes who they be whom
he calls, then how well he loves them, when he says, Qui portamini ab
vtero adsenectutem, But we must note first of all in this place, why the Lord
does separate the house of Jacob from the house of Israel, and why he does
call the house of Jacob an entire house, and the house of Israel a broken and
dissolved house: for he says, hear me all you of the house of Jacob, all you
of the house of Israel which have escaped, and remain. If Jacob and Israel,
and Israel and Jacob be all one thing, and all one house, fauing that one man
had two names, how was it possible for the one to stand, and the other to fall?
In very truth in old time all the Synagogue had but one God, one people, one
lineage, one king, one law; but when they began to sin and play the Idolaters,
our Lord did immediately divide the^. By the one house and by the other are
understood the church and the Synagogue, whereof the one, which was Jacobs,
came wholly unto the church, and Isreal's fell unto the Synagogue, but almost
overthrown, not because she deserved it not, but because all which was written
might be fulfilled. According unto this Prophecy, the Angel said unto the
virgin in his embasie, He shall reign in the house of Jacob, and he said not,
he shall reign in the house of Israel, because the Synagogue did then draw
toward an end, and the church unto her beginning in the son of God. God then
calls the house of Jacob, which is the church, calls those which remained
of the house of Israel, which is the Synagogue, because Saint Peter was the
residue of Israel, and Saint Paul was the residue of Israel, and all those of
his College were the remnant of Israel, the which the son of God went
throughout all the Jewish nation to gather together as it had been crummes of
bread hurled abroad. Now that we know what the house of Jacob is, and those
who remained of the house of Israel, it is now reason also that we know what
he will do with them, and why he does call them, and why he used a speech
unto them, which was never hard of before, that is, that he does bear them
upon his shoulders from their mothers wombes. God will have nothing else with
them, but only that they believe in him and hear him, seeing he says, Audite
me Hear me: and withal he does put them in remembrance of the great
benefits that he does for them, to wit, carry them upon his shoulders,
Portamini ab vtere; and therefore if we will have Gods favor, we must believe
the words which he does speak, and be thankful unto him for all the
benefits that he shall bestow upon us. Robertus upon Esaias says, If we will
compare that which God requires at our hands with that that he does give us,
without comparison he does bind himself unto more than that which he does
bind us unto: for he does bind us to nothing, but to believe in him, and he
does bind himself to maintain and govern us, Ab vtero vsque ad senectam:
that is, from the time that we be first borne, until our dying day our Lord
does bind himself to bring us up like his children, and maintain us like his
brothers, in so much that like a pitiful Father, and a merciful Lord, he
gives us that which we have need of, and counsels us that which we have to
do. O infinite goodness, and exceeding charity of thine, my good God,
considering that by this speech, Ab vtero portamini, thou do bind thy self
to give us food to live with, and by Audite me, thou do bind thy self to
give us counsel to save our selves with! and therefore we have of thee a
Lord to help us, and a Father to counsel us. Our Lord, which did create us,
is a better Father unto us than man which does beget us, seeing that he
says, Qui portamini ab vtere: By which fatherly speech he does let us
understand, that he does not only provide for our necessities, but does also
dissemble our iniquities. O that our Lord does say very well, Qui portamini ab
vtero, seeing that he does bear us on his shoulders as often as he does vvinke
at our wickedness: for if he should punish us for every fault according unto
his justice, we should by this time have had no memory left of us. If our Lord
should not bear us upon his shoulders, and dissemble with our faults, to
provoke us to repentance, he should scarce have any at all to punish above two
or three hours; and for the first sin only, if it had pleased him, he might
have condemned us to hell. What temporal father does so long suffer his own
children, as our Lord does all us. What father does carry his child in his
arms above an hour, as our Lord does us all our life time? Before we be
borne, we offend him in original sin, and after we be borne we offend him
all the rest of our life with other grievous sins; yet notwithstanding all
this, he does bring us up like his children, and deal with us like brothers.
What would thou have me say more unto thee, but that from our mothers
womb our wickedness does strive with his goodness, he in forgiving us and
we in offending him: O great goodness and unspeakable clemency! what father
or mother did ever the like for their children, that thou my good Jesus have
done for my sinful soul? There is no living creature this day in the world,
that does give milk unto his young ones above two years: but our eternal
Father and Christ his precious son, from our birth until our old age, does
give us the milk of his grace, the bread of his doctrine, the help and
succor of his church, the pardon of his clemency, and the reward of his glory.
Dilexit me and tradidit semetipsum pro me, says S. Paul^ as if he would say,
Do not marvel, you Galathians, that I did preach so vehemently unto you, and
that I did exalt Christ's name with such great feruency: for I tell you if you
know it not, that besides that he loved me very much, he suffered himself
to be crucified for me. This is so strange a thing, that S. Paul speaks of in
this place, that unless a man be acquainted with the phrase of Scripture, he
would take scandale at it: for when Paul says that Christ died for him, not
mentioning any other, he seems to exclude the redemption of all the world
beside. What means this, O divine Paul, what means this? if the son of
God did give himself for thee, why do thou preach him to be the redeemer of
all mankind? Were thy sins so grievous and so enormious that they had need of
all Christ's blood to redeem them? If God should send into the world a new
redeemer for the taking away of every sin, how were it possible that God
could send so many, seeing that he had no more sons but Christ? Tell me I
pray thee, how could so glorious a humanity, so profitable a life, such sound
doctrine, such a copious redemption, such a dreadful death be employed in
thee alone, and not benefit any but thy self? If it be so O Paul that
Christ gave himself for thee, and not for me, what have I more to do with
Christ than with a holy Prophet? If he died for thee alone, is it not
reasonable that thou alone sholdest be thankful for his death? God forbid that
it should be so, neither does his mercy permit that the Apostle only should be
redeemed, and all the world besides deprived of the blood of Christ: for his
redemption was so copious, and there was such abundance of blood shed for us,
that on Christ's part redemption did abound, and there wanted on ours to be
redeemed. Did not redemption, think you, abound on his part, seeing that one
drop of his blood was sufficient for all redemption; and did there not want on
our side, seeing that if there had been an hundred thousand worlds, he would
have redeemed every one of them? When the good Apostle said, Tradidit
semetipsum pro me, he spoke it not to extenuate and diminish Christ's passion,
nor straiten his redemption, but to confess before all the world, that
whatsoever the son of God had suffered upon the cross, he was as much and
as streitly bound to be grateful for it, as if he had died for him alone. S.
Augustine in his book of Christian doctrine says. As our Lord did know every
man's offenses in particular, so he did redeem every of them particularly, in
so much that every man in particular is as greatly bound unto him for his
blood; and as certain a debtour unto him for his death, as if he should have
redeemed him alone, and suffered for him only and no other. Theophil says,
Even as in thy creation thou art as greatly bound unto God as if he should have
created thee and no other, so in thy redemption thou art ^s greatly bound unto
him, as if he should have redeemed thee and no other: for at that time when he
bought thee, he gave as much for thee as for all men, and as much for all men,
and no more, as for thee. S. Barnard says. If the son of God should have
redeemed a thousand thousand of worlds, he would have given no more blood for
them than he did, and if he should have redeemed no more but me alone, he
would have shed no less blood than he did: by reason whereof we cannot de^nde
his redemption betwixt us, that thou might be but meanly grateful unto
him, and another less; but thou must think that he died wholly for thee, and
wholly for me, and that every man is as great a debtour unto him, as if he had
died for him alone. Anselmus says. Do not think that Christ bought us
ingreat, and at the first sight, as flocks of sheep are bought, but he
bought every man by himself alone, satisfying in particular for every sin,
so that as he found many in the world, so he redeemed them all: but if he had
found but one sinful soul in the world, he would have bestowed his precious
blood in redeeming her alone. Isidorus Desumme bono says, Mark and note well,
good Christian, that Christ did not less love thee, than he loved me, neither
did he buy thee with lesser travel tha^ he bought me, not giving less blood
for one than for all. And thereupon being as it were carried away with great
love toward us, he esteemed not, nor did not look to the price which he gave
for us, but unto the love with the which he bought us. If our blessed Lord
would have looked unto the smalnesse and base value of that which he did buy,
as he did look upon the great love with the which he did buy us, would he,
think you, have bestowed one drop of his blood upon us? If humane nature
should be joined and coupled with the nature of Angels, and that of them both
there were made one nature, what could it do, what were in it, what were it
worth, that the son of God should shed so much as one drop of blood for it?
That it would please Christ to die for us, let us thank the great love which
he bare unto us, and not any desert or merit of our own. For if he should have
expected at our hands that we should first have deserved it, he should yet be
to take flesh upon him, and to redeem us. Origin in his Periarchon says, As
the sun when he rises, does no less give light unto al tha^ unto one, and
as well unto one as unto all: eue^ so the son of God did not die more for all
tha^ for one, nor nolesse for one tha^ for all. Barnard says, O infinite
goodness, O inspeakable charity! which of all creatures would have done so much
for thee as thou have done for me, that is, esteem more of my soul, than of
thy own life, of my honor tha^ of thy fame, of my rede^ptio^ tha^ of thy
passion, and of my remedy and help than of thine own hurt. O with what great
reason the Apostle did say, Tradidit semetipsum pro me, casting upon himself
the whole price of the blood of Christ, but not that which it was worth in
value, but that great obligation unto which it did bind him. The son of God
than does complain to his Father, saying, Why have thou forsaken me, because
he did punish him and not the Synagogue, whom he had brought up and carried
upon his shoulders.

CHAP. X. How Christ complains unto his Father upon us for our
ungratefulness, considering that he has taken upon himself all our offenses.
QVidvltra debui facere vineae meae, quod non fec? Christ spoke these words by
the mouth of the Prophet Esayas, chap. 5. As if he would say, What can any man
do more for his vineyard, or Lord for his Commonwealth, than I have done for
thee O Synagogue? These are tender words to feel, and pitiful to hear,
seeing that on one side he does complain of the Synagogue, and on the other
he will reckon and debate the matter with her, and cono^^ce her first, that all
the fault is in her and not in him, before he do punish her and give her
penance. God does debate the matter with the Jews, as one good friend does
with another, going about to win them with the great benefires which he has
done for them, and the great ingratitude with the which they have recompensed
him. Our Lord might very well punish the Jews without delay, and not contrary
unto the order of justice; but yet he would first put the^ in mind of the great
goodness which they had received at his hands, and of their manifold sins
which he had dissembled, to the end, that if they feel the smart of it, they
might not justly complain on him. It is a cunning manner of reprehending a
man's friend, to tell him of the good turns which he has done unto him, and
the dangers which he has delivered him from, because by this means he does
not only reprehend him, but also confound him. Saint Jerome to Martella says,
The sum of all the benefits which God can do to us are, to direct us in the
right way of goodness, and put from us the way of sin and wickedness,
because we are no less bound unto him who does deliver us from perils and
dangers, than unto him who does us great good turns. S. Gregory upon the
Psalms says, When the redeemer of the world did make our Lords prayer, Pater
^^ster, when he did command us to say, Da nobu hodie, give us this day, he
did also enioine us to say, Sed libera nos, But deliver us from evil; by which
words he did teach us, that we should not only crave help of him, but also
beseech him, that he would deliver us from evil. What innumerable benefits
God has bestowed on us, Esaias does tell us in this authority when he says,
Quid vltra debut facere vincae meae, and S. Paul when he said, Tradit
semetipsum pro me, where the one speaks of the great care which our Lord has
in governing and maintaining us, and the other of the bitter pain he took in
redeeming us. Our Lord says very well, what should I have done more unto my
vineyard, seeing that he took humane flesh for us, washed away our offenses,
endued us with his grace, incorporated us in his church, and made us capable of
glory? What should he hauedone more, considering that he has left us his body
to receive, his merits to help our selves with, his Saints to imit-te, his
Gospel to keep, and his Sacraments for a medicine? Quid vltra debus facere,
considering how he made our bodies of nothing, created our souls to his own
likeness, given us Angels to guard us, and bestowed all the earth upon us?
What should he do more, seeing that he has commanded the sun to give us
light, the earth to sustain us, the fire to heat us, the water to wash us, and
the air to recreate us? What should he do more for us, seeing that over and
above all other beasts he has given us judgment to discern good from bad,
memory to rememberthings p^st, and a will to love that which is holy and good?
If these benefits do seem great unto thee, yet I tell thee further, that he
has done more than this for thee, which thou have forgotten, of which our Lord
will call for an account, at the great day of his general accounts. What are
these new savors, or when does he unto us any other good turns, but when he
turns some dangerous hurt from us? Grief of mind, anxietie of heart, fears
of life, sudden passions touching our credit and fame, with such like as are
wont to assault us every minure of an hour, although we think not on them:
so that if our Lord should not keep us with his mighty hand, we should live
with pain, and die with peril. What are those mischiefs which do most of
all weary us, and which are never from us, but dreadful death, unspeakable
grief, bitter tears, extreme sorrow, and intolerable fear? These fine
dolours do bait, and overthrow all mortal men, because they are so common
among great men, and so universal among the meaner sort, that until this day
we have known none exempted from them, and we have heard of none who have died
and not tried them. If every man will examine his own person, he shall find it
to be true, that he knows all these mischiefs and evils, not by any science
which he has heard, but by experience within himself, seeing that we see
nothing else every hour, but every man to weep and bewail his infinite
pains and griefs? And because we may not seem that we do speak at
pleasure, we will speak of every word a little, to bring thee to remembrance,
how every one of these griefs is experimented in thy self. As concerning the
first, which is death, what mortal man was ever borne in this life, whom death
in the end has not made an end of, and put into his grave? With this condition
we come into the world, and live in the world, that in the end we must leave
the world, and that by reason of a common law which he has given us. The
second grief are tears: and what mortal man did ever live in this world with
such great joy, but has wept at some time or other, and that heartily? Horace
says, That weeping is so natural a thing unto all mortal men, that we be
borne weeping, live weeping, and die weeping. Demosthenes says. That a man
has need of a master to learn all offices and duties, unless it be weeping;
because there is nothing whereof a man has such abundance and plenty, as of
cares in his mind, complaints in his tongue, and tears in his eyes. The third
pain is sorrow: for what mortal man did ever attain unto such sure and quiet
state of life, that he should never need to fetch at any time a deep sigh? O
that it is well seen in the life of holy Jacob, that to mourn, sigh, and
weep, are offices and duties so annexed unto the miserable life of man, that
we shall first see our selves dead, than free from them! The griefs which
trouble our minds are so many, and the anxieties which charge our bowels are
so huge and strong, that lamenting and vvailing is taken for a remedy, and
sighing for a comfort, and weeping for an ease; because it happens often to
afflicted minds, that the more tears they shed, the more ease their hearts
receive. The fourth pain, which is grief: what man has ever been so strong
and healthy, who has not been thrown down with some sickness, or beaten
with some great affliction? O that the Apostle said very well, that we have
a treasure in fickle vessels, seeing that we are so weak in strength, and
feeble of health, that we do nothing but keep our selves from the sun
least he burn us, and from cold least it go through us, and from the air
least it distemper us, from the water least it stop us, and from meat least
we digest it not. Auerroes says, That because these inferior bodies are
subject unto the superior influences of the heavens, they pass great peril,
and are endangered by the stars and planets: for the elements often changing
in themselves the bodies which are made of them, do also the like. Of all the
riches of this life, there is none equal or to be compared unto health,
because that all other pains and griefs either time does cure, or discretion
does moderate. The fist pain, which is fear: what mortal man had his heart
ever so at rest, that no fear has ever come upon him, or in whom no
sudden passion has reigned? Menander says, That of necessity there must
reign in men's hearts, mirth or sorrow, love or hatred, pain or ease, and hope
or fear; but of all these, sorrow and hatred, pain and fear, are those which
do most of all reign in our bowels, because we see mirth and love, pleasure
and hope, either late or never come to our door. Cicero in his Commonwealth
says; put case that we love many things, yet without comparison we fear
more things, and that which is worst of all is, that our love does change
every day, but our fear does never depart from us. Plautus says, How merry so
ever our countenance be, and how full soever of laughter thy mouth be, and
howsoever the tongue talks, yet nevertheless the sorrowful heart is loaded
with fear; for he fears least his credit and honor shall be taken from
him, or least they steal away his wealth, or least his life be near an end,
or least that which he loves should be long absent. Xenophon says, What
pleasure or contentment can reign in any mortal man's heart, seeing that we
suffer so many griefs without us, and so many fears torment us within us. Lo
then you see these five principal griefs proved unto you, although it was not
needful to prove them, seeing we see that all men do die, all men weep,
that all men are full of sorrow, that all men complain, and that all men live
in fear. If we could happily meet with any man now adays who would bind
himself to keep us from these griefs, and cure us of these fears, what
would we deny him, or what would we not give him? If we pay bountifully
and be thankful unto the Physician, who does cure us of one grief, what
should we pay or give him, or what thanks should we render unto him, who
would cure us of all? Vere languores nostros ipse pertulit, and dolores
nostres ipse portauit, says Esayas, chapter, 54. As if he would say, The
Redeemer of the world, and the heir of all eternities was he who took our
infirmities upon himself, and did load and burden himself with all our
griefs and sorrows. In old time Esculapius the inuenter of Physic was much
set by; the Greeks esteemed of Hipocrates their first Physician; the Thebanes
of Anthony Musa their first surgeon; and the Romans of Archagnatus their first
Physician, whom they adored for a time like an Idol, and in the end stoned
him in Campus Martius. The Greeks, the Romans, the Thebans had never such a
Physician as we Christians have of Christ: for all other Physicians of the
world can but counsel us, but our great Physician has science to counsel,
experience to cure, and power to heal. S. Augustine says, There was never any
such manner of curing in the world as Christ brought with him, because that all
other Physicians before his time, if they found any man sick, they left him
sick, and if they found him in pain, they left him in pain: but holy Jesus
did never lay his band upon any that was diseased, but he left him whole.
Hilarious says, When the Gospel says of Christ, Totum hominem saluum fecit,
be spoke it not so much for corporal infirmities, as he did for spiritual
diseases, the which are wont to proceed, not of corrupted humors, but of
sins which had taken root. S. Ambrose says, The son of God did then heal
me of all my griefs, when he took them upon himself: for seeing that they
had such possession of me, and so long time rooted and wxt old in me, how was
it possible that any man should take them from me, if he had not cast them
upon himself? He did cast my death upon himself, when he did die upon the
cross, he did cast my sorrow upon himself when he was in his agony, he did
cast my tears upon himself when he did weep for my sins, he did load
my grief upon his own back when he did taste vinegar and gaul, and he did
take my fear upon himself, when he did fear death like a man. When a
temporal Physician comes to visit a sick person, he does comply with him
by taking him by the pulse, and by giving him a regiment of life, and if he
find him to have an ague he leaves him with it, insomuch that they may
better be called counselors, seeing they do give counsel only, than
Physicians, seeing they cure not. God forbid that any such thing should be
said of our Physician, seeing that from the time that he came down from heaven
to cure the world, he himself became sick, and cured him who was sick, and he
who was sick did rise up alive, and the Physician remained there dead; and the
reason of that was, because he changed the health which he brought with him,
with the sickness which the other had. O that this exchange was a glorious and
happy exchange which thou did make with me, good Jesus, seeing that thou
did change thy goodness for my naughtiness, thy clemency for my justice,
thy health for my infirmity, thy innocence for my malice, and thy pain and
punishment for my fault! And because we have made mention before of five
notable pains and evils, with the which all mortal men are beaten and
afflicted, it is reason that we see in this place how the son of God did
bear our weaknesses, vnburdening us of them, and burdening himself with them.
Vere languores nostros ipse pertulit, when he said in the garden of Gethsemani,
my soul is heavy unto death: for with those doleful words, he loaded his
soul w^^h my heaviness, and did unload upon me all his joy. When did our joy
begin but in his greatest sorrow? So long as God did not know by experience
what sorrow was, we did never know what mirth was; and from that day that he
began to weep, we began to laugh. He did truly take our infirmiries upon him,
when good Jesus upon his knees in the garden said unto his Father, Transeat a
me calix iste: for in that agony he did cast all my fear upon himself, to
the end that I should afterward be less timorous. Before that God took flesh
he was feared of all men, and did fear no man, and wicked man did fear all
things, and was feared of no body: but since the time that Christ like a
fearful man said, my soul is sorrowful and heavy, there is no reason that
we should fear any thing, for his fear was sufficient to make all the world
courageous S. Barnard upon that saying, Cum ipso sum in tribulatione says
Seeing that thou do bind thy self, O good Jesus, by these words to be
always at hand with me, and to be by my side when I shall be afflicted and
persecuted, why, or for what cause, or whereof should I be afeard? There is no
cause to fear the flesh, seeing that thou did make thy self flesh: there
is no cause to fear the devil, seeing that thou have overcome him: there is
no cause to fear sin, because thou have brought it to an end: there is no
cause to fear the world, because thou have overcome it: there is no cause to
fear man, seeing thou have redeemed him; neither will I fear thee O my good
Jesus, but love thee. Before that thou did make thy self man, I was man
who did fear; and now I am he who is feared: sin does fear me because I
admit him not: the flesh fears me because I cherish him not: the devil
fears me because I believe him not: and the world fears me, because I
follow him not. He did then truly take our infirmities upon him, when as upon
the altar of the cross he did cry with a loud voice and many tears, and when
he prayed and shed many tears, with the which he did wash away our offenses.
He did then take our infirmities upon him, when as in the last hour he did
yield up his ghost, Inclinato capite, accepting the death which his Father did
offer him, to transfer life into us. Damascen says, From what time did we
loose the shame of death, but since Christ did fear death? No man ought to
marvel that the son of God did fear death, but that which we should marvel
at is, that he made his martyrs not fear death, and that they should go so
freely to death, seeing that they go more cheerfully to be martyred, than
Princes do go to be crowned. The son then does complain unto his Father,
saying, Why have thou forsaken me, because that having taken our infirmities,
sins, and sorrows upon himself, it is no reason that we should be so
ungrateful and unthankful unto him.

CHAP. XI. Christ complains unto his Father how badly envy did use him: and
how in Samaria they sold an ass head for fourscore pence, and they gave but
thirty for his.
INuidebant ei fratres sui, nec poterant ei quidquam pacifice loqui. Genesis,
37. chap. The Scripture declaring the great hatred which Jacobs eleven sons
bare unto their brother Joseph, speaks these words: and the meaning is this,
The elder brothers did hate the young very much, because his father did love him
best, and make most of him; and their hatred and envy grew to that depth, that
they could not endure to see him, nor speak one friendly word unto him. Saint
Paul thought that envy was the root and foundation of the perdion of mankind,
seeing he says, that Propter inuidiam mors intrauit in mundum: and therefore
it shall be great reason that we declare what envy is, and what hurt it does,
and who is Queen of envy. Aristotle says, That envy is nothing else but a
passion of the mind, and a mortal anguish to see another man in credit and
honor, imagining that to be his discredit. Horace says, The greatest grief
that we have with envy is, that it is not in the eyes, for so it would be
seen, nor in the hands, for it would be felt, nor in the tongue, for it would
be heard, but his chair and seat is in the secretest place of the heart and
mind, where it abides, complaining of every man, and tormenting him who
possesses it. Menander says, The mother of envy is swelling pride, and
cursed ambition, and therefore they never go asunder, or very seldom, but
where pride is there is envy, and where envy, there pride. S. Augustine says,
Take away envy, and presently all that is mine, is thine, and all that is thine
is mine. Origin says, Envy does grow so fast upon me by reason of the
disordinate love which I bear unto my own person: for thereby I bear malice
unto my inferiors for fear least they become my equals, and I envy my equals
least they go beyond me, and I spite my superiors because they do me no
good. S. Jerome in a Sermon says, That the difference betwixt a malicious man,
and an envious man is, that the malicious man does love nothing but that that
is naught, and the envious man does hate nothing but that which is good. S.
Gregory in the fifth book of his Morals says, The naughty man does envy none
but such as he sees in higher estate than himself, or whom he sees to be
of better life than himself, or whom he hears better spoken off than
himself: whereof it insueth, that how much the other does grow and increase in
goodness, so much the envious man does vex and torment himself. Isidorus
says, Take heed of envy, my brother, take heed; for it is nothing else but a
certain disease which does trouble thy senses, burns thy breast, gnaweth thy
bowels, grindeth thy heart, wastes thy life, darkeneth thy memory, and
condemns thy soul. Seneca says, That a man does seldom envy him whom he
can overcome, but him whom he cannot vanquish. And the selfsame Seneca says
further, It is more expedient for us to beware of the envy of our friends, than
of the hatred and displeasure of our enemies, because the enemy carries his
hatred in his tongue, and I take heed of him: but because my friend hides his
envy in his heart, it cannot be known, nor I cannot beware of him. Laertius
says, I would to God, that all envious men had their eyes scattered over all
the world, that because other men's goods and welfare is a torment unto them,
they might be tormented with so many tortures, as they see other men's hap and
felicity increase. Diogenes says, There has no man lived in this world in
fame and credit, but he has presently felt the worm of envy; whereof it
follows, that the poor and miserable man does only escape the envious man's
hands. Demosthenes in an Oration says, What shall I do wretched man as I am,
or whether shall I go? For if I desire to live in poverty, misery does weary
me; and if I choose to be rich, envy does torment me. To come then unto our
purpose, all this discourse has tended unto no other end, but to admonish all
men of honest life, and of a clean conscience; to beware of enny, because the
Devil is such a friend unto this vice, that if he see a man to be very
envious, he will tempt him with no other sin. Cicero says, What has caused
all the vvarres which we have had with strangers, and all the dissensions which
we have had among our selves, but abundance of wealth, and the envy which men
have borne unto Rome? Although Christ was poor, yet he was hated of the
wicked, accused of malice, and persecuted with envy. But his poverty being
so great as it was, and hiding his power as he did, whereof should any man envy
him? They did not envy Christ for the feature of his body, seeing there were
other beautiful also, nor for his stock and kindred, seeing there were
others noble also; not for his eloquence, seeing there were others learned, nor
for his wealth, seeing there were others more vvealthy; but that which they
did most of all envy at was, his Catholic doctrine which he did preach,
and holy life which he did lead, because that none of the Prophets which
went before him, did preach of such high points as he did, nor yet any one of
them did live so sincerely as he did. Saint Augustine upon those words,
Sciebat enim quod per inuidiam tradidissent eum says, The envy conceived
against good life, is more dangerous than that which is bred by reason of our
wealth: for if he be a naughty man which is possessed of this wealth, he
will endeavor himself rather to increase his substance, than amend his life.
Let us compare then the envy which Jacobs sons bare unto their brother
Joseph, with the envy which they did bear unto Christ, and we shall see
how well the figure does answer unto the thing figured, and the spirit unto
the letter, seeing that the one was fold by envy into Aegipt, and the other
also through envy crucified. Joseph did mislike his brothers doings, and
therefore they did envy him; and Christ did not like the Jews doings, and
therefore they did hate him: and they did persecute Joseph because he did
accuse them before their father; and envied Christ because he did reprehend
them before the people. The Jews malice toward Christ was greater than
Joseph's brothers against him; for Joseph was only sold, but innocent Jesus was
not only sold, but also crucified. Joseph's brothers could not give him one
fair word, neither could the Jews hear Christ's doctrine with patience: and
therefore if his divine providence should not have kept him from their fury,
they had taken Christ's life long before away from him. Nolunt audire te, quiae
nolunt audire me filij hominis, quia omnis Israel est attrita front, and duro
cord, said God unto the Prophet Ezechiel: as if he should say, Be not angry
O Ezechiel, be not angry, if thou perceive that thou do no good with thy
speech, and have no credit among them: for seeing that they do not believe
me, it is not to be marvelled though they do not hear thee: for the house of
Israel is grown now unto that madness, that it has neither conscience in her
soul, nor shame in her face. These are the words of the eternal Father,
directed unto his blessed son, letting him understand by them what small fruit
he should reap by his doctrine, and what small credit they would give unto
his speech; and the reason is, because that all those which were of the house
of Israel were inwardly without a good spirit, and outwardly without shame.
According unto this speech of the Prophet such Prelates as govern and preach,
do toil and labor exceedingly, when the subjects which hear the^, are a
people without any conscience, and of less shame. For besides that they do no
good among the^, there is also great danger to live among them. Ezechiel did
very well couple small conscience with small shame, and small shame with a
small conscience, because that you shall never or very sildome see a shameless
man, but he is without conscience, nor a man without conscience but is also
shameless. Wickedness for wickedness, and sin for sin, A Christian can
have no greater sins than to be obstinate in heart, and without shame in his
face, because that hell is full of none but of such as are of an obstinate
heart and impudent countenance. The man which is of a tender and soft heart,
and shamefast in his behavior, is easily amended, and does now and then sin
by stealth; but he who is hard hearted and shameless in condition, does late or
never amend his sin, because he cares not for being counted a sinner. When
Christ said, Gaudete and exultate, quia nomina vestra scripta sunt in caelis,
he gave us heence to be glad of nothing, but only that we were good Christians,
and registered in the book of Saints; and likewise that we should be sorry of
nothing so much, as to be naughty Christians, and blotted out of the book of
life: for he was borne in an evil hour, who does not endeavor to amend his
life, and does not care at all to sin. We speak all this to prove that the
Jews were of a shameless forehead and hard hearted, seeing that Pilate did
know plainly, that they did accuse Christ through envy and malice, which he
gathered by the shameless speeches which they used against Christ, and the
false proofs which they alleged against him. Facta est fames magna in
Samaria, ita vt caput asini vaenundaretur octoginta argenteis, 4 Reg. 6. The
Scripture rehearses this, to show the great misery and distress that Samaria
was in, as if it would say, When Samaria was at wars with the Arabians,
being besieged and afflicted with famine, an ass head was worth fourscore
rials, and a certain measure of Pigeons dung five rials, so that they had no
meat to eat but asses, and nothing to dress it with but Pigeons dung. Although
the flesh of an ass be loathsome to eat, and Pigeons dung filthy to burn, yet
notwithstanding we will draw some mystery of this figure, to advance Christ's
honor by it, because there is no word in holy Scripture which has not some
secret hidden under it. In this figure of the ass is represented the great
war that Christ found in man's nature. What other thing was the war which
Samaria had with the king of Arabia, but the displeasure and anger which God
had against the Synagogue? What was the great dearth and famine which they
endured, but the exceeding want which they had of good doctrine? What did it
mean that an asses head was sold so deerly, but only that a good man was
little worth, and a naughty man highly esteemed? By the Pigeons dung wherewith
they did dress the asses head, is meant nothing else but the Mosaicall
ceremonies with the which they did offer up their sacrifices. There fell
nothing unto the Synagogues lot but the dregs, and the wine unto the church; to
the Synagogue the bark, and unto the church the fruit; the thorn unto the
Synagogue, and the rose unto the church; the Pigeons dung to the Synagogue, and
to us the Pigeon. The war betwixt God and man's nature, was far more cruel,
than that which was betwixt the city of Samaria and the king of Arabia, because
men did nothing but sight with God with their sins, and God did nothing unto
man but inflict punishment upon him. If they ask the son of God why he came
into this world, and took humane flesh upon him, he will answer them, that his
coming was to relieve this famine, and appease this war, in testimony
whereof the Angels in heaven did sing, when Christ was borne, Peace, Peace;
seeing that I am a mean between you, there must be no more anger left. When
the son of God came into the world, the war ceased, and when he began to
preach, the famine began to cease, because that this famine, which humane
nature was afflicted with, was not caused for want of corporal food, but for
want of virtuous me^. The want of victuals dured in Samaria but the space of
one year, but the want of virtuous men continued in the Synagogue from the
time of the valerous Machabeans until the coming of Christ: for from that
time until Christ's coming, they had no Prophet to give them light, no
captain to defend them, no Priest to teach them, nor any other famous man to
rejoice in. Who did ever find a greater dearth in the world than that which
Christ found among the Jews? Seeing that he found the princely scepter broken,
the priesthood at an end, the Temple robbed, the city perverted, and her
liberty lost? There was a great dearth in the Synagogue, considering that
there was not in her one person of account. For he did not choose the twelve
Apostles for his companions because they were holy, but because he meant to
make them holy. There was a great famine in Samaria, seeing the governor was
Pilate, who was a Tyrant, the bishop was Cayphas, who was a profane person,
the Pharisees were counselors, who were Hypocrites, the Preachers were
Sadduces, who were Heretics, and their governors were Romans, who were
Gentiles and Pagans. How was it possible that there should be any good in a
Commonwealth, which was governed by such naughty governors? As in the
unfortunate Samaria they had no kine nor calves left, so also the Synagogues
Patriarchs and Prophets were at an end, and that which was worst of all was,
that as Samaria was constrained to feed upon asses heads, so the Synagogue was
forced to be governed by naughty and wicked men. We do not say much in
saying that they were governed by wicked men: for we might with good reason
call them asses, seeing they had no discretion to know that which was good,
nor wisdom to eschew that which was naught. Do thou not think that
Pilate the judge was a very ass, seeing he confessed before them all, that
he found no cause to put Christ to death, and yet Tradidit illum voluntati
eorum? Thou do confess, Pilate, that Christ was without fault: and yet
do thou condemn him to die? Was not the High Priest Cayphas a very ass, to
say that Christ blasphemed, because he said that he would come to judge the
world? Art thou judge of the world which is not thine, and vvilt thou not let
him judge the world who has created it? Was not, think thou, King Herod a
great ass for clothing Christ in fools apparel, because Christ would not
give him an answer, seeing that for that act he should rather have accounted
him wise than otherwise? Wherein could the son of God have better shown his
discretion and patience, than in not answering unto any injury, and in not
misgouerning himself in any word? Was not all the whole congregation and
counsel of the Jews, a very ass in thy opinion, in that they did cry for
liberty for Barrabas, and procured that Christ should die? The Synagogue did
not buy Barrabas life so good cheap, as Samaria did the asses head, because
the asses head was bought for money, but Barrabas life did cost Christ his
blood. It was not worth so much, and yet they gave more in Samaria for an asses
head, than they did for Christ's blood in Jerusalem, seeing they gave but thirty
pieces of money for Christ, and fourscore for the asses head. To speak
morally then; men buy the asses head dearly, when they choose for the governor
of a Commonwealth, or Prelate, a simple and indiscreet man; because that in all
canonical elections, the learned is to be preferred before the simple, and
the wise before the indiscreet. There must needs be a great famine in that
monastery, in which they choose for their head, such a one as is light in
behavior, base in lineage, a fool in his judgment, and an ass in his
conscience. The Prophet did not say in vain, Cum sancto sanctus eris, and cum
peruerso peruerteris; For a wise man can bring up but wise men, a wicked man
nothing but wicked men, and an ass none but asses. O thou whosoever thou art
who do hear or read this, do not think that we call those asses who have
but small or no learning, but those which have no conscience, nor no bringing
up: for he is often fitter to govern who has great experience and discretion,
than he who is full of knowledge and folly. We do not call him an ass who is
ignorant in Logic, and Philosophy, and Divinity, because that in Universities
men learn rather to dispute than govern, make Sillogismes, than rule subjects.
When a Prelate is unpleasant in his conversation, hard in charity, variable in
his opinion, slack in justice, negligent in prayer, these we call asses, and
unworthy of such a calling; for, for my own part, I had rather my Prelate
should be experienced in government, than skillful in learning and knowledge.

CHAP. XII. Christ complains unto his Father, that all other martyrs had
their pains and troubles inflicted upon them at diverse times, and he his all
at once.
EGressus est frater eius, in cuius manu erat coccinum, quem appellauit Zaram,
Genesis 38 cha. As if he would say, Thamar brought foort^ two children at one
birth, and both alive; of the which, the one they called afterward Zaram, which
was the last of the two, and was borne with a scarlet thread tied at his finger:
which for a certain was a strange thing to behold, and deeply to be
considered of. If we will curiously seek out the meaning of this figure, we
shall find that it contains a deep mystery, pertaining directly unto our
purpose, because it shows how soon our redemption began in Christ. That two
children have been borne at one birth we have seen often, and that one should
be borne before the other we have also heard: but that the one should have his
finger tied and not the other, is a thing that has never been seen nor hard
of; and therefore by how much the thing is more rare, by so much it is the
fuller of mystery and secret. Deeply then expounding this sigure, who were the
two children born at one birth, but only the humane and divine nature, which
saved the world? The two children whose names were Phares and Zaram did know no
other mother but Thamar, and the divine and humane nature did acknowledge no
other father but God: for as it is an easy matter for a father to have many
children, so it is a hard and impossible thing for Christ to have many fathers.
Although those two children were very natural, and near brothers the one to
the other, and of one belly, yet they were never sovnited together, as the
divine and humane nature was united in Christ, because these two were never
separated in Christ in his life, nor severed at his death upon the cross. And
as one of these two children was borne before the other, so the redeemer of the
world was first God before he was man, and was first born of his Father,
according to his divinity, than he was of his mother, according to his
humanity. We know well that of the two brothers Phares and Zaram, the one was
born after the other: but the divine birth was so far before the other, that
we find no beginning of it, because it was Ab aeterno. Of these two brothers
the first of the^ was borne in health, pure and clean, and without any mark
at all, to give us to understand, that Christ's first birth, which was his
divinity, did return again as whole, fair, and clean to heaven, as it came
from heaven; because it is the natural condition of the divine essence, that
how much the straiter his power is joined unto it, so much the stranger and
further it is from all kind of suffering. What did it mean that the other
brother was born with a colored thread tied about his finger, but that Christ
should shed his blood for the redemption of all the world? O good Jesus, O
redemption of my soul! thou do see well, that to come out of thy mothers
womb with thy finger tied, is nothing else but to come into the world
condemned to death. Zaram only, who was the figure, and the son of God, who
was the thing figured, were those who had their finger tied with a colored
thread, because he and no other was to die for the world, and redeem us out of
sin. What other meaning had the thread of scarlet, saving only the shedding
of his precious blood? The difference betwixt thee, O my sweet Jesus, and other
condemned persons is this, that they are tied in a hempen cord, and thou in a
thread of scarlet, and they about the neck, and thou about the finger, and they
are lead to be hanged, and thou to be crucified. A thief is led away bound
with a great tope, because he is drawn to death by force, but the son of God
is tied with a small fine thread, because he dies not by force, but of his
own free will: for if it were not his good pleasure so to do, neither the
Angels, nor men, nor the devils were able to put him to death. O high mystery,
O divine Sacrament! who ever saw or heard, that before a child were borne, or
knew what sin was, yet that he should come out of his mothers womb already
condemned? What mercy can be compared unto this, that before his mother should
give him milk to suck, his own father threatened him that he should die
crucified? Elegit suspendium anima mea, and ossa mea mortem, and nequaquam
vltra iam viuam, says Job chap. 7. And he spoke them when his children were
dead, and his body plagued, and his goods lost, and himself upon the dunghill;
and it is as if he would say: My pains and dolours do so narrowly beset me
about, and my grief is come to that bitterness, that my soul has chosen to
be hanged, and my life to come at an end, because I am a weary to suffer any
longer, and do loath my life. Such pitiful complains as these are, and such
tender words, cannot proceed but from an afflicted and grieved heart, and
from a man which desires death. Because it is the property of one which is
distressed, to complain unto all those which comfort him, and fill himself
with weeping with all those which come to visit him. What else would holy Job
say, when he says, Elegit suspendium anima mea, and ossa mea mortem, but that
his soul desired to be hanged, and his bones choose death, and his life to be
at an end? O holy man, thou have nothing left thee but thy soul, and would
thou have it hanged, nothing left but thy bones, and do thou desire to have
them dead, thou have nothing left but thy life, and would thou loose it?
Thou must understand, my good brother, that Job did not speak these doleful
words in his own name, but in Christ's name, unto whom this speech does
most properly belong. Because that from the beginning of the world until this
day, there was never soul so sorrowful as his, nor never body so martyred as
his was. Saint Chrysostom upon these words of the Apostle. Fidelis deus, qui
non permittit nos tentari vltra id quod possumus, says thus: Our Lord is very
faithful and pitiful, because he tempts no man above that which he is
able to suffer, nor suffers no man to have greater pain than he is able to
bear, the son of God excepted only, upon whom the Father laid in the
judgment of men, torment and pain not able to be endured, and withal
innumerable temptations. What vvilt thou require more in this case, but that
God the Father laid martyrdom upon Saints by ownces* but upon his blessed
son by great loads and burdens* Wha^ great distress was his soul in,
think you, and what grief did oppress his heart, when he sighed for the
gallows, and his body desired his grave? When did thy soul desire to be
hanged, but when thou did crucify thy blessed humanity upon the cross;
and when did thy bones covet death but when thou did loose thy life for
the elects sake? When the Scripture says Elegit, He did choose, it is
signified that thou did die willingly for us: and when he says Suspendium,
his death was signified, and withal his determination which he had to redeem
the world, and that our redemption should be hanged upon the tree. And when he
says, Ossa mea, the multitude of people is set forth which were at his death,
as well the good as the bad, the quick as the dead: the good, to see
themselves redeemed by him, and the bad to see themselves revenged of him. All
humane pains are brought unto three principal heads, that is, to the trouble
and travel of the body, to the grief and sorrow of the mind, and to the loss
of life. These vexations are wont to happen at diverse times, and also be
divided and laid upon diverse persons, and he who has grief of body feels
no sorrow of mind, and if he have anguish of mind yet not so great that it
should take his life from him, because our Lord is so pitiful that he does
not look unto the multitude of our offenses, but unto the weakness of our
forces. God was more pitiful with all mankind than with his own only
son, considering that he gave other men their troubles and pains by pieces,
and unto his son all at once. For he gave him sorrow and grief of mind,
seeing he says, My soul has chosen to be hanged: and he gave him the
pains of the body, seeing he says, that his bones desired death: and he
took away his life considering that he says, Iam non viuam. What unspeakable
sorrow, and what sea of tempest should toss and vex that blessed soul when
he said, My soul has chosen to be hanged, that is, that it would be a
comfort unto him to be crucified! What cruel grief should crush his bones
when he said, and my bones death, thinking it an ease to see his bones in
their grave, rather than to suffer such intolerable torment? What a jest did
they make of his doctrine, and how little did they regard his person, seeing
he says, I will live no longer, that is, that he would forsake us, because
we are incorrigible, and because we do not deserve his company, he will
not bestow his grace among us. This speech may otherwise be very well
understood, because the time which he did suffer and die in did take from him
all that might mittigate his pain, and comfort his heart. No other Martyr
could ever say, My soul has chosen hanging, because there was none of them
which vvanted comfort in their sorrows, and help in their pains; and above
all, this was a great comfort to them to think for how good a master they
suffered, and what a great reward they expected for their martyrdom. That
which did comfort Martyrs in their Martyrdom, did discomfort Christ in his
passion. For if he did die, it was for a lost and perverse nation, and the
reward he looked for was perpetual ingratitude; because there was never so
great a matter performed, as when Christ died because we should live, and yet
there was never deed so ungratefully requited, as his death was by us. Saint
Barnard says, O good Jesus, O my souls joy, Art thou not content to loose thy
life for my life, but that thy sorrow and grief should continue also until
they take thy soul from thee upon the cross? If the son of God had said
only, Tristis est anima mea, it had been tolerable: but to say, Vsque ad
morte^, it is a thing not to be any way endured: For it was only he and no
other, in whom the pain ended at the same time that his soul departed from
him. Cyprian says, That by this speech, Vsque ad mortem, the son of God does
bind himself to die sorrowfully and comfortles, taking no ease at all in his
passion, because there was no portion of the inferior part, which grief did
not wholly possess, nor any bone in all his body which was not bruised and
broken with grief and pain. Christ says, Eleg it suspendium anima mea,
because that as all the time that he lived in this world, he kept the glory
of his soul in suspense, because it should not fall upon his body; so at the
time of his passion he did keep his reason in suspense, because it should not
comfort his soul. For if Christ would have given his glorious soul license
to impart some small sparkle of her glory unto the body, he had never been
comfortless; and if he would have given license unto his reason to have
comforted him in his passion, he should never have felt his passion so sharp
and bitter. But because our redemption should be more copious and abundant,
he would admit no comfort nor consolation at all. Ne fortitudo lapidum
fortitudo mea, nee caro mea, says holy Job; As if he would say, O great God,
do not punish me so rigorously, nor show thy self so cruel against me,
because my heart is not so hard as a stone to feel no pain, nor my flesh as
hard as copper, that no torments are able to hurt it. He who spoke these
words, did crave aid for his grief, and favor for his anguish, seeing he did
confess that his heart was not able to bear them, nor his strength able to
sustain them. There are some men so senseless that they feel no kind of
tribulation no more than if their hearts were made of stone* and contrary
there are some of so tender a nature, that if a man do but touch their coat,
they cry out that they may be heard unto heaven, in so much that the first
like unto beasts feel nothing, and the other like impatient men never cease
crying. When the holy man says, That his heart was not like a heart of stone,
he meant that he did feel all tribulation and anguish, even unto the heart:
and when he said that his flesh was not made of copper or brass, his
meaning was, that although he did feel all tribulation, yet he did never
complain of it; in so much that if he did feel it as a man, yet he did
dissemble it like a wise man. S. Gregory in his Morals says, Job does very
wisely under these words show us the manner how bad men and good men do
suffer their anguish, and he compares those which feel no tribulation unto a
stone, and those which complain on them always, unto sounding copper: for
indeed he who feels no grief at all, is like unto a stone, and to feel it
and hold his peace is the part of him who is wise and discreet. Christ's heart
was not of stone, because he should not feel, neither was his flesh of
copper, to complain: for he did feel all pain and anguish more than any
man, and did suffer it better than any; for in all the time of his passion he
did never complain upon any when he suffered, nor did never command a revenge
to be taken on any when he died.

CHAP. XIII. How the son complains of his Father, because that he had
condemned him to die before that Judas had sold him.
QVare me posuisti contrarium tibi, and factus sum mihimet ipsi grauis? These
words are uttered by holy Job, in the person of the son of God, speaking unto
his Father upon the cross: and their meaning is this, O my Father, why art
thou so contrary unto me, as if I were thy enemy? does it not content thee that
for my friends sake I am grievous unto my self, and complain on my self? It
is an ordinary thing to see one man complain upon another, and to see me
complain upon my self is no new thing, but to complain on thee and my self
at once, is a hard case: for although my tongue can count my griefs and
tribulations, yet my heart cannot suffer them. If Christ did complain of Herod
for mocking him, or of Pilate for giving sentence on him, it was no marvel;
but to complain on his Father, it seems that there is no patience able to
endure it. For seeing that he should have defended him, it seems a very hard
part to suffer him to be crucified. The son of God does frame two great
complaints in these words, the one of his eternal Father, the other of
himself: and therefore it is very convenient that we declare how the eternal
Father did send his son to die, and how he himself went to suffer on the
cross: and in so doing, we shall find that the one did that which he did,
moved thereunto with charity, and the other to suffer that which he suffered,
was moved with pity. Qui proprio filio non pepercis, sed pro omnibus
nobistradidit illum, says S. Paul: and his meaning is this, The love which God
bare unto all the world, was so exceeding great, that he would not pardon the
death of his own proper son, but would have him crucified for all. Being, as
he was, his natural son, and his only son, and so holy a son, and so
well-beloved a son, was it not a thing most wonderful that he would suffer
him to be crucified? David had many sons besides Absalon, and yet when the
captain Ioab had slain him in field, David was almost besides himself, and
cried out, O my son Absalon, O my son Absalon, who will do me the favor
to kill me, and restore me thee again? He that gave such sorrowful words for
the death of a son, would he not, think you, have powered out far more
pitiful lamentations, if he had been handled, as Christ was crucified? To
have killed a servant for to save his son, any Father would have done; but to
kill his son for to save his servant, only the Father of Christ did, who
having no other son but him, gave them him as freely to be carried to be
crucified, as if they had led him to be crowned. Damascen says, The eternal
Father did well know, that our business could not be brought to pass, but by
his sons means; and he knew also very well, that so old a strife would cost
his son very dearly, and notwithstanding all this he gave his full consent
that he should be condemned to die. And that which most of all did show his
goodness, and our wickedness is, that the devils, against whom he did plead
and strive, did not give sentence against Christ, but man for whom he did
plead, and whose cause he did defend. Theophilus does seem to say, that it
imports more to say, that the father did suffer his son to be crucified,
than to say that he does suffer sin: which appears by the Apostle, when
he says, Quod pro nobu omnibus tradidit illum: and he says not, Quod
permisit, but he says that he did deliver and give his son to be
crucified. If the father did give him to be crucified, who was able to defend
him? If we do give credit unto the Prophet Esayas, the son does charge no
man with his death and passion saving only his Father, seeing that he says in
the Fathers name, Propter peccata populi mei percussieum, as if he would say,
Let no search be made for the death of my son, because I was he who stroke
him and wounded him, and crucified him, and buried him, because the sins of
my people could not be cleansed, but with the blood of my son. David was of
the same opinion in the 88 Psalm, saying, thou have shortened the days of his
life, and have thrown his seat upon the ground. Who was able to cut off his
days, or cast down his seat, but only he who gave him life, and honored him
with a seat? All this was figured, not only in Abraham, who had drawn his
sword to kill his son, but also in king Moab, who for the liberty of the
people, did kill his own son from the top of a wall. Origin upon the Apostle
says, Although it seem to be a thing against humanity for the father to be a
butcher of his own son, and make an anatomy of him, yet it was no cruelty
for the father to make his son to die for the redemption of the world, but
rather a great point of charity; because it was decreed from the beginning that
as our hurt came by disobedience, so our bulwark and defense should be by
obedience. Theophilus says, God left his son in the hands of death, with an
intention, that because that if she did set upon him without cause, he should
loose the right which he had upon others: and so it befell unto him; for
because he ventered upon him who was just, he lost his action against him who
was a sinner. S. Augustine upon S. Matthew says; There were at Christ's death,
first Christ's father, and then the son, the Lieutenant Pilate, Judas the
Disciple, and all the people of the Jews: and as they were all of diverse
conditions, so they were of diverse intentions. Pilate gave sentence on him for
fear, Judas sold him for covetousness, the Jews slew him by malice, the
Father delivered him for charity, and the son offered himself to die with
pity: and he says further, Do not say, O you Jews, do not say, If he be
the son of God, let him come down from the cross: for you would have
crucified him long before that time, if his Father had not denied you him, and
afterward when he would, and how he would, he delivered him unto you. What
did Pilate in the death of Christ but sin, what did Judas in the passion of
his Master but sin, what did the Jews in crucifieng Christ but sin? The
passion of Christ our redeemer the Father permitted, the son suffered, the
holy ghost approved, in so much that we be not bound for our redemption unto
those who put him to death for to revenge their injuries, but unto those who
suffered it, to redress our faults. O how much we owe unto God the Father for
his clemency, seeing that because he would not punish my offense in my self,
he punished his own son for it, not according unto his innocence, but unto my
great offense, the which his holy son did lay upon his own shoulders, to the
intent to disburden me of it. Anselmus in his Meditations says, Say, O my
soul, say with the Prophet, I am he who sinned, I am he who have offended
thee, I am he who has sinned: for the Lamb thy son, what has he done? Let
thy fury be turned against me, O Father, who have committed the fault, and not
against thy son who is without spot, and let not the cruel spear of iron
pierce his heart, who can do nothing but love, and let him enter into my heart
who can do nothing but sin. O fatherly affection, and favor never heard of
before! what is there in me to give thee, or what is there in all the world to
serve thee with, seeing that for to seek out him who was lost, to redeem
him who was sold, to unloose him who was bound, and deliver him out of
captivity who was taken prisoner, thou did make thy own son captive. O
infinite goodness, and unspeakable clemency! what pity did constrain thee,
or what charity did overcome thee, that to give light unto the blind, to heal
the lame, put him in the right way who went astray, to make clean the
unclean, to lift him up who was fallen, and pardon him who had offended, thou
would not pardon thy own son? What priesthood can be compared unto thy
Priesthood, or what sacrifice is like unto thy sacrifice, seeing that in old
time they did offer nothing unto the Priest, but some live beast for the sins
of the people, and thou did not offer but thy own proper son? The son
then has great occasion to complain of his Father, saying, Why have thou put
me contrary unto thy self, seeing that he commanded that son which he loved
best, to die for those which most of all did hate him.

He follows this matter in a moral sense.
FActus sum mihimet ipsi grauis, says Job, as we have already said. Although
says he, I complain of many, yet I complain of none more than of my self;
and although many things do wage battle against me, yet I am the greatest
enemy unto my self. Origin upon this place says, It is a thing never heard
of, and a very strange complaint: for although a man be never so culpable, yet
he desires to excuse himself, and accuse others. Irenaeus in a Sermon says,
We fall every day and stumble, and sin: yet notwithstanding all these faults,
no man does confess himself to be naught, nor acknowledge his brother to
be good. Petrarch says, That men complain of the sea, that it is dangerous,
of the air that it is corrupt, of his friend that he is a dissembler, of the
time that it is troublesome; and yet I see no man (says he) who complains of
himself: and therefore we are like unto young gamesters, which never blame
their own play, but when they loose do curse the dice. This speech of Job does
contain much matter, and therefore it is convenient that we tell you how many
sorts of war there is, seeing he says, that he makes war against himself.
There is therefore one kind of war which is called a royal war, another
called civil war, another more than civil war, another personal, and
another cordial or of the heart. Of all which wars I will tell you what we
have read, and what we think. It is called a royal war, because it is made by
one king against another, or by one kingdom against another: as the war
betwixt Darius and Alexander, Troianus and Decebalus, Rome and Carthage, the
which two proud cities, although they had no kings, yet they were heads of
kingdoms. There is another kind of war called civil war, which is betwixt
neighbor and neighbor, or when a city deuideth it self, and fights the
one against the other; as in Carthage betwixt the Hannones and Hasdrubales, and
in Rome betwixt Scilla and Marius, and afterward betwixt Caesar and Pompey, all
which ended their lives before they ended their quarrel. There is another
war called more than civil war, as betwixt the son and the father,
brother and brother, uncle and cousin; as betwixt David and his son Absalon,
who purposed to take away the kingdom from his father, although he achieved
not his enterprise, but in the end was hanged upon an oak. It was more than a
civil war that was betwixt the Aiaces the Greeks, Bries the Licaonians,
Athenones the Trojans, Fabritioes the Romans. This is the most dangerous kind
of war that is, because those hatreds which are conceived betwixt kinsmen, by
so much the more are more deadly, by how much they are nearer tied in kindred.
There is another kind of war which is called personal or a combat, when two
valiant men do fight a combat for the auerring of some weighty and important
affair, where for to save their honor they loose sometime their life and
honor both. This kind of combat the valiant David fought against the Giant
Golias, the one armed and the other without arms: yet in the end David did
overcome Golias and killed him with his sling, and cut off his head with his
own sword. There is another kind of war more stranger than those we have
spoken of, which is called the war of the heart or entrals, which is begun
in the heart, fought in the heart, and also ended in the heart. In this
sorrowful war, sighs are the darts they cast, tears the weapons they fight
with, the bowels the field where the battle is fought, and those who fight
are the hearts, and he who can weep best, is accounted the best soldier.
Factus sum mihimet ipsi grauis, because there, there fights one against the
other, and both against him, love and fear, sloth and courage, talking and
silence, anger and patience. O what great reason Job had to say, Factus sum
mihimet ipsi grauis, seeing that not in the corners, but in the very midst of
our hearts, theft and alms deeds do fight and strive the one against the
other. And reason and sensuality, care and sluggishnesse, strife and
quietness, anger and patience, covetousness and liberality, pardon and
revenge. O unhappy battle and dangerous combat, where I am made Mihimet
ipsi grauis, seeing we fight here not in company, but alone, not openly but
secretly, not with swords but with thoughts, and there is nothing seen but
all is felt. And that which is vvorst of all is, that to overcome we must
sometimes suffer our selves to be overcome. Where but in this more than civil
war, in what fight but in this, in what strife but in this, did all the
holy and virtuous men end their lives? Who then will say that it is not very
true that, Factus sum mihimet ipsi grauis, seeing that we are so much the
better accepted of God, by how much we are contrary unto our selves. The
Apostle complained of this war, when he said. O infaelix homo! quis me
liberabit de corpore mortis huius? his meaning was, O unfortunate and
sorrowful man as I am! when will the day come, wherein I may see my self
free, and as it were exempted from my self, to the end that I may do that
which I would do, and not as now, to desire that which I ought not. Saint
Augustine speaks of this civil war in his Confessions, when he said;
Factus sum mihimet ipsi grauis, seeing that I am bound and fettered, not with
yrons and chains, but with my own sensuality: but I gave my will voluntarily
unto the Devil, and of my will he makes now that which I will not. Anselmus
in his Meditations says, I am made grievous and painful unto my self,
because there is no man so contrary unto me, and so against me, as I am to my
self, and I am like a fool besides my self, in so much that living within my
self, yet I go wandering abroad out of my self. Isidorus in his book De summo
bono says, I am made grievous unto my self, and for that cause my judgment
is so darkened, my memory so weakened, my thoughts so changed, that I know not
what I would have although it be given me, nor I know not whereof I should
complain although I be demanded. Do thou not think that my judgment is
sore troubled, and that I am an alien from myself, seeing that I do
oftentimes, by desiring to know that of my self that I know of others, enquire
of my self for my self? Barnard says in a Sermon, Am not I, good Jesus,
grievous and painful unto my self, seeing that if hunger do make me faint
and weak, eating does also loath me, if cold do weary me, the heat does also
molest me, if solitariness do make me sad, company does also importune me,
in so much that I am pleased and contented with nothing, and am always
discontented with my self? How can I be pleased with my own doings, seeing
that if I do behave my self once like a wise man, I do behave my self an
hundred times like an indiscreet man? S. Ambrose in an Epistle to Theodosius
says, Because I am grievous and painful unto my self, I do withdraw my
self from the company of men, because they should not change and disguise me,
I fly from the devil because he should not entrap me, I forsake the world
because he should not damn me, I renounce wealth and riches, because they
should not corrupt me, I refuse all honor and dignities, because they should
not make me proud. But alas alas, notwithstanding all this, and although I
suffer very much, yet my body is never at rest, my mind is very unquiet, by
reason whereof I grow vvorser and vvorser every day in virtues, and plunge my
self more and more into the world. Whosoever he were who made these verses,
he made them most gravely: In war that I am under taking,
Against my self my sorce does spend me^
Since with my self war I am making,
O from my self then God desend me.


When such grave and wise men do complain on themselves, we have small
reason to trust to our selves, because a wise man should distrust none more
than himself. I will justly say, Factus sum mihimet ipsi grauis: for if I be
in the kings displeasure I forsake his country; if I am pursued by justice, I
fly from it; if I be troubled with a naughty neighbor, I remove into another
street: but having my own proper will to my enemy, how should I possibly fly
from my self? Who will not say, I am made grievous unto my self, seeing that
within my own heart I harbor love and hatred, contentment and discontment, my
will and my nill, my liking and disliking, my ioies and my griefs, and also my
delight and my sorrow? For my own part, I say and confess, that I am grievous
unto my self, considering that I willingly would that I had no such will:
for pride does puff me up, envy does consume me, gluttony does wast me,
anger causes me hatred, incontinency does disquiet me, in so much that if I
do abstain from sin, it is not because I have not a will unto it, but
because I am weary and can sin no more. O how true it is, Quod factus sum
mihimet ipsi grauis! for if I be sick, it is because I have eaten too much,
if I be poor it is because I took my pleasure too much, if I be imprisoned
it is because I have stolen, if I be sad it is for that I loved, if I be
ashamed it is for somewhat that I have committed, and if I be disconte^ted it
is through my own choice; and if I have committed an error in my own choice,
whom should I blame but my self? If the truth be well examined, there is no
man who ought to be more grieved with any man than with himself: for as of one
part we do nothing else but complain of the troubles and travels which we
suffer, so on the other part we our selves do continually seek them. If it be
true that I am grievous unto my self, with whom shall I have a good peace, if
I my self do make war against my self? Who shall deal with me that I be
not grievous and troublesome, seeing that I my self cannot be content with
my self? By what means can I possibly set my neighbors at one, if my
sensuality and reason do bandy one against the other? Who until this day has
ever had more cruel enemies against him, than I have now of my own thoughts
and desires, considering that they draw me to that which is good afeared and
amazed, and unto that which is wicked with great confidence and boldness? I
do conclude then and say, that considering the time which I lose, and the
small profit which I make, the care I have in sinning, and careleslenes I have
in amending, the great goodness I receive at God his hands, and how little I
serve him, the evil which I do, and the good which I hinder, I am greatly
ashamed to live, and very sore afraid to die.

The end of the fourth word which Christ our redeemer spoke upon the Cross.
Here begins the fifth of the seven words, which the son of God spoke upon
the Cross, to wit, Sitio, that is, I am a thirst.
CHAP. I. Why the son of God did bid all those which were a thirst come unto
him, and yet said upon the cross that he himself was a thirst.
SCiens Jesus quia omnia consummata sunt, vt consummaretur Scriptura, dicit
Sitio: These are one of the seven words which Christ spoke upon the cross,
which S. John rehearses in the 19 chapter: as if he would say, The son of
God knowing that all that touched the redemption of all the world was now
finished, having an intention that all the scripture should be accomplished, he
spoke the fifth word, saying Sitio, that is, I am a thirst. Christ did well know
that it was written in the Psalm, In siti mea potauerunt me aceto, seeing that
to fulfill the Scripture he suffered that great thirst, to the end that all the
mysteries should be accomplished which were prophesied of his death. The
Prophets had prophesied many things in Christ's name which he should do when
he came into the world; among the which they had prophesied that he should
suffer very great thirst: and therefore to say that he had thirst to fulfill
the Scripture, was to say, that he did suffer that torment to vngage his
word. Christ did deal like a friend with all the Prophets and holy men of old
time, considering that to the cost of his life, and great travel of his holy
person, he did accomplish and fulfill all that which they had laid down in
Scripture, to the great credit of the Prophets, and great glory of holy writ,
and with the great travel of his own person. Christ said preaching that there
was no tittle, no point, nor sentence of holy Scripture, which should not be
fulfilled according unto the letter. The first mystery of the incarnation, Ecce
virgo conciptes, was fulfilled literally, seeing himself was a virgin, and
borne of a virgin: and also the last mystery of his passion, was accomplished
literally, Dederunt in escam meam fell, and in siti mea potauerunt me aceto,
Seeing that they gave him upon the cros^e gaul and vinegar to drink. What did
Christ mean when he said, that to fulfill the Scripture he had such great
thirst, but that he might now freely depart and go out of this world, seeing
that all the redemption was ended, and the Scripture accomplished? The simple
Reader ought not to imagine, that the son of God would not have come into the
world, nor redeemed the world, nor endured this torment and thirst, if it had
not been written in the Prophets: for he must learn, that the Scriptures are
tied unto Christ, and not Christ unto the Scriptures; because that they should
not have been written, if he should not have been borne and crucified; and yet
he should have been borne and crucified, although the scripture had not spoken
it. Venerable Beed says, Seeing that all Christ's actions are great, and those
of his death and passion most great, it is much to be noted, and to bewondered
at, why it was the pleasure of the son of God, that his thirst should be his
last work, and that he would depart out of this life with great thirst. S.
Augustine says, The last grief and pain which Christ suffered was his
thirst, the last complaint which he made was of his thirst, and the last
request which he made was for a cup of water, and the last torment which
he endured was of the gaul, vinegar and mire which he drank, because that
immediately after that he had tasted of that cup he gave up his ghost unto his
Father. Seeing therefore that this thirst is the last torment, the last request,
the last complaint, and the last work that Christ did in this world, it is
convenient that we tell who he is who suffers this thirst, where he
does suffer it, for whom he does suffer it, and at what time he does
suffer it. He who suffers is Christ, the place where is upon the cross, I
am he for whose sake he suffered it, the time was until death, insomuch
that with the same great thirst which he endured, his soul was drawn and
pulled out of his body. The high mysteries of the cross of Christ may well
be compared unto the eating of Pine-apples, and their kernels, the which the
oftener they be cast into the fire and taken out, the more kernels they yield
to eat, and more husk to burn. That which happens unto the labourer with
those Pines and kernels, does happen unto us in these divine mysteries, in the
which the more we think upon the passion and cross, the more secrets we
discover, and the more mysteries we find. Cyprian says, That which men
dispose of a little before their death, is always of greater importance, than
that which we deal with in our life time, because it is done with greater
heed, provided for with deeper consideration, ordered with better discretion,
rated and determined with better conscience. No man did ever dispose better of
his life and soul, than Christ did of his own person and the church, because
he disposed of them with more care than Jacob, vvth more pity than Isaac,
with more discretion than Iosue, with greater wisdom than David, and greater
bounty and liberality than Salamon. Mulier da mihi bibere, said Christ to the
Samaritane woman, As if he would say, Give me a cup of water, good woman,
because thou see that I am weary of the way, and very thirsty. When Christ
said unto the woman, Da mihi bibere, and also when he said upon the cross, I
am a thirst, it was a sign that he had been a thirst many days, and also many
years, and very desirous to quench his thirst with water. That which Christ
says in the 7 of Saint John, seems to be very contrary unto this, If any
man be a thirst, let him come unto me. Upon a solemn day of Easter, Christ
cried publicly in the market place. If any man be a thirst let him come unto
me. O high mystery and deep secret! who is able to understand that which
Christ says in this place, seeing that sometime he asks the Samaritane
woman for a little water, and on the cross he says that he dies with
thirst, and yet on the other side he makes open proclamation, that all which
be thirsty should come unto him? How can these two speeches hang together,
Woman give me some drink, and this, If any man be a thirst, let him come
unto me? Do thou inuit all men to come to drink at thy Tavern, and have
thou not a cup of water for to quench thy own thirst? For the better
understanding of this, it is to be noted, that God does take some things of
us, and yet there are some things which God does give unto us; which is easily
perceived, in that he took flesh of us when he would become man, and yet if
we will become pure and holy, he must impart his grace unto us. This being
so, when Christ says, If any man be a thirst let him come unto me, he does
give us to understand, that he is the fountain of grace, of the which we
should all drink of: and when he sayih, Woman give me some drink, he does
let us also understand, that there are some things in us of the which he would
be served vvithall. When the son of God says, If any man be thirsty let
him come unto me, to what water, think thou, does he inuit thee, but
unto the water of his grace and of his glory? And when he says unto the
Samaritane woman, give me drink, what water think thou did he ask, but
only patience and obedience? Christ does inuit us to drink of his great
goodness and favors, and he craves of us of the water of the pooles of our
poor service, saying Da mihi bibere, in so much that to show the great love
which he does bear unto his creatures, he faineth that he has need of
their services. S. Barnard upon those words of the Psalm, Sitiuit anima mea
ad deum fontem viuum says, O what a great difference there is betwixt the
thirst of the good and the bad, because the bad thirst after nothing but
wickedness, and the good after virtues, the bad after temporal things, and
the good after spiritual, the one after sin, and the other after amendment,
so that all the thirst of the wicked is after sin, and the thirst of the good
after salnation. Basil upon the Psalm says, The Prophet would never have
said, My soul has thirsted after God a lively spring, if he could have found
the fountain of glory in this world, and the water of grace in this life.
But alas of how many waters soever we drink of, and how many waters soever
we seek for, we shall never meet with the water of life, until we come to
enjoy the divine essence. Hugo de sancto victore upon the Psalm says, All the
things of this life are dry fountains, and dead waters; and conrary, all
things of glory are fresh fountains and water of life: for there and not here
we shall live all contented, and not thirst at all. All which live in this
world, live in hunger and thirst, because all the vices which we like of do
hurt and not profit, make us sorrowful and not ioifull, weary and not
recreate us, loath and not fill us. What vicious man is there in the world, who
the more he does give himself to vice, is not the more thirsty after them? Let
not the Devil deceive thee, my brother, in saying I will now cloy and glut my
self with vice: for the more thou do eat and drink and be merry,
although thou do seem to be fully satisfied, yet thou art not so, but only
a weary. Saint Barnard upon the Passion of our Lord says, What does it mean
that the son of God went out of this world dead with thirst, but only that
there is nothing in this world that can quench the thirst of our soul?
Anselmus says, How is it possible, O my good Jesus, how is it possible that I
should live in the world contented and fully satisfied, seeing that thou
did depart out of it hungry and thirsty? S. Jerome upon S. Luke says, All
that the world does give us to quench our thirst withal, is but vinegar, and
all that he gives us to mittigate our hunger is but gaul, the which things
being well proved do take away our life, and not our thirst. Robertus upon
Saint John says, That for the son of God to die with thirst, is to let us
understand, that have we never so many dignities, let us heap up never so much
riches, and let us prove never so many vices, and let us cocker our selves all
we can, yet we shall depart with as great thirst out of this world, as if we had
not lived but one moment in it. In this sorrowful life there is nothing but is
thirsty: the flesh does thirst after dainty cherishing, the soul does thirst
after longer life, the heart does thirst for more strength, the Devil to
deceive us, and Christ does thirst after our salvation. Which of all these do
not live in hunger and thirst? What does our flesh but complain in every part,
that we keep it naked, that we keep it hungry, weary, discontented, and dead
with thirst? What sinful soul did ever depart out of this vvretched life, so
beset with grief, or laden with years, which would nor have given all
that he had been worth to have lived one year longer? What humane heart is
there on earth, which watches not to get more, and breaks not his sleep to
be worth more? Why does the Devil vvatch but to keep his own, and beguile
the good? Why are there so many sorts of vices in the world, and so many
entisements, but to quench the thirst which it has, to make us all vain,
worldly, and light? Why did the son of God come into the world, preach the
Gospel, live in pain, and die upon the cross, but only for the great thirst
which he had to save the world? Lo then, we have proved how the flesh, the
heart, the soul, the world, the devil, and Christ, are all hungry and desire
thee O my soul: and that which cannot be spoken without tears is, that only
Christ does thirst after thy salvation, and all the other after thy perdition.
O my soul, if thou had as great a thirst to amend thy self, as Christ
has to save thee, or if thou had as great a thirst to amend thy self as
these thy enemies have to deceive thee, I do promise thee that thou would
not live as thou do so carelessy, nor yet behave thy self so riotously. The
good do inherit the thirst of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ, and the
wicked do inherit the thirst of the devil. And what is the thirst which the
good do inherit, but to be peacemakers, humble, chaste, sober, and very
charitable? And what is the thirst which the wicked do inherit of the devil,
but to be more mighty, and rich, and more vicious? O what great difference
there is betwixt these two thirsts! for the thirst of the good and virtuous
goes to be quenched at the fountain of life, which is glory; and the thirst
of the wicked goes to be quenched at the dead waters of pain and punishment;
in so much that such as our thirst is in this world, such shall be the water
which we shall drink of in the other. O how well the Prophet said, My soul
did thirst after the living God, because that all the water which our Lord does
give us to drink is of the lively fountain, which is clear unto the eye, and
fresh to recreat, sauerous to provide of, and wholesome to taste of, delicare in
disgesting, and most precious to keep. The water which the world gives his
followers to drink of is deep to teach unto, troubled to see unto, unsavory to
drink, puddle in taste, and stinking to keep. Let us conclude then that the
servant of God is always thirsty and desirous of God, who as he who is very
thirsty does seek drink with all diligence, so he who is desirous of God does
seek all the ways and means he can to serve and obey him.

CHAP. II. How the Crows gave the Prophet Helias meat; and how the Jews gave
Christ neither meat nor drink.
REcede hine, and vade contra Orientem, and absconde te in torrentem Carith,
and ibi de torrente viues: nam coruis praecepi vt pascant te: God spoke these
words unto H^lias Reg. 3. chap. 17, as if he would say; It is my will and
pleasure, O Helias, that thou live no more in this land, but that thou
should go out of it, and thou shall go toward the East, and hide thy
self in the brook Carith, where thou shall have no need to fear hunger,
because I will command the crows to bring thee meat and bread every day, and
there thou have water enough for thy drinking. When our Lord did command Helias
to go out of Samaria, there was a great famine over all the land, and he was
also persecuted by the wicked queen Iezabel: and yet having an intention to
succor his Prophet, he appointed him a place far off, where he should hide
himself, and provided him all kind of victuals for him to eat. Helias being
gone to the brook Carith, there he lay hidden a long time, feeding only upon
that which the crows gave him, and drinking of the water which ran in the
stream. And after a few months were past, and the Queens persecution was
ceafed, and the famine amended, Helias returned to the people, and the crows
were seen no more. Before we do come unto these mysteries, it is here to be
noted, what great care our Lord has over his servants, and how he is never
careless of his friends, because his natural condition is never to be
unmindful of those which do not forget to serve him. Cum ipso sum, eripiam
eum, and glorificabo eum, says the Psalmist in the name of our Lord: and his
meaning is, I my self, and no other, will be always with him in his troubles,
and I will bring him safe out of them, and he shall escape out of them with
honor and glory. If we do well understand Christ, he promises three things
unto such as suffer persecution and tribulation for his service: The first is,
that he will be at their side in all troubles and vexations: the second, that
they shall never lose their life, nor endanger their conscience for any
trouble, be it never so strong: the third, that he will deliver them out of
that trouble with great fame and glory. If such great profit be gotten by
persecution, why does any man follow the pleasures and delights of the world?
What tribulation is there in this world so hard and dangerous, which is not
ouercomed with the help of Christ? O how happy is that soul which is tempted
for the service of God, and is persecuted for the love of him! seeing he has
given his word and his credit that he will not suffer any to fall in his
temptation, nor forsake any man in his tribulation. Note gentle Reader, that
Christ does not say, I am with them In gaudio and exultatione, in mirth and
joy, but In tribulatione, in tribulation: for as in this life he knew nothing
but how to shed tears, suffer temptations, endure travail, so he has
compassion of none but of such as weep, and are persecuted and tempted; in so
much that as the devil is the captain and ringleader of all which live in
pomp and iolitie, so Christ is the head of all that are afflicted and in
tribulation. Saint Barnard says, If this that is said, Cumipso sum in
tribulatione, be not performed in thee, think with thy self that thou do
not suffer that tribulation for Christ, but for thy friend and thy self; and
therefore in that case let him help and succor thee for whom thou do suffer
that danger. If thou do not make reckoning of Christ, nor think on him, nor
suffer for his sake, what has Christ to do with thy paint and travail? If
thou do suffer for the flesh, let the flesh help thee, if thou suffer for the
world, let the world deliver thee, if thou suffer for thy friend, let thy
friend give thee aid, if thou do suffer for Christ, to Christ commend thy
self: for if thou do serve others, what reason is it that thou should ask
favor of him. Saint Basil says, What friend had God at any time whom he
forgot, or in what tribulation did he ever see him when he helped him not?
Gregory in his Register says, He who did not forget Noe in the flood, nor
Abraham in Chaldea, nor Lot in Sodom, nor Isaac in Palestine, nor Jacob in
Assyria, nor Daniel in Babylon, do thou think that he will forget thee in
thy affliction and tribulation? Remigius says, If this promise of Cum ipso sum
in tribulatione, be not kept with thee, think that our Lord does it, either
for thy greater profit, or his own service: for the greater the tribulation
is which thou endurest, the more thou do merit for thy soul: and if it be
not for this cause, it is because thou shall fall into some greater danger,
from the which our Lord does keep his holy hand and divine succor to deliver
thee. And because that the curious Reader may not think that we swerve from
our purpose, it is to be noted, that the Prophet Helius (whose figure we
handled) was beset with three grievous persecutions, that is, with the war
which was in Jury, with the famine which was over all the land, and with
Iezabels hatred. He durst not preach for fear of the Queen, he durst not go
abroad for fear of the war, he durst not hide himself for fear of famine
and hunger; in so much that this holy Prophet was so much without hope of
remedy, that he knew not whether he should have his throat cut openly, or
whether he should die for hunger secretly. Our Lord therefore to fulfill his
promise, Cum ipso sum in tribulatione, took him out of Jury, unwitting to the
soldiers; and did hide him in Carith, where no man could see him, and sent him
meat by crows to feed on, and did provide him a stream of water to drink of.
We may gather by this example what a good Lord we have, and what care he
has over us if we serve him, seeing that he does pay us for all we do, and
succor us for all that we suffer for him. To come now unto the purpose, all
this figure was fulfilled in Christ at the foot of the letter: for as Heliac
was persecuted by Iezabel, so was Christ of the Synagogue, and Christ found as
great a famine of good men, as Helias did in Samaria of victuals. Hugo de
sancto victore, says upon those words of Jeremy, Paruuli petierunt panem, The
bread which the little ones cried for to ear, and the lamentation which Jeremy
made because there was no man to give it him, was not understood of the
material bread which was wont to be in the arc, but of spiritual bread,
wherewith the souls are fed: and to say that there was no man found to give it
them, was as much as to say, that there was no good man left to preach unto
them. Chrysostom in an Homily says, In Commonwealths well governed, the want
of a good man is greater than the famine of bread and wine, because we have
seen that God has sent a famine for the demerits of one man alone, and after
abundance for one good man's sake alone. Ambrose says, Famine, war, and
pestilence, are much to be feared in naughty Commonwealths, and where there
are no good persons: for although our Lord does suffer them to come for a time,
yet he does not consent that they should long time endure. What goodness have
Commonwealths in them, if they have no good men in the^? And what want they, if
they do not want good men? Saint Augustine in his Confessions says, When I
hear a knill rung for the dead, my soul is presently driven into a perplexity,
whether I should weep first for the good which die, or the bad which live,
because there is as great reason that we should weep for the life of the bad,
as for the death of the good. Now that we have proved, that the want and
famine of good men is more dangerous in a city than a dearth of victuals, who
does doubt but that the scarsenesse which Christ sound in the Synagogue was
greater than that which Helias found in Palestine? What good thing, or what
good man could there be in the Synagogue, where the Viceroy Pilate was a
Tyrant, the famous high Priest Caiphas a Symoniacle, and the masters the
Pharisees Hypocrites, and the counselors the Sadduces Heretics, and their
kings and Prophets all ended? The son of God did kill this hunger, when he
gave the world a church for a Synagogue, Apostles for Prophets, a law of love
for a law of fear, a new Testament for an old, the spirit for the letter, the
truth for the figure, and his holy grace for our old offense. What would have
become of us, if Christ had not left so many good men in his church? He left
us many Martyrs, many confessors, many virgins, many doctors; in so much that
when Christ died, although he left not the world many books to read in, yet
he left us many Saints to follow. The figure says further, that Helias went
to hide himself in the water-brooke of Carith, which was a figure, that the
son of God should come to take flesh, and hide himself in the entralls of
the Virgins womb: and as it was figured in Helias, so it was accomplished in
Christ, because that under his humanity which he took upon him, he did hide
his divinity which he carried with him. When the Prophet Esayas said, Vere
tues deus absconditus, he knew well that God would hide himself for a time,
and remove himself from their eyes, seeing that the catholic Church did
acknowledge him, and the unhappy Synagogue was ungrateful unto him. Recede
hinc and absconde te in torrentem Carith: the eternal Father spoke these words
unto his precious son, as if he had said unto him, Go my son, go and
hide thy self in the world, because thou may redeem the world: Where thou
shall hide thy power because thou may suffer, thou shall hide thy wisdom,
because they may mock thee, thou shall hide thy prudence, because they may take
thee to be unwise, thou shall hide thy justice, because they are to judge thee
like a blasphemer, and thou shall hide thy strength, because thou may the
better die. O how well this was fulfilled in Christ, hide thy self in the
water-brooke of Carith! for if he should not have hidden his great power before
Pilate, who would have been able to take his life from him? If the son of God
should not have hidden his eternal wisdom, durst the Pharisees have mocked at
his doctrine as they did? If Christ should not have hidden the rigor of his
justice, who would have been able to do justice upon him? If Christ should
not have hidden his inexpugnable strength, how should it have been possible
for any man to draw his life out of his body? The Prophet Zachary spoke unto
this purpose, Ibi abscondita est potentia eius, As if he would have said: Thou
may not look, O Synagogue, thou may not look for a Messiah which will be
mighty but weak, not rich but poor, not in health but sick: do not imagine
that he should be honorable but thrown down; do not proclaim him for to
be a great Lord but a servant; he shall not be a warrior, but a man of
peace; and he shall not go much openly, but for the most part in hucker
mucker. Seeing that Esaias says, thou art truly a hidden God, and also
Zacharias that his power is hidden, why does the Synagogue look that the
Messiah should come openly, considering that their Prophets said that he was
to come secretly? Origin in his Periarchon says, Because the son of God came
not to fight with visible men, but with invisible sins and enemies, there was
no necessity that he should come fighting, but preaching, it was not needful
that he should wander over all the world, but only publish his Gospel among
them all, and if the arrogant Jews did not reach unto the knowledge thereof,
it was not because they could not, but because they would not. Theophilus
says: speaking with the church the Prophet David says, Deus noster manifest
veniet; and speaking with the Synagogue, the Propht Esaias says, Vere tu es
deus absconditus, and thereupon it happens, that the unhappy Israelites,
although they were learned in knowledge, yet of no credit in conscience, and
so they deserved not to know him, because they would not believe him. The
figure goes further and says, that the place where Helias went to hide
himself, was at water-brookes of Carith, which is as much to say as, a thing
cut in sunder, or parted in the middle, which had bin once whole. The
water-brooke where Christ did hide himself, was the depth and vehemence of his
passion, where our good Lord entered diuing and ducking as in a dirty and
dangerous river, where he remained drowned and dead in the water of his
passion: and the son of God p^^ted himself in two, when his soul went into
hell, and his body remained in the grave, and when those parts which made him a
man were dissolved, although they were never severed from the Hypostaticall
union, seeing that he was as well God in hell and in the grave, as he is this
day in heaven. He was so hidden in the brook of his passion, that there was no
part of his divinity seen, and the beauty of his humanity scarsely perceived:
and because our blessed Redeemer would suffer his enemies to be revenged on
him, he did suspend for that time, the operation of those miracles which might
have hindered his passion. The figure says further, that the Prophet Helias
being in the brook secret and close, crows of the fields brought him his
dinner in the forenoon, and his supper at night, so that the birds gave him to
eat, and the water to drink. If this mystery were not a figure and foretelling
of some other great mystery, it were to be thought, that as God did send the
Prophet Daniel meat by Abachuch the Prophet, so he would have sent Helias meat
by some other Prophet, or holy man. If by Helias Christ be figured, by Iezabel
the Synagogue, by the persecution his passion, and by the brook the cross,
and by the water his blood, and by his hiding himself his death, why should
not the crows signify the Jews? Seeing there were Eagles inowe in the air,
and Pigeons plenty in the world, what great ability did God see in the crow,
that he should make him steward unto Helias his faithful friend? What was the
meaning that God did commit Helias to the crows, but that he should also
commit his son into the hands of the Jews? The qualities of a Crow are, to
be in color black, in flying flow, in his flesh hard, in smelling quick, in
eating ravenous, and in condition ungrateful. And because the raven or crow is
an ungrateful bird, the Proverb is, that if thou bring up a Crow, he will
pecke out thy eye. The people of the Jews were an ungrateful Crow unto
Christ, seeing that for a recompense that he took flesh of them, and taught
them so long time, although they did not pecke out his eyes, yet they crucified
all his members on the cross. What bad thing is there in the crow, that is not
also in the Jews? They are black in faith, slow in judgment, hard in
belief, cruel in condition, ready to malice, and most covetous. What means
this, O my Father, what means this? After that thy son had lived thirty
three whole years, do thou command him to be cast unto Crows? Certainly the
Crows which we see with our eyes, are not so cruel as the Jews which we
speak off, because the Crows do eat of nothing until it be dead, but the
wicked Jews did venture upon Christ when he was yet alive. O that Helias did
far better with his Crows, than the good Jesus with the Jews, because
Helias Crows did give him bread and flesh to eat, but Christ's crows gave him
nothing but vinegar and gaul to taste. Let the conclusion of all our speech be,
that it was better with Helias in his banishment and water-brooke, tha^ with
Christ on the Mount of Caluary, because Helias went out alive from the water,
and Christ remained dead on the Mount of Caluary, and Helias did never know
what hunger was, but the son of God did never kill his hunger, nor quench his
thirst.

CHAP. III. How the hangmen drank the wine which was brought unto him, and the
other thieves, and did suffer Christ to die with thirst.
SVper vestimentis pignoratis accubuerunt tuxta altar, and vinum damnatorum
bibebant in dome dei sui. Osei. 2. God spoke these words complaining on the
Israelits, as if he would say, My people of Israel are come to such mad and
shameless behavior, that within the Temple, and hard at the altar they drank
the wine which was prepared for the condemned, and they lay down and leaned
upon the garments which were laid to pledge. It is an usual thing and common
in tauerns, that drunkards do cast themselves down to sleep upon other men's
apparel, and if it be in hot Summer, to sleep upon the benches of the
Temple. If there were no greater matter contained under this complaint and
rebuke, and if the sense were not of greater weight than the letter, and the
thing figured worthier than the figure, it was no new thing, nor rare fault, to
drink of another man's wine, or cast himself upon some cloak laid to pledge,
or to sleep in the holy Temple. That which God speaks here, and that which
our Lord complains of, reaches further than it seems for, and does draw
us unto a deeper mystery than outwardly it appears: for if we mark it well,
God did never speak unto the Synagogue, but it did redound afterward to some
mystery in the church. First the Prophet in this place makes mention of
certain garments: secondly, that those garments were a pawn and pledge:
thirdly, that they were laid near unto an altar: fourthly, that drunkards lay
upon them: fifthly, that they drank there much wine: sixthly, that that wine was
the wine of condemned persons: and then that they drank within the holy
Temple. What one of these words does want his mystery, or what circumstance is
there not worthy of deep consideration? In the selfsame sort that this was
prophesied by Osee, it was fulfilled by Christ: for wine being brought for
Christ to drink of, and also the other thieves, the Jews did not only not
give it them, but did themselves drink it, and then being very dronk, they
took Christ's clothes, and cast them on the ground, and sat upon them. When the
Prophet says, that they drank the wine, and lay down upon the garments hard
by the altar, he says most truly: for the first church that ever was in the
world was the Mount of Caluary, the first altar was the cross, the first
sacrifice offered up for the redemption of man, was his own body to be
crucified on good Friday, upon the same altar of the cross the first faithful
were the Virgin and Saint John, with the other Apostles and secret disciples.
In that holy Temple, and by that sacred altar, who were they which leaned and
were cast down upon the garments, but only the unhappy and unfortunate Jews?
Think it is a great mystery, that the Prophet did not see those of his
Synagogue sitting, but leaning near unto the altar, to let us understand, that
they be neither open Christians, nor conceiled Jews: for Christians they could
not be, because they will not believe in Christ; and if they will be Jews
they have no Temple where to Iudaize. Robertus says, Until this day the Jews
are not prostrate before the altar, which is Christ, to believe him, nor yet on
their knees to worship him, nor on foot to defend him, nor embracing him in
sign of love, but leaning to offend him, because their intention is to tread
his holy garments under feet, and keep off Jesus Christ from them with their
elbowes. Taking this prophecy in another sense, it is to be noted, that
oftentimes in Scripture by good garments are understood good works, and by
torn garments naughty works; and thereupon it is, that as the body is clad
and fostered with a new garment, so the soul is decked and garnished with holy
works. And because that the curious Reader may not think that we speak at
random, we will prove our saying by Scripture. What was the meaning that Saint
John saw Christ Vestitum ponere, which was to see him with a long garment, but
to see him laden with virtues from the head to the foot? He that went to the
wedding not having his nuptial garment, but because he was uncomely clothed,
was carried to prison: who is represented unto us, but he, who although he do
lead an evil life, yet does dare to enjoy Christian liberty? When God does
command in the Apocalips, Omni tempore vestimenta tua sint candida, let thy
garments be white always, what does he signify, but that we should be all
clean and virtuous? When the Scripture says, that Jacob made his son
Joseph, Tunicam polymitam, that is, an embrodered garment down to the ground.
What was the meaning that his garment did reach so low, but that the son of
God should be perfect in all virtues? What did it signify that the Jews did
cast clothes under the ass feet to go over, and the Apostle put them upon the
ass which Christ rode upon, but that he misliked all that the Synagogue did,
and approved all that the church did? S. Augustine says, Because in holy
writ, by the garments which we wear are understood the works which we do,
we may truly say, that no man goes well clothed but the virtuous man, nor no
man with a torn coat but the wicked and naughty sinner. Christ did use but two
garments in this world, the one next his skin, which was without seame, the
other an upper garment which served him for a cloak and coat; in so much that
Christ did show the perfection of his poverty not only in his diet, but also in
the simpleness of his apparel. Barnard says, The son of God did teach us
not only to live, but also to apparel ourselves, because his holy garments
were few in number, vild in color, small of price, good in profit, but clean
in use. Hylarius says, Although the garments which the son of God ware were
but few, vild and torn, yet the Scripture does much esteem of them, not for
the value which they are vvorth, but for the great mysteries which they did
signify. Origin in an Homily says, What were the garments which the son
of God went always clad with, but his divine and humane nature, whereof he
was made? His coat without seame, and in which there never entered needle nor
scissers, was his divine nature in great purity glorious from the beginning, in
the which there was no beginning, nor shall be no end; for that nature is now
as it was from the beginning, and shall be for ever as it is at this instant.
By the other coat which was sown and cur, is understood Christ's sacred
humanity, which was formed by the Holyghost, and borne of the Virgin Mary,
and therefore Christ's vvearing of these two coats does signify, that he and
no other is God and man, and the son which was incarnate. Before that
Christ took flesh, he had but one coat to cover self withal, which was his
divinity: but after that he came into the world, he put on another coat,
which was his humanity, and by that means he did lend us his coat to make us
holy, and we did lend him ours to make him a man. Saint Chrysostom says,
The one of Christ's coats, to wit, that which was without seame, continued
whole and untorn in his passion, but his uppermost garment was rent and
torn, to give us to understand, that although his enemies had power to lay
hands upon his sacred humanity, yet they had none at all to touch his divinity.
Damascen says, One of Christ's coats fell whole and entire unto the knights,
and the other torn and ragged unto the hangmen, and that because we should
understand, that to the catholic church there fell the entire and whole coat,
seeing that she does fully believe that Christ is both God and man, and unto
the Synagogue there happened his torn coat, seeing they believe that he is no
more than a bare man. Saint Augustine says, By Christ's two garments are
understood both his bodies, that is, his true body made and compacted of his
holy members, and his mystical body, which are all good Christians: and
because thou may perceive, my brother, how much thou art bound unto Christ,
know thou, that he did esteem better of his mystical body, which are
Christians, than of his own true body which was made of his own members.
What was his meaning that he suffered them to take away and tear in pieces
the one of his coats, and yet never touch the other, but only that he is more
grieved when any man does speak evil of his church, than to have laid hands
upon his own proper person? Remigius says, O how whole, and entire he did
leave us the unsown coat of his church! and yet naughty Christians and
perfideous Heretics, do rent his coat into as many pieces, as they do raise
dissentions, and stir up heresies in the church. It was Christ's holy will to
die not only without a coat, but also not to have one thread of a coat upon him,
which he did suffer to the great prejudice of his gravity, and loss of his
credit. Who was ever, or who ever shall be so grave in his doctrine, as the
son of God was, and so honest in his person? And seeing that Esayas says,
that he was offered up because he would, it is to be believed, that seeing
they could not crucify him, if he himself would not, so they could neither
have stripped him naked unless he had consented unto it. Whereof it follows
in a good consequence, that if he would die for our redemption, that he did
let himself be stripped for our comfort. What did it signify that the son
of God did put off all his garments, but that he did dispossess himself of
all his good works? I and thou, thou and I, my brother, have great need to die
clothed and clad, to wit, with our own faith and good works, and also be
helped by others. For as for holy Jesus, as he came out of the womb of his
mother united unto the divine essence, so he had no necessity of his own
works, to save himself, nor of other men's merits to pardon us. Cyrillus upon
S. John says, Of as much as the son of God did merit praying on the
mountain, preaching among the people, healing the diseased in hospitals, by
suffering among his enemies, and dying upon the cross, I say he did spoil
and make himself naked of all that, and put it upon us; insomuch that we are
heirs of his blood with which he redeemed us, and successors of all the merits
which he heaped together. O glorious inheritance, and happy wealth, which
thou good Jesus did leave to the parishioners of thy church! seeing that by
the means thereof, we are made sons of the Father, brothers of the son,
puples of the Holy ghost, companions to the Angels, parishioners of the church,
and heirs of thy glory. O what great difference there is betwixt the
inheritance of heaven, and an inheritance in the world! Worldlings leave their
children store of goods and revenues, and much debate and strife to defend
them, and many enemies to persecute them: but our good Lord in lieue of great
wealth did leave us his grace, and in steed of enemies did leave us his
merits. What should have become of all the sinners of the world, if as Christ
died spoiled and deprived of his goods, so he would have died clothed with
all his merits? What should become unto proud men, if he would not have left
them his humility, and what of cruel men if he would not have left them his
charity? What end should angry men come to, if he should not have left them
his patience, and what were it of all sinners, if he should not have left
them his clemency? Cyprian says, If Christ would have ascended to heaven with
all that which he merited in this world, and not impart it among us, and as it
were unclothed himself of them as of certain garments, there should not have
been in the world at this day a church to preach in, nor Priest to be
ordained, nor Sacrament to be administered. Cyrillus says to this purpose, If
the son of God would have merited for himself alone, and died for himself
alone, we might have said with reason, that he had come into the world, and
took flesh upon him for himself, and not for us. But let such blasphemy be
far from our tongues and thoughts, and far from our heart, because our good
Lord died not for himself, but for us, nor did not merit for himself, but
for us. Hugo de sancto victore says, Because that the great Redeemer of the
world did leave us his garments for relics, and his merits for Treasures,
the Church his spouse has at this day, Sacraments to give, sacrifices of a
contrite heart to offer, sweet doctrine to preach, and rewards to promise for
amendment of life.

CHAP. IIII. He follows the authority of the Prophet Osee, and speaks of
the garments which Christ left in pledge.
PArtiti sunt vestimenta mea, and super ea miserunt sirtem, said Christ in the
21 Psalm, complaining unto his Father on the cross, as if he would say, O my
good Father, thou wast not content only, that they should spoil me of my
garments, and turn me naked to my great shame, but also that the hangmen
should divide my coat, and the soldiers cast lots upon him. We must see in
this place, how many coats there were, and whose they were, and among whom
they were divided, because all our salvation does consist in being excluded or
admitted unto that division. There were but two garments in all, and Christ was
the master of them, and they were divided betwixt hangmen and soldiers, the
place where was by the cross, and the manner how was by lots. These two
garments were divided betwixt the Gentlemen which kept and guarded Christ, and
the hangme^ which crucified Christ, insomuch that according unto the merit or
demerite of every one of them, they received their part of the garment.
Theophilus says, Who are meant by these gentlemen and knights, but the
virtuous and just; and who by the hangmen but sinners and naughty men? O
infinite goodness, O clemency never seen before! such as thine was O good
Jesus upon the altar of the cross, where thou did bar no man of the
inheritance of thy sweatings, and dividing of thy merits, deprive no man,
exclude no man, nor disinherite no man, but there fell as well one part to the
hangmen which lifted thee up upon the cross, as to Nichodemus who took thee
down from the same. Isichius upon Leuiticus says, As the son of God was the
Redeemer of all men, so his pleasure was, that his garments should be divided
for all, and that none should be excluded from the general redemption; which
he did presently himself declare, seeing that he saved the thief who was a
Jew, and converted the Centurion who was a Gentile. O what great hope we have
to be saved, and what great confidence that Christ will pardon us! for seeing
that he has distributed part of his merits and garments among butcherly
hangmen, it is to be believed, that he will give with a better will unto his
chosen friends. The difference in dividing his garments was this, that those
cruel hangmen did immediately divide and tear in pieces his garment as it was
given them, and the Gentlemen kept it whole as it fell unto them, in so much
that in the handling of the garments, the persons qualities might easily have
been known. That which the Jews did in those days, the self same do
Christians at this day: for those which are good do keep all that Christ
commanded them, and those which are wicked, keep no more than please them:
insomuch that the good and virtuous Christian does keep Christ's garment entire
and whole, by endeavoring himself to keep the commandments; and the wicked
and perverse do keep it rent and torn, and be content with the bare name of
Christians. S. Jerome says, If thou do see thy self, my brother, proud in
presumption, envious in ambition, angry in impaciency, a glutton in eating, and
covetous in giving, tell me I pray thee, what do thou hold of a Christian,
and what do thou want of a Pagan? What greater disaster and loss could
happen unto thy soul, or what like evil fall upon thy body, than of all the
distribution and dividing of Christ's coats and merits, there should fall
nothing to thy lot but the name of a Christian? Do thou not know that they
call thee a Christian in a mockery, if thou do not follow Christ, as they call
him white John, who is all black? O how unhappy they be, unto whom there fell
nothing but a shred of Christ's garment, that is, to brag that he has heard
the Gospel preached, and that he was baptized like a Christian. For Christ is
not content only with that, but his pleasure is, that as he gave us all his
garments freely, so he will that we serve him with all our might and forces.
With the hangmen there fell a shred of Christ's garment unto him who keeps but
one commandment only, and unto him his whole coat which keeps all that
Christ commands: for Christ said not unto the young man, who asked him what
he should do to go to heaven, Keep the commandment, but keep, and observe
the commandments. There fell a shred or ragge of Christ's garment unto him, who
thinks to observe the Gospel only by wishing well; and unto him it fell
whole and entire, who serves him with works and deeds, and not with desires:
for as Saint Barnard says, The heavens are replenished with good works, and
hell is full of good desires. S. Augustine says, As of children which do
equally inherit their fathers goods, some do increase their portion, and some
wast and consume it; so is it in the church of God: for although all were
inheritours of the garments and merits of the son of God, yet some do
dissipate and tear them to their own perdition, and some conserve and keep them
to their salvation. The authority alleged before says, Super vestimentis
pignoratis accubuerunt, as if he would say, The Gentiles sat down upon the
garments which were laid togage, and the Jews leaned also upon them. For the
Prophet to lay down as a great fault and offense, that the Synagogue durst be
so bold as to lean upon certain garments which were laid to pawn, it must be
expounded with great diligence, and read with great heed, because that in
Scripture the newer and more unusual a term is, the greater mystery it does
contain. It is requisite for us to declare what these garments are, and why
they were laid to pawn, and when they were laid to pawn, and also unto whom,
because that all these circumstances do greatly beautify the mystery, and
lead us to the secret. For the better understanding of this new prophecy,
Super vestimentis pignoratis, etc, We must handle another place which is as
new as this, the newness whereof vvil bring us to the knowledge of the other.
The new speech is this, Ecce noua facio omnia; Which words Saint John in the
Apocalips heard Christ speak. Behold and mark well all you which be of my
Church, how I do not that which others have done, nor undertake that which
others have undertaken, nor teach that which others have taught, nor live as
others have lived, because that in my life and family there is no corrupt and
rotten thing, but all sound and whole, nor any old thing but all new. This is
such a new kind of speech, that no man ever spoke the like until the son of
God came: and to say the truth, unless it were he who had created all things,
who was able to renew all things? For if all the Angels, and all men are not
able to make a fly, how should they be able to make a new world? Rupertus
says, O how well Christ says, in saying, Behold I make all new! for beginning
in himself, he was a new man, he had a new soul, took new flesh, gave new
light, taught new doctrine, lived a new life, and promised new glory. Was he
not a new man, seeing that no man but he was both God and man? Who but he had
a new soul, seeing that his and no others was united to the divine person?
took he not new flesh, seeing that none but he was of a mother and a virgin?
Who but he gave the world a new law, seeing that he was the first which
preached the Gospel? did he not also promise a new reward unto his elect,
seeing none before him promised the kingdom of heaven? Si volueritis and
audieritis me, bona terrae commedetis, said God. Esaias 1. as if he should say,
If you will believe me, and keep my commandments, I will give you victory
against your enemies, I will give you health to your bodies, I will give you
corn in your fields, and I will give you peace in your kingdoms. This is
that the^ that God promised them, and all the reward which he gave the^ for
their trauails, insomuch that the reward and glory of the Synagogue never went
out of the kingdom of Palestine. The son of God does not deal with us
which are Christians, as his Father did with the Jews, seeing that he says
Matthew 10. Qui fecerit and docuerit hic vocabitur in regno caeloruu^, As if he
would say, The Christian who shall keep my commandments, and the preacher
which shall set forth my law, his name shall be written among those which are
predestined, and he shall be placed in the kingdom of heaven. Saint
Augustine says in a Sermon, As the son of God did command us to keep new
precepts, so he did promise us new rewards for it, and as he gave great
commandments, so he gave great rewards: whereupon it is, that until he came
into the world, no man commanded that which he commanded, nor no man promised
that which he promised. Christ said not in vain, Ecce noua facio omnia, but
because he instituted the Sacrament, which was a hard thing to reach unto, and
commanded us to believe the blessed Trinity, which is a high matter to
understand, willed us to believe him both God and man, which is a new thing to
be received, charged us to love our enemies, which is a hard matter to do,
and commanded us to keep his law only, which was a new thing in the world to
do. S. Thomas in his book against the Gentiles says, That as the son of God
did not command those of the old law to believe great things, so he did not
promise them but small things, and because he commanded his chosen Christians
to believe hard things, and perform things which were not easily done, he
promised that they should possess and emoy very high rewards. To come then
unto the text of Vestimentis pignoratis, etc. It is to be noted, that as the
service of the just was to be done here upon earth, and the reward which they
are to receive to be given above in heaven; because we should not think that
he mocked us, in deferring our payment to the other world, his pleasure was to
leave us a good gage and pledge in this world, until he should reward us for
our good life in heaven. The pledges which Christ left us in this world were
his precious garments, his holy works, and his most holy Sacraments. Why did
Christ, think thou, leave us so many pledges in this life, but because he
will vnpawne them afterward above in his glory? In his glory above all those
pledges shall be taken away and have an end, because that in heaven we shall
need to hope for nothing, because we shall see that with our eyes, which now we
desire; nor we shall have nothing to believe, because there shall be nothing
hidden; we shall have no cause to fear, because there shall be no death; we
shall need to ask for nothing, because life is there everlasting; neither shall
we desire any thing, seeing that glory is there perpetual. O how happy be all
Christian people, seeing they have not only Christ's garments for a pledge and
hostage, but also Christ himself remaining with us, under the visible signs of
the Sacrament, until he give himself unto us in heaven glorified! Let no man
marvel to hear us say, that we have Christ for a pledge and pawn, for that
which his Father promised us, seeing that the Apostle says also that we have
the Holy ghost for a pledge, for that which the son commanded us, Ipse est
pignus haereditatis meae, as if he would say, God the eternal Father has given
us the gifts of the holy Ghost, and all the garments and merits of his son
for a pledge of that which he has promised us; and this no longer but until
he will carry us to his eternal glory, and give us the fruition of his divine
essence. What Christian is there who will be afraid to loose himself, and not
have a hope to save himself, having as we have for an assurance of our
salvation, as Christ's robes in pawn, and the gifts of the Holy ghost in
hostage? Super vestimentis pignoratis all holymen do lean, when they join
their works with Christ's works: for all that we do is little worth unless
we tie it unto Christ's merits. It is to be weighed, that the Prophet Osee did
not see the garments by themselves, and elbowes by themselves, but garments
with elbowes, and elbowes with garments, to give us to understand, that we
cannot merit with our own works, and that Christ will not always save us by
himself; by reason whereof, it is necessary, that we fasten our arms upon
his works, and that he stick his works upon our elbows arms.

CHAP. V. Where is brought a sigure of Tobias, and declared to the purpose.
EXentera hunc piscem, and cor eius and fell and iecur repone tibi, Tobias 6
chap. The Angel Raphael spoke these words unto young Tobias, as if he would
say; Cry not, nor be not afraid of this fish, but take him out of the water,
flay him, cut him in the middle, and take out his heart, his gaul, and liver,
and keep it all for thy self, because it is all very medicinable to cure a
sick man. The story of Tobias is very well known to the learned in Scripture.
When he sent his young son Tobias to Rages a town of the Medes, for the
recovering of ten marks of silver which he had lent his friend Gabelus, when
he was captive in Babylon, and when young Tobias came to the river Tygris, to
wash his feet, there came forth a very great fish to the banck side toward
him, with such boldness, as if he would have eaten and swallowed him up,
before that he could fly from him. When the Angel saw the fierceness of
this fish, and the great fear that the youth was stroke into, he began to
encourage him, saying: Fear not the fish, because the fish ought rather to be
afraid of thee, and therefore it is necessary that thou do by him that which he
would have done to thee, because another cannot recover health before this fish
be killed. Tobias took heart by the encouragement of the Angel, and
fastening on the fish by the gilles, drew him out of the water, and stripped
him, and took out his heart, and his gaul, and his liver, as the Angel his
master had commanded him to do. Now that Tobias fear was past, when the fish
was dead and drawn, he said unto his Angel: Tell me brother Azarias, to what
purpose thou did command me to keep the fishes heart, gaul, and liver,
and did not bid me eat at all of him. To this the Angel answered, Thou
must understand, my son Tobias, that this thy journey, and this chance which
has befaln unto thee, wants not a great mystery, as hereafter it shall
appear. But for the present, let it suffice thee to know, that the meat of
this fish is good for trauailers to eat of, and the heart good to cast out
devils, and the gaul good to heal the blind, and the liver sovereign for to
cure other external diseases. There are presented unto us many deep mysteries
in this figure, if it may please God to give me the knowledge to expound them;
for in it is set forth the wonderful death which the son of God suffered,
and the inspeakeable fruit and benefit which we receive by it. Here is to
be understood, who Tobias is which takes the journey, what the fish is which
put him into a fright, what garbish he took from him, what skin he stripped
him of, what is the flesh which he broiled, what is the heart which he took
out of him, what the liver, and what the gaul which he kept. Although we
speak but a word on every word, yet this seems to be a figure full of great
secrets. To come then to the point, who is Tobias who goes to recover his
fathers goods, but only all mankind, who goes every day a journey, to recover
the grace which his father Adam lost? Dum sumus in seculo, peregrinamur ad
dominum, says the Apostle, As long as we live in this mortal world, no man
can say that he has a dwelling place, or neighbor, but only, that he is a
pilgrim and a wayfaring man, and the end of our journey and pilgrimage is, to
seek for the grace which our first father lost us, and the glory which our
eternal father promised us. Then we say a man is a pilgrim when he makes no
abode any where, but goes on, and staieth no longer in a place than he can
get necessaries for his journey. If we ask a man what he does, it is an
ordinary answer to say, that he either plaieth, or does his business, or
some such like, which in truth is not so, but his better answer is to say,
that he wastes and consumes himself, and that he is a dying; for a man's life
goes away in playing and laboring. Seneca says, Does not thy life, think
thou, go away, seeing that every hour thy life is an hour shorter, and every
day a day shorter? Saint Augustine upon the Apostles words says, If a man be
asked how old he is, or what years he has, he is wont to answer either
thirty, or forty, or such like; which is clean contrary unto that which he
should answer: for he should not say he has so many years, but that he
wants so many years: for if he have any years at all, it be those which he
looks for; for as for those which are past, they are now none of his. The
Philosopher says, that De tempore non habemus nisi Nunc, Whereby he means,
that we have no time but the present moment, because that the time past is
already gone, and the time to come is uncertain. Cicero de senectute says,
What has a man that has lived an hundred years, but only time lost, a
grieved heart, a weary body, small help, a loathing life, a vading credit, and
death at his gates? O how well the Apostle says, As long as we be in this
world, Peregrinamur ad dominum, seeing that by how much the more we increase
in age, so much the more we decrease in life. And to say the truth, to die
young, or to die old, is nothing else but to come to our Inn betimes or late.
Remigius says, The Apostle does call us pilgrims and strangers with great
reason, because he sees, that we have no goods in this world, which are proper
to our selves: for if every man would leave that which were another bodies, for
a certain he should be left very naked. For says Alchimius the Philosopher,
if the sheep should take thy garments from thee, the kine thy shoes, the worms
thy silk, the earth thy linen, the vines thy wine, the corn thy bread, the
trees their fruit, the fountaynes their waters; tell me I pray thee, of thy
self, and by thy self, what should thou have, what should thou be worth
or what should thou be able to do? Horace says to this purpose, Be not
proud like a lion, nor exasperate thy self like an ounce: for if every one
would take from thy house and person that which is his, there would be no
living creature more base tha^ thou, seeing that thou have neither industry to
maintain thy self, nor weapons to defend thy self. We have said all this,
to prove that if Tobias was a pilgrim, we are also pilgrims. But alas alas,
he is accompanied with the good Angel who keeps him, and we compassed with a
thousand enemies which besiege us. Do not we, trow you, take our voyage
beset with a thousand perils, and hindered with as many troubles, considering
that the devil does tempt us, the flesh molest and provoke us, the world
deceive us, friends fail us, our heart sorroweth, our health decaieth, and our
life daily shorteneth? The figure says, that as Tobias went on his journey,
the fish came to the bancke to swallow him up, whereof in the end he received
more profit than fear, insomuch that by the same fish, of which he thought
he should have been devoured, his father received remedy. What was that great
fish, of which Tobias thought he should have been devoured, but only the son
of the eternal God when he came to redeem the world? The fish was bred in
the bottom of the river, and the son of God was borne in the bosom of the
eternal Father; and how deep soever the river Tygris was, yet the sea of the
divine essence is far more deeper. Augustine in his book of the Trinity
says, Will thou see how much more deeper the eternity of the Father and of his
son is, than the sea? For it is possible to empty the sea for all his
greatness, but for the secrets of the holy Trinity, it is impossible fully to
understand. The fish coming out of the water drove young Tobias into a great
fear, but Christ caused a greater fear when he came into the world, seeing
the Angels bowed themselves, the kings adored him, the stars were changed,
the Jews were moved, and the devils were aseard. The fear which the fish
put Tobias in, continued but half an hour, but the fear which Christ put the
world in, dureth until this day: for being afeard and amazed, the Jews and
Pagans cannot yet persuade themselves, that Christ should be the God who^ they
should believe in, and the Lord which shall judge them. When that fish went out
of the river to the bancke, of two which were there present, the one which was
the Angel knew him, and the other, which was Tobias was afeard: and even so in
like manner when the son of God came down from heaven unto the earth, the
Synagogue was scandalized, and the church received him, in so much that
according unto old Simeons prophecy, this divine fish came to the shore of the
world, for the resurrection of the good, and the scandale of the wicked.
Praeparauit dominus piscem grandem vt deglutiret Ionam, says the holy
Scripture, Jonas 2. As if he would say, At the very instant when the cruel
Mariners did cast the Prophet Jonas into the bottom of the sea, immediately
our Lord prepared a great fish, which swallowed him alive, and which kept him
in his bowels safe and sound. As before we met with Tobias and his fish, so
now we have light upon Jonas and his fish, whereof the one was greatly
afeard, and the other swallowed up, by reason whereof we must seek out some
secret in them, and discover some mystery in the expounding of them. Whose
figure does Jonas represent, but only the good and godly, and who were the
Mariners which threw him into the sea but only wicked men? Then the Mariners
do cast Jonas into the sea, when the wicked do persecute and cast down the
good, because there is no greater torment to a naughty man, than to hear a
good man praised in his presence. Of all those which were in that ship only
Jonas was a holy and virtuous man, as it does plainly appear, because there
was no one which spoke against the throwing of him into the sea, but were all
of one opinion in that fact: for albeit naughty men be sometime at variance
among themselves, yet in doing of mischief they easily agree in one. O in what
greater danger good men's fame and credit is in, among the wicked, than their
lives and goods in the deep seas which is plainly seen in that, that men did
cast the holy Prophet Jonas from them, and the waters did receive him into
them, Origin upon holy Job says, What should become of the good, if God had no
care over them? What would not naughty men venture to do with their small shame
and less conscience, if their power should stretch as far as their malice? If
thou will see, my brother, the care that God has to keep thee, if thou have a
care to serve him, thou shall see it in the holy Prophet Jonas, in that our
Lord had prepared long before a fish to save him, than the Mariners had
determined to drown him. The fish which did save the Propher Jonas, did not
put him by him, nor on him, nor under him, but within him, and so kept him so
warily in his entrals, that neither the fish durst kill him, nor the waters
drown him. O that thy goodness is infinite, and thy charity very great, my
good Jesus, seeing that thou do acquit all those which the world does
condemn, love those which the world hates, receive those which he casts
off, foster those which he suffers to perish, and give honor unto all
those which the world does dishonor. Aymon upon Jonas says, The Prophet Jonas
slept in the lowest part of the ship, and the Mariners did cast him into the
bottom of the sea, and the Whale kept him in the secretest part of his bowels;
I mean by this, that Christ does put us in the daintiest part of his bowels:
for it is his property to keep those in his heart, which love him from the
heart. S. Jerome says, If thou do put Christ in thy eyes to look upon him, he
does put thee in his to look upon thee; If thou place him in thy ears to
hear him, he does place thee in his to hear thee; if thou have him in thy
tongue to praise him, he has thee in his to honor thee; if thou put him in
thy heart to love him, he does put thee in his to love thee; insomuch that
where thou do put Christ, Christ does also in the same place put thee. Upon
those words of the Psalm, Iacta cogitatu^ tuu^ in domine, S. Basil says.
Yield thy self, my brother, yield thy self to the will of God, go whither he
will direct thee, do that which he commands thee, give him that which he
asks of thee, believe him in that which he tells thee: for as he preserved
the Prophet Jonas in the Whales belly, so he will preserve thee in the dangers
of this life. By this which happened unto the Prophet Jonas, it is very
evident, that three is nothing firm and stable but that which God does sustain,
nor nothing sure but that which God does keep, seeing that that holy Prophet
was dry among the waters, found comfort in danger, a remedy against death, and
profit in his enemy. Did he not find a remedy against death, and profit in
his enemy, seeing the water did not only not drown him, nor the huge and great
fish kill him, but was in the Whales belly with as great contentment and
delight, as a Prince is in his royal palace? We have spoken all this, because
no man should omit to do his duty, or go with the truth, as far as he can,
for fear of temptation, or jealousy of naughty persons; because our Lord who
delivered Tobias that the fish should not devour him, and Jonas from the sea
that it should not drown him, will also deliver thee from temptations which
follow thee, and from the enemies which persecute thee.

CHAP. VI. Here the Author follows the figure which he touched before, which
is declared well to the purpose: and there is brought also a prophecy of
Jeremy.
APprehende branchiam eius, and trahe eum ad te: quod cum fecisset, traxit eum
in siccum, Tobias 6. chapter, These are the words which the Angel Raphael
spoke unto young Tobias, as if he would say; I have told thee already, that thou
should not fear this fish, but rather as he came unto thee, so thou
should go and meet him, and apprehend him by the head, and pull out his
gilles, all which I would not tell thee, unless I thought it convenient for
thee. Although Tobias did not then know the Angel for to be an Angel, but
thought him to be another man like himself, yet notwithstanding he gave
credit unto his speech, and accepted of his counsel, so that Tobias did
immediately kill and panch the fish upon the sand, which thought to eat him in
the water. We do in this place advertise the curious Reader, that he shall
not be able to understand this chapter, if he do not read the chapter before
going, because this figure of Tobias was there begun, and from thence is
cited. To continue then this figure, the text says, that Tobias did sit upon
the fish, and took him by the sins near unto the head, and by the gilles in
the throat, and drew him to the sand, and there did cut off his head and strip
him, and took out his heart and liver, and kept his gaul for himself, and
did eat part of him, and salted the rest for his journey. Who is Tobias but the
Judicial people? What was the fierce sea but the passion of Christ? And what
was the great fish but the same Christ? And what was the sand where the
fish was panched, but the high Mount of Caluary where Christ was put to death?
Tobias did greatiustice upon that unhappy fish, when he panched him on the
sands; but the Synagogue did far greater cruelties upon Christ when they
took Christ's life away on the Mount of Caluary: for if Tobias did kill the
fish, it was because the Angel which kept him did so command him, but if the
Synagogue did put Christ to death, it was done of mere envy and malice. For
the better understanding of this place, it is here to be noted, that it was
done by a continual miracle, that Christ did never suffer his most holy soul
to communicate and impart her glory unto his body, because that if he had not
hindered that, his body had not ben passible at all. It was for no other cause
but Propter nostram salute, that our great Redeemer suffered the death upon the
cross as if he had been a sinner. Candolfus says, Christ sometimes gave
place, that the glory of his soul should redound and fall upon the members of
his body, as it happened in the hill Thabor, by reason whereof his precious
flesh was so tender in suffering, and so passing desirous to return to the
fruition of the same glory, that the absence and delay of that divine and
heavenly comfort did bring Christ most grievous torment. Upon those words of
the Psalm, Abyssus abyssum inuocat. Saint Basil says, for as much as the
soul of the son of God was full of glory, and his precious body laden with
grievous pain and anguish, O how oftentimes the depth of his travails and
griefs did fervently desire and sigh after the depth of his comfort and
consolation, the which his eternal Father would not impart unto him until
he had ended the redemption of the world. O great goodness, O infinite
charity! who but thou, O my good Jesus, was hungry with bread in his hand,
thirsty with water in his mouth, naked with garments in his chests, sad and
afflicted with glory in his soul? Upon those words, Tristis est anima mea. S.
Barnard says, It is no marvel if my soul be sorrowful, and full of
anguish, because the hour of my glory and felicity is not yet come: but in
thee O good Jesus, why should thy flesh be so wearied? And why should thy
soul be comfortless, seeing that thou carriest with thee all the glory which
is in heaven or in earth. Vbertinus upon this place says, The Redeemer of the
world being in the agony of death, and very near the end of his life,
remembering himself of that heavenly comfort and divine influence, which from
the glory of his soul was wont to be imparted to his precious body, spoke
this word Sitio, as if he would say, O how great the thirst is which I suffer
in this last hour, and terrible agony, to wit, of that influence and heavenly
comfort, which was wont to be imparted from my own soul unto my own flesh,
because this death and passion which my own Father does lay upon this my weak
flesh, is not only grievous, but does also exceed all other humane punishment.
The great thirst that Christ suffered upon the cross, and the cooling water
which he desired, was not the water of the fountain of the hill Lybanus, nor
yet that which ran in the river Silo, but that heavenly consolation which the
glory of his soul was wont to cause in him, for that other humane thirst
could not so much grieve him, considering how near he was to the end of his
life. We have used all this discourse to extol the word of the figure which
says, Et traxit piscem in siccum, It is to be understood, that young Tobias
did kill the fish upon the sand, which would have killed him in the water.
When, think thou, did Tobias draw the fish upon dry land, but when the
eternal Father did leave his blessed son upon the cross without any humane
consolation? O how dry was that dry tree upon which the heavenly fish hanged,
who having been brought up in the deep sea of the divine essence, had not
there so much as one drop of water to drink. What can be pitied more in this
life, than for a fish having been brought up in the water, yet afterward to die
for want of water? Tobias fish was hard by the water side, and yet died
with thirst, and Christ's flesh was coupeled with his holy soul, and died
also with thirst, because the eternal Father to give us drink of his water
of heaven, killed his own only son with thirst, and brought him to die upon
the sands of this world. If Tobias should not have drawn the fish to the land,
he could not have mastered him: if Christ had not become man, neither could he
have died, for howsoever it be natural for us to die, yet it is much more
natural for God always to live. What means it that the self same fish of
whom Tobias thought he should have been devoured, lay dead afterward at his
feet, but that, that God which all the powers of heaven did fear and tremble
at, we see now meek and gentle, and hanged upon the tree? When God was nothing
but God, and in his own divine essence being, all the world did fear him and
tremble, but after that he came upon our sandy humanity, and set foot upon
the dryness of this world, he who before made others afeard, was himself
afraid, and he who before did throw down others, fell himself, and he who
before enriched others became poor, and he who gave all comfort wept himself,
and he who killed before died. Desertum faciam mare eius and siccabo venum
eius, said God by the Prophet Jeremy, chap. 51. as if he would say. I will make
all his sea as dry and without water, as desert and solitary mountains are
wont to be, and I will cut off all the veins and streams of his depth,
because there shall flow no water at any end. These words must curiously be
expounded: for God to say, that the sea shall be as dry as a solitary
mountain, and that he will cut off all the veins of his course throughout
all the world, seems to be a new speech, and a thing that was never seen to
be believed. Leaving the letter, and speaking according unto the sense of these
words, the eternal Father does forewarne his precious son, that he will not
only deal with him like one which will not he are him, nor give him any
comfort, but also, that he will cut off all occasions, whereby hec may any way
receive comfort; in so much that to make the sea become a desert, is to make of
God a true man, and to cut off the veins of the sea, is to cut off all
heavenly consolation. What other thing was that deep sea, but only the divine
essence? And what else was it to make a dry desert of the raging sea, but to
make him who was the eternal God a true man? God said by the mouth of his
Prophet, Desertum faciammare eius, speaking of his son; and as he did
prophecy, so he did accomplish it: for when he hanged upon the altar of the
cross, he never made answer to any petition which he made him, nor yet to
quench his thirst gave him so much as one cup of water. What a strange thing is
this, O eternal Father, what a strange thing is this? For thy bastard and
abortiue children thou did drawwater out of the lively rock, and for thy
lawful son have thou not so much as one drop? When Agar and her son. Ismael
were ready to perish with thirst in the mountains of Bersabee near unto the
Mount Lybanus, using thy infinite power thou did make of the dry desert great
abundance of water; and why the^ do thou make unto thy son of an abundant sea
a dry desert? thou did send meat to the Prophet Daniel when he was cast unto
the Lions, although no man did demand it at thy hards, and will thou not give
thy precious son a little water at such great entreaty? Considering that when
the famine was at Samaria, thou did command the Crows to carry the Prophet
Helias food, and the river Carith to give him drink, why do thou not help
thy own son, whom thou have engendered of thy own substance, with a little
water, in this his extreme thirst? Considering that thou did turn the sower
waters of Marath to be sweet, because those cursed people should drink of
them, why will thou give thy precious son neither of the sweet nor sour? O
what great increasing of torments to Christ are framed in the figure of Tobias,
joined with the prophecy of Jeremy, seeing the one did draw the fish to the
dry land, and the other made a desert of the sea! for upon that dry tree of
the cross, Christ was exceeding dry, seeing he could not obtain a little
water to drink of, and he was also in a great desert, seeing that he found
not so much as one friend to comfort himself with. The fourth mystery which
the figure contains is, that Tobias did open the fish, and took out his gaul
and his heart; both which did him and his afterward great good, the one for
his own marriage, and the other to cure his fathers blindness. It is greatly
to be noted, that in all that fish, Tobias found nothing which was not worthy
of the keeping, commodious and profitable in curing and sauerous in eating. The
best that ever has been, or shall be in the world, was the Creator and
Redeemer of the world, whose words were holy, whose doctrine was profitable,
whose works were marvelous, and whose bowels were most loving. What did
Tobias unto that fish, that the Jews did not unto Christ? If the fish was
drawn out of the river, so was Christ from the people; if the fish was put
upon dry land, so was Christ carried unto the Mount of Caluary; if the fish
was stripped, so was Christ whipped; if the fishes throat was cut, Christ was
also crucified; if the fish was opened, so was Christ pierced with a spear; if
the fish was cast into the fire, so was Christ also cast into the sepulcher.
This which we have said is but a little in respect of that which we will say,
and that is, that the holy catholic Church has drawn out this blessed fishes
gaul, with the which he cures us, and heart with the which he loves us,
and liver with the which he pardons us, and bowels with which he does
cherish us. O good Jesus, O my souls health, who has ever had or who ever
shall have a more louinge heart than thou to love us, or so sound a liver to
pardon us, or so profitable a gaul to cure us, or such tender bowels to
cherish us? What will thou deny me now, or what will thou not now give me, O
my good Jesus, seeing that for to show thy clernency and mercy upon me, thou
art hanged upon a dry tree, made a dead fish, opened, drawn and bowelled for
my sake? What love can be compared unto thy love, seeing that for that which
touched me, and not for any thing that belonged to thee, thou did consent
that they should open thy heart, and did permit them to rend and tear thy
bowels? What am I able to give thee, O good Jesus, what can I give thee,
unless it be my heart which is filthy for thine which is clean, my rotten
liver for thy whole one, my bitter gaul for thy sweet one, and my wicked and
hurtful bowels for thy most loving ones? Which are the greatest relickes which
are this day in heaven or earth, but the heart, liver, and bowels, which Christ
left unto his church? O how happy should he be who should have such relickes in
his custody! for having thy heart in custody, how could thou choose but
love me, and having thy bowels in keeping, how would thou but pardon me? How
is it possible, O my good Jesus, how is it possible that there should be any
evil thing in thee, when as the church has thy precious gaul for a relicke?
Since the beginning of the world there has never been any such thing seen or
heard, that is, that among the relickes which the church does account for the
best, the gaul is one of the most precious, because that without that bitter
gaul, neither the world could have been redeemed, nor the Prince thereof have
been overcome. What is the gaul which the church keeps in her treasure, but
only the bitter passion which Christ suffered? The richest jewel which the
Synagogue had, was the Manna which came from heaven, and the greatest treasure
which the church has, is the gaul and passion of Christ. Betwixt which two
what great difference there is, it is easily perceived, because that the
profit and commodity of our gaul does continue until this day, and will
continue for ever; but the memory of that old Manna is already lost. O glorious
gaul, O happy gaul, which thou good Lord did leave unto thy catholic
church! for if it did kill thee, it did make me whole, if it gave thee pain
it gave me glory, if it was gaul unto thee, it was honey to me, and if thou
did end thy life with it, yet my soul was redeemed with it. Christ's
passion was bitter gaul unto Christ, and yet Christ's death was a sweet gaul
for the redeeming of all the world: for if unto him there fell travel and
pain, yet unto us there fell rest and quietness, if it fell to his lot to
suffer, yet it fell to us to rejoice and be glad, if the sour fell unto him,
the sweet fell unto us, in so much that he chose the gaul for himself, and
left the honey for us. Iurauit patribus dare terrans fluentem lacte and melle,
said the Prophet Moises Exodus 13; As if he would say, You shall well remember,
O ye children of Israel, how you did agree with our Lord, and he with you,
and that both of you by oath, that you should never serve any other Lord but
him, and that he would give you a land which should flow milk and honey.
Notwithstanding this oath, the children of Israel were such naughty periures,
that our Lord determined not to give them a land which should flow honey, but
which should bring them forth gaul, seeing he made it batten for to sow in,
rugged and rough to travel in, unhealthful to dwell in, vveake in defense,
dry to drink in, and very poor to maintain it self. God did make a far
better agreement with his Church, than with the Synagogue: for he did not
send us a land which should bring forth honey but gaul, and therefore he
commanded us to do works which should be very unpleasant and unsavory
unto sensuality, although very conformable and very profitable. Christ did
drink bitter gauls, and gave us of the same to drink: for when he was
poor, he commanded us to be poor also, he was persecuted, and commanded
us to suffer persecution, he pardoned his injuries, and commanded us to pardon
ours; he suffered death being without fault, and charged us to suffer it being
in fault: all which things are as unsavory and bitter to accomplish, as honey
is sweet in eating. O what bitter gauls our Savior does command us to eat,
when he says, The way is streit which leads unto life! but he turns these
bitter gauls into sweet hony-combes, when he says, My yoke is sweet: for if
the way unto heaven be bitter, yet it is made very sweet, by going in Christ's
company. The yoke of the world does make us believe that he is of honey, and yet
he is but of gaul; and contrariwise the yoke of Christ does threaten us, that
he is of honey: for immediately as we bow our heads to carry him, Christ
puts himself on the other side to help us.

CHAP. VII. Of a new thirst which King David had, which was a thirst not to
drink, but to save himself.
SItiuit anima mea, ad doum fontem viuum. Psalm 41. These words king David
uttered, showing a new thirst which he had, and thereupon makes a new
petition, as if he would say; O what a great thirst my sorrowful soul
endures, and how she desires to drink of the fountain of the water of
life: for if she cannot obtain to drink of it, she can do no less but die
with thirst. The renowned king David in very tender words, does show us a new
kind of thirst, and a manner of drinking which was never before seen, and a
quality of a water which was never discovered before, and a name of a fountain
never before heard of. First he says, that he endures thirst, secondly, that
the thirst is in his soul, thirdly, that his thirst is of the water of the
fountain, fourthly, that the fountain is of water of life; and lastly, it is
called a divine fountain. It is necessary, that we first examine, what thirst
David speaks of, and what water he desires to drink of: for as there are
many kinds of waters, and many sorts of such as are thirsty, so there is also
many kinds of thirste, and many things wherewith to quench the same. If
Euripides do not deceive us, corporal thirst is caused of the hear of the
liver, or of the inflaming of choler, or of eating salt things, so that indeed
true thirst is nothing else but overmuch heat, and want of moisture. With this
corporal thirst the people of Israel was troubled in the wilderness, and
David when he desired the water of Bethleem, and the captain Sisara when he
fled from the battle, and also Sampson when there gushed out water unto him
out of an asses iawe bone. King Artaxerxes also was troubled with this thirst,
when flying from the battle, he was glad of water at a poor man's hands. And
this thirst is very common and wearisome, and costly, if it be to be quenched
with wine, and dangerous unto those which give themselves to drink too much of
it. The thirst which the poor Israelites suffered in the wilderness, and the
water which they drank out of the ro^k, did cost them very deerly; for at the
same time they drank and wept. It did cost the poor captain Sisarah very
dearly also, when he did ask the Prophetess Debora for drink: for at the
same time she gave him a cup of milk to drink, and put a pogge in his
temples to kill him with. When great king David thirsted after the water of the
cesterne near unto Bethleem, although his servants did bring him of it, he
would not drink of it, nor durst not taste it. This material thirst, which
does weary and molest us daily, is such, that there is no wine in the world,
which can wholly quench it, nor any water that can so coal it, but it will
come again. Which is easily perceived; for if we drink at dinner, we drink
better at supper, and the more a man does drink, the more he may, and although
we kill our ^hirst for a time, yet it is not fully taken away. To come then
unto our purpose, is this the thirst which the Prophet speaks of, and whereof
he complains? This should not be his thirst, this should not be his
anxiety, nor yet his complaint, nor that which he so fervently desired: for
being as he was, so mighty and great a king, he wanted neither noble wines to
drink of, nor dainty waters to recreate himself withal. There were three
cesterns of water in Jerusalem; the one at the gate called Salinaria, where all
those of the city drank of, the other hard by the Mount Sion, where those
drank which were out of the city, and the other at the gate of the Temple,
where the flesh which was sacrificed was washed. Seeing then that there were so
many cesternes in Jerusalem, who could hinder David of them, or let him for
drinking of that cold water? If he would not drink of these waters, because
they were standing, had he not the river Iordane hard by? Had he not hard by
the flood Cedron, which came from the Mount Lybanus? If he desired water of the
well, in Syon he had it; if fountain water, in Bethleem he had it; if wine
made of grapes, in Larude he had it; if liquor made of dates, it was brought
out of Egypt: so that if his thirst had been like unto ours, he had more
means to quench it, than that thirst which he suffered. This is not the
thirst which molested him, nor the grief which troubled him: for if the thirst
which he endured had proceeded from the heat of the liver, or of eating of
salt meats, it is not to be thought that he would have enregistred it in holy
Psalms. O renowned Prince and mighty king, will thou not tell what thy thirst
was of? If you will know after what I thirsted, where my grief lay, and what
the pain was which I endured, I let you understand, Quod sitiuit anima mea ad
deum fontem viuum; and the meaning this, O sorrowful man that I am and
comfortless, seeing that the thirst which I endure proceeds not of a
corrupted liver, for mine is sound and whole, nor of burnt choler, for there
is no such thing in me: my thirst is then not that which the body suffers,
but that which my sorrowful soul endures. The thirst which I suffer, and the
dryness which I abide is so hard to be extinguished, that no living creature
is able to take it from me, nor any water to quench it. O happy is the soul
which thirsts after nothing, but after our Lord! for look what the thirst is
which the soul has, such is the water which she seeks to mittigate it with.
O that this is a divine sentence which the Prophet does utter unto us in this
place! whereby we are plainly taught, that the thirst of the soul is far
different from the thirst of the body, and that the thirst of the spirit is
one, and that of the flesh another, that of the just man one, and that of the
sinner another, and the heavenly thirst one, and the humane another. Whereby is
the thirst of the body quenched, but by drinking? And with what is the thirst
of the soul slackened, but by contemplation? And with what is the thirst of
the spirit killed, but by serving God? And with what is the thirst of the world
eased, but by following the world? And what does the just thirst after, but
grace in this world, and glory in the other? And what thirst has the wicked,
but to procure all means he can the cockering of himself? The humane thirst
is of humane things, and the heavenly thirst is of heavenly things; and
thereupon it is, that what our intention is which we have in our hearts, such
is the thirst which we suffer in this world. If our principal intent be to be
greater in the world, all our thirst is to climb higher, if to be richer,
then our thirst is in gathering goods together, insomuch that such as our
thoughts are, such are the lives we lead. Tell me, I pray thee, what does the
proud man hunt after, but to be of great authority, what does the envious man
shoot at, but to throw down another, what does the furious man intend, but how
to revenge upon his enemy, what does the glutton follow but dainties for the
belly? This is the thirst which the wicked do suffer; and that which cannot
be spoken without tears is, that their life is sooner at an end, than the
thirst of their wickedness is quenched. S. Augustine upon the Psalms says, In
great sinners and obstinate hearts, although the proud man do die, yet pride
dies not, although the envious man die, yet envy dies not, although the
covetous man die, yet covetousness dies not, although the carnal man do
die, yet his carnality dies not, insomuch that the vicious man is dead, before
that his vice is at an end. Why, think thou, do we say that the vicious
man is dead before his vice is at an end, but because that if the time, in the
which he sinned, be ended and past, yet his desire of further sinning is not
ended. S. Ierom says, In damned and unfortunate persons, their torments are
therefore infinite, because their desires of sinning were also infinite, because
our Lord does make greater reckoning of that which the heart does desire, tha^
of that which the hands do work. S. Basil upon the Psalms says, O how much
more dangerous is the thirst which a naughty man's heart does suffer, than
that which the body does endure! because this is assuaged with a cup of cold
water, but the thirst of the heart is mittigated by adding sin unto sin;
and thereupon it is, that if the thirsty man take pleasure in drinking, the
great sinner takes far more in offending. Let me be no more credited, if I
were not told of one which had not left only one vice untried, nor let pass
one day wherein he had not sinned. What shall we think of him, but that if
he had always lived, he would always have sinned? What a remediles thirst
should he have after sin, and what a friend should he be of wicked persons,
who left no sin which he proved not, nor no day vvherin he offended not?
The rich covetous man which was in hell, did not complain of the fire which
did burn him, nor of the cold which pinched him, nor of the hunger which he
endured, but of the great thirst which tormented him, and therefore asked no
other favor of Abraham, but that he would cool and refresh his tongue with a
drop of water: it was the just judgment of God, that seeing he had no other
thirst in this world, but of wealth, authority, and power, and treasure, that
he should have an excessive thirst in the other, not of wealth and authority,
but of a bare cup of water. Lo thus you have seen it proved, how the
punishment follows the offense, and how one thirst succeeds another. But
alas alas, the thirst of this world has an end, but the thirst of the other
world shall dure always without end.

CHAP. VIII. God complains that we forsake him for vile and base things: and
does compare us unto old pooles.
ME dereliquerunt fontem aquae viuae, and foderunt sibi eisternas dissipatas,
quae continere aquas non valent. These words God spoke by the Prophet Jeremy in
the second chapter, as if he would say, My people of Israel have run into two
great inco^ueniences; that is, they have forsaken me, who am the fountain of
the lively water, and have made for themselves to drink in, cesternes and
pooles which cannot hold water in them. Although the Apostle do say, that our
Lord is profound in his judgments, yet in those things which touch the
profit of his creatures, he is plain and easy: for if he be well pleased,
he does presently show it, and if he be angry, he does immediately complain.
When Abraham had ended the sacrifice of his son Isaac, our Lord did
immediately thank him for it, and when king David had ended his adultery with
Bersabee, he complained out of hand: for our Lord is so far without
dissimulation and malice, that he does nether feign himself to be content,
nor deny himself to be angry. What more would we have God to do for us,
than like a good Lord, be thankful for that which we do in his service, and
like a good friend admonish us of that which we should do for him, and like a
pitiful Father correct us when we do any thing against him? Our Lord then
does here complain, not only for that we do forsake and leave him, but also
for what vile and base things we do it, whereby we show how little we do
account of him, and how greatly we do injury him, seeing that no man does use
to change his master, unless it be for his further profit. If it were so,
that as we do leave one man for another, so we should leave one God to dwell
with a better, it were a thing to be borne vvithall, but seeing that there is
but one true God, how is it possible to meet with a better God, or yet any so
good? What other thing is it to forsake God for the creature, but to leave the
kernel for the shell, the fruit for the rind, the rose for the thorn, the
flower for the bran, and the fountain for the stream? Therefore like an angry
Lord, and a man greatly iniuried, God complains and says, Me dereliquerunt
fontem aquae viuae, for there can be no greater madness in the world, than to
leave the Creator for the creature, the Lord for the servant, the just for the
sinner, and the righteous for the unjust, and that which is everlasting for
that which is transitory. Our Lord in this place as it were jesting and
mocking us, does call all our works cesternes which cannot hold water, that
is, that we are cesternes or pooles which let out all waters, because we be
not well glewed and fastened. O how our Lord has shamed us in these words,
and embased us in saying by the Prophet Jeremy, that all our works are
nothing but old broken cesternes, and puddles wherein there is nothing commonly
but reeds and duckeweed, dirt and mire, stinking vvaer, and venomous adders.
Our Lord does compare us with great reason unto that which he does name,
and does scorn and mock us fitly by it, because the sins which are in our
souls, are far vvorser than those filthes which are found in standing
puddels. What is there in an old puddle, that is not in my soul? What are all
my works but a little mire, whose property is to trouble the water, and hold
them fast which enter into it. O how unhappy we be, seeing we stick so fast
in worldly things, that we cannot get out, and so bemire our selves in vain
things, that we can never make our selves clean, insomuch that there escapes
no man which is not either defiled with sin, or wet with infamy. Our
works are also compared unto duckweed in standing puddles, whose property
is, to fill the water, and give it an evil savor. O wretched and unhappy
that I am, seeing I do no more good in the catholic church tha^ that weed
does in the water, which is easily seen, seeing I offend and hurt others with
my evil example, and that which is worst of all, I possess the room of a
good one. Thou and I, I and thou, my brother, wherein do we serve God, or
wherein do we benefit the church, unless it be in furthering the bad, and
persecuting the good, and cherishing and pampering our bodies, and in eating
the bread of the little ones? Do not thou eat the bread of the little ones,
when as if a Moore or a Pagan had received so many favors as thou have at Gods
hands, he would have served him more than thou have done, and offended him much
less? What does the duckweed serve for in pooles, but to hide and succor
frogs, and in what do I serve Christ in, but because all kind of sin
should rest in my heart? What sin did ever knock at my door, unto which I
have not presently opened? Woe be unto me, woe be unto me, what do I say that
I answered presently, when sin called at my door, seeing that very often before
it does call at my door, I go up and down seeking it from house to house?
Our works are also like unto standing puddle, whose property is to be troubled
and thick to look into, and very stinking to drink. When our Lord says by
the Prophet Esaias, Auferte malum cogitationum vestrarum ab oculis meis, how
should he not detest our works, seeing he says, that all that we do think
of does stink? Anselmus says, If we will have God accept of that which we
do, it is necessary that all that be clean which we think of, for God does
not so much look unto that which we be, as unto that which we would be if
we could. O my soul, O my heart, what is in me that has a good savor, and
what is in thee which does not stink? Does not my body stink with the evil
works which I do, my flesh with sloth, my mouth with lies, my life with
covetousness, and my heart with malice. S. Barnard says, According unto the
time which I have lived, and according unto the small profit which I have
done, I am partly weary of my life, and partly afeard to die: for if I behold
my flesh, it is now stinking with years, and if I look unto my conditions,
they are also rusty with age. All my works are so unpleasant and corrupt, and
my conditions so stinking, that it is more tolerable to smell a dead carcass
with my nose, than unto thee O my God, to smell this filthy heart of mine. Our
works are also like unto the frogs which are bred in puddles, whose property
is to make the water loathsome, and offend our ears with their croaking. S.
Barnard upon the Canticles says, Look how beautiful a thing it is to see a
soul when she is in the state of grace, so deformed a thing it is to see her
when she is darkened with sin; for in the one estate God is never satisfied
in looking upon her, and in the other he will never hear her. The properties of
frogs are these, they are evil favored to look upon, loathsome to touch,
unpleasant to hear, and monstrous to eat of: for if it be well marked, they
have no scales like a fish, nor feathers like a bird. Origin talking of the
frogs of Egypt says, A frog and worse than a frog is that soul, which in the
fountain of his goodness does not bath her self; because we may well say of
such a soul, that she is evil favored in respect of her sin, loathsome in
respect of her punishment, and not to be suffered in respect of her infamy.
The quality of the frog is to croake night and day, and it is the condition of
a naughty man always to complain, because it is one of the infelicities which
naughty me^ endure in this life, that they complain of all things, and live
discontented with themselves. It is also to be weighed, that how well soever
the stones of a poole be joined, yet the water does woose between them
unless they be well mortered together, because that the property of the
water is to moisten that which it touches, and seek always where it may find
a place to issue out. What think thou is the clay and mortar with the which
a holy soul is fastened together, but only Gods holy grace? Irenaeus in an
Homily says, What does it avail us to have in the poole of our soul, the
virtue of humility, the goodness of patience, the wealth of alms giving, and
the perfection of abstinence, if there want the clay and pitch of charity to
keep them together? S. Ambrose upon Beati immaculati says, Let us not cast
away our selves, and grieve because our Lord will not impart his graces unto us,
but because we know not how to keep them when we have the^, because there is
required greater virtue to keep that which is gotten, than to recover that
which was lost. O what great reason our Lord has to say and complain of all
the good turns that he does us, and of all the favors which he does bestow
upon us* for we cast them al into an old puddle, where we have nothing but the
dirt of covetousness, the frogs of vainglory, the reeds and duckeweeds of
hypocrisy, and the tod-poole of lechery.

CHAP. IX. How the son of God did not refuse to drink gaul and vinegar,
although he knew it would kill him.
QVis poterit gustare, quod gustatum adfert mortem? Holy Job spoke these words
in his sixth chapter, As if he would say, What man is he which so much hates
himself, or who has so corrupt a taste, or who is so weary of his life, that
he dare drink or taste of any liquor which he knows will presently make him
yield up the ghost? These words are full of matter, and contain deep mysteries
in them. For as they were prophesied by holy Job, so they were fulfilled by the
son of God, when as on the altar of the cross he tasted a cup of such
bitter poison, that in tasting of it his life went presently out of his body.
The Philosopher in his second book De generatione says, That the life of a
reasonable man does consist in the perfection of the radical or natural
moisture, and in the conservation of natural heat; and that is the only reason
why nature does desire meat and drink of us; for by eating and drinking that
humor is always preserved. We see oftentimes men of ninty or a hundred years
die, and yet never complain of any grief, and the reason is, because that
that natural moisture was ended in them, and their natural heat was
extinguished in them, and therefore we may say of such that their life did
rather end, tha^ that they died. Now that we must eat and drink of necessity,
which of these two is most agreeable unto nature, and which less grievous? If
Aristotle do not deceive us in his book De secretis secretorum, this question
was debated before Alexander the great, and in his presence thoroughly disputed
on, because that at the table of that mighty prince no man was admitted to
speak but his captains which sustained his wars, or Philosophers which
governed his house. The conclusion which those learned men gave was, that it
was far more pleasing and agreeable unto man's nature to drink than to eat,
and their reason was, because that drink does assuage the thirst, which is a
very troublesome and offensive thing to suffer, and that it has neither need
of a knife to cut it, nor teeth to chew it, Vltimum refugium naturae est potus,
said the Philosopoher, as if he should say, The last refuge that nature does
give to sustain us withal, is the strength to drink, which is easily perceived
in those which are sick, whereof we see some, partly by reason of their long
infirmity, partly by reason of their old age, lose their sight, some their
hearing, some their smelling, some their eating, and yet none lose their
drinking. What old man have we seen in our days in the world who has not
been able to drink a cup of wine? Dioscorus an old Physician says, that of
what age or condition a man be, he is easilier comforted with drink than meat.
And therefore seeing that is more necessary for me to drink than to eat, in
times past when meats at certain times were forbid, they did not limit their
cups in drinking: for look how much a man is recreated and refreshed when he
drinks at his pleasure, so much he is tormented and afflicted when endures
thirst; and thereupon the Philosopher says in his book De somno and vigilia,
That there is no torment equal unto that, when a man is denied his drink, and
kept from sleep. Plutarch says, That the great tyrant Dennis gave his enemies
no other torment, but much salt meat to eat, and no drink to drink, and made
them labor hard, and not permit them to sleep. Cicero in an Epistle says,
That nature is a great enemy to three things, that is, of grief and sorrow,
because it wastes the bones, of great weakness, and of great thirst, with
the which choler is enflamed. To come then unto our purpose, if to suffer
thirst and want sleep be two great torments, who was more tormented with these
than Christ was? For if we talk of his sleep, we know well that he had not
slept from the last night which he slept in Bethania, and if we talk when he
drank from the time that he celebrated his last supper, he never drunk drop
of water. Barnard says, Considering the hunger which he had suffered, the
torments which were given him, the blood which they drew from him, the journey
which he went, do thou not think that my good Jesus had great cause to want
sleep, and be very thirsty? Cassiodorus says, Why will thou, O my good
Lord, why will thou have me to occupy my pen in showing how thirsty thou wast
upon the cross, and how much sleep thou did want, considering that there
was no kind of punishment which was not experimented upon thee? Anselmus
says, Who but thou, O my good Jesus, who but thou, did suffer in the
manger cold, in Egypt banishment, on the way weariness, in the palace scorning
and mocking, on the cross thirst, in thy honor infamy, and in thy person
death? There were as Barnard says five torments, which did most of all
afflict Christ upon the cross, that is to say, the stripes of the whip which
did open his shoulders, the nails which pierced his hands, the thorns which
tore his Temples, the spettle which the hangmen did spet at him, and the thirst
which did burn his bowels. We must take great compassion of the thirst which
Christ suffered upon the cross, and we are to wonder at the remedy which they
gave him for it: for in steed of water they gave him gaul mingled with
mirrhe, and instead of wine pure vinegar. If we marvel that Christ took
these cruel drinks, we are much more to marvel to see that Christ himself
with his own mouth did ask for them: for if he had not said Sitio, I am a
thirst, no man durst have given him gaul and wine mingled with mirre.
Chrisostom says, Christ saw those cups of g^ule and vinegar from the cross in
the Jews hands, and he knew very well that their desire was to give him of
that drink, and yet notwithstanding he said alowd Sitio, I am a thirst, to the
end that they might have time and place to reach him that drink. Hilarious
says, When the maker of the world said unto the Jews Sitio, it was to tell
them plainly, that they should give it him with their own hands, although he
knew well what they would give him, because that the great thirst which he
had, and the gaul and vinegar which the Synagogue gave him did signify a
greater matter, and enduced us unto a greater mystery than any man thought of.
As it were in a maze and astonished with that that Christ did, holy I^b spoke
that which he spoke when he said, Quis poterit gustare, quod gustatum
adfert mortem? The meaning of these words is this: What man is there in such a
desperate taking, or so far out of love with himself, which dare taste of a
drink with the which he knows that he shall die presently? The son of
God did so immediately after die upon the cross, that in ending his draught of
gaul and vinegar, he began out of hand to yield up his ghost. If old
Hystoriographers do not deceive us, Socrates among the Athenienses, Midonius
among the Lacedaemonians, ^rias among the Thebanes, Escarrus among the Romans,
by drinking of poison ended their lives, not because that their desire was to
drink of that poison, but because their enemies through force caused them to
do it. God forbid that my pen should write such blasphemy, of my good
Jesus, unto whom no man offered gaul and vinegar, no man entreated him unto
it, no man forced him to take it, but he of his own will said Sitio, I am a
thirst and dry: for if he would have dissembled his thirst, and held his
tongue, they would never have given him that detestable drink. Isidorus says,
What man, or what Angel is able to reach unto this secret, that is, that the
son of God being then to give up his last breath, yet should say, that he
thirsted after a cup of water? Why do thou say so late Sitio, and ask
either for wine or water? for seeing that thou art even at the last farewell of
thy life, it cannot otherwise be, but as thou art a drinking, thy soul must
depart from thee. It had been a far lesser trouble and grief, to have endured
thirst half a quarter of an hour which Christ had to live, than have suffered
the thorns which boared through his head, and all the rest of the torments
which he had passed through that day, but that his pleasure was to suffer them
all, and complain of his thirst only, because the thorns were only a
torment; but his thirst signified a mystery unto his Church. There is a mystery
in Christ's being a thirst, there is a mystery in that that he manifested it,
there is a mystery in that they gave him wine mingled with mire, and another in
that they mixed it with gaul, there is a mystery in that they offered it him
in a reed, and giving him it with Isope contains a mystery, and in that he
tasted of it and did not drink it there is also a mystery contained. If it be
diligently looked into, the mystery of the Sacrament where Christ communicated
with his disciples excepted, and the Sermon with the which he did comfort the^,
and the prayer which he made when he did sweat blood also excepted, there is
no mystery written with so many circumstances, as this of the thirst which
Christ suffered, and whereof he complained. And therefore mark with great heed
all that the holy Scripture writes of Christ's thirstines; because that with
how many more circumstances a thing is uttered in Scripture, to so many more
weightier considerations it does inuit us.

CHAP. X. How the Synagogue could give Christ nothing to drink but rotten
dregs.
PArum est mihi vt suscites faeces Israel: dedi te in lucem gentium, vt sis
salus mea vsque ad extremu^ terrae, Esaias 48. These words are uttered by the
eternal Father, speaking with his only son, when he sent him into the world,
and they are as if he would say: being my only begotten son, and taking
upon thee so hard an enterprise, as is the redeeming of the world, thou
should be content to restore the house of Jacob only, and the dregs of
Israel, because the end why I send thee into the world is, to give light unto
all the Gentiles, and redeem all the whole world. There are brought in in that
communication, the Father which speaks, the son unto whom he speaks, the
Synagogue of whom he speaks, and the end why he is sent, and also the great
importance of the journey, seeing that by the means thereof he will lighten
the blindness of the Gentiles, and streine the dregs of the Jews. And when he
says, Vt sis salus mea, our Lord does highly extol the love which he bears
us, seeing that as when one man does commend an important affair unto another,
the Father says here unto his son, that it touches his own safety and life,
that a full and general redemption be made of all men, not excluding any one
at all. When the father says unto his son, Dedi te in lucem gentium vt sis
salus mea, what will he say, but that it is most agreeable unto his clemency,
and that he holds it for a point of his honor, that all enter in and be
comprehended under his general redemption, the wine and the dregs, the good
and the bad, the Gentile and the Jew, the quick and the dead. The Father who
does commend unto his son the grounds and dregs, does he not more
earnestssy commend clean and holy things? In Gods shop, the lees which he
casts abroad are better than all the wine that the devil keeps together. I
mean, that one whom our Lord has humbled and brought low, is better than all
those which the devil has lifted up. And because that our Lords calling of
the Jews lees and dregs of Israel, seems to be a scandalous and injurious
speech, it is necessary for us to declare how these dregs took their
foundation: for it is not possible for us to expound the holy Scripture as we
should, unless we do first understand the letter. For the better
understanding of this which the Prophet Esaias says, that which Boethius says in
his first book of Comfort makes much for our purpose, that is, Quod
infaelicissimum genus infortunij est, hominem fuisse faelicem, and his meaning
is, that there is no greater disaster or infelicity in the world, tha^ for a
man to have been on the top of felicity, and then to be thrown down; because
such one does nothing else but sigh after the honor which he has lost, and
never cease bewailing the infamy which he has gotten. When holy Job thought
with himself, and called to mind the time when he was rich and of great
estimation, and very healthful of body, and then saw himself upon a dunghill
vviping worms off his own body, what grief of mind should oppress him, and
what a sea of thoughts weary him? When our Lord degraded and put out of their
kingdoms Nabuchodonoser and Antiochus, if we look well unto it, we shall
perceive, that the tears which they wept, and the griefs which they
complained on, were rather to think of the honors which they had lost, than
of the punishment which they presently endured. Cleopatra queen of Egypt, Brias
captain of the Greeks, and stout Hannibal of the Carthaginenses, and the
Consul Cato among the Romans, slew themselves with their own hands after that
adverse fortune had taken away their honors. What will not a shamefast man
do, what will he not suffer, what will he not settle himself unto, after
he sees himself disgraced and fallen from his honor? Seneca in his book of
Clemency says, If all men were of my opinion, there should be more compassion
taken on him who falls from his estate, than of him who loses his wits:
because that he who is become a fool, does not remember that ever he was
wise; but the disgraced man and he who is trodde^ down, does always bewail
his unfortunate mishap. To come the^ unto our purpose, there was never nation
so much made of at Gods hands, as the people of Israel was, because he called
them his loving son, his peculiar people, his chosen vineyard, his enclosed
orchard, and Commonwealth whom he most of all affected. He went for their sakes
into Egypt, he opened them the red sea, he gave them Manna from heaven, he
gave them Angels to keep them, Priests to guide them, duk^es to defend them,
countries to inhabit, and great riches to joy in. What did he not give them
if they asked it, and what did he deny them if they requested it, seeing that
in the day time he made them a shadow of a cloud, and in the night gave them
light with a pillar of fire? All these privileges dured no longer tha^
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob lived, and the rest of the fathers, and with the^ all
familiarity died. Tertullian says, That as long as there were holy men among
the Jews, they were well-beloved of God; but when the people of Israel went
worser and worser, our Lord did forget them, and had no care at all over them.
For as the church says, Sicut to colimus, ita nos visita, Is it much that God
should be careless in doing of us good, if we grow cold in his service? S.
Augustine says in an Homily, When the son of God came into the world to
take flesh upon him, the Synagogue had fallen into decay long before, which
they shall easily see to be true, who will diligently read the Scriptures. For
the Prophet Malachias does call her soot, Jeremy dross, Baruch a putrified
worm, Ezechiel a moth, Amos a wild vine, Abdias smoke, Osee a sink: for as he
was wont to invent names to honor thee, so now he seeks names of infamy to
discredit thee. And like unto one who is angry and discontented, God calls
his people of Israel dregs and sink, and soot, and smoke: for as the Jews
grew more and more in sins, so God punished them more and more, and quipped,
and taunted them with new names. What greater injury could he do to them, or
what greater reproach could he use toward them than call them filthy dregs and
rotten lees? Fulgentius in a Sermon says, According unto the prophecy of
Esayas, Can you, O you Israelites, deny me that there is any thing left of
your Priesthood, of your royal scepter, of your rich temple, of your ancient
kingdom, of your famous people, but the lees which smell, and the dregs which
stink? Christ found very stinking dregs, in all the Jewish Priesthood, seeing
we read of it in the books of the Machabees, that they gave not the room of
the high Bishop unto him who best deserved it, but unto him who bought it for
most money. The son of God found very rotten dregs in the royal scepter of
Judah, considering that it was usurped of the Romans, and tyrannized by Herod's.
Christ found filthy grounds in all the Scriptures, seeing that the Rabines had
falsified them, and interpreted them according unto their own meaning. Christ
found the Hebrew tongue stained in lees and dregs; and the reason was, because
that as the unfortunate Jews had been captives in diverse parts, so they spoke
diverse languages. Was not the Synagogue now become stinking and filthy dregs,
seeing that there was no vice in the world which was not found in her? In the
Princes Christ found pride, in the Priests envy, in the Pharisees hypocrisy,
in the old men malice, in the young men ignorance, and in the popular and
vulgar sort covetousness.

CHAP. XI. How the Synagogue gave Christ that to drink that she her self
was, that is gaul, and that which she had, that is vinegar.
ECce ignis and ligna: vbi est victima holocausti? Genesis 22. These lamentable
speeches passed betwixt the Father and the son, the son and the Father, in
manner of a dialogue, the one asking and the other answering. The case was then
this, that when Abraham had brought his son Isaac from among the people, and
being gone up to the hill with his hands bound, the wood set on a heap, and the
fire kindled, and the sword drawn to sacrifice his son, he said unto his
Father; behold father, here is the wood and the fire made, where is the beast
which shall be sacrificed? To this demand the sorrowful Father answered this,
Dominus prouidebit sibi victimam holocausti, sili mi; as if he would say, Take
thou no care my son, take no care? for the Lord will provide a sacrifice
which shall be more acceptable unto him, than all the sacrifices of the world.
This prophecy, which the Patriark Abraham utters, is so excellent and high,
that although many have read it, yet very few understand it: for although it be
short in words, yet the mysteries which it contains are many. What means
this, O old Abraham, what means this? God does command thee to kill and
burn, and sacrifice and offer thy own son, and do thou prophecy that our
Lord will provide for a sacrifice far better than this which thou do
bring? O high mystery and divine Sacrament! for the holy man having his son
in a readiness to be sacrificed, the wood prepared to cast him into, the fire
made to burn him, the sword drawn to kill him, and a commandment from God to
offer him, yet carelessly says, that the Lord will provide another sacrifice.
Abraham does not speak here with the Synagogue his mother (for, for her the
sacrificing of Isaac was prepared, which was the figure of a sacrifice) but he
spoke with our mother the holy catholic church, for whom God would provide
another new sacrifice, which was Christ crucified, in whom all the sacrifices
of the law were to end, and the Sacraments of the church take their beginning.
Because all me^ might know that Abraham did not speak of the sacrifice of
Isaacs son, but of the sacrifice of Christ which was to come, our Lord said
not, that he had already provided a sacrifice, but that he would provide;
neither did he say that he would provide it for another, but for himself;
neither that he would provide many, but one; neither that he would
indifferently provide for any, but a killed sacrifice laid whole on the altar.
Theophilus upon the Apostle says, That in all the old Testament, there was no
sacrifice so excellent, nor so strange, nor so costly, as that of Abraham and
Isaac his son. And seeing that Abraham the maker of that sacrifice does
prophecy that there shall be another sacrifice which shall excel his, why do
not you, O you Jews, receive Christ as a true sacrifice? Neither did Abraham
say that he would provide many sacrifices but only one: for if we mark it
well, it was the poor Synagogue which was laden with many sacrifices, and
believed in many Christ's, and offered many Holocausts; but the holy church has
but one sacrifice, believes but in one Christ, and does offer but one
Holocaust. Neither does Abraham say that the Lord would provide a sacrifice for
any other but for himself, seeing he says, Dominus prouidebit sibi: for
until the very instant and hour that his son was crucified on the cross,
he was never pleased nor pacified, for the offense which was done unto him.
Neither did Abraham say that he would provide indifferently any sacrifice, but
specially that sacrifice which was called Holocaustum, because that in all other
sacrifices there remained always one part for the priest to eat of, and
another for him which offered it for to take away. But it was not so in that
sacrifice which they called Holocaustu^, because that in it all the whole beast
was quartered and cut in pieces and burnt, and so being made ashes was wholly
offered unto God. Was it not, think you, an Holocaust, and a great Holocaust
which Christ offered, seeing there was no spot in it whereby it should be cast
away, nor any member in his body which was not tormented? To come then unto our
purpose, it is to be noted, that we have made all this discourse to prove that
in the mystery of this word Sitio which end, because that the Jews did but
borrow them until our Lord should provide them a sacrifice, which by Abraham
he promised unto all the world. Isidorus upon Genesis says, The sacrifice
which God promised to send into the world, ought to be worthy of him unto whom
it was offered, and profitable unto him who did offer it; which could not be
by dead calves, and the blood of goats, and unpleasant liquors, nor yet with
bloody hands. How was it possible that the sacrifices of time past should
please the Lord, or profit the sinner which did offer them, seeing their altars
did seem rather butchers shambles, than temples of Priests? Rabanus says,
Abraham's sacrifice was profitable unto himself, and hurtful unto his son,
seeing he should there have lost his life; and because we may know that this is
true, the Lord did ordain that Abraham's sword should only threaten his son
Isaac, and afterward kill the son of God. Our Lord seeing what small benefit
should be gotten by the death of that child, and what grief it would cause
unto this old Father, although he gave him license to draw his sword, yet he
did not consent that it should come near the child; the which our Lord would
never have hindered, if the death of that child could have been sufficient to
redeem all the world. God the Father was older than Abraham, and loved his
son better than Abraham did his: yet notwithstanding all this, seeing that in
that only sacrifice did consist man's salvation, he consented that they should
take his life from him. Esichius upon Leuiticus says, That that which Abraham
did, was only good unto himself alone, because he did accomplish that which
was commanded him; but when he said that the Lord would provide a sacrifice
unto himself, that was profitable unto all the world, considering that by that
prophecy we were warranted and made sure, that we should be redeemed by the
son of God. Origin says, That it is much to be noted, how that all the
sacrifices of the old law did proceed from two things only, that is, from the
beasts which they did kill, and the fruit which they plucked from trees. Of
their beasts they did offer the head and feet unto the Lord, the caul, the
flesh, and the entralls, and of trees incense, storax, fruit, grapes, aloes,
mirrhe, oil, and sweet odours. And God was not content only, that every man
should offer what pleased himself, but only of that which God in the law
commanded, that is, of beasts that they should offer the greatest, of fruits
the best, of perfumes the sweetest, of mettales the richest, of liquors the
most excellent. If we believe the Philosopher in his book De animalibus, The
first thing that is engendered is the heart, and the last the gaul: and when a
beast dies it is contrary; for the first thing that corrupts is the gaul,
and the heart the last thing that dies. The Commentator says, That as the
gaul is the last thing that is engendered in man so it is also the most
filthiest and basest thing that is in him. Of all liquors the wine is the most
precious, and contrary no liquor worser than the dregs of sour corrupted wine.
Do thou think, my brother, that we have traveled in vain in proving unto
thee, that the gaul is the worst part of the beast, and putrified dregs the
worst of liquors? The end why we have spoken all this is, because that when
the Redeemer of the world was dead with thirst upon the altar of the cross,
they gave him these two things to drink, that is bitter gaul, which is the
last and worst part of the beast, and dregs and vinegar which is the worst of
all liquors. S. Augustine upon S. John says, The purest, clearest, and
cleanest of the Synagogue was already ended and gone, and turned into vinegar
and lees, by reason whereof they gave Christ nothing to drink but gaul and
vinegar, giving us thereby to understand, that they did not give him only that
which they had in the Synagogue, but also that which themselves were. For what
was all the Synagogue but sour vinegar, and bitter gaul? It was not without a
high mystery that they offered that which they did to Christ upon the cross:
for as the gaul is the last and the vildest thing that is in the beast, so the
Synagogue was now at an end, and at the vvorst of all her life, in so much that
she was become nothing else but a gaul of malice, and also vinegar of
covetousness. Saint Jerome says, Even as vinegar has been good wine, because
it was gathered of the best of the vine, so the people of the Jews were
sometimes good, because they had good me^ among them; in so much that there is
no other meaning in that they gave Christ wine mingled with mire, and sour
vinegar to drink, but that the people were now corrupted, and scarce one good
man left among them. How came this hap among you, O you Jews, that all the
wine of your vessels is become sour vinegar, and all the honey of your hiues
turned into bitter gaul? Then your wine began to turn into vinegar, when you
would not receive Christ for your Redeemer, and then all your honey turned into
gaul, when you did defame his doctrine and bereave him of his life. The
Synagogue strikes great pity into my heart, to see that in time past they did
offer unto their God sacrifices, Holocausts, and offerings, and afterward gaul
and vinegar, and dregs, by which cursed and wicked offering, they took away
their makers life, and brought their Commonwealth unto an end.

CHAP. XII. How that the thirst that Christ had upon the cross, was not so
much for drink, as to desire to suffer more for us.
EXpergefactus lassus adhuc sitit, and anima eius vacua est, Esaias, chap. 29.
The Prophet Esaias utters these words, speaking in general of the great
trauails and most greiuous thirst which the son of God suffered in
particular: and it is as if he would say, The great Messiah waked out of his
sleep, like unto a man who had escaped out of a lithargy, or some drousie
disease, and when he beheld the state of his soul, he found that she was
empty. For the Prophet to say that the son of God slept upon the cross, and
that after he waked and was weary, and found his heart empty, seems a strange
and a doubtful thing unto pitiful ears. For if it be true that he
suffered, how was it possible that he slept; and if he slept, how could it be
that he suffered? What is more strange unto torment than sleep, and what a
greater enemy to sleep than torment? Considering that the son of God hanged
upon the altar of the cross, his feet bare, his hands torn, his side pierced,
his sinews wrested, and his bones put out of joint, how could it be that he
should sleep or take any rest at all? He who should hang upon the cross as
Christ did, that is, weary, wasted, bloody, nailed, and one joint drawn from
another, would he not have greater ability and inclination to complain, than
desire of sleep? The Prophet utters four things in this prophecy, the
first, that Christ did awake out of a sleep and dream which he slept, the
second, that he awaked aweary, the third, that he awaked thirsty, the fourth,
that he found his heart empty. Of all these four things, the one does make us
most of all to marvel: for to say that Christ was aweary I believe it, to say
that he was a thirst I agree unto it, and that he wanted all comfort I do also
admit. But to say that he slept, there is that which makes me to wonder,
because his eternal Father did not send him thither to sleep, but to redeem
all the world. It is much to be noted in this place, that the famous Augustine
says against Manichaeus. Saepe, imo saepissime in sacris literis
circumstantiae scripturarum declarant Scripturam, as if he would say, It
happens oftentimes, that when the Scripture is dark and obscure, that the
circumstances before going and coming after do declare and explain the same
Scripture, and one Prophet does declare another, and one text another. This
then being so, it is convenient for us to find out in Scripture some kind of
sleep, and by that we may conjecture and guess at the manner of sleeping which
the son of God slept upon the cross, and also we shall know, when, how, and
wherefore Christ did awake out of his sleep. Excitatus est tanquam dormiens
dominus, and tanquam potens crapulatus vino, says the Prophet David, Psalm 77.
as if he would say, Our Lord did awake out of his dream like a man that is
sleeping, and he rose out of that dream like a man full of power, and like
unto one who had drunk wine. It is a verefied truth in our Christian faith,
that God is a pure spirit, and a substance not compounded but simple, which
has no flesh which may putrify, nor bones which may be broken, nor hunger
which may cause him to eat, nor stomach to digest with, nor vapors to ascend
and provoke him to sleep, nor years to make him old. If it be true that
there is no time which can make God old, nor meat which can force him to
sleep, is it not also true, that his sleep is otherwise to be understood than
ours, and that he awaketh in another manner than we do? When the Philosopher
says, That sleep is the image of death, what else does he mean, but that a man
which sleeps, is nothing else but an image of a dead man? Mark well the
conditions of a dead man, and thou shall find the same in one which sleeps:
for he who is in his bed asleep, and he who is in his grave can neither
speak, nor hear, nor understand those which call upon them, nor feel those
which touch them, nor offend those which abuse them, nor complain on those
which blaspheme them, nor revenge on those which hurt them. Who will not say
that our Lord does not sleep this kind of sleep, seeing we see that in
naughty men he does dissemble their ambition, the blasphemies which they speak,
the adulteries which they commit, the incests they go about, and the malice
which they think? What is sleep in a man but to have all his members at rest?
And what else is sleeping in our Lord, but the suspending of his vengeance and
punishment? The wicked men think, that because our Lord does suffer them to
live in the world, and not punish the^, that therefore he is asleep, and that
he has no care over the things of this world; which is an error without all
doubt: for they must know, if they know it not, that that which we call in a
man sleeping, is called in God dissembling. Upon those words of the Prophet,
Dormitauerunt omnes, S. Ambrose says, Our Lord does wink at the naughtiness
of wicked men, not because he has a desire that they should sin, but because
he hops that they should amend, which if they do not, the Lord awaketh for
their wickedness, and lays his heavy hand over the^. When is our Lord seen to
awake out of his sleep but when he lays his hand over the naughty man, and
does chastise him for his error? Even as when one will give another a great
blow, the higher he does lift his hand, the greater stroke he does give him,
in the self same sort, the longer time our Lord does stay and wait for the
wicked, the more rigorously and with lesser pity he does punish him. Whereof,
think thou, does it proceed, that God does awake to punish thy sin, but
because he does see thee sleep so long time in sin? Isidorus says, Will thou see curious reader, that our Lords casting himself to sleep, is nothing
else but to dissemble at our faults, and that to awake is nothing else in him
but to begin to punish thy sin; thou may perceive it by that, that as the
Prophet had said, Excitatus est tanquam dormiens, he added immediately,
Etpercussit eos in pectora eorum. What other thing does the Prophet say unto us
by these words, but that at the self same time, hour, and moment, that the
Lord did awake out of his sleep, he did put his rigorous hand over the Princes
of the Gentiles. Look well unto it, my brother, look well unto it, and be not
deceived, and if thou think that our Lord is asleep, and has no regard of thy
doings, take thou heed for it is the temptation of the devil, and that none of
the least with the which he does deceive the world: for thou will one day
think that the Lord is careless, and he will send some grievous punishment
upon thee. And thou art now to understand, that there are so many in thy house
which will awake him, as thou have faults and sins in thy soul. In the house
of our Lord, who is the waker of his clemency, but only our amendment, and who
is the waker of his justice but only our offense? Upon those words of the
Psalm, Ecce non dormitabit, S. Barnard says, As the enemy which does impugn
Israel, Non aormitabit neque dormiet, so the Lord who defends Israel, Neque
dormitabit neque dormiet, and if it seem that his clemency is asleep, when he
does favor us, it is because we should live better, and if it seems that he
does defer his justice, it is because we should amend. What should Isay more
unto thee, but look what works thou do, such wakers of God thou have. If
thou be good, thou do awake him to do thee good, if thou be naught, thou
do awake him to do thee hurt: because that in the sight of our Lord the
fault cries for punishment, and goodness asks reward. Ioining then mystery
unto mystery, and Sacrament unto Sacrament, now that we have declared how God
slept in the old Testament, it is reason that we declare also how his son did
sleep and awake upon the cross, seeing that there is no less to be wondered
at in the sleeping of the son, tha^ there was to be spoken of in the sleeping
of the Father. For to think that the son of God did sleep upon the cross,
as one that is weary and in health is wont to do were a vanity, and also an
heresy, for giving him as they did gaul to eat, and vinegar to drink, there
were more reason that his stomach should be ready to ouerturne, rather than
his head have any inclination to sleep. When Esaias says, Expergefactus lassus,
he speaks nor of material sleep, but of spiritual, and if he say that
Christ did awake, his powers within him without doubt did not awake, because
they were broken with torments but those powers did awake which lie hidden
within him. And although the Apostle do say, Quod ex ipso, and in ipso, and
per ipsum sunt omnia, to wit, of him, in him, and by him all things are, yet
there are six principal things above the rest in him. These six are, his
essence, his power, his wisdom, his humane flesh, his patience, and his
clemency, and of these six excellences and graces, three of them slept, when
the son of God suffered, and the other three always watched. His pure and
divine essence slept upon the cross, seeing he did not show himself by it to
be an absolute God, for if he had showed himself to have been only God and
not man, he could never have died upon the cross. His high and eternal
wisdom slept upon the cross in his passion, seeing that he never answered
unto any injurious word, were it never so grievous against him. Esichius says,
Christ did suffer that to be done by him on the cross, that a sheep does by
himself in the butchery, for if the son of God should have shown before
Pilate and Herod any spark of his wisdom, the Jews had never been able to
have put him to death. His inspeakable and incomparable power did also sleep in
his passion upon the cross, not revenging at all on his enemies, for if it
would have pleased him to have used it, in less than a moment, hell would have
swallowed the^ all alive. Now that we have told what three powers slept with
Christ on the cross, it is also convenient for us to show what three they were
which watched with him the same time. His tender flesh did not sleep at the
time of his passion upon the cross, which was not one moment at ease, nor an
instant without torment. How was it possible that Christ should not be but
awake on the cross, seeing that there was no vain in his holybody which did
not bleed, nor no part of his flesh which was not bruised, and beaten black and
blew? His incomparable patience did watch and not sleep upon the cross, the
which our blessed Jesus did never lose, seeing that he never spoke injurious
word unto his enemies, nor never showed them an angry countenance? Augustine
says, All devout persons ought to follow Christ in the virtue of suffering,
for besides that the virtue of patience is meritotious before God, she is also
an occasion of great quietness in man's life. Christ's divine and loving
clemency did also watch, and not sleep in his passion, the which he did show
when he pardoned his enemies, and prayed for his malefactors. O infinite
goodness, O inspeakable pity, O my good Jesus, for if we should grant that
all the other virtues should have slept on the cross, yet thy clemency would
never have given over watching, for it is far easier for the son to lose
his light, than for thee not to forgive and pardon. Plutarch in his Apothegms
says, That the Emperor Titus on a time gave a great sigh and said, Diem
amisimus amici, as if he would say, It is not reason that this day should be
reckoned among the days of my life, seeing that I have done no good, nor used
any liberality in it. This speech was spread throughout all the world, and much
commended of the Philosophers, and worthy of so high a Prince. That which the
Emperor Titus spoke of his francknesse, Christ might far better have spoken
of his infinite clemency, for if the Emperor did let no day pass in the which
he did not some good, neither did Christ let slip any hour or moment wherein
he did not pardon some offense. And because the Prophet says that the son
of God did not only sleep, but also that he did awake, let us now see how
these three powers did awake in Christ, and when, and for what cause. His
incomparable and divine essence did rise and awake when he spoke that terrible
word at the time that his soul was drawn out of him, and thereupon as it were
in a trance and a maze, the great Centurion said of Christ, That this was the
son of the true God. Christ did also awake his high wisdom upon the cross
when he spoke those seven words in the last hour of his death, in the which
there is contained more profound, and deep science and knowledge, than is in
all humane Philosophy or knowledge. Christ did also awake his incomparable
power, when he made the sun to be darkened, the earth to tremble and quake,
the graves to open, and the dead to rise again. Who does doubt, but that the
son of God does show in these wonderful meruels, the highness of his power,
the depth of his essence, and the greatness of his wisdom, and the valor of
his person? O my good Jesus, O the light of my soul! how unlike thou art unto
the children of vanity and lightness, who do show their essence, and yet are
nothing; show their power, and yet can do nothing; show their wisdom, and
yet do know nothing.

CHAP. XIII. Where he goes forward with the figure mentioned before.
ADhue sitit expergifactus, says Esaias in the place before named, as if he
would say, When the redeemer of the world did awake upon the cross, he did
awake very dry and thirsty, which was so great a thirst, that it continues
until this day: it is most certain that when a man does suffer many griefs
at one time, that he speaks of that which grieueth him most, and points
with his hand where his greatest pain lies. The anguishes which Christ
suffered in his mind were innumerable, and the griefs which he endured in his
body were intolerable, and that which is most of all to be meruelled at is,
that his torments being so many and so sharp as they were, yet he complained
of none of them on the cross, but only of the thirst which he endured. Saint
Barnard says, O good Jesus, O redeemer of my soul, having so many things to
complain on, do thou only complain of thirst? Thy shoulders are naked and
whipped, thy hands broken, thy head bleeding, thy flesh bruised, and yet do
thou complain on nothing, but of the thirst which troubles thee, and of want
of water? Do thou complain that thou art thirsty, and not that thou art
bloody? have thou not greater want of thy blood, than of water? Seeing the
blood which runs from thy head, does bath thy face, and wet thy tongue, why
do thou ask again for water? For a quarter of an hour that thou have to
live, do thou complain that thou want water? O that the thirst which I
suffer says Christ, is not to drink wine or water, but to see your amendment,
and carry you with me to my glory, for seeing that I am now taking my journey
to heaven. I have a great thirst to take my elect with me. The thirst which I
have, and the dryness which I endure, is not so much to drink any liquor, as
to redeem you and save you, and reconcile you with my Father, and therefore if
thou have no pity on me, yet at the least take some on thy self. O that I
had rather, that thou had some pity on thy self, than on me, because it
is a greater grief to see thee lost, than to see my self suffer. S. Augustine
says, Thou did add unto all thy anguishes, this word Sitio, showing
thereby such a great thirst, and representing outwardly the exceeding love that
thou did bear me inwardly, and unspeakable charity, which caused thee to
make but small account of all that thou did suffer in respect of that
desire which thou had to suffer. And he says further, O my good Jesus, I
know well that thy thirst is not for thy self, but for me, and this thy
anguish is for no other cause, but for the salvation of my soul: and when thou
say that thou have a desire to drink, that is as much to say, as to suffer
more for me, in so much that the care that thou have over me is so great, that
by means thereof thou do wholly forget thy self. What means this O
redeemer of my soul, what means this? Thy ioints being loosed one from
another, thy eyes broken, thy mother having her farewell, and having complained
on thy Father, do thou say anew I am a thirst? What pity may be compared
unto this, or what goodness equal unto this Oredeemer of my soul. We see by
this word Sitio, that death was sufficient to take all thy dolors and griefs
from thee, and yet that it was not enough to cut off the love which thou
had to redeem us. Who is able to say truly, that thy love did end upon the
cross, considering that for the love of thy elect thou did yet thirst
after more griefs and anguishes? All this Saint Augustine spoke. Chrysostom
says, When the eternal word said upon the cross, I am a thirst, I do not
believe that he did so much ask for water to drink, as he did ask for time
of his Father to suffer more grief and torment. For as the candle when it is
going out does cast the greatest light, so Christ the more his death drew
near, the more his love and charity does kindle toward us. Remigius upon
Saint Matthew says, Although the divine providence did reduce all the
travails of his life unto three years, and that also he brought all the
torments of the cross unto three hours, yet it is not to be believed, that
Christ his infinite charity was contented with this short time, and therefore I
think for my own part, that the thirst which he showed upon the tree was
not so much to drink of any water of the river, as to declare and make
manifest his love unto the world. Fulgentius in a Sermon says, The son of
God did think, that seeing his Father had not given him charity by weight, so
he should not give him torment by measure, by reason whereof he cried aloud
on the cross Sitio, to let us understand by this thirst, that seeing the gifts
which he received had no end, that the torments likewise which he received
should not be limited.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the cruelty and ingratitude that the Jews used in giving
Christ gaul and vinegar, and how he satisfied for every sin in particular.
DEderunt in escam meam fell, and in siti mea potauerunt me aceto, says Christ
by the Prophet, as if he would say, Being upon the altar of the cross full of
torments, laden with griefs, compassed with enemies. I had scarsely spoken
the word Sitio, but they gave me gaul to eat, and vinegar to drink. There is
much matter to be spoken upon this, that is, what drink they gave him when
they gave it him, where they gave it him, why they gave it him, in what they
gave it him, and how quickly they gave it him. The drink which they gave him
was gaul and vinegar, the place where was upon the cross, the time was when
he was yielding up the ghost, the cause why was to help him to die, they gave
it him in a reed and a sponge, and that presently when he had thirst; so that
all these circumstances do aggrauate the fault in them. We find that the
devil made two banquets in this world, the one in the terrestrial paradise
unto our Father, where he gave him the fruit of the tree to eat; the other to
Christ in the desert, where he invited him to stones of the field, the which
might have been ground, sifted and so mingled, that they might have been eaten.
The Jews gave Christ worser meat, than the devil offered him in the desert,
for they gave him gaul to eat, and vinegar to drink, which are bitter and
sour, horrible in taste, and mortal in eating. For as the Philosopher says,
The truest love is the love of children, the smell of smells is of bread, the
savor of sauors is of salt, the sweetest of all sweetes is of honey, and the
bitterest of all bitters is of gaul. For what is there under heaven sweeter
than honey, or more bitter than gaul? For what stomach is there in the world
so strong, who after a cup of gaul and vinegar would not either burst or die?
Rabanus upon S. Luke says, If the Jews had remembered that his Father gave
them fresh water in the desert to drink of, and bread from heaven to eat of,
and that his son likewise gave five thousand of them fish their fill, and
bread until they left off it, they would not have given him gaul to eat and
vinegar to drink. Damascenus says, That it is proper to naughty men to be
very sparing in matters of virtue, and in matters of vice very lavish, which
does easily appear in Christ, for he asking for nothing but drink, they gave
him also somewhat to eat. Anselmus says, That the abundance of malice, and the
want of conscience made the Jews put that bitter gaul to Christ's mouth, which
other men do loath to touch. The Jews did also show the depth of their wicked,
naughtiness in giving Christ that horrible drink, being as he was so near
death upon the cross, because that all men are wont in that extremity, be
they friends or enemies, to help him who is in torment to die well, and no man
in that hour dare to trouble or vex him. Origin says, That it is a custom
among savage and barbarous men, that such as were enemies in their life time,
do reconcile themselves, and pardon one another in death, Because as Plato
says, Death alone does end all travail and all anger. This general rule
failed only in the Jews, as men which were more barbarous and inhumane than
all other, who at the very time that Christ was yielding up his spirit, did
spet upon him, blasphemed him with their tongues, hated him with their hearts,
and tormented him with gaul and vinegar. King David and king Saul were mortal
enemies, but when the Philistims had slain Saul in the hills of Gelboe, they saw
David weep bitterly for him, and caused him to be buried with great care and
diligence. All writers do affirm, that there were not greater enemies in all
Greece than Demosthenes the Philosopher, and Eschines the Orator, but when
Eschines understood in Rhodes that Demosthenes his enemy was dead in Athens, he
did not only weep many tears for him, but did also bestow sumptuous funerals
upon him. The great hatred and wars which were betwixt Julius Caesar and
Pempeius the great, are known unto all the world, yet nevertheless when
pitiful Casar had Pompeius head in his hands, he spoke many pitiful words
in his favor, and shed many tears over his head. Cyrillus upon S. John says,
That there was never read of the like hatred as the Jews bare Christ, seeing
that although they saw his breath going out of his body, yet they gave him
gaul to eat, and vinegar to drink, because that as they had tormented his
outward members with torments, they might also poison his inward bowels with
grief and pain. S. Cyprian says, It is not credible that the wicked Jews had
men's hearts in them, but the hearts of some mad dogs, seeing that the more
the son of God did draw near unto death, the more they did wax cruel,
because that the end why they gave him gaul and vinegar, was because he
should die sooner and also raging. If as it did please Christ only to taste of
that drink, it had been his will to have drunk it all, considering how there
was no blood left in his veins, and also his weakness at that time, it is no
doubt but it would have shortened his life, and put him to a more painful
death. O that this doctor said very well, that they had not men's hearts in
them, for otherwise, considering the extremity they saw him in, they could not
have done less than have given him some wine to drink, or water to refresh
him, or used some words of comfort. O pitiful case, and unspeakable cruelty,
seeing that at the hour of thy death, thou had no friend to encourage
thee, no drop of water to refresh thee, but only a little gaul for thy
breakefast, and a little vinegar to dry thy mouth with. Let not me use then
any delicate meats, and let all superfluous diet be far from me, for
seeing my God and Lord does neither eat nor drink but gaul and vinegar, from
evening to evening, how dare I fare daintely at set meals? How dare I look
for death, seeking a thousand dainties every hour, and change a thousand meats
every day? Seeing that thou, O my good Jesus, had thy mouth poisoned with
gaul, and wet with vinegar? O sacred mouth, O holy tongue, who is so wicked,
as to dare bath that mouth with gaul and vinegar, having preached with the
same so many Sermons, given so many holy lessons, taught so many people, and
done so many miracles? You should put gaul and vinegar, O ye cursed Jews,
upon this my mouth, which is never opened but to deceive, and upon my tongue
which can do nothing but lie, for as for that of your Creator and our
Redeemer, what sinue was there that he did not tell you of, and what virtue is
there that he did not teach you? Saint Barnard says, O what great difference
there is betwixt mouth and mouth, tongue and tongue? For man's tongue said unto
Pilat, crucifige eum, and Christ's tongue said unto his Father, Nesciunt quid
faciunt. In so much, that the peoples whole drift was to induce Pilate to kill
him, and Christ's whole intention was, to persuade his Father to forgive them.
Vbertinus says, Should not Christ have had better reason to have given the
people gaul and vinegar, seeing they accused him openly, tha^ they to Christ,
considering that with tears he did excuse them? Quid vltra debui vineae meae
quod non feci? Said Christ to the Prophet Esaya^, as if he would say, O my
chosen vine, O my dear Synagogue, what did thou ask of me that I did not
give thee, or what could I do for thee that I have not done? These words are
deeply to be considered of, seeing that by them our Lord does call the
Synagogue to a reckoning, like unto one friend which chideth with another, who
with intention not to break off their friendship, will try out where the
fault lies. And to the same purpose God spoke by the Prophet Jeremy, when he
said, Iudicium contraham tecum, as if he would say, I will O Israel, that
thou and I, and I and thou, sit down to judge, and take an arbitrator betwixt
us, to the end, that both parts being hard, he may judge what small reason thou
have to offend me, and what great cause I have to complain on thee. O infinite
goodness, O unspeakable clemency of thee my great God, what creature can
justly say, that thou have condemned him without justice, seeing thou do
first sit down to verify thy justice? O unto how many may God justly say at
this day, what can I do more for thee than I have done, and wherein can thou
offend me more than thou have offended me? O good Jesus, O light and glory of
my soul, what should thou do more for me than create me, or what could
thou do more for me than redeem me? Thy goodness and my wickedness do strive
before thy face, and thy grace and my offense, thy bounty and my
ungratefulness, thy mercy and mine obstinacy, thy pardon and my sin: in so
much, that I never cease to sin, and thou never to dissemble it. But to
speak more particularly, it is to be considered, that our God was not
co^te^ted to redeem all of us in general, but he did also satisfy for our sins
in particular, laying upon himself a particular pain which should answer unto
our particular offense. Christ satisfied for the sin of pride when he took
man's flesh upon him, unto which humility there can no virtue of any Saint be
compared, because he made himself of God a man, of eternal temporal, of one
that was immortal mortal. Barnard says, That of all those which were proud,
Lucifer was the greatest, of all gluttons Adam, of all Traitors Judas, of all
patient men Job, and of all humble men Christ exceeded all. Christ satisfied
for fornication by his circumcision, and thereupon it is, that because the
sin of lechery is that sin, into which men do easiliest and most oftenest
fall into, our Lords pleasure was to redeem it with his precious blood. Christ
satisfied for the sin of envy with his incomparable poverty, which he so
streitly kept, that he had neither house to dwell in, nor a penny to spend,
nor wealth to live by. S. Jerome says, That the end of Christ's poverty was, to
withdraw from himself things necessary, because we should leave off things
superfluous: for if a Christian have any thing in his house which is
superfluous, he does possess it all as stolen from the poor. Christ
satisfied for gluttony by his continual fasting all his life time, and
oftentimes suffering great hunger; which is easily seen, because that after
his fast in the desert he was greatly a hungered: and also when he and his
disciples did eat ears of corn in the field. S. Barnard says, Christ had
such a great fervor to preach by day, and did contemplate so continually by
night, that although he had meat, yet he did scarce remember to eat it. Christ
satisfied for the sin of anger with his continual patience, which patience
of his was so perfect that he never knew how to revenge an injury, nor never
use toward any man an injurious word. In patientia vestra possedebilis
animaru^ vectrarum, said Christ to his disciples, Luke 25. As if he would say,
The merit and reward of patience is so great that it makes him who has it,
lord over his own soul. Many possess their ears by not hearing of
backbiting, and other possess their eyes, not seeing of vain things, and
others possess their hands by keeping them from stealing, and others their
tongues by keeping them from blasphemy, but of all these which I have spoken
off, does Christ say that any of them does possess his soul, but only he who
has patience? What does it avail us to be lords of our feet, hands, and ears,
if the devil do possess our souls? What is it to be lord and master over a
man's own soul, but wholly to subdue his own sensuality? Ambrose upon S. Luke
says, He only has his will in subjection, who in travail and vexation has
great patience. Christ does say very well, that you shall possess your souls
in your patience. Seeing that patience is the virtue which does confirm
friends, reconcile enemies, cut off passions, and makes our he arts mild and
gentle. Lo then thou see it proved, how the son of God was not content to
redeem all the world in general, but that he did in particular as it were
satisfy for every sin, disburdening every man of a particular fault, and
casting upon himself a general pain.

CHAP. XV. Here there is brought a figure of David, and declared to the purpose.
OSi quis mihi daret potum aqua de cisterna, quae est iuxta portum Bethleem. 2.
Reg. 23. king David being in the field of the giants, and fighting with the
Philistims in summer time, and wearied with the heat of the sun, and wanting
water, gave a great sigh, and uttered these words: O who would give me now a
cup of water of the cestern which is near unto the gate of Bethleem, where I
was wont to recreate my self when I was a young man, and take my fill in
drinking of the water. David's sigh being heard, and his great desire of
drinking perceived, three young men which were his servants, determined to arm
themselves, and go to Bethelem for water, maugre the enemies, with a
resolution to bring some, or die in the place. And as they had sworn so they
did accomplish it, and going through the enemies camp striking and killing, the
end was, that they shed more blood in going, than they brought water in coming
again. In the letter of this figure, there are two things to be noted, that
is, that good king David did not sigh, nor desire sauerous wine to make him
drunk with, but for a pot of water to refresh himself with. Whereof we may take
an example, that we may better overcome our invisible enemies with abstinence
than with abundance and plenty. Yet so it was, that notwithstanding the great
thirst which David had, he would not drink one drop of that water, saying
that God forbid that he should drink of that water which was gotten with the
deaths of so many men, and was bought with so much blood. Every man may take an
example to himself by this, that no man should carry any thing to his house
gotten with an evil conscience, or by the prejudice of another, for we see
nothing more common than that men for greediness of another man's do not only
lose that which was their own by inheritance, but that also which of other men's
they had gotten. Leaving the letter, and coming to the spiritual meaning, it
does well appear, that Christ is the son of David, and that David is the
father of Christ, seeing the one was thirsty in the field, and the other on the
Mount of Caluary, the one sighting, and the other sufiering, the one compassed
with enemies, and the other hanging between thieves, the one to drink a cup
of cold water, and the other to redeem mankind. How far greater the thirst
was which the son of God had, than that which David had, it is easily seen
in that, that David did manifest his thirst with words only, and the son of
God with words and tears: whereupon we may infer, that his true thirst was
not so much to drink water of the cesternes, as to save sinful souls. O that
the thirst which Christ suffered was of a far more higher degree than David's
thirst, for David did but sigh for water, but the son of God did not sigh but
did suffer death to redeem our souls, and David did quench his thirst with
the prejudice of other men's blood, but the son of God did not kill his, but
with his own blood. Christ had not so good friends on the Mount of Caluary, as
David had in his camp, because David's servants brought him water to refresh
him withal, and Christ's enemies gave him gaul and vinegar to taste of. Super
vulnera mea addiderunt dolorem, said the Prophet David speaking in the person
of Christ, as if he would say, The greatest travail and grief which I feel
now is, that besides the words and dolours which the Jews gave me in
crucifieng me, sinners have now added another dolor unto my former dolours,
which does grieve me more than all the others did. The dolours which Christ
suffered in his passion, his wounds and thorns caused them, but the dolor
which he now complains of, our sins do cause. And he has great reason to
complain more of this than of the others, because the wounds which they gave
him and the nails and thorns which tormented him dured but one day, but the
grief which our offenses do cause in him do every hour offend him. Saint
Augustine says, If there were no fault in us, there should be no wounds in
Christ, and thereupon it rises, that we wound him more in his entrails with
our offenses, than the Jews did with their nails. But some man may say that
Christ does not so much complain by the Prophet of his wounds, as of a grief
and dolor which they added above all dolours, and therefore it is convenient
that we declare what this dolor is, and how far it reaches. For the better
understanding of this point we must note, that over and above all the sins
which we commit we do add a new one unto them, which is as it were a
counterpeise against every sin, the which causes the sin to be more
grievous and lesser hope of amendment in us. What is this new sin but the
pleasure which we take to have sinned, and the desire which we have to sin
again? And because we may not seem to speak at random, we will give of
every one an example. If the proud man would be content to be proud only, it
would be but half a fault, but alas he says that he is nothing proud at
all, if we regard his great desert, by reason whereof he desires to be of
greater power and authority and ability to bestow more than he does. If the
angry and impatient man would be content to chide only, to brave it, and
murmr, it might pass; but alas he does add fault upon a fault, that is, he
has a very great thirst and a desire to injury and molest his enemies, take
their lives from the^, and also to ransacke and spoil their goods. If the
covetous man could be content with that which were necessary, and with somewhat
more, it were tolerable; but alas, like a noughty Christian he heapeth sin
upon sin, for besides that he is not content to save bread and drink, yet
he never ceafeth day nor night to hoord up all he can. If the carnal man
would be content once to attain his desire, and that which his sensuality
requires, it might be dissembled; but alasle he has such a great thirst to
enjoy all he sees, that if it were in his power, he would leave no virgin
vndefloured, no married woman not diffamed, nor any widow not deceived. If the
slothful man would be content himself not to go in the cold in the Winter,
nor into the head in Summer, but would eat without any labor of his own, and
sleep in his bed without care, we would not much care if he did it; but
alas, he has such a great desire of ease, and is such an enemy to labor,
that he desires nothing, but that his neighbors should take pain, because
he might eat, and that all they should watch because he might sleep. If the
glutton would be content to eat till he were fill, and sometimes until he
belked, we would not so much regard it; but alas he has such a great
desire to eat daily of exquisite meats, and drink wines of great price, that
if it were possible, there should be no fish in the sea which he would not
eat of, nor no meat on earth which he would not taste. Lo then this is the
dolor which Christ complains on, when he says, Super vulnera mea addiderunt
dolore^, which did so much grieve him that he felt none more, for Saint
Augustine says, That God does not look what we be, but what we desire to be.
What greater wickedness, or what greater naughtiness can there be in the
world than not to be content to be naught, but to desire to be more naught.
Cassiodorus says, That the offenses which we commit are the wounds which we
give Christ, and the dolor which we add unto these wounds, is the desire
which we have to sin more and more. This cursed desire and wicked thirst of
adding sin unto sin, is also paid for and satisfied for the just which
come unto our Lord when he said aloud on the cross, that he had a desire to
suffer more, as the wicked had to sin more. O infinite goodness, O
unspeakable cleme^cy, who had ever so great a thirst to enjoy our sins, as
thou my good Jesus had to suffer torment? Who until this day had ever a
desire to become worser and worser, but our Lord had a greater desire to make
him better and better? Who had ever a greater thirst to increase his vices,
than Christ had to make us very virtuous? O my soul, O my heart, do you not
see that your thirst of sinning more and more is cured with his thirst of
suffering, and that your thirst of heaping one sin upon another, is quenched
by Christ's thirst of adding one pain unto another? Quod facis fac citius, said
Christ to Judas in the night of the last supper, Ioh. 13, as if he would say,
Seeing that thou wast so shameless as to sell me yesterday, and art determined
to deliver me this night unto my enemies, make an end of thy supper and rise
from thence, and do that which thou will do quickly, because that the end of
thy perdition shall be the beginning of my redemption. O sorrowful speech, O
heavy word which Christ spoke unto the unhappy disciple, because that thereby
he is permitted to do what he would, as though he should give him license
utterly to destroy himself, and that there should be no hope of his
amendment. What other meaning had those words which our holy master spoke
unto the reprobate disciple, that is, Do that which thou have to do with
speed; but to declare by those words, that he had forsaken him, and that he
will defend him no more with his holy hand? and yet in this lamentable speech,
Christ used great clemency toward Judas, for when he said, Do speedily that
which thou will do; it was to say, deliver me quickly, and die thou quickly:
for how much the older thou do grow in years, by so much the more thou will
grow in offenses. God of his mercy keep us from this license or permission, for
it is a great sign that this man is already foreseen to be damned, whom our
Lord does permit to begin to be naught presently. Our Lord does never give
this license to a Christian religious soul, but when the flesh does move him,
or sensuality disquiet him, he takes away the occasions of falling, and gives
him new desires to strengthen him with. Woe be unto him unto whom our Lord
says as he did to Judas, Quod facis fac cito, that is, that he may do that
which sensuality does lead him unto, and accomplish that which the devil
persuadeth, for the greatest malediction that God does put upon any man, is, to
suffer to put that in execution which sensuality requires. Remigius says,
That the devil is so great a friend unto his friends, and has so great care
of pleasing the^, that they have no sooner thought of a sin, but he does
presently lay open the way to commit it. Damascen says also, That when a man
desires to be worser than he is, the devil is by and by so busy, that he
does agree that which did disagree, and join that which was far asunder,
opens that which was shut, lighteneth that which was dark, makes that
easy which was most hard, and gives that, that was not to be hoped for.
This being true, as true it is, what will not a naughty man do, what will
he not venture on, yea and what will he not attain unto, having so good a
tutor and help as the devil? If a good man would do any good work, he
finds a thousand stumbling blocks to hinder him: and contrariwise, if a
naughty man will commit any naughty fact, he shall find as many helps for
the performance of it, and the reason is, because our Lord does seem to forget
his, because they should merit the more, but the devil does always favor
his, because he will incite them to sin. We have spoken all this, by reason
of the gaul and vinegar which the Jews gave Christ, for it is a vvonder to
think with what speed they sought it out, and what diligence they used in
giving him it, for surely if the Scripture did not assure us of it, it would
seem but a dream to say that they should have all things so readily and at
hand as they gave him. Is it not a thing much to be wondered at, that the
Jews being out of the town, and in open field, as soon as he had said Sitio,
that they should presently have at that place, sour vinegar, bitter mirrhe,
poisoned gaul, unsavory isope, and a sponge to drink it in, and a reed to
reach it him? If a man should have gone into the town to seek all these six
things, he would have been six hours a getting them: For he must have gone
to the butchery for the gaul, to the Apothecary for the mirrhe, to another
place for the vinegar, to a shop for the sponge, to a garden for Isope, and to
the river for a reed. But when Christ said upon the cross, I am a thirst,
they did not stay six hours to seek these things, but they did reach them him
presently all at once, kept, and hidden ready for him: for if his soul would
not have forsaken him with the torment of the nails, she would have
forsaken him by the force of that drink.

The same leave that Christ gave Judas, it seems that he gave it also unto
the Jews, that is, that they should do by him what they would, and how they
would, and as speedily as they would, which liberty they used with the
advantage, seeing that in short space they vvatched him with their eyes, dogged
him with their feet, laid hold on him with their hands, blasphemed him with
their tongues, hated him with their hearts, and ended his life with their
drinks. The naughty Jews went to the Mount of Caluary, and there went also
old Joseph and Nichodemus, but their intentions were far different the one
from the other, the holy men carried pinsers with them to pull out the nails,
ladders to take him down from the cross, ointments to anoint him with, a
sheet to wind him in, and a shroud to bury him in. Non sic, impij non sic, The
wicked did not go so, but to go their stacions on good Friday, and meditate on
the Mount of Caluary, they carried under their clokes in one pot the vinegar,
in another bladder the gaul, in a box the mirrhe, and in a cloth the Isope,
in one hand the sponge, and in another the reed. Tell me I pray thee, what
inward minds these wicked Jews had, seeing they did show such outward shows
of their pilgrimages. Of these bitter trauails and unsavory liquors, we may
gather certain lessons, worthy to be known, and profitable to be kept in
memory. We must above al things take heed that we do not offer unto our Lord
any liquor which is not pure, clear, and clean, or mixed, for here upon earth
men refuse mixed liquors, because they do corrupt the stomach. Cibus simplex
est vtilissimus homini, compositus aute^perniciosus, says Pliny, as if he
would say, The body is best maintained with vncompound meats, because that
compound meats are dangerous for the body. The like condition is to be
observed in the soul, the which does detest dissembled manners, and abhor
doubling in conditions, for being as she is a most simple justice, she cannot
endure to be furred with malice. Hilarious says, I will say that he does offer
unto Christ, his understanding mingled with vinegar, who occupies his thought
more on another tha^ God: I will say that he does offer his memory mixed with
mirrhe, who troubles his memory with nothing but how he may lead his life
without disquietnesse: I will say that he does offer his will mingled with
gaul, who forgets his creature and serves worldly things: he does offer
his heart unto Christ mingled with bitter Isope, who at the same time will live
at ease, and yet serve our Lord: and he does offer unto Christ a good work put
upon a reed, who does it for no other end but for vaineglory: and he offers
Christ his life soken with a sponge, who does all that he does of hypocrisy.
Finally, we say that those do offer unto Christ drinks of bitterness, who in
belief are Christians, and in works Pagans.

CHAP. XVI. That the church of Christ has great abundance of spiritual
waters, which are his grace and the gifts of the holyghost: and of the fire
which Christ came to put in the world, which is the love of God; and of the
profit that this love of God does in the soul.
HAurietis aquas in gaudio, de fontibus saluatoris, Esaias 12. chapter. The
Prophet Esaias spoke these words, speaking unto good Christians of the Catholic
church, and of the great good that Christ will do in her: and they are as if
he would say, When the Messiah promised in the law, shall come into the world,
all such as were dry and thirsty shall receive great joy, with great abundance
of waters to refresh and recreate their persons. The Prophet does promise
four things in this place, that is, that they shall not draw water but waters,
not out of one well or fountain, but fountains, not by force but willingly,
not out of every well, but of the fountain of our Savior. Agar wanted the
fountain, how much more fountains? the children of Israel found water, but
sour: the Patriarch Iac^l found sweet water, but he had great strife in
getting it. They brought king David water, but it was of a cesterne, insomuch
that the Synagogue was so poor, that she could not get a cup of clean water.
The catholic church may hold her self very happy and rich, seeing that God
has promised her abundance of waters clear and clean, flowing from the
fountain of her Savior and Redeemer. It is much to be noted, and also to be
meruelled at, to see that our Redeemer Jesus Christ said upon the cross,
Siti^, and yet says that he has waters and fountains to refresh and quench
the thirst of all the world. What means this O good Jesus, what means this?
Have thou not one drop of water for thy self to drink of, and yet do thou
inuit all the world to drink of thy fountains? It does well appear O my good
Jesus, that thou have all that good for me, and keep all travails unto thy
self, seeing that of thy sweet water thou do inuit all men to drink, but
the gaul and vinegar thou do give no man to taste. What are the fountains
that thou would have us drink of, but thy holy wounds with the which we
were redeemed? O sacred fountains, O holy wounds, which are so delectable to
behold, and so sweet to taste, that the Angels are desirous to drink of them,
and all creatures are willing to bath themselves in the^. They are fountains
which always flow, they are waters which always run, and what do they flow
but blood and water, and whither do they flow but to the Catholic church? Holy
Jesus did give us much more than Esaias did promise us, for Esaias did promise us
nothing but waters, but he gave us afterward waters of his bowels, and blond
of his vains. O good Jesus, O holy fountain, from whence but from the
fountain of thy bowels did the water flow to wash our spots, and from whence
but from thy precious veins did the blood run to redeem our offenses? It is
gathered in scripture, that the waters of Rasim were most swift, the waters of
Iorda. troubled, the waters of Bethleem were pooles and standing, the waters of
Marath were bitter, the waters of Siloe were sour: The waters of thy wounds O
my Redeemer, are not of these qualities, for they are safe to sail in, clean
to behold, sweet to taste, and profitable to keep. What means he to say that
you shall draw waters In gaudio, but that as we were redeemed with his great
love and will, so we should serve him with great joy and mirth? He does draw
waters of the fountains of Christ with joy and mi^th, who does serve him with
good will; and he does draw blood out of Christ's wounds with sorrow and
grief, who does serve him with an evil will, whose service is neither
acceptable to God, nor profitable unto him which does it: for as our Lord does
give nothing which he does give, but with joy and mirth, so he will not that
any man serve him, but with pure affection and entire good will. With what
great love the son of God has redeemed us, and with what a lively will he
will be served, we may gather by his own doctrine, and see it in his own
loving words. Ignem veni mittere in terram and quid v^lo nisi vt accendatur,
Luke. 12. This high word no man could say, but he only who was the word of the
eternal Father, and the meaning is this, If thou will know why I came down
from heaven, understand thou that it was for no other cause, but to burn and
set all the world on fire, and therefore I bring this light with me, because it
may burn day and night, and that thou may blow it that it go not out.
Christ speaks to the same purpose in another place, when he says, Non
venipacem mittere sed gladium, as if he should say, Let no man think that I
came into the world, to give it peace and quietness, but to put a gallows and
asword in it: the gallows to do justice on the wicked, and the sword to
martirize the good. These words are worthy of the noting, and also to be feared
of all mortal men, for having created the world, what means he to say that
he came into the world but to put it all to fire and blood? What man is there
this day in the world so noble in birth, or so rich in wealth, but if he
proclaim publickely, that he will burn both man and woman, but they will
presently lay hands on him, and bind him hand and foot, or co^demn him for want
of discretion? What can be more stranger, or what inue^tio^ may be like unto
that, for our Lord to tell us. and also warn us, that he has brought nothing
else with him but a firebrand to burn, and a sharp sword to cut our throats?
Upon those words, Non veni mittere pacem sed gladium, S. Augustine says, If
we will well understand, that which Christ says in this place, we should not
only not be scandalized at it, but also highly thank him for it: for to say
the truth, with that fire he does sear our dead flesh, and with that knife he
does let out our corrupt blood. Beda upon the Apostle says. What is the sire
which Christ brought from heaven into the world but his exceeding great love?
The quality of this high fire is, to heat and not burn, to give light and not
hurt, to burn and not consume, to putrify and not wast, to warm and not to
grieve. O good Jesus, and light of my soul, what sensuality can overcome me,
or what tentation can throw me down, if at the coals of thy fire I warm my
self, and give my self light with the flame of thy love? What can he do,
what is in him, or what regard is there of him in this life, who does not warm
himself at the fire of thy love? What made S. Andrew go cheerfully and
singing to be crucified, but the fire of the love which burned in him? What
made S. Agnes go more ioifully to martyrdom than a new married spouse to bed,
but the fire of thy divine love which shined in her? What made those stones
seem unto S. Steven honey comoes, but that holy love which burned in his soul?
Iguis erat and calefaciebat se. O what a difference there is betwixt the fire
which Christ brought down from heaven, and the fire which Cayphas has in his
palace. For S. Peter warming himself at it, of a Christian became a Pagan,
and S. Paul warming himself at Christ's fire, of a Pagan became a Christian.
God send me of Christ's fire, seeing it does make me know him, and God keep
Cayphas fire from me, seeing it does make me deny him. For if S. Peter had not
warmed himself at Cayphas fire, the wench would not have importuned him, nor
he denied Christ, not have lost the confession of the catholic faith. The
Evangelist says that, Petrus calefaciebat se, that is, That Peter did warm
himself at the fire, but he says not that the fire was able to take his cold
from him, and therefore the fire which the world has for her worldlings is
such, that they are but few which warm themselves at it, but many which wax
cold by it. S. Peter being from the fire said unto Christ, Tecum paraui iam in
mortem me, and by the fire he said, Non noui heminem, in so much that being at
supper with Christ he did burn, and being at Cayphas fire he was a cold. The
son of God then seeing that there was not below in the world heat which could
recreate, nor fire which could burn, nor light which could comfort, nor flame
which could give light, nor any thing which might content, he brought from
heaven with him the fire of his holy love, with the which we should all be
enflamed, all lightened, and all contented. The son of God would never have
said, I came to put fire on earth, if he had seen that there had been the
true fire of his love upon the earth, but seeing that the fire of the world
does burn and not heat, hurt and give no light, wast and not burn, grieve and
not cheer, burn and not purify, smoke and not shine, he remembered to bring a
fire which should heat all the world. Woe be unto him which will not warm
himself at this fire, and woe be to him who will not receive light at the
flames of his love, because that the only perfection of our salvation does
consist in offering our selves to God, and in loving him with all our heart. It
is much to be noted, that Christ brought at one time fire to burn, and a sword
to cut men's throats, seeing he says, Ignem veni mittere in terram, and also,
Non veni pacem mittere sed gladium, to let us understand, that he brought fire
with him, with the which his elect should serve him with love, and a sword of
the which the imperfect should have fear. He burns with lively flames who
serves God with love: and his throat is cut who serves God with fear, and
not with love. Whereupon it is, that in the ark of Noah there were many little
rooms, and in the house of God many dwelling places, so also in the Catholic
church there are diverse manners of serving of God, he does serve God much better
who serves him with love, than he who follows him for fear: but in fine so
as we do not offend our Lord, be it with love, or be it with fear, let us
always serve him. He is happy who suffers his throat to be cut with the
knife of fear, but he is very happy who goes to warm himself at the fire of
his love: for the fear may be so great, that he may err in that which he
takes in hand, but he who loves him much cannot err in that which he does.
According unto Ovid, he cannot err who loves a good thing, nor there can be
no error where there is perfect love. Cyrillus says, If the Synagogue did
highly esteem of the sword with the which David did cut the Giant Golias
throat, we which be Christians ought much more to esteem of the fire of love
with the which Christ did redeem us, because it was his love only which gave
us the hope of his glory, and over our death the victory. Leo says in a
Sermon, If they ask the son of God what he brought from heaven, he will say
love; if they ask him what Art he knows, he will say love, if they ask him
what he is, he will say divine love, if they ask him what he would have us to
do for him, he will say nothing but love him. Basil says, O what great
difference there is betwixt the serving of God, and serving of the world; for
the world would have us serve him with our person, flatter him with our tongue,
give him of our wealth, and also venture for him our souls: but the son of
God is far from asking any of these things of us, for he seeks no more of
us, but that we answer the love which he does bear us, and be grateful for
the benefits which he does bestow upon us. Si obtuleris primitias frugum
tuarum domino de spicis adhuc virentibus torrebis eas igui. God spoke these
vvorder unto Moises, and then commanded Moses to proclaim them before all the
people, as if he would say, When the Summer shall come, and the harvest draw
near, if the ears of the first fruits which they offer unto God should be
green and not dry, see thou dry them first in the fire, before that thou
offer them in the temple. Isidorus says, The giver of the law to command that
they should offer the first fruits of all their harnestes, and to command them
that they should not offer them up green but dry, and to command that they
should not be dried in the sun but at the fire, and that they should be
thoroughly dried but not burned, the Scripture would never have set down this
so particularly, unless there had been some my stery contained under it.
Origin upon Exodus says, That because in holy writ there is no blot to
scrapeout, nor no letter to be added, we must so interpret that which God
speaks, and that which the law ordains, that without wresting of the letter
we may apply it unto our learning. What other thing is it to offer unto God
the first fruits of our corn, but to present before him al our desires? who
dare begin any heroical work who does not first co^sult with God, and commend
it unto him? unless they had first craved the favor of the God Jupiter, the
Gentiles durst not so much as write a letter: and dare thou which art a
Christian, not asking for Gods grace, enterprise any thing? he steals his
first fruits from God, who takes any thing in hand, and not reco^mend
himself unto God, and he paieth his first fruits unto our Lord, who without
his holy grace begins nothing, for it is he only who will guide our works
in his service, and he who will direct the^ to our profit. Chrisostom says
upon S. Luke, for God to ask the first fruits of that which we cut in the
field, is to ask of us that we love him with all our hearts: for that which
is not begun under him, and in his holy name will end afterward by the hands
of the devil. He does pay our Lord his first fruits, who when he rises out
of his bed does commend himself unto our Lord, and offer unto him all that
which he will do that day, and he steals his first fruits from our Lord,
who neither cares for to serve God, nor to say any one prayer, but as soon
as he rises begins to lie and cousin. He paieth our Lords first fruits,
who of four and twenty hours which are in the day, bestows one in
thinking upon him, and he steals from God the first fruits, who has
neither regard of his soul, nor thinks upon God at any hour. It is also to
be weighed, that our Lord is not contented with his first fruits of green
corn unless it be offered up dried at the fire, to give us knowledge, that
all that we do is nothing vvorth, if we do not vvarme our selves at the
fire of his love. What is all that vvorth which I do, or what am I vvorth
which do it, if I do it not for God? He does offer up all his ears of his
corn dried, who does all his works for God, and he does offer them green,
who does them not but only for men, whom we do assure, that for those God
will never pay, nor yet men be thankful. What other thing be the green ears
and not ripe, but all our weak and humane actions? Green, and hard, and
unseasoned are all our works, and therefore we have need of the heat of fire
to dry them, because God does never accept that which is offered, if he who
does offer it be not accepted. He offers unto our Lord green ears, who
has no patience in travels: for as the value of gold is known in the
goldsmithes melting pot, so is a good Christian known in tribulation. He is a
green Christian who does interpret the Gospel according unto his own will,
and he is a very green religious man who strives against his superior:
because that the true servant of our Lord should have no will of his own, nor
desire authority, nor dare to possess any thing proper. Then we will say that
the ear is dry, when it goes easily out of the straw: then we will say that
a man is perfect, when he is weaned from all covetous and worldly things. Thou
art very green my brother, if with thy humility there be mingled any
ambition, with thy charity any envy, with thy poverty any covetousness, with
thy chastity any wantonness, and with thy honesty any hypocrisy, by reason
whereof thou must draw near unto the heavenly fire, until thou have cast this
dream from thee. It is a great sign that the block which lies smoking in the
sire, is not thoroughly dry, and the religious person which yet tastes of the
world, is not well grounded in religion; because the true servant of our Lord
has his heart as dead to the world for Christ's sake, as a man's body is dead
which lies buried in the grave.

The end of the fifth word which Christ our redeemer spoke upon the Cross.
Here begins the sixth word which Christ spoke upon the cross, that is,
Consummatum est, vz. All is now finished and at an end.
CHAP. I. Here there are put diverse understandings of this speech:
CVm accepisset Jesus acetum dixit Consummatum est. This is the sixth word which
the Redeemer of the world spoke at the hour of his death on the altar of the
cross, and it is as if he would say, As he ended to take and taste of the
gaul and vinegar which they had given him in the sponge, and offered him upon
a reed, he said Consummatumest, that is. That all is now accomplished and made
perfect, seeing the redemption of the world is ended, and the malice of the
Synagogue fulfilled. If we look curiously unto it, we shall find these words
true, Consummatum est, and few in number, but yet the mysteries enclosed in
them very many, because we are assured by those words by his holy mouth, that
we are pardoned of the eternal Father, that is, that satisfaction is now
ended, and that we are now by his precious son redeemed. Being a rule of the
Philosopher, Quod omnia quae fiunt fiunt propter finem. If Christ had not
spoken these words Consummatum est, we should not have known so plainly, and
of his own mouth, whether al mankind was fully redeemed, or whether there
remained any mystery of holy scripture to be accomplished. But seeing the son
of God said Consummatu^ est, we may stand upon a sure ground, that there is
neither any works of our redemption unaccomplished, nor any one tittle of
Scripture not fulfilled. O what a great comfort it is to humane nature, that
Christ had said, Consummatum est, by his own holy mouth. For David, Jeremy,
Esaias, Daniel, Ezechiel, durst never say, that sin was at an end, but only
that it should have an end in the time of the Messiah; the which as it was by
them prophesied, so it was by Christ fulfilled. Septuaginta hebdomedae
abbreuiatae sunt super populum tuum and super vrbem sanctam tuam vt consummatur
preuaricatio, etc, The Angel Gabriell spoke these words to the Prophet Daniel,
chap. 9. as if he should say, Seventy weeks hence, which shall be
accomplished four hundred and seven and twenty years hence, the holy of all
holies shall be anointed, justice shall be perfect, noughtinesse shall be
blotted out, and sin ended. Compare thou now, O curious reader, the prophecy
of Finem accipiet peccatum, with Consummatum est, which Christ spoke, and thou
shall plainly see how it is said only of the son of God, that he shall
redeem us, and how he does assure us that he has already redeemed us. S.
Augustine says. Who was able to say that sin is at an end, but only he who
died to end sin? It is here to be noted what is said, who speaks it, where
he speaks it, and in what meeting he spoke it, and for what mystery he
spoke it. That which is spoken is, Consummatum est, he who spoke it is Christ,
the place where, is the cross, the time was even as he was yielding up the
ghost, the cause why, was for the comfort of all his church: for of all the
seven words which Christ spoke upon the cross, there is none which makes so
much for our purpose, as Consummutum est. In the first word which was. Father
forgive the^, what interest had the church in it, seeing that Christ spoke it
only for the pardon of the Synagogue? In the second, which was, Lord remember
me; what had the church in it, seeing it was spoken by the thief which
suffered by Christ? In the third which was, Behold thy mother; what part has
the church therein, seeing he spoke it only unto the disciple which was there
present, and to his mother which wept by him? In the fourth, which was, Why
have thou forsaken me; what has the church therein, seeing he speaks only
unto his Father, and complains of his Father unto his Father? In the fifth,
which is, I am a thirst; what part has the church therein, seeing that thereby
he does show the exceeding great thirst which he sustaineth for the torments
which he suffers? In the seventh word which is, Into thy hands O Lord I
commend my spirit; what part has the church therein, seeing the son goes
out of the world, and commends his spirit unto his Father? If we have any
part of all the seven words, it is in Consummatum est, in giving us knowledge
by his own mouth of the perfection and end of the old law, and of our full
redemption, seeing he spoke then unto us only, and forth end of all our sins,
which were at one time redeemed even as Christ did end his life, and gave up
his blessed ghost. O profound mystery, O unspeakable secret, and never heard of
before, in Consummatum est, seeing that it is nothing else to say Consummatum
est, but to give notice unto all the world, that the church is now begun, and
the Synagogue cast down, the Scripture fulfilled, and his life ended. His
precious blood is ended, the which is so drawn out, that there remained no
one drop in his veins, for he came with a determination into the world,
fully to accomplish all the love which he bare us, and to shed for us all the
blood which he possessed. That is Consummated which I came into the world
for, and my fathers commandment is also accomplished for whom I came into the
world, to manifest his holy name: for so I have done: and if I came to lighten
the world and to preach, I have preached and given it light. The grief of my
body is ended, the torments of my members, the persecutions of my enemies, the
weariness of my bones, the multitude of my travels are all at an end. All that
which the Prophecies prophesied, all that which the Patriarchs signified, all
that which the holy men desired, and all that which our Fathers craved of God,
is finished and consummate. The riches of the Temple, the highness of the
kingdom, the rigor of the law, the pureness of Preisthood, and the honor of
the people is at an end. The hatred of the Jews, the envy of the Pharisees,
the hypocrisy of the Saduces, the malice of the Scribes, is fully at an end.
What was ever seen that Christ began, which he brought not in the end to full
perfection? We are those which do hardly begin any good thing, and if we do
begin it, scarce bring it to the middle, and if we bring it to the middle we
never end it. The son of God is he only who begins all things when he
will, continues them as he ought, and finisheth them as he lusts. When
Christ went to Jerusalem to suffer, he said unto his disciples. Ecce ascendimus
Hierosolimam, and consummabuntur omnia quae scripta sunt de me, and when he
prayed over the supper, he said, Opus consummaui quod dedisti mihi, and on the
altar of the cross, he said also, Consummatum est, giving us to understand by
that speech, that like unto a man he does give that which he is commanded, pay
that which he does owe, and accomplish that which he does promise. S. Cyprian
says, Much greater, O my good Jesus, much greater is the taking of the
torments, which thou have endured, than the wasting of the grace which we have
lost; and far greater is thy pain than our fault, and thy offering than our
offense: and therefore thou do say, Consummatum est, because that now the
fault of the servant is ended with the death of the son. Anselmus says, O
how truly thou do say, O my good Jesus, Consummatum est, for having thy eyes
broken as thou have, thy shoulders opened, thy hands piersed, and the world
redeemed, what does there remain to end, seeing that thou art at an end.
Damascen says, When upon the cross, the son of God says, Consummatum est,
If he would have used the rigor of his justice, as he did use his accustomed
clemency, had it think you have been much, that all the world should have
ended with him, seeing the Lord ended and died there which did create it.
Remigius says, O bill of payment, O precious money, O sure account, O
acquittance of God, which thou do give us, O good Jesus, when thou do
say, Consummatum est, seeing that thou do assure us by that speech, that the
bond and obligation which the devil had over our humane nature is paid by thee,
and cancelled and blotted our, and also cast into dust and ashes. Five thousand
years and more we were bound to hell, and subject unto the devil, but the
son of God going to the cross to die, he unbound us from the service of the
Devil, and as he went by little and little toward his end, the obligation
went wearing away, in so much that with this speech Consummatum est, the soul
went out of his body, and sin took his end in us. O high Lord, O great
redeemer, when thou say, Consummatum est, what is that which does not end,
seeing that thy life does end? Gods humane life does end, death to hell, sin
to the world, idolatry to gentility, ceremonies to the law, and figures to the
Scripture. Pope Leo says, by this word Consummatum est, was ended, the reproach
of the cross, the banishment from heaven, the power of the devil, the treason
of the disciple, the denying of Peter, the sentence of Pilate, the indignation
of the people, the life of the son, and the comfort of the mother. O
comfortless mother, O virgin borne without the like, what grief did thy
sorrowful heart feel, when thou heardest thy son say that his life was
ended, thou continuing as thou did without thy son? What means this O
good Jesus, what means this? With this speech Consummatum est, the pain
ends to those which languished in desiring thee, the offense of the wicked
cease, the blood of thy veins dries up, and yet do not the tears of thy
mothers eyes end? With this speech of Consummatum est, All is finished, do
thou dry the tears of those which have offended thee their fill, and do
thou make no reckoning of thy blessed mother, who unto the cross has followed
thee? If under that speech do enter all whom thou have created, why do
thou leave out thy mother of whom thou wast borne? Most blessed mother of God
certainly is not left out, because that here on the cross is finished and
accomplished the quietness of her heart, the light of her eyes, the
contentment of her entrails, the end of her desires, the rest of her will, the
life of her soul, and the hope of her glory.

CHAP. II. Against disordered eaters and drinkers, and how Christ was a greater
martyr than any other, and there is declared a prophecy of Esayas.
QVando hora voscendi fuerit, veni huc and intinge buccellam tuam in aceto.
Ruth. 2. chapter, Honorable old Booz spoke these words unto the honorable
and virtuous woman Ruth, when she went with her workmen to gather the ears of
corn for to maintain her self and her mother in law, as if he should say,
When the hour of dinner is come, thou shall come where my people lay the
table, where thou may eat of that that there is, with a piece of bread wet in
vinegar. This labourer Booz, and this woman Ruth were great grandfathers to
king David, because they begat Obed, and Obed begat Iesse, and Iesse begat
David, in so much that although they were simple country people, yet they
deserved to be counted in Christ's line, and be great grandfathers unto King
David. If we look curiously unto this letter of the text Booz touches four
things in it, that he does inuit Ruth, that he does inuit her at dinner time,
and that to bread alone, and to wet it in vinegar. This is another kind of
banquet than that which the Emperor Vitellius made to certain Ambassadors of
Persia, of which Plutarch says, That if they had bound themselves to give them
another dinner like unto their supper, he doubts whether all the treasure of
Rome would have sufficed to have done it. This is another banquet than that of
Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra, wherein he and she did spend so many precious
stones beaten into powder, and such a great sum of riches, that in the
opinion of writers, another Asia might have been bought with it. This was
another kind of banquet than that which king Assuerus made to the nobles of his
kingdom, in the which for the space of an hundred and fourscore days, there
was neither stint in eating, nor measure in drinking. By these examples it is
manifest that profane men do inuit like unto profane men, and virtuous and
good men like unto virtuous men. Such a one seems to be this good man Booz,
who going in the field, and reaping in summer time, does not entreat any to
breakfast but to dinner, and has nothing to eat but a slice of bread dipped in
vinegar. And this good labourer Booz the better to show his temperancy, and his
great abstinency, did not say unto Ruth that she should wet all the bread in
the vinegar, but a slice only, the which being hard, he bid her rather wet it
to make it soft, than that she should have any great dainty of it. The holy
Scripture recites this story for the praise of those which are past, and
confusion of those which are present, I mean of those which the Apostle
speaks of, whose God is their belly, who rather follow Epicure in eating,
than Christ in living. Of all the vices which man's nature is subject unto,
there is none that grows so fast as gluttony, because that in times past all
men did keep such a mean in eating, and sobriety in drinking, that there was
overmuch meat, and searsity of eaters, but alas now a days there are store
of eaters, and want of meats. Vidi monstrum a natura, hominem bis saturum in
die, said Plato when he returned from Scicilie unto Asia, as if he should say,
The thing which makes me most of all to wonder at in Scicilia, is that I saw a
man a monster in nature, because he filled his belly twice every day in
eating. O if Plato should come in this our time, how much more would he be
scandalized at us then he was to see Dennis the Tyrant fill his belly twice a
day, for intemperate men are not content now adays to dine and sup, unless
they have also their breakfast and drinking. Let those take example of Booz who
will give good example, who did not inuit Ruth to breakfast and drinking, but
to dinner, seeing that he says, Veni huc hora vescendi, because that the
servant of our Lord should not eat when sensuality does crave it, but when
reason requires it. Booz did not entreat his well-beloved Ruth to dainty dishes
or to precious wines, but only unto a piece of hard bread moistened in vinegar;
because that immoderate eating and disordinate drinking does destroy the
memory, dull the understanding, vvast the natural heat, stop the stomach,
weaken the feeling, disable the person, offend the conscience, and consume a
man's goods and substance. Neither did Booz inuit Ruth to eat of that bread as
much as she would, nor taste of that vinegar as much as she could, but only one
slice once dipped in the vinegar; to give us to understand, that all that which
sauoureth of delicacy and daintiness should be far from a religious man.
The letter left a side, and coming to the sense, we have thought good to
bring in the figure of vinegar, to search out the reason and cause why the
son of God took vinegar for the last torment of his martyrdom, and why in
having end to taste of it, he gave up the ghost. Repleuit me amaritudinibus and
inebriauit me absynthio, The Prophet Jeremy spoke these words in his
Lamentations, in the name of the redeemer of the world, as if it were in
complaining of the Synagogue, and says, In payment of the great benefits which
I have done thee O my Synagogue, thou have filled me with bitterness, and made
me drunk with the juice of wormwood. If there should be no mystery contained
under these words, the text would seem to be contrary to it self, for if his
body be full of bitterness, how could her co^tain any more juice of wormwood,
and if he could receive more, how then was he full? For the understanding of
this, you must understand that as Christ was more than an Angel, so he had
more innocence than an Angel; and as he was more than a Prophet, so he had
more knowledge than a Prophet; and as he was more than a prince, so he had
more power than a Prince; and as he was more than a saint, so he had more
perfection in him than saints; and also because he was a greater Martyr than
all other Martirs, he did suffer more martyrdom than any other Martyr. Origin
upon Job says, That by reason that the son of God was more than man, because
he was both God and man, he knew more than a man, he could do more than a
man, he did more than a man, he suffered more than a man, and endured more
than any man; for the griefs which passed through his heart, and the torments
which his members suffered, what tongue is able to rehearse them, how much more
what body is able to suffer them? Every martyr may say with Jeremy, He has
filled me with bitterness; because they were tormented with so many torments:
but the son of God only can say, And he has made me drunk with absynth:
that is to wit, over and besides that he suffered all that other martirs did
suffer, he did suffer another new kind of martyrdom, which did exceed all
other martyrdomes of man. All the holy and chosen men of our Lord have drunk a
thousand draughts of very bitter martyrdom, but the son of God only did drink
Absynth, because there was no heaviness which did not possess his heart, nor
no dolor which did not oppress his members. Saint Ambrose says, All the
words which Christ spoke we may believe, but all the excellent works that he
did, we be not able to imitate; because that besides the common strength which
bodies are wont to have, he took more to be able to suffer those torments,
for the flesh of the son of God was so tender and delicate of it self, that
if he should not have added force unto his own force, and strength unto his
own strength, it could not have been but he should have died very young, or
else never have been able to have suffered so high a martyrdom. What was
Christ's meaning then, when he said Inebriauit me absynthio, But that he only
drunk that drink of absynth, seeing that he alone did suffer more torments
than all the Martyrs. Christ is not contented to say, that he drunk much of
that drink, but that he drunk it all, to let us thereby understand, that as
no man can be drunk but with pure wine, so the son of God was he who suffered
pure martyrdom without any ease at all. No man ever drank of pure martyrdom
as Christ did, for all other martyrs, if they suffered in some of their
members, they did not in others, and if they suffered in body, they suffered
not in spirit, and if they suffered in spirit, they had some comfort in it,
insomuch that the comfort which God gave them was greater than the martyrdom
which they suffered. Upon those words of the Psalm, Extraneus sum fratribus
meis, Basil says, Christ was a stranger and separated from his brothers, the
other martyrs his companions, because that in his bitter passion he was less
comforted and more tormented than any of them. Like unto a man ouerloaden with
reproach and infamy, and full of torment, Christ said upon the cross, Deus,
Deus, meus quare me dereliquisti? The which complaint he would never have used,
if his father had comforted him as he did other Martyrs. Speaking the more
particularly, Christ in tasting gaul and vinegar, said immediately Consummatum
est, to let us thereby understand, that in that bitter drink was ended the cure
of the sweet taste which Adam had in eating the apple. The figure does very well
answer unto the thing figured, and the hurt unto the remedy, in that, that as
that entered in by the mouth in which Adam sinned, so by Christ's mouth entered
in the remedy of that sin; and as sin began in a sweet apple, so it should end
in sour vinegar. Hard by the wood Adam committed the offense, and on the wood
Christ redeemed the sin; in sweetness our hurt began, and in bitterness
began our good and remedy. Adam in eating of that which liked him died, and
Christ tasting of that which was bitter gave up his ghost. Because the truth
should answer unto the figure, the spirit unto the letter, and the secret unto
the mystery, and the fault to the pain, the son of Gods pleasure was, that his
last torment should be with sharp vinegar, because that with that drink
should be cured the grieuousnesse of our sin. Ad anunciandum mansuet is
misit me, vt mederer co^tritis cord, and predicarem captiuis indulgentia and
clausis apersionem, Esaias, 61. These are the words of the redeemer of the world
spoken by the mouth of the Prophet Esayas, declaring by them his meaning why he
came from heaven into the world, saying, The cause why I came into the world,
was to preach unto the meek, to cure the diseased, to tell captives that they
should be delivered, and denounce to all that are bound that they shall be now
loosed. The redeemer of the world recites four causes why he came into the
world; that is, to preach unto the good, to cure the diseased, to redeem
captives, and loose prisoners. These four things are so high to be
enterprised, and so hard to be achieved, that none but Christ in the world was
able to do it. It may be, that some man be able to preach, but he cannot cure,
and if he can cure infirmities, yet he is not of power to redeem captives, and
if he be of power to redeem captives, yet he has no authority to let go
prisoners: insomuch that there is no man in the world so valerous, but does
want the performance of one of these four things, only the son of God has all,
sees all, understands all, knows all, and can do all. And thereupon it
happens, that man does not perform that which he takes in hand, because he
cannot, but Christ not because he cannot, but because he will not. Esaias says,
That Christ came first to preach to the humble and meek, and not to the proud,
to let us thereby understand, that the meek and gentle would believe him, and
the proud and foolish mock at his life and doctrine. He says secondly, that
he came to cure and heal him who had his heart broken, and not those who had
no repentance of their naughtines, to let us thereby understand, that the
shedding of his precious blood should have no virtue nor efficacy in those
which never amend, but in such as of their wickedness do repent. Thirdly he
says, that Christ came into the world to redeem captives out of captivity:
wherein thou say most truly O my good Jesus, because there was no sin in the
world which thou did not pay for, nor no sinner whom thou did not
redeem. Fourthly, he says, that Christ came into the world to deliver
prisoners out of jail, and loose them out of prison: wherein he says also
most truly, for he did deliver all men from the thraldom of the devil, and
redeem sinners who were captives. O glorious incarnation, O blessed coming, O
happy ^ourney that that was which Christ made from heaven to the earth, seeing
the exercises wherein he occupied himself, and the office which he took upon
him were such, that the Angels knew not how to do them, nor all the men in the
world undertake them. Upon these words, Vt mederer cord contritis, S.
Augustine says, Magnus venit medicus, quia magnus vbique iacebat egrotus, as
if he should say, agreeable to the words of Esayas, There came from high
heaven a very great Physician, because that in every corner of the earth there
lay a sick body. What Physician was there ever in the world who brought such
medicines as Christ did, or kept such an order in curing us? the order which
Physicians prescribe, is, that first they ordain a diet for the patient, to
extenuate the humors, then they procure him some sweat to expel ventosities,
then they let him blood to correct the matter, and then they give him a
purgation to rid and empty him of all that is superfluous and hurtful in him.
The Physician does all this, giving a receipt in a paper, and sending it to the
Apothecary, and ministering it to the patient; in so much that the Physicians
cure is in the pulse which he does handle, and receipt which he ordains. When
good Jesus says by Esayas, Veni vt mederer contritis corda, although he
observed this order in curing the diseased, yet he observed it not in
administering his medicines. For the swearing bleeding, and purging, which the
diseased should have received, our benign Jesus took upon him when he was in
health. Do thou not think that he kept a diet, when he did fast not only
forty days, but considering that all his holy life was a longer diet? Do
thou not think that he sweat all our sins, when in his agony in the garden
his blood did run by all his pores? Do thou not think that he bled all the
corruption of our sins, when he did scarce leave a drop of blood in all his
veins? Do thou not think that he purged the corruption and perdition of
all the world, when he took the purgation of gaul and sour vinegar? Not
without a high mystery then, and a profound Sacrament, he said upon the
cross, Consummatum est, as he ended to take that purgation, giving us thereby
to understand, that the diseased man was purged, let blood, sweat, and was
healed, and that there was nothing else to be done in him, if he did not fall
again by fault.

CHAP. III. Of the greatness of the son of God, and how all things have
weight and measure, and number, saving only the humanity of Christ.
COnsummatus factus est, and obtemperantibus sibi causa salutis aeternae.
Hebrews 5. The Apostle speaks these words, talking with the Jews of the
high perfections which were in Christ, as if he should say, This son of God
which I preach unto you, was very perfect in himself, and was cause that all
such as did believe in him, should attain to everlasting life and salvation by
him. There are some which be neither good to themselves nor unto others; and
there are some which be good to others, and not good to themselves; and there
are other who are good to themselves and all others, and of these the son of
God was, seeing the Apostle says, That he was Consummatus, to wit, that the
son of God is good in all perfection, and to all good men very profitable.
Under these few words the Apostle comprehends many grave sentences, that is,
he will call us to memory who the son of God is, and therefore he says, Quod
consummatus factus est, and also what profit we receive by his coming, and
therefore he says, Quod fuit causa salutis aeterna. These two things are not
of such small quality, but that under them all the holy scriptures are
comprehended. For having said what Christ is, and what he has done in the
world, there is nothing more to be sought for in all the Gospel. Because
Christ did say on the cross Consummaetum est, and because the Apostle S. Paul
does say of Christ, Consummatum factus est, it is convenient for us to turn
again to these words, because we may see in them how great Christ's omnipotency
is, unto the which no poor creature is able to reach unto. To speak of the
greatness and omnipotency of God, is to go about to take the heavens with our
hands, or measure the earth by handy breads, or the sea by ounces. Cum
inceperit hora tunc finiet, said the wise man, as if he would say, The
greatness of God is so high to reach unto, so inscrutable to understand, so
invisible to see, so omnipotent to comprehend, that when we think that we are
come to an end of understanding it, then we are but at the beginning of
searching it. Holket upon these words says, What would the wise man say, [that
when we should make an end, then we should begin] but that if we will speak of
the greatness of God, either that we never begin to magnify it, or never end
to praise it. S. Augustine in his fourth book De Trinitate, says, The cause
why the mysteries of God do make all the world afeard is, not because God is
one, but Trinus, and that he is one the Jew is easily convinced, and the Moore
also to believe it, but that God is Trinus and one, as he is, none does believe
it but the Christian. And he says further, that which God does make us wonder
at in his divinity, Christ does in his humanity, for if he had but one thing
alone in him, we should dare to speak of his greatness, but having three
things in him which are, divinity, flesh, and soul, and that all three are
brought and reduced to one divine person, the understanding will be aweary to
think of it, and the tongue dumb to rehearse it. Omnia fecit deus in numero
pondere, and mensura, says the wise man, as if he should say, Our Lord is so
certain in all that he does, and so wary in all that he takes in hand, that
be they never so many he numbreth the^ all, be they never so great he
weighs them, and be they never so broad he measures them, so that in the
house of God there is number, weight, and measure. The most sacred humanity of
the son of God comes not under this reckoning, for being as it is united unto
the word, it is so perfect and adorned with such high merit, that there is no
number to count it, nor wait to weigh it, nor yet yard to measure it. As
concerning the first, Christ's humanity wants this which we have said of
number, seeing he is but one person, and according to the Philosopher, no unity
is a number, but the beginning of number. Upon those words of the Prophet, Tu
solus cog nouisti nouissima and antiqua, S. Basil says, Alone and not
accompanied with any, the son of God is united to the word, and in his holy
governance no man sits with him, nor no man does bear him company in that
high principality; for as in that he is God, he has being by his own proper
production, so in that, that he is man he is first created, and of all things
created, he is the beginning of number. Upon those words, Omnia per ipsum facta
sunt, Irenaeus says, Even as all things were made by Christ, in that that he
was God, so they were made by him in that that he was man, because he was the
first thing which God intended in the creation, to create all things for him,
as unto him who should be heir of all: by reason whereof we owe unto the son
of God, not only our redemption, but also our creation; for if it had not been
by him, and for him, God would have created nothing: for the means being taken
away, the end was also taken away. Touching the second, the humanity of the
word wants weight, and he cannot be weighed, for all the Saints being put in
one balance, and the son of God in another, it would be that, that a drop of
water is in respect of all the water which is in the world. Who is he which
can be weighed with Christ, or be compared with the least of his merits? If
before his sight the heavens be not clean, how dare any saints be weighed with
him? Concerning the third, the humanity of the word cannot be measured,
because that the grace which was given to him alone was so much, that neither
in heaven, nor in earth there is found any measure for it. How can there be
found any measure in the son of God, seeing that it is he with the which is
measured all humane and Angelical nature? We may gather of that which we
have said, that seeing Christ has removed from himself, number, weight, and
measure, yet that it is a folly and a rashness to think to find an end in his
greatness. We speak all this, because that considering that there is two
natures in Christ, one divine, and the other humane, we will not talk
immediately of his divine essence, but of his humane, as it is compared to the
divine, and so we shall understand somewhat of Christ, although we cannot
comprehend all that does belong unto him. Suscepit de manu demini duplicia,
says the Prophet Esayas, chap. 40. speaking of that which the eternal Father
had given his only son, as if he should say, All other creatures received
single favors, and only the son of God received them double, for all other
besides himself were nothing but bare men, but he was man and God, and God and
man. Duplicia suscepit de manu domini, because he was more than that which he
seemed to be, and he was more than that which was hidden, because his
divinity was hid, and his humanity did appear, and to his divinity was united
his humanity. He received two gifts of our Lord, seeing that under that earth
is hidden a precious pearl, and under that rough covering is enclosed the
heavenly cloth of gold. He received double favor at our Lords hands, seeing
that under the penitent weed we shall find the great king of Niniuy, and under
those dead skins, we shall find the good Patriarch Jacob alive. He received
two things at our Lords hands, for if we take away the covering, we shall see
all the divine essence, and if we break the veil of the Temple, we shall
know the height and the purest part of the heaven. He received two
singularities of our Lord, seeing he alone and no other is at one time a
traveler and at his iournies end, at one time with the superior portion
enioieth, and with the inferior suffers. He received two gifts, seeing it was
given to him and to no other, to be passible and impassible, visible and
invisible, mortal and immortal, temporal and eternal. Suscepit de manu
domini duplicia, seeing it was given unto him alone to be the end of the
unhappy Synagogue, and the beginning of the catholic church, and to be him
who does inflict punishment upon the bad, and gives glory unto the good.
Behold then how Christ's humanity is a perfect image and a high resemblance,
such as is not to be found neither in heaven nor upon earth, because it is made
to the lively likeness of God, and because it is always like his mould and
type which is the Word. Hilarious in his second book of the Trinity says, Even
as a glorious body united unto a glorious soul, is as it were spiritual, and
has spiritual conditions, so the humanity of the divine word being united
unto God, has the same conditions and qualities, as he unto whom he is united.
Damascen in his sentences says, As it was commanded that all should be given
to the noble dame Judith which did belong to Holofernes, seeing that she had
overcome him, so unto the man Christ it was given and attributed, that all that
should be said of him, which was said of the Word, seeing that he did also
overcome the devil. And because we may the better see what conformity there
is betwixt the humanity and the divinity, we will speak one word upon every word
of that which S. John did put in the beginning of his holy Gospel, speaking of
the eternal Word. In the beginning was the Word, says S. John, speaking of
the eternal generation of the son of God. Wherein he gives us to understand,
that that eternal word has his being by the first internal emanation of the
Father, seeing that he proceeds of him by the way of understanding, which is
the first emanation, and before the will, seeing it is presupposed. That which
we say of the divinity, we may also say of the humanity, seeing that it was in
the beginning of God, by an Hypostaticall union in the word, and by an
excellency of perfection above all that which God created. And the word was
with God, says also S. John, as if he should say, Because thou may see that
the person of the Father is not the person of the son, nor the person of the
son the person of the Father, if I have said, that In the beginning was the
word, I say now that near unto God was the same word, in so much that that
which is near unto me is without all doubt distinguished from me. The
humanity is so near unto the divinity, that it is one person with it, and
thereupon it is, that as in the Father and in the son there is but one
essence although they be two persons, so in the word of God, and in the
humanity of Christ, although there be two natures, there is but one person;
and this divine, and not humane. S. John says further, And God was the Word,
which may also be said of the humanity well understood, as of the divinity, by
the high communication of divine and humane qualities which are in Christ,
because there are many things in Christ by grace, which are in God by nature.
Upon those words. In quo habitat omnis plenitudo diuinitatis, S. Ambrose says,
The divinity of the word does dwell so perfectly in the humanity of Christ,
that because that is so nearly united and deified which is contained, it
takes the name of that which contains it: and he says further, Quod factum
est in ips^ vita erat. The which he speaks, because that being (as he is
God) the fountain of all life, and that of his only will does proceed all
life, it is certain that all that should be in him should be life. S.
Augustine upon S. John says, As all things in God shall be called life,
because they are accompanied and joined in him, so in his holy humanity, all
things are life, because there are united in him all the goodness of glory and
grace. As all that which is made in the word is life, and all that which is out
of it is death, so all that which is wrought in Christ for his honor and glory
is life, and all that which is not done in him and by him is all death. S. John
goes forward and says, And the life was the light of men, which he speaks
for the light of reason, which he did imprint in the souls, which were blind
by sin, the which blindness was remedied with the light of the humanity of
Christ, the which although it do not shine like unto the most simple divine
light, yet it was sufficient to lighten all humane nature: and he adds
further, That the light does shine in darkness, Et tenebrae eum non
comprehenderunt, which words may be no less verified of the humanity of Christ
than of the divinity of the word. Hilarious upon those words says, In respect
of the divine clearness all other creatures may be called darkness, because
it is impossible that the divine should not always shine, but the humane has
every hour need of light. God does shine in the darkness of our sins,
seeing that none but he can forgive them: and in this point it is no other
thing to say, Tenebrae eum non comprehenderunt, but that his most great mercy
cannot be made empty. S. Barnard in a Sermon says, God is mighty in forgiving
sins, but he is most mighty in forgiving those which are often committed,
wherein is showed his infinite mercy, seeing that he is not comprehended by
them, nor limited in pardoning them, but he does pardon them when he will, how
he will, and unto whom he will. In that that he is man, Christ has also
darkness where he may shine, that is to wit, all pure creatures be they never
so holy and chosen, seeing that of themselves they have no light at all, if
they do not receive it of the son of God. S. Jerome says, The perfection
and light of Christ is so great, that being compared unto that which other
Saints have, it seems that it makes them somewhat imperfect, which is to be
understood, not because there is any want in them, but because there is a great
abundance of excellency. Irenaus in a Sermon says, Although God took from the
spirit of Moses to give unto those elders which should be judges with him, yet
notwithstanding Moses continued wiser than they: so it is in Christ, from whom
how much grace so ever the holy men do take, or have taken, yet they did never
draw his grace dry, nor at any time compared themselves with him. We have used
all this long discourse to prove how well the Apostle said of Christ, Quod
Co^summatus factus est, seeing that by these words it does appear, that he had
all perfections in him, and by his Consummatus est, which he spoke upon the
cross, that all our wickedness is now finished and at an end.

CHAP. IIII. Herein is entreated of the greatness and wealth of Salomons
temple, and how that in the sacred and holy temple of Christ's humanity, the
holyghost has bestowed greater workmanship, riches, and spiritual gifts, then
were in the temple which Solomon did build.
EDificauit Solomon domum domini, and consummauit eam. 3. Reg. chap. 6. that
is, King Solomon builded a house for our Lord, and he made such speed in the
building of it, that he never ceased until he had finished it. Origin upon
this place says, The love which God bears mankind is so great, that it
pleased him to make himself a neighbor and an inhabitant of this world, and
therefore he would have Solomon build an house here upon earth, where he might
with ease communicate with every person. And because that this material temple
was a figure of the true temple which was Christ, and because the Scripture
says of the one, Quod consummauit eam, and Christ also says of his
Consummatum est, we will first tell you how magnificent Solomon was in building
of his, and then we will declare unto you how liberal the holy Ghost was in
framing that of Christ. The case thn^estandeth thus, that in the year four
hundred and fourscore after that the Jews went our of Egypt, and in the
fourth year after that Solomon inherited the kingdom, in the second month of
that year, which was in April, the building of the Temple began, and was
finished in all perfection in the seventh year. There were always busied in
the working of that temple a hundred fifty and three thousand and six hundred
workmen, and all this in time of peace, for otherwise in time of war, it
might have been that some should have builded, and others defended. Of this
great number of workmen, fourscore thousand brought stones out of the
mountains, and seuen^y thousand carried burdens on their shoulders, and the
three thousand and six hundred were as it were overseers and commanders: The
vassales of the king of Tyrus are not comprehended under this number, who did
cut wood on the Mount Lybanus, and yet they were many in number, as it may
appear in that Solomon did send them at one time twenty thousand load of
corn, and twenty thousand of barley, and twenty thousand quintales of oil,
and forty thousand measures of wine. Neither are there included in this number
the Mariners which brought timber, nor the engrauers which engraued images,
nor the goldsmithes which wrought in silver, which were a great number, seeing
that the metal which they wrought was much. The Scripture makes no mention of
the silver that was spent there, but he says only that there was such
abundance of it in Salomone house, as there are stones on the earth. What shall
we say of the gold that was spent there, which would seem incredible to all
the world? Before that king David died, he left three thousand measures of gold
for the building of the Temple, which he offered of his own, and not of that
which he had taken in war. All the nobles of the Realm did offer also for
the building of that holy edifice five thousand measures of gold, besides
others metals of lattin, copper, and tin, whereof there is no weight laid
down, because the quantity of it exceeds number. What riches was spent there
may be easily gathered in that, that the Temple was all covered with gold from
the top unto the bottom, and that not of plain gold like a painted table, but
curiously cut and kerned. In this proud building, this word gilding is sildome
used, but this word clad with gold, and enterlaced with gold, and covered with
gold is often spoken, and therefore that which Solomon did of pure gold, is more
the^ now adays is wont to be gilded. The Gloss says, That the floor of the
greatest place, which they called Sancta, and the floor of the lesser, which
they called Sancta sanctorum, were both paued with fine gold, and all this for
the reverence of the arc, whereby so much the more every thing was more
precious, by how much the nearer it was unto it. For the service of this Temple
there were appointed twenty and four thousand Priests, of the great tribe of
Leui, whose charge was to panch the beasts, offer sacrifice, light the lamps,
and kindle the fire. For to keep the gates of the Temple, there were appointed
four thousand porters, and for to sing the Psalms which David made, and those
which Solomon made, there were chosen other four thousand, whose office was
also to play on instruments of music. If the building which Solomon made was
proud and stately, so was also the first sacrifice which he offered, for he
killed and offered unto our Lord on one day twenty and two thousand beefes, and
a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. Now that we have spoken of the pomp,
glory, and riches of that famous temple, we will tell you in what all this
great treasure did end, and thereby it may be perceived how vain and brittle
all worldly glory is, and especially that which is founded upon riches. It is a
thing much to be wondered at, and worthily to be noted, that when the Sancta was
not rich, and when the great city of Jerusalem was poor, with their poverty
they did overcome all their enemies, and afterward with their wealth they were
overcome by them. David was poorer than Solomon, and Saul was poorer than
David, and yet for all their poverty they had more victories over their enemies
then Solomon and Roboam his son in their times, whose riches and treasures
did exceed the treasures of their predecessors. Men think that the remedy
against misery and poverty, does consist in getting much wealth and riches, and
in having abundance of all things; the which thing to think is a great vanity,
and a dangerous thing to get, for we see many, who thinking to bring wealth and
riches to their house, bring death, war, and dissension to it: and because we
may not seek far for examples, let us look upon the Jews with their
treasures, and if we weigh the matter well, we shall find for a truth that
misery and poverty is not remedied with riches, and that the captain of misery
is peace, and the companion of riches is misery. No longer after the death of
Solomon but five years, Sesach king of Egypt did send to Jerusalem seventy
thousand horsemen, and twice as many footmen, and a thousand two hundred Wagons
for cariages, and took Jerusalem and robbed the Temple, and spoiled king
Roboams palace: insomuch that the Temple was not so long a sacking as it was a
building. The king of Babylon did send his army to Judea, who used the matter
so well, that he took the city, and robbed the Temple, and led the king of
Judea prisoner to Babilonia, and no man was able to resist him or hurt him.
After this great mischief came the king of the Chaldeans, who killed the young
men, took the women captive, set fire on their towers, burnt the sanctuary,
and took the people prisoners, and robbed the treasure. The wars which the
Egyptians, Chaldeans, and Babilonians had with the Hebrews, were not because
they did hold them for their enemies, but only to rob their treasures: nsomuch
that against the poor Israelites made greater wars their own riches, than
all other barbarous nations. Let the litterall conclusion be, that we may say
truly of the Temple of Solomon, Quod Consummatum est, seeing that the Temple is
at an end, Solomon which made it, the people where it was made, the riches with
the which it was made, and the sacrifices for the which it was made. Of all
this we may gather, that God does not give us riches, because we should love
them, but because we should benefit our selves by them, and serve him with
them: but alas that which God does give us to serve him withal, we do turn
to our own pleasures and delights. Dominus in templo sancto suo, dominus in
caelo seeds eius, says the Psalm. 10. as if he would say, The places where our
Lord does most of all abide are in the heavens where he has his seat, and in
the holy Temple where he has his dwelling place. Because we should not think
that the Temple which he here speaks of is the Temple of Solomon in
Jerusalem, or of Dian. in Antiochia, or of Pantheus in Rome. God said not that
he dwelled in every Temple, but he added holy, and also his For in the Temple
where God must dwell there must be no sin, nor any else with him. The Temple
which Solomon made was very rich, and although it was a Temple, it follows
not that it was holy, for if it had been, and those also which made it, they
would not have killed within it the great Prophet Zachary hard by the altar,
nor they would not have placed the Idol As^aroth in it upon the altar, nor
they would not have consented that Pompeius should have made a stable for his
horses hard by the altar which was dedicated unto divine sacrifices. Neither
was that Temple holy in respect of the Priests and ministers which were in it,
for if it had been holy they would not have had birds at the gate to sell, nor
banks for Usurers, nor Christ would not have rebuked them, nor they put Christ
to death. Neither was that Temple holy in respect of the sacrifices, seeing
that they were not sufficient to take away sins: and if there was any profit
in them, it was not by reason of the sacrifice which was there offered, but in
respect of the merits of those which did offer them. Neither will we say that
Salomons Temple was holy by reason of the matter whereof it was made, because
that true and sincere holiness is not in gold, silver, timber, and stone,
whereof it was made, but in the Christian and glorious Temple which is there
assembled and gathered together. It follows then of that which is spoken,
that God does not abide every where, and where every man lusts, but where our
Lord will make his dwelling place must be a Temple, and that a holy Temple, and
his own Temple, or else he will dwell with none. Where or who is the true
Temple where God dwells, but the most sacred humanity of the son of God? We
shall call his deified body a Temple, and a holy Temple, and his own Temple:
because of him and of no other, God said at the river of Jordan, This is my
well-beloved son. This holy Temple was builded not by the hands of Solomon the
peaceable, but by the hands and industry of the Holy Ghost, in whose framing
and fashioning as Solomon spent seven years, so the Holy Ghost did endue his
with his seven gifts. This our Temple is far more richer than Salomons was,
for if his was covered with gold, so ours is covered with divine love: and the
difference betwixt those two may easily be known, by the difference that is
betwixt a simple gilter, and a great lover. In Salomons Temple, the things of
gold were so measured, and those of wood so leuelled, that when they were laid
down, there was no Ax nor hamber heard: When the Holy Ghost did frame the
Temple of the most sacred humanity of Christ in the womb of the blessed
Virgin Mary, he framed it so just, and made it in all perfection so
exquisite, that there was there no axe of sin, nor hamber of the devil. The
windows of that temple were broader within than without, to signify unto us
that the love which Christ had secretly in his entrails was far greater and
brother than the wounds were which he suffered for us: and although that at the
beginning he does lead his a straight and narrow way, yet after that they do
taste of his heavenly love he makes all things broad and large unto them. In
this holy Temple of Christ, we must offer pure gold and excellent silver, which
we do then, when in heart we believe him, and with our mouth confess him.
There must also be offered latten, copper, and brass, by which we may
understand the virtue of patience, for as those metals do suffer many blows,
and serve to many uses, so the virtue of patience does suffer many injuries,
and makes many men virtuous. It is fit for us to offer there a ^acinth stone,
which is of the color of heaven to signify thereby unto us, that al our works
and desires should be directed to attain heaven, because that is in heaven which
we do believe on earth; there he dwells who^ we preach here; and that is
recompensed there which we suffer here. We should offer also in the lively
Temple of that blessed humility, scarlet well colored and fine: whereby is
understood the memory which we ought to have of his holy passion, the which if
it was troublesome for him to suffer, is most profitable for us to contemplate.
O how happy should he be of who^ it might be said, thy hears are like unto the
scarlet of the king died in the gutters. What are the hears but my thoughts?
and what are the gutters but his precious wounds? and what is the colored
scarlet but his most precious flesh, died in his own precious blood? O who
could be worthy to wash in this blood the hears of his thoughts, every day a
little time, for seeing them of that color, they would presently be acceptable
to Christ. Thou should offer also in this most holy Temple scarlet twice
died, that is, love doubled: and if thou will know what love doubled is, we
tell thee that it is the love of God, and the love of thy neighbor. He offers
scarlet twice died, who does the works of charity unto his neighbor, and
gives no evil speech unto any man: and he does also offer scarlet twice died
who offers his soul unto God, and part of his goods unto his neighbor in
necessity. God did also command fine white linen to be offered unto him,
whereby a chaste and a clean conversation is understood, because there is
nothing in this world in greater danger than the fame of a virtuous person.
Fly then my brother, fly the occasions of the world, and trust not so much as
thy self, for how much the finer the third of thy fame is, the sooner it will
be broken and spotted, if thou have not a viligant care over it. God commanded
likewise that they should offer him in his Temple timber of the wood Cethin,
because it was incorruptible, whereby are understood all perfect works and well
finished, and this he notes, that if in virtuous works we have not great
constancy and peseuerance, the worm does consume them like as they do
timber. God does also command that they should offer in his Temple goats hear,
if they had nothing else, nor no other riches, and thereupon the Lord may offer
what he will, and man what he can. What other thing are the goats hear which
thou art to offer unto him, but only our sharp and austere works with the
which we are to serve him? With a vile and base and rough covering, cloth of
gold and fine silk is kept, and with a severe life fame is conserved and a
clean conscience, because that dainty meats and curious apparel are not to be
used among perfect men. O how happy he should be who might say with Christ,
Consummatum est, that is, that he followed our Lord until the last hour as he
might, and offered unto him that which he had.

CHAP. V. How that all the mysteries and prophesies which God had prophesied of
him were most highly fulfilled in Christ in Jerusalem.
ECce ascendimus Hierosolimam, and consummabuntur omnia quae scripta sunt de
filio hominis, Luke 18. Christ spoke these words unto his disciples in the
last journey that he made with them in this life, and it as if he would say,
Behold we go up into the great city of Jerusalem, where all the prophesies
shall be fulfilled which are written of me, and where the son of the
virgin shall be delivered unto the Gentiles, shall be scorned, and spet upon,
whipped and put to death, and after three days they shall see him risen again.
Before all things it is principally to be noted, that whersoeuer this aduerb
(Ecce) is put, there is always signified some great mystery as in Esayas,
Ecce, Behold a virgin shall bring forth: in the incarnation, Ecce, Behold the
handmaid of the Lord: in the transfiguration, Ecce, Behold a white cloud: in
the temptation, Ecce, Behold the Angels shall minister unto him: and in his
resurrection, Ecce, behold an earthquake. The things which Christ spoke unto
them in this place were so high, and the mystery so great which he discovers
unto them, that they could not only not understand it, but they were also
afeared and began to tremble to hear it: for they thought it a violent thing
that they should martyr a holy man, and they thought it a very strange thing
that any man should rise again. Theophilus upon S. Matthew says, That it is
much to be noted, that in all other iournies which Christ made, it is always
said that he went in the company of his disciples, this one excepted, where
he says, that he went before them, to declare the great joy that he had, to
see that he went to die and suffer passion for those whom he meant to redeem
and save. The difference betwixt those which take in hand any journey is this,
that he who goes with greatest joy goes always foremost, because he would
soonest come to the end: and so it fell out here, for Christ having a greater
desire of our redemption and salvation than the Apostles had, made most have on
the way. Secretum meum mihi, secretum meum mihi, said God by Esayas chap. 24.
as if he would say, From the beginning of the world in the deapth of the
eternity, I have kept close a secret which no man knows. O infinite good, O
high Trinity, what is this secret, and from whom do thou hide it? If there
be more than one secret, why do thou call it two? and if there be but one,
why do thou say twice, My secret to my self, My secret to my self? He
does twice iterate this word Secret, because there be two mysteries, and yet
calls them in the singular number, because they are but of one Christ, in
whom they were accomplished, and for whose cause they were unto the world
revealed. What greater secret, or what greater mystery, or what higher
Sacrament could there be in the world, than for Christ to tell his disciples,
that being God he should die, and being man he should rise again? And it was
not without a great mystery that Christ would draw his disciples from the
people, draw them to the way, and talk with them in secret, letting them
understand by these circumstances, that that which he would tell them should be
a great secret, seeing that he did not tell it the^ but in great secret.
Chrysostom upon S. Matthew says, All the glory of God and all the salvation of
the Gentiles consists in the death which Christ died, and in the blood which
for all the world he shed: and therefore because the mystery was so high and so
strange, he would not discover it but unto those of his holy college, and unto
them also in great secret. It was a high mystery to say, That being God he
should die; and it was also as strange to say, That he who was man should rise
again: and he would not reveal it unto the people, because they should not be
scandalized, but revealed it to those of his holy college for their benefit,
because that the most preciousest treasures are always kept in the best and
surest chests. It is not then without cause that the text says, Assumpsit eos
secreto, to let us thereby understand, that we should not reveal high secrets
to all men, nor yet hide the^ from some men. Now that Christ has drawn his
disciples into the field, and lead them somewhat beside the way, the text
says, that he spoke secretly unto them, saying, Behold we go up to
Jerusalem: as if he should say, My children and my brethren, I will open a
secret unto you, such as you have never heard before, that is, that we draw now
near unto Jerusalem, where I am to suffer, and now the time is come when I
must suffer, and the death which they will give shall be such as my Father has
ordained, and which in the Scripture is prophesied, and which by me is
accepted. And because our Lord here says that he must die in Jerusalem and not
else where, the prophecy of the Psalm is to be considered, 73. which says,
Deus autem rex noster ante secula operatus est salutem in medie terrae. His
meaning is, Our God and our king has determined to redeem the world in a
place which is in the middle of the world. If we read Ptholome in his tables,
and believe Strabo in his book of the situation of the world, they will say
that the situation of the city of Jerusalem is in the middle of the earth, and
that that precisely is the navel and center of the world. According unto the
prophecy alleged Christ dying in Jerusalem, he died in the middle of the
world, because that Jerusalem has on the South side the kingdom of Egypt, on
the East side the kingdom of Arabia, and on the West side the Mediteran^an sea
does compass it, and one the North side the kingdom of Syria. Basil the
great says upon the Psalms, There could nothing be more fit and convenient,
than that he who was the mean and mediator that God should pardon our sin,
should die as he did in the middle of the world: for if he should have died
in the East or in the West, they would have thought that they had been
redeemed, and that all the rest had continued condemned. By reason whereof, our
Redeemer of the world would die in the midst of all men, seeing that he
suffered for all men. Barnard in an Epistle says, When the Prophet says, that
our Lord has wrought our salvation in the middle of the earth, he means
that he loves the mean very much, and hates extremes: for he does as well
hate the extreme of fasting, as overmuch eating; and he hates as well
extreme poverty as too much wealth; and he hates as well too great baseness
of mind as extreme pride; and he hates as well extreme ignorance as overmuch
eloquence. Cyprian says, In this thou may see what an enemy Christ is to
extreamties, and how little he favors such as use them, in that, that for
to give us an example, that in all things we should cleave to the mean, and
fly the extremes, his will was to die in the middle of all the world. We
must note also, that Christ says, Ecce ascendimus, for by this he shows
that he goes not to his death forced or constrained by any, but of his own
love: the which infinite love as it brought him from heaven to take flesh, so
it does lead him to die on the cross. When the son of God says unto his
Disciples, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, this is no speech of a malefactor, but
of a great Redeemer, because the wicked man never says unto his friends, I
go to die, but look they carry or lead me to receive justice. O high
mystery, O divine Sacrament, who ever heard that such a man as Christ was,
young, healthful, free, and just, of his own proper will should say unto his
Disciples, Behold I go to Jerusalem to die: as if he would say, Behold I go
to be merry and to great joy. Aymon says, What says he else when he
says, Behold we go up to Jerusalem, but make it known unto the rulers of
the church, that he goes to die before his information be drawn, before the
sergeants do take him, before the hangmen do keep him, and before that the
judge has given sentence on him. Rabanus upon this place says, When Christ
says unto his Disciples, Behold we go up to Jerusalem: it is as if he
would say, Behold and mark well, that when you shall see me hanged upon the
cross like unto a malefactor, do not think that I am only a man, for if to
die be the condition of a man, yet to die willingly is the property of God
alone. He who is a pure man dies although he would not, but he who is
God and man dies when he will: and such was the son of God, who took
death when he would, and took again his life when it pleased him. Remigius
in a certain Homily says, In this speech of, [Behold we go up to
Ierusalem] the son of God does show two things unto us, that is, That he
goes to die; and that he goes to suffer that death of his own accord: so
that we owe him for two debts, the one for the blood which he shed, and the
other for the love with the which he shed it. Cyrillus says also, If as
Christ said, Behold I go to Jerusalem to die of my own voluntary will, he
should have said, Behold they draw me to be iusticied by force; we should have been bound unto him for the martyrdom which he suffered, and not for the will
with the which he suffered. But seeing he says plainly that he goes of his
own voluntary will, to the butchery of the Mount of Caluary to be executed;
it is certain, that if we owe him much for that he did suffer, we owe him
much more for the love with the which he did suffer. S. Jerome says likewise
in this speech of Ecce ascendimus, our great shepherd does admonish all
other sheepeheards, that when necessity does so require, they should not oppose
themselves against any tyrant if they would put the^ to death, but also offer
themselves to death for the salvation of their flock: because there is no
higher degree of martyrdom, than to die for the saving of his neighbor. Simon
de Gassia says, For the son of God to say unto his disciples, Behold I go
to die, and not, They carry me to kill me; was to let them understand, that to
the Christian religion, and profession of the Gospel we should not be
drawn by force, but go willingly, because our Lord does not so much regard
the feet with the which we seek him, as he does behold out intentions with
which we love him. And Christ says further, Et consummabuntur omnia quae
scripta sunt de me, as if he would say, The cause why I go to Jerusalem is
because all things which are written of me by the Prophets may be fulfilled
and accomplished. Origin says, All things which were written of Christ are
brought unto three things, and all those to be fulfilled by him, to wit, that
which he should do, that which he should suffer, and the reward which he
should have, as well for that which he did in his life, as for that which he
suffered at his death. That which Christ did, was to plant the church: that
which he suffered, was a most cruel death: and the reward which he received,
was his glorious resurrection: insomuch that in his holy life, in his
dreadful death and passion, and glorious resurrection, all the holy Scripture
is contained. These two speeches which Christ spoke do very well agree, that
is, that which he says here Consummabuntur omnia, and the other which he
uttered upon the cross Consummatum est. For in that, that he died and rose
again, all was fulfilled that was written of him. But speaking more
particularly, Christ says, that in entering into Jerusalem, he should be
delivered unto the Gentiles, and that he should be mocked with injurious
words, and spet upon with gross spettle, and whipped with much discipline,
and that he should also be crucified and put to death with great nails. Who
ever saw or heard the like unto this, that they should unload such a heap of
injuries, and such a multitude of torments upon so tender a body, and so just a
person? Dedit percutientibus se maxillam, and saturabitur opprebrijs, says
Jeremy, chap. 3. Speaking of Christ's injuries, as if he should say, The
redeemer of the world will be so patient in his trauails, and so obedient unto
his persecutors, that he himself will offer his cheek to be buffetted, and
he will put himself before them, because they should fill him with injuries.
How well so ever Jeremy did prophecy this, yet Christ did fulfill it better,
seeing that he offered unto his enemies not only his cheek that they might
buffet it, but also all his holy body that they might kill it. What means
this O good Jesus, what means this, The Prophet Elias did she from the city
of Jerusalem, because Queen Iezabel should not cut off his head, and do
thou go to Jerusalem, where thou know that they will deprive thee of thy
life? Great king David fled from the city of Jerusalem, and went out of it,
because he would be no more persecuted of king Saul, and do thou go to
Jerusalem to be crucified? In this point sure thou art not David's son, nor
Helias companion, for if they fly from Jerusalem to save their lives, thou
go to Jerusalem to offer thy self to death. If thy death had been a common
death, it might have been born with, but seeing that it was more grievous to
suffer the circumstances of thy death, than death it self, what necessity
constrained thee, or what charity moved thee why thou should not have fled
with thy Father David, or absented thee with the Prophet Ely? It is a thing
worthy to be noted, that Christ puts it for the greatest point of his
Martyrdom that he should be iniuried, and also that he should be scorned and
mocked. By which complaint he does let us understand, that the son of God
did grieve more at the injurious words which they spoke unto him, than at the
lashes and discipline which they gave him. Jeremy does not say that Christ
should be filled in his passion with stripes flagellis, but opprobrijs,
reuilings and injuries, and the reason is, because stripes and lashes pass no
further than the shoulders, but injuries entered unto the entrails. Who is he in
the world which will not be more grieved at an injurious word, tha^ with the
point of a spear? Jeremy makes no reckoning of the thorns, nor of the
nails, nor of the lashes, but only of the injuries which Christ suffered,
seeing that he says, Saturabitur opprobrijs, because he passed through those
torments but one day, but he suffered injuries and blasphemies every day. In
these words of Ieremies, He shall be filled with injuries: he signified unto
us, the cruelty of his torments and the multitude of his injuries: for as he
who is full, has no more place in his stomach to fill, so there was no
torment which to the son of God they left vngiuen, nor no injury unspoken.
For what torments were there which they gave him not, or what injuries could
there be spoken which they uttered not. Hugo de sancto victore upon Jeremy
says, Because the son of God would declare that he was the iustest of all
others, and of all martyrs the greatest martyr, he said that he should be
filled with injuries and reuilings: because that in all other martyrs, they did
lay hands with no other intention, but to martyr them, but in Christ they laid
hands to kill him, and tongues to injury him. S. Jerome on this place says,
Jeremy says very well of Christ, Quod saturabitur opprobrijs: for we do not
read of any Martyr, that he was martyred with tongues, but with hands, the son
of God alone is he, whose life they took away with their hands, and fame with
their tongues. Isichius upon Leuiticus says, With great reason, the Prophet
Jeremy says of Christ, That he should be filled with injuries: seeing we see,
that in his holy passion, liers do sell the truth, sooles mock wisdom, the
guilty whip innocence, the wretched spet upon glory, and the dead kill life. S.
Barnard in a sermon of the passion says, What heart is able to endure it, or
what fingers able to write it, to see that the liberty of captives is sold, the
glory of Angels scorned and mocked, the morning star of the world spet at,
the Lord of all scourged and whipped, and he who is the rewarder of travels
murdered? S. Ambrose upon S. Luke says, Of Christ only, and of no other
Jeremy says, Quod saturabitur opprobrijs: seeing that he was sold like a
malefactor, mocked like a fool, spet at like a vile person, whipped like a
thief, and put to death like a traitor. S. Hilary in an Homily says,
According unto the prophecy of Jeremy, the son of God shall be filled with
injuries, seeing that he is sold of the Symoniacles, mocked of hypocrites,
whipped of tyrants, spet at by blasphemers, and put to death by heretics. Let
our conclusion then be, that not without a high mystery, nor profound
sacrament, Christ before he should suffer, said these words of Consummabuntur,
and in the end of his suffering, Consummatum est, to let us understand, that at
one time Christ's life did end: and if we be such as we ought to be our faults.

CHAP. VI. Here he entreats of that high prayer which Christ made upon the
table, saying, Pater sancte non pro mundo rogo, sed pro illis vt serves eos a
malo. In which prayer if he obtained constancy and stoutnesse for his Apostles,
yet he forgot not the weak saying, Non rogo vt tollas eos a mundo.
PAter sancte claritatem quam tu dedisti mihi dedi eis, vt sint Consummati in
vnum, I^h. 17. These words are spoken by the mouth of the son of God, praying
unto his Father, after he had made a sermon before supper, the highest and
longest that ever he preached in all his life time, as if he should say, O my
holy, eternal, mighty and blessed Father, that which I entreat and request of
thee in this last hour is, that seeing I have given to my Disciples part of
the light and science which thou have given me, thou would also give them
grace to be perfect in that kind of perfection as thou are wont to make
perfect the elect. By occasion of those words which Christ spoke upon the
cross, that is, Consummatum est, and by reason of that other which he spoke,
praying unto his Father, Consummati sunt, it shall be necessary for us to
declare in this place what that is which the redeemer of the world spoke in his
prayer, and what the Scripture says of it. It is here to be noted, who he is
which prays, where he prays, when he prays, and how he prays, and for
whom he prays, and what he prays: for oftentimes in Scripture the
circumstances how a thing is done, makes it either weighty or very weighty. He
who prays is Christ; the place where, is the p^r^or; the time, is at supper;
how, is with lifting up his eyes; the things which he prays, are very high;
they for whom, are his disciples. In this high prayer Christ spoke dainty
words, most grave sentences, very secret mysteries, very necessary aduises, and
very profitable counsels; by reason whereof, it is convenient to read them with
attention, and note them with devotion. Christ then says in the beginning of
his prayer, Pater sancte serua eos in nomine tuo qui tui sunt, and pro eis rogo
and non pro mundo, as if he should say, My holy and blessed father, that which
I ask of thee for these thy children and my disciples, is, that thou deliver
them from sin, and keep them in thy service, seeing that they be my brothers
by nature, and thy children by grace: and if I ask any thing of thee it is not
for those which are of the world, but for those which thou do keep under
thy safeguard. O sweet words for the good, and sorrowful for the bad, seeing
that by them are divided and separated the perfect from the foreseen, the
elect from the reprobate, Gods friends from the children of perdition, and also
the neighbors of heaven from the lovers of the world. Howsoever Christ our
redeemer prayed from the heart for those which he loved from the heart, yet he
set this word Sancte Pater before his prayer, because it is a very natural
thing, that this word Pater, makes a father attentive to here the child, and
makes his eyes tender to behold him, and his heart gentle to love him, and
opens his entrails that he can deny him nothing. What sweeter words can come
to a fathers ears, than to hear his son call him father? As a son
well-beloved and tendered, once Christ calls his father my father, another time
just father, and another time Lord and father, sometimes holy father, and
sometimes father and nothing else, so that such as his prayer was, such was the
name which he gave him. It is not then here without a mystery, that he
calls him Pater sancte, because he who prayed in this prayer was most holy,
he to whom he prayed was holy, that which he prayed were holy things, the
place where he prayed was a holy place, and he for whom he prayed was his
holy college. What do thou ask O good Jesus, what do thou ask? Pardon
for my sheep, that God would deliver them from Wolves, pardon for my
disciples, that God would keep them from the devil, pardon for my elect that
God would separate them from sin, and pardon for my friends that God would
take them up into heaven. As thou art going thy journey to the cross, at the
point of death, in the evening of thy agony, and when they come to apprehend
thy person, among so many things which thou do ask of thy Father, do
thou ask nothing for thy self? O heavenly care, O unspeakable love, O charity
never heard of before, such as thine is O creator of my soul toward all
mankind, seeing that in such a dismal day, in such a narrow strait as thou art
in, thou have cause sufficient to crave of thy father for thy self, saving
only that to remember me thou do forget thy self. And Christ says that he
does ask for such as are his, that is, for those which in the depth of his
eternity are predestined, and are in the number of the elect, to the end that
they may be one thing in the father, as the father and the son are one
thing. Let the curious reader mark in this place, that this abuerbe Sicut
does not in this place make an equality betwixt God and man, but only a
resemblance, and a likeness for unlike, the which because Arrias would not
understand, became to be an infamous heretic. When Christ said Sint vnum in
me, his meaning was this, That which I ask of thee (O heavenly Father) is,
that as those of my college be thy children and my brethren by grace, I am thy
only begotten son by nature. Saint Augustine upon this place says, As the
father and the son are one, and the same thing, not only by equality of
substance, but also for equality of will, so the disciples are one thing with
Christ, not by nature, but by a bond of love and fellowship. And he adds
further, that because the perfection of a just man is no other thing but the
participation which he has with the divine likeness, we are good in so many
degrees, in how many we draw near to the likeness of God. Christ says
plainly for whom he prays seeing he says, Quia tui sunt; and also for whom
he does not pray, seeing he says, That he does not ask for the world: so that
those be participant of his prayer which do serve Christ, and he excludes
those which follow the world. O how happy those be which follow Christ, and
which love Christ, and serve Christ, because they only be partakers of his
prayer, the which love and service every man should prove in himself, not in
the words which he speaks of Christ, but in the works which he does for his
service. Chrysostom says, We should be afeard very much my brethren, that
Christ did not say, I pray unto thee father for those who call themselves thine,
but only for those which are thine, because there are many now adays in the
church of God who are baptized, and call themselves Christians, and do go to
church, who when they are gone from thence, are proud, envious, covetous,
carnal and blasphemers; of which we may say, that they call themselves of
Christ, but they be not of Christ. For such beasts as these, Christ does not
pray, nor such naughty men as these have no part in Christ's prayer, not because
Christ's holy prayer does not reach unto all, but because they remain out of it
because they continue in their sins. Cyrillus upon Saint John says, Why
do thou ask for thy disciples, for if they be thy Fathers, thou have no
need, and if they be not his what have thou to do with them? That which I
ask for them is, that as they are his by faith, they may be his also by
charity, for it would little avail them to be constant in faith if they
should not be also fervent in love. Remigius says, There is no doubt but the
son of God was never asked by any, nor importuned by any, nor suborned by any
to pray for those of his college, but of himself, he moved himself to pray,
and commend them to his Father, giving us thereby to understand, what great
care he has to look unto us, if we be not careless to serve him. But how
should not that other part make us afeard and astonished, when Christ said [I
pray not for the world] seeing he excludes from his prayer all vain light
worldlings, which are al worthily shut out of his church, seeing they would not
follow his doctrine. When the son of God says, Non rogo pro mundo, he says
that he does not pray for the proud man, he says that he does not pray for
the envious man, for the fleshly man, for the covetous man, for the blasphemer,
for unto such persons their paradise is their vices, and hell Gods
comma^deme^ts. How (says Christ) shall I ask for the world, seeing I am not
known of any neighbor in it? Rupertus upon S. John says, Seeing that Christ
says, I do not ask for the world, let every man mark what life he leads,
for thereby he may see what part he has in Christ's prayer, for the rewarder
of virtues is Christ, and the pay-maister of vices is the devil. Tell me I pray
thee why the son of God should pray for them which are blinded in the world,
and whose glory is this wicked world, seeing the captain and ringleader of
such is the devil? S. Augustine upon S. John says, Why does the son of God
say in his prayer [I do not entreat for the world] but because the transgressor
of the precept is he who commits the sin, and he who commits the
sin is the lover of the world, and the lover of the world is the servant of
the devil, and the servant of the devil is a neighbor and inhabitant of hell.
Bonauenture in the life of Christ says, When the devil goes about to make me
sin, and when the flesh goes about to overcome me, and when the world goes
about to pamper and make much of me, I presently do call to mind that speech
of Christ, I pray not for the world; and that, Rise to judgment; and that, Go
into everlasting fire. Although these three enemies are strong to overcome, yet
these are three mighty arrows to shoot at them: for if we remember, I do not
pray the father for the world, Rise to judgment, Go into everlasting fire; who
dare commit a sin, nor yet take his sleep by night? Christ says further,
Non pro eis tantum rogo, sed pro eis qui crediturisunt in me, as if he should
say, O my holy and blessed Father, behold that my church must be very much
increased, and must dure unto the worlds end, by reason whereof, I do not ask
thee only for these which sit at my table, but also for all those which will
believe in me hereafter. And he says further, Non rogo vt tollas eos de
mundo, sed vt serves cos a malo, as if he should say, Although my elect be
not of the world, nor have no part in the world, and the world hate them,
yet I do not ask thee that thou would take them out of the world, but
that thou would deliver them from all evil. Speaking literally, our Lord
asks here of his Father, that he would not take all his Disciples so soon
out of the world, partly because they be not well grounded in matters of
perfection, and partly because the Gentiles should be lightened by the^: and if
they should have died with Christ, all the world should have been unconverted.
Theophilus says, When the son of God says unto his Father, I do not crave of
thee that thou would take them out of this world, but that thou would
keep them from evil, above all things I say, that blessed be that mouth which
spoke that, and blessed be they for whom he spoke it, seeing thereby we be
certified, that how bad so ever we be, our Lord does labor always to bring
us to his service. Mark then the infinite goodness and charity of our Lord,
who when he had said, I do not ask for the world, says presently, I do not
desire that thou would take them out of the world. The which words he spoke
immediately after the other, because we should not be bold to sin, trusting
unto Gods mercy, and yet if we do chance to fall, that we should not
persevere and despair. To say that Christ should not entreat for the world, it
is a dreadful speech, and yet to pray that he should not spoil the world of
the good, is a speech of great comfort: for seeing that he would not have the
world without good ones, it is a sign that he would that by them we should
be converted. When the Lord would drown all the world with a flood, he did
first put Noe in safety; and when he would send fire upon Sodom and Gomorra,
he placed Lot upon a high hill; and when he would punish the murmurers in the
desert, he commanded Moses and Aaron to go out to the field: so that it is a
great sign that God is angry with some when he takes the good out of their
company. Unhappy Judas immediately after he had departed out of that holy
college, hanged himself; and it happened otherwise in S. Peter, whom although
Christ suffered to fall, yet he did not abandon him and put him out of his
sight, for as soon as he had committed the fault Christ presently looked him
in the face. Judas was a disciple, and S. Peter was a disciple, Judas did
sin, and S. Peter did sin, the one did sell Christ, and the other did deny
Christ, Judas was damned, and S. Peter saved, and the reason was, because
Christ was where Peter sinned, and would not be where Judas did hang himself.
In the two great captiuities of Babylon, there were many just men carried away
captive among the wicked, as Thobias, Daniell, and Esdras, and Abdias, all
which our Lord did send thither, not because they had committed any sin
against him, but for the consolation and remedy of some sinners. What should
become of sinners and naughty persons, if our Lord should take away all good
men from amongst them? In the merit of the good and virtuous, God does sustain
us which are sinners; for otherwise, because we are Gods enemies the son
would not shine upon us, nor the heaven would not rain upon us, the air would
move it self, and the earth open, and wild beasts would devour us, and the
devils would kill us. Gregory says, That sinners may have great hope when our
Lord does not draw the just from among them, for in not seperating the good
from the bad, it is a token that by the merits and hands of those good men,
he will draw us from that which is naught, and lead us to that which is good.
Ambrose says, In those words which Christ spoke [I ask not for the world] he
does threaten us with his justice: and in the other speech of, [Non tollas eos
de mundo] he does flatter us with his mercy, seeing that in the one he
sets away the obstinate from obtaining of mercy, and in the other he gives
hope unto the weak, that they shall have part in his clemency. I beseech thee
then O my good Jesus, I beseech thee, that thou would not separate me from
among the good, or else put not the good from me, for if I should not be good
for conscience, at the least I should be for shame. It is also much to be
noted, that our Lord does not entreat his Father, that he would not take the
good out of the world, but that he would keep them from all peril and
danger: in so much that in his most high prayer he does neither forget the
vveake, nor be careless of the good, because for sinners he prays that
they be not forsaken of the good, and for the just he prays, that they be
not ouermaistered by sinners. If it be true that Saint Gregory says, Deus qui
nos in tantis periculis, and that the Apostle says, Periculum in mari,
periculum in terra, and also the Prophet, Hoc mare magnum and speciosum, why
does not the son of God pray that his Father would deliver us from more than
one danger, seeing there are so many in the world? It seems that there should
be some great evil in the world, seeing that Christ makes mention of it and
of no other, as so it is truly, for if that evil had not come into the world,
there should have been no hell in the other. Irenaeus says, As in heaven
there is one holy one above all holy ones, which is God, and in hell there is
one evil above all evils which is the devil, so there is in the world one
naughty thing which passes all the rest which is sin. Tell me I pray thee
what naughtiness would there be in the world, if in the world there were no
sin? Hunger and cold, thirst and weariness, we do unjustly call evils or
naughty things, because they are not naught of themselves, but only the
relics of that great evil, for if we had not known what thing sin had
been, neither should we have known what hunger and cold had meant. For to
deliver us from this great evil Christ does teach us to pray, when we say,
Sed libera nos a malo, and so Christ in his prayer says, Non rogo vt tollas
eos de mundo, sed vt liberes eos de malo. So that we are to crave nothing else
of our Lord, but that he would deliver us from sin, and guide us in his
service. What do thou ask thy Father O my good Jesus for thy elect, what
do thou ask for thy well-beloved disciples? I do not ask riches for them,
for that is a frail thing; I do not ask honor for them, for that is a vain
thing; nor life, for that is transitory; nor ease, because there is none in
this world; I ask only that thou would deliver them from sin, for my
disciples cannot possess greater riches than to have their hearts clear from
sins. Christ adds further in his prayer and says, Non pro eis tantum rogo,
sed pro eis qui credituri sunt in me, as if he should say, I do not pray
only (O my Father) for these which eat at my table, but for all those which
will hereafter enter into my church; because that thou being in me by nature,
and I being with them by grace, they may be perfect in one perfect charity.
Christ made his prayer in very good order, for first he prayed for himself,
then for his Disciples, then for weak sinners, and in the end for all those
which were to come. If Christ should have prayed only for those which sat at
his table, what should have become of all those which should afterward be borne
in his catholic church? Chrysostom says, That Christ prayed for the quick
and for the dead, for the present and for the absent, for those which were
already born, and for those which should afterward be born, insomuch that all
the favors which. God does for us at this day, Christ did merit for us by his
life and blood, and obtained them with his prayer. S. Augustine says, In the
merit of those words which Christ spoke in his prayer, Non tantum pro eis rogo,
we which are now in his church have as great part in the merits of this life
in the bestowing of his blood, and in the perfection of his prayer, as his
disciples which were with him then at his table. O glorious speech, O blessed
prayer which Christ used when he said, I do not pray for them only, but for
those which shall hereafter believe in me, although we had never seen him, nor
done him any service at all, nor deserved any love at his hands, yet he prayed
with as great affection for us as for those which sat at his table. Rabanus
says, Because the son of God was the founder of the church, he prayed unto
his father for those of his church, not forgetting nor excluding any one: by
reason whereof, we shall ask with great confidence those things which belong
to the salvation of our soul, for seeing he does pray to his Father for those
things which are fit for us, it is to be believed, that he will not deny us of
that which himself possesses. Theophilus says, Mark well that Christ does
not pray here for those which believe that there is a God, but only for those
which do believe in God. The Pagan does believe that there is a God, the
devil does know well that to be true which God says, but only the good
Christian does believe in God, because he does that which God does command
him. There be many which believe that there is a God as the Pagan does, and
believe God as the devil does, but they do not believe in God as the good
Christian does: for the Apostle says, that our faith is not known by the
words which we speak, but in the good works which we do. Christ does conclude
and says, Vt omnes sint Consummati in vnum, that is, he entreats his
Father, that all those which be at his table, and all those which shall after
succeed in his catholic church may end in one faith, in one baptism, in one
love, and in one charity.

CHAP. VII. Herein he entreats of the variety, and diversity of names of the
sacrifices of the old Testament, and of the exellency of the sacrifice of the
new Testament.
SI oblatio tua fuerit de sartagine, similae conspersum oleo, and
absquefermento, diuides, eam, minutatim, and funde super eum oleum, Leuit. 2.
chap. God spoke these words to holy Moses, giving him order how the Priests
should be appointed, and how the sacrifices should be offered, as if he would
say, If any Hebrew will offer unto God any fruit to be fried in a frying pan,
the flower must be kned with oil, and without leaven, and after it is well
fried, and oil sprinkled upon it, and cut into very small pieces, so offered
unto Aaron, to be offered upon the altar. Before we come to expound these
mysteries, we must show the cause why our Lord would busy and occupy the
people of the Jews, in such strange rites, in such new sacrifices, and in so
many ceremonies, being as he was, so grave a Lord, and so mighty a God.
Stapulensis in the first of Leuiticus says, That for three causes God
commanded the Jews, to offer so many small sacrifices, and made with so many
ceremonies. The first is, that because the Jews had been brought up in Egypt,
where all were idolatours, and they given to Idolatry, the Lord would that they
should offer those sacrifices unto him, and not to the gods of the Gentiles.
The second reason is, that because under those sacrifices he would declare and
figure the true sacrifice which should come into the world which was his
precious son. The third reason is, that being occupied in that multitude of
sacrifices they should have no time to bestow in committing of other sins,
because the foundation of all wickedness is accursed idleness. It is also to
be noted, that there was seven kinds of sacrifices in the old law, unto the
which all other were reduced, although they seemed to be infinite. The first
sacrifice was called Holocaustum, which was the greatest and most sumptuoust of
all, because it was offered unto our Lord without any other respect: the second
was called Pacificum because it was offered in time of war, partly because
our Lord should give them peace in their times, and partly because he should
give the^ victory against their enemies. The third was called Propiciatory
which was offered in time of great dearth or pestilence, and the end of it was
because our Lord should withdraw his hand from over them, and take that plague
from them. The fourth was called Pontificat, which was offered for the sins
of the priest of the Temple, and the end of it was, because they did hold it
certain, that if the Priest were laden with sins, that the Lord at his
hands would not accept the sacrifices. The fifth was called Regale, which was
offered for the sins which the king had committed, and the end of it was,
because the Lord should pardon the sins which he had committed, and lighten him
to govern well his Commonwealth. The sixth was called Common, which was offered
for the sins of all the people of Israel, and the end of it was, that the Lord
should take them under his protection, and look upon that people. The seventh
was called Particular, and this was offered for every particular person, and
the end of it was, that God should pardon him for that which was past, and give
him grace to amend hereafter. All these sacrifices differed in the beasts which
were offered in them, and in the ceremonies with the which they were offered:
and in one thing they all agreed, that is, that there could no sacrifice be
made for the remission of any sin, unless the blood of one clean beast were
shed. The Apostle said not without great cause, Non fit sanguinis effusio sed
remissio, because no man could be made clean of a fault in the old law but by
the death of some beast. Origin says, It is certain that every beast does
rather live by his blood, than by his flesh, or members, or bones which he
goes with, for when he leaves bleeding, he leaves breathing. Although it
be true, that in recompense of the least fault, we are bound to offer our life
for it, yet God in the old law was content with the life of a dead beast, in
recompense of the life which that Jew did owe him. O how happy we be which
fight under the name of Christ, because the parishioners of the synagogue did
offer the blood of dead beasts, but the faithful Christians offer nothing but
the blood of the son of the living God; insomuch that we have no necessity to
offer our lives in recompense of our offenses, because the life of one was
sufficient to make clean all the faults of the world. S. Paul could not
praise Christ's buying of us better, than to say, Emptiestis pretio magno,
giving us thereby to understand, that with the blood of his veins he had
bought our lives, and also taken away our offenses. For to have pardoned a Jew
of his fault, it was necessary every time that he had sinned, to kill a beast:
but in Christ's holy law one death took away all deaths, one life did buy all
lives, and one pain took away all pains and offenses. When the Apostle
calls Christ, Hostiam viuentem, he wants not a deep secret and a profound
mystery, because that in the old law they called Hostia^, the sacrifice which
was offered against those which were enemies, and they offered nothing but dead
sacrifices, because the beast which they did offer was neither called
sacrifice, nor Hostia, until his life had been taken from him. The son of
God gave the name of Hostia a sacrifice when he died, and the name of life when
he rose again, and therefore we may very well call him a lively sacrifice, a
holy sacrifice, a pure sacrifice, and holy bread, seeing that he is the
sacrifice and Hostie which gives life unto all, and is the holiest sacrifice
of all other, and the purest, and the cleanest bread of all others. Anima cum
obtulerit oblationem sacrificij domino similae erit eius oblatio and fundet
super eam oleum, and ponet thus, Leuit. 2. God spoke these words unto Moses,
because he should tell them the people of Israel, as if he should say, If any
will offer any sacrifice which shall be acceptable unto me, offer me it of
the purest flower mingled with oil, and therewithal he shall add a little
frankincense. If we do curiously look unto it, of three things only our
Lord requires an offering of us, that is pure flower, good oil, and sweet
incense; the which things are easiy to be found, light to offer, and not
costly to buy. S. Ambrose says, In this we may see what a great desire our
Lord has to pardon the sins which we commit against him, in that he himself
does teach us what sacrifices we should offer unto him. What is understood by
that fine sifted flower, but that most sacred humanity of the son of God?
This holy flower was so sifted and putrified, that all the Angels which shall
come to see it, and all the men in the world which shall come to cleanse it,
shall not find in that sacred humanity one small grite of original sin, nor
on spot of mortal sin, nor one little dust of any other small sin. Of this
most pure flower Christ did knead the sacramental bread in his last supper,
which he left us in the church, which does differ far from that which mother
Eve did leave her children, because that in eating of that we do sin, and
receiving of this we do live. What is the incense which God commanded us to
offer with the flower in his Temple, but the divinity which is joined with the
humanity in Christ? Until the gate of the Temple the flower was carried by it
self, and the incense by itself, but being brought to the gate of the Temple,
the one was incorporated with the other: which mystery was most notably
accomplished in the coming of Christ, because that so far asunder was
mankind which was here upon earth, from the divinity which was in heaven, but
the son of God coming into the world, immediately God with man, and man with
God became one. What is the oil with the which God commanded the flower and
incense to be tempered, but that which in the blessed Trinity we call the
holy ghost? The conjunction and bond of love betwixt the Father and the son,
and he who did incorporate the flower with the incense, was no other but the
holy ghost, for so said the prophecy, Vnxit te deus, deus tuus eleo letetia,
and so said the Angel unto the virgin when he said, Spiritus sanctus
superueniet in te. That which the Prophet called oil, the Angel afterward did
call the holy ghost: insomuch that the cake which God demanded of flower, oil,
and incense, was nothing else but the humanity of him which was made by the
father, and by the son, and by the holy ghost. A cake so well seasoned, a
sacrifice so highly well made, which of the saints would not offer, and which
of the Angels would not adore? The sacrifice which God did demand in times
past, was not that which the Synagogue did offer, but that which the catholic
church does now offer, for they did offer him dow wet in vinegar, and foustie
oil, and most sharp incense, but the sacrifice which we do now offer him is
the humanity and divinity of Christ, united and put together by the hands of
the holy ghost. It is no reason that the Christian and devour reader should be
ignorant why God commanded but a part of the flower to be offered, but all the
incense. To put a measure in the flower was to say, that the humanity of it
self was limited and had an end, and to put no measure in the frankincense
was to say, that in the divinity there is neither beginning nor end, which is
most true, because the works which the son of God did were limmitted and
circumscribed in that, that he was man, but being kneaded with the oil of the
holy ghost, he made them infinite in value and weight. To come then to our
first purpose, the text says, si oblatio tua fuerit de sartagine simile
conspersa oleo, and absque fermento, diuides eam minutatim, and fundas super
came oleum, as if he should say, The fritter which thou shall offer unto me,
shall be made of the flower of the meal, without leaven, kned with very good
oil, and then being well pricked, thou shall sprinckle it over with new oil.
If there should be no mystery hidden under this Judicial sacrifice, we might
have occasion to think that our Lord were a glutton, and given to variety of
meats, seeing that in the beginning of this chapter he asked of the^ fritters
or cake dressed with good oil, and now again a cake made of the flower of
wheat, and that without leaven, small broken, and fried in a frying pan in very
whote oil. Of this high and new sacrifice, what is the flower but the humanity
which suffered, what the oil but the love with the which he died, and what
the frying pan but the cross where he died? To say that God the Father did
ask for a cake made in a frying pan, and to say that the cross of his son
was the frying pan, and that the fine flower of his precious flesh was fried in
that fryingpan, and that the oil with the which it was fried was the love with
the which he redeemed us, is no vnreuerent speech to use; neither is there any
errorin affirming it, seeing we he certain that there is no word written in
holy Scripture which is not full of high mystery. The property of the fryingpan
is, being put upon the fire the fire does not wast him nor melt him as he
does many other things, and beside: he makes those meats which are cold,
hard, and not to be eaten; whote, soft, and very sauourous. What was the death
and passion of our redeemer Jesus Christ, but a frying pan put to the fire? The
sacred humanity of Christ being put in the fryingpan of the cross,
notwithstanding all the torments which they gave him, and all the injuries and
reproaches which they spoke against him they never diminished any part of his
virtue, for although for the space of three days his soul was separated from
his body, yet they divide not his Diety from his soul, nor from his body.
Isichius upon Leuiticus says, Before that the son of God was fried in the
frying pan of the cross, his flesh was so raw that it could not be eaten, but
after that the fire of his passion did season it us and fry it, there is
nothing in heaven more sauerous, nor nothing on the earth more profitable.
Cyrillus in another sense says, There were four things in this sacrifice,
fire, the pan, oil, and flour: These four things were found in the passion of
Christ, that is, the fire which the Jews kindled to the end he should dieithe
frying pan, was the cross which they sought out where he should die: and the
oil, the love and charity with the which he died there for to redeem the
world: and the flower, his most sacred flesh which there was fried. O glorious
sacrifice, O eternal meat, that thou art O son of the living God, seeing
that fried and whote, and seasoned, thou did give thy self in the frieng
pan of the cross, to the end that all men might eat thee, and none excused
from serving thee. When the son of God said, Nisi manducaueritis carnem filij
hominis, his Disciples being scandalized, Abierunt retrorsum and dixerunt,
durus est hic sermo. But after that, that most sacred flesh was seasoned and
fried in the frying pan of the cross, it was soft and sweer to taste of,
sauerous to eat, and profitable to be taken. Sum tibi sartaginem ferream, and
ponas eam murum ferreum, inter te and eiuitatem, said God by the Prophet
Ezechiel, chap. 4, as if he should say, Go thy way out of the city, and thou
shall put a frieng pan of iron between thee and the city, because thou may
neither see her, nor she hurt thee. Who ever saw or heard the like, that the
Lord should command the Prophet to fight with a frying pan, and defend himself
behind the same? Tell me O Ezechiel, what hurt could thou do with a frying
pan, seeing it has no point, or how could thou defend thy self under it,
considering that it will scarce cover thy head? If thou will go to fight take
a lance with thee, and if thou will go to defend thy self from thy enemies
take thy Target, because the frying pan is fitter for the kitche^ tha^ the
war, and better to dress meat with than to fight. O glorious cross, O holy
frying pan, where the flesh of my God was fried, where his blood was shed,
where his charity was enflamed, where our fault was melted, and where his
life was ended. The frying pan of the Synagogue was neither good for wars nor
profitable for peace: But thou holy cross and happy frying pan wast he, with
the which the devil was overcome, God pacified, the world redeemed, and the
heaven opened. What thing can I put betwixt thee and me O good Jesus, but this
precious cross and frying pan where thou did end thy life, that my sin
might not come unto thee, nor thy punishment pass to me. Do thou not think my
brother, do thou not think, that God commanded the Prophet to put between him
and the city a frying pan, for any good that it would do him, but for that
which the frying pan signified: for thereby was signified the cross and the
crucified, which should be a mediator between God and the world. O sweet
Jesus, O my souls delight, where but in the frying pan of thy dolors and
griefs, and where but in the oil of thy charity and love, did thou end
consume and fry my enormious sins? Where but in the frying pan of the cross,
where thou saiedst, Consummatum est, giving us to understand by that last
speech, that there thou had ended and made a full account of our sin and
thy anger, of our perdition and thy passion, of our ignorance and thy life?

CHAP. VIII. Wherein is declared a figure when Moses did anoint the altar
seven times with one finger, and how that unction was a figure of Christ, and
fully accomplished in his most sacred humanity.
DIgito suo vnxit Moses altar septies oleo vnctionis, this is written in the
40 chapter of Exodus, as if he should say, In the same day that Moses did
institute his brother Aaron bishop, and ordained also his children Priests, he
did anoint the great altar seven times, and that with one finger, and did
consecrate it with oil. Cyrillus upon this place says, That although all the
holy Scripture be full of mysteries, yet there is greatest attention to be
given when it speaks of the altar, or of a Priest, because that, that mystery
cannot be handeled, and not talk of the mysteries of Christ. If we do look
into the words of the text, we shall find that that which is anointed is the
altar, that with the which it is ointed is holy oil, and the manner how is
with one finger only, and that seven times; and that which was further ointed
were all the ornaments of the altar. These were the qualities of the altar,
near unto it were the holy breads, before it burned lamps, on the side of it
they did put the candlestickes, on the top of it the offered sacrifices, at the
foot of it they shed the blood, behind it were the people, over against it was
the veil, upon it was the Cherubin, about it were the curtains. This altar
was made of wood which would not rot, there could come none to it but the
Priests, they could not go up to it by steps nor stairs, night and day lamps
burned there, and other fire which should not be put out. Although the altar of
the Synagogue had many privileges, and great freedoms, yet it had a
counterpeise with it, which was, that upon it they slew all the beasts which
they did offer unto God, and therefore it was sometimes so bloody and so laden
with flies, that it seemed rather a board in the butchery to cut flesh on, then
an altar of the church. Who is the true altar, and the holy altar, and the
clean altar, but only the son of the living God? Origin says, In the Temple
of the Synagogue the altar was one thing, and the Priest another, and another
thing that which they offered; but in the altar of the church, the altar where
they offer, and the Priest which does offer, and the sacrifice which is
offered, and he unto whom it is offered is one and the same thing. Leo in a
Sermon of our Lords Supper says, In this high supper and in this holy altar,
the son of God is the ultar, and the meat, and he who inuiteth, and he who is
invited, he who eats, and is eaten, he who annointeth, and is anointed, he
who offers and is offered. What preheminences had the altar of the old
Synagogue, which are not greater in the Catholic church? Their altar was of
the wood of the Mount Lybanus, and ours of the most sacred humanity of Christ;
theirs was of wood which would not corrupt, and ours of flesh which cannot
sin; theirs was made bloody with other blood than their own, and ours is
washed with his own blood; upon theirs they did kill beasts, upon ours they
forgive us our offenses; to theirs there could none go up but the Priests of
the temple, but unto ours all the sinners of the world may come unto; in theirs
there burned a fire of light which must every hour be kindled and put
together, but in ours there burns the fire of his love and charity which can
never be extinguished. O holy altar, O glorious altar of the cross, in which
there is offered not dead beasts, but men's sins, not to prove the^ but to
pardon them, where our weak services are offered, not because thou would
praise the^ O Lord, but because thou would accept them, and where also the
merits of thy holy son are offered, not for his own sake who was without sin,
but for ours who can do nothing but sin. The altar of the Synagogue had no
step nor staire, because the common sort did believe nothing in God but his
essence, but to the altar of our catholic church, which is a congregation of
the faithful, they go up by three steps, because we believe in one essence and
three persons. The text also says, that the altar of the synagogue was
anointed with one finger only: who shall we say that this finger is but the
selfsame holyghost? Hilarious de Trinitate says, In all the Trinity there is
but one arm, and that is the Father, of whom the Prophet says, Et brachiu^
meu^ co^fortauit eum, neither is there any more but one hand which is the son,
of whom also the Prophet says, Filius meuses tuego hodie genui te, nor there
is in all the Trinity but one finger of who^ the scripture says, Digitus dei
hic est. In the unctions and creations of us there are many fingers occupied,
that is, my great grandfather begat my grandfather, and my grandfather my
father, and my father begat me, and I begat my son, and my son begat my
nephew: but in the generation of Christ there was applied one only finger,
which was the person of the holy ghost. August in a sermon says, Seeing that
he which does beget is one, and he who is begotten is one, and she who does
bring forth is one, and he for whom he is borne is one, which is the world;
why should there have been more then one finger, which was the Holy Ghost? The
text says further, that the altar was not anointed once only, but seven times
a row. What is meant that Christ was anointed seven times a row, but only that
all the seven gifts of the holy ghost were bestowed upon him? It is to be
noted, that in all the sacrifices which they made of kine, sheep, and goats,
and pigeons, the altar was always anointed with blood, saving when they
ordained Aaron a priest, at what time they did anoint it with oil alone, the
which was not done without a mystery. The reason the^ is this, that because al
their sacrifices were done to take away the Jews sins, the which were to be
taken away with shedding of blood, Quia sine sanguinis effusione non fit
remissio, says the Apostle, there was no need of effusion of blood in the
sacrifice which did only represent Christ, because in him there was no sin at
all. Why should they have anointed with blood the altar of the humanity of
Christ, considering that not only there was no sin in him, but in him all the
sins of the world were to be taken away? If the curious Reader would deeply
understand this high figure let him turn Moses name into the Father, and
Aarons name into Christ, and the altar into humanity, and the name of
anointing into gift, and blood into the water of baptism, and the finger into
the holy ghost, and then he shall truly find, how well the truth does answer
unto the figure, and the letter to the spirit. The text says further in the
same chapter. Vnxit altar cum omnisuppellectili, as if he should say, After
that Moses had made an end of anointing the altar with holy oil, he did
also anoint all things that did belong to the altar, that is, ewars, basins,
candlestickes, towels, hooks, chafindishes. Let no man think it to be a
jest, that God commanded to anoint with holy oil, not only the altar, but
also all things which did appettaine to the altar, because that by this is
discovered one of the greatest privileges that Christ had, which no man did
ever but he enjoy in the world. What should it mean that at the altar of the
Synagogue there remained nothing which was not anointed with oil, but that
there was nothing in the humanity of the word which was not fully replenished
with the holy ghost? Why is Christ called Sanctus sanctoru^, but because his
holy unction was more holy tha^ that of all the other saints? When the church
does wash her creatures in baptism, she does with water wash, and as it were
only there anoint souls which were defiled with original sin, the which
souls are made so clean and pure with that unction, that if they should depart
presently out of this life, they should imediately by Gods favor go to glory. O
unhappy that we be, for although they wash and anoint our soul in baptism,
yet there remains our memory to be anointed, seeing that we forget God;
there remains our understanding to be anointed, seeing we think of other
things tha^ of God; there remains our will to be anointed, seeing that we
put our love on other things besides God; and also our heart remains to be
anointed, seeing we give it to another tha^ to god. What shall we say of our
poor body, seeing there is no part or member of it which is anointed? seeing
my eyes can see nothing but vanity, my ears hear nothing but lightness, my tongue
nothing but lie, my members commit sin, and my hands theft? what shall I say of
such a body, is he not rather rotten the^ anointed? when the Apostle S. Paul
said with weeping tears, alas and woe be unto me unhappy and unfortunate man,
who will deliver me from the servitude of this body? would he have spoken such
pitiful words if the powers of his body had been anointed with holy oil of
love and charity? the church like a pitiful mother does anoint us with the
wholesome water of baptism when we be born, and afterward she does wash and
anoint us with love and charity when she does give us grace to love god and
forgive our neighbors: the first vnctio^ is to help us that we do not sin, and
the second to make us clean of all that which we have already sinned. O what
small need Christ has to be so many times anointed, nor by the church
helped; for from the first instant of his incarnation was anointed, not only
the altar of his most holy humanity, to enjoy presently the divine essence, but
also all the members of his holy body were anointed, because they might never
sin, nor never be separated from God. The figure of anointing the altar with
all the furniture was spoke of none but of Christ, nor fulfilled in none but in
Christ alone, because it does easily appear, that as the holyghost left no
part in his soul nor body, which he did not sanctify and make holy, so there
was no power in his soul nor body, which to our benefit he did not employ.
We may better say of Christ than of Moses, he does anoint the altar, Cum
omni suppellectile, seeing that with his feet he visited the altars of the
Temples, with his hands cured the sick, with his tongue preached to the people,
and with his heart forgave sinners.

The end of the fifth word which Christ our redeemer spoke upon the altar of the
Cross.
These four chapters are all which the Author left, made upon the seventh word
which Christ spoke upon the cross, that is, In manus tuus, etc. For whilst
that he was a making it, it pleased our Lord to take him out of this life.
CHAP. I. How God is the only and true comforter, and how he was Deus vltionum
to the Synagogue, and is to the church Pater misericordiarum.
BEnedictus deus and pater domini nostri Jesus Christi, pater misericordiarum,
and deus totius consolationis, qui consolatur nos in omni tribulatione nostra.
These are the words of the Apostle, speaking of the goodness and mercy of our
Lord God, as if he should say, Blessed and praised be the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who is the father of all mercies and God of all comfort, and who
is the true consolation of all our tribulations. With a high style and lofty
words the Apostle does extol the greatness and power of God in calling him
Father, and Father of mercies; and God, and the God of consolations: and above
all that, he keeps them not for himself only, but does succor us with them
in all our tribulations. O how happy is the Apostle who utters these words,
and how blessed we Christians for whom he spoke them, and how blessed is
Christ, by whose merits they were spoken? What grauer sentences, or sweeter
words could be spoken, seeing that by them he makes himself, of God, our
Father; of a judge, our advocate; of a Lord, our brother; of a revenger,
merciful; of him which was cruel, gentle and meek; of him which could not be
spoken with, most affable; and of one which was invisible, treatable. Thou
may have pity on me, and I have pity on thee, and I can comfort thee, and
thou can comfort me, but to have pity on all, who can do it but only the
father of mercies? and comfort all men, who is able to do it but only the
father of all consolations? If I be sick one may cure me, if I be naked
another can cloth me, if I be sad a friend can somewhat comfort me, but tell
me I pray thee, who is able to help me in all tribulation and distress, but
only our Lord who does comfort us in all our tribulations? Who says by the
Psalm, Cum ipso sum in tribulatione, and of whom speaks the Apostle, Quod
consolatur nos in omni tribulatione: of who was he ever called whom he did not
help? The father of our Lord Jesus Christ is he, who in calling upon him, does
open; in speaking to him, does answer; who being demanded any just thing, does
grant it. By pieces and by patches, and by crowns men can give us of their
pleasures, and the world his delights: only he who is the God of all comfort
can comfort us in our distresses, and succor us in our necessities. It is much
to be noted, that the Apostle does not say the God of consolation, but the Lord
of all consolation: whereof we may infer, that all comfort which does not
come of him is dissolute or fained, or imperfect. We should have great pity
on those men which say, Let us go sport our selves at the water, let us go
walk in a garden, who seem rather to play the Idolaters then to recreate
themselves, seeing they put all their felicity and case in seeing a green
meddow in the running of the river, in flourishing trees, and to sit in a
banketting house. Seneca in an Epistle says, Let no man think that
consolation does consist in that which we see with our eyes, or hear with
our ears, or touch with our hands, or smell with our nose, but only in that
which the heart desires: for no man can be at rest, if his heart have not
contentment. With variety of meats the taste is recreated, the sight reioiceth
in fair sights, the hearing is delighted with sweet music, the smell is
pleased with aromaticall perfumes, and the feeling ioieth in soft things; but
what shall the poole heart do, which neither takes taste in meats, nor
pleasure in music, nor delight in that which it sees, nor contentment in
that which it smells? what other thing says the church when she says,
Sursum cord, but that we should lift up our hearts unto God, seeing that there
is no perfect consolation for them below in the world. Al wicked men would bid
God much good do it him with his glory, if they could find any perfect case
upon earth for their hearts, but because they cannot find it, be he never so
bad he sighteth to go to heaven. We say all this, because the Apostle saying,
that he is the God of all consolation, how can any man have any consolation in
this life, unless he give it him who is the God of all consolation? How great
soever a lord Hector was in Troy, and how great soever Alexander was in Asia,
and how mighty soever Caesar was in Rome; notwithstanding Christ was greater in
his church: because all those Princes were such over their cities only, but the
son of God is the God of all consolations. What greater pleasure then to give
pleasure to whom thou love, what greater contentment then to give contentment
to whom thou likest? Our Lord kept this treasure for himself alone, and
reserved this segniory for himself, that is, Quod sit deus totius
consolationis, and thereupon it is, that if he will not show that which he can
do, and impart among us that which he has, no just man should live
co^te^tedly, nor any Angel happily. If as one is lord of many possessions and
inheritances, he were also of many pleasures and consolations, what would we
not give for them, what would we not bestow to attain unto them, and unto
what would we not put our selves to take them? All mortal men go after their
pleasures, and hunt for delight, but alas they seek them in the house of the
God of travels which is the world, and forsake the Lord of consolations which
is God, and therefore they go astray in that which they seek, and go
discomforted in that which they desire. Barnard in a sermon says, O what a
great comfort it is to the good, that they have him for their God and Lord who
is the God and Lord of all consolations: for it is not to be believed, that
being the God of al comforts, that he does not impart some of them unto his;
and especially, seeing that he does not discomfort those which offend him, who
will not believe but he will comfort those which serve him? When the Apostle
says that our God is the God of all consolations, and not only that, but also
the father of mercies, we have great cause to love him, and to be thankful
unto him, seeing that not long before he called himself the God of revenge,
as now he does call himself the Father of mercies. S. Ambrose says, What
greater news could we hear, or what could he give us for a greater reward, then
for our Lord to give himself unto us for our father, his son for our
brother, the holy ghost for our master, his church for our mother, the
Sacraments for a medicine, his death for a pardon, and his blood for our
redemption? Isichius upon Leuiticus says, Mark the depth of the Scripture,
and thou shall see that when he speaks of mercies, it does not call God, Deus
misericordiarum, The God of mercy, but Pater misericordiarum, the Father of
mercies; and when it talks of justice, it does not call him Pater vltionum,
but Deus vltionum, The God of revenge, because it is the office of God to
punish, and the duty of the father to pardon. The Prophets did often use this
word Deus, God, and helped themselves little with this word Pater, Father; and
Christ contrariwise, did often benefit himself with this word Pater, Father,
and sildome with this name Deus, God: giving us thereby to understand, that the
time of justice was now ended, and that the time of mercy was come.

Isidorus De summo bono, says, O eternal goodness, and depth of all
wisdom, why should I distrust in thy great clemency, being that thou art my
Father, and Father of all mercy? Let the Pagans distrust in thee who believe
thee not, let the wicked distrust in thee who serve thee not, for I will
hope in thee with those which serve thee and love thee: For although I cannot
wholly serve thee, I labor as much as I can not to offend thee.

Anselmus upon the Apostle says, After I heard thee say, O my good Jesus,
Pater ignosce illis; and the Apostle say, Pater misericordiarum, Although my
naughty life make me afraid, yet thy great mercy comes immediately to my
mind, for the same day that thou did make thy self man, thou did
change thy name, from the God of Revenge, into the Father of Mercies. O
glorious and happy change, that is, the changing the name of God into the name
of Father, and the name of a Revenger into the name of a Defender, the name of
Justice into the name of Mercy, the name of a Creator into the name of a
Redeemer, all which thou did change when thou wast made man, and did
suffer on the cross for me.

Saint Augustine upon the Apostles words says, Tell me O good Jesus, tell
me O great Redeemer, after thou had changed the name of Deus vltionum
into the name of Pater misericordiarum, what did thou see so hard that thou
did not bring to pass, or what sin did thou see so enormious that
thou did not pardon? In calling thy self the Father of mercies thou
did forgive Matthew his exchanges, Mary Magdalene her vanities, the
Samaritane her Adulteries, the good thief his theft, and the fisherman Peter
his denying of thee, the Apostles forsaking of thee, and thy enemies putting
thee to death. Irenaeus says, Seeing that the time of Deus vltionum is past,
and that the time of Pater misericordiarum is come, have mercy on me, O great
God of Israel, have mercy on me: and when shall this be, but when thou vvilt
give me strength to serve and praise thee, and endue me with grace to save
me? O Father of mercies, O the God of all consolation, when shall my soul
hear for her self, Pater ignosce illi, as the wicked Synagogue did hear
thee say, Father forgive them? What does it avail me, that thou have pardoned
those which did then put thee to death, if thou do not also now forgive us
which most wickedly offend thee? Children for children, sinners for sinners,
there is as great reason that thou should pardon those of thy holy church as
those of the Synagogue, for if they were children of the God of revenge who
did put thee to death then, they are also children of the Father of mercies,
who do offend thee now.

Saint Augustine in his Confessions says: O Father of mercies and God of all
comfort, if it be true that I was with those which took thy life from thee
upon the cross, why should thou not as well forgive me my fault, as thou
did then theirs?

Unto thee O eternal Father, I say Mea culpa, and unto thee O holy son I
confess my offense, in that, that if I was not with Judas when he sold
thee, yet I was with the wicked and ungrateful Jews when they did
crucify thee: for if they did fasten thee on the cross with nails, I did
there crucify thee with my sins. Anselmus in his Meditations says, O good
Jesus, O the bliss of my soul, who carried thee to the cross, but the love
which thou had to redeem us? And what tormented thee but thy dolours? And
what took thy life from thee but my sins? And by whom have I life but by thy
merits? O Father of mercies, if it be true, that for my demerits thou did
lose thy life, and that by thy great merits I recovered my soul, do thou not
think that thou have much in my faults to pardon, and in my soul to redress
and amend? Barnard says, O creator of all things, O redeemer of all sins,
unto thee O my God I offer my self, and before thee O my Lord I present my
self, not such a one as thou did leave me when thou did create me,
but such as one as thou foundest me when thou redeemedst me. What a one
did thou leave me but made to thy image and semblance? and what a one
did thou find me but with my innocence lost, and laden with sin? O
father of mercies pardon me, seeing that I am a work of thy own hands,
pardon me seeing that I am one of thy children, and seeing I say unto thee upon
my knees, Tibi soli peccaui, it is reason that thou answer me (O my God) with
Miscriatur tui.

CHAP. II. Of the difference that is betwixt David's testament, and Christ's
testament, seeing the one commands to revenge other men's injuries, and the
other pardons his own death.
NOn deduces canicies eius pacifice ad inferos, 3. Reg. chap. 2. King David
being in the last point of his life, commanded his son and heir apparent,
Solomon, to be called unto him unto whom he spoke these words, Thou
rememberest my son Solomon, when my servant and capraine Ioab did slay
captain Abner and Amasias who were scruants unto king Saul, the which offense
because I cannot revenge in my life, the charge shll be laid upon thee, to see
that he go not quietly to his grave: and David said further unto him, Thou
shall also remember, that when I fled from thy brother and my son Absolon, my
enemy Simei came against me, and followed me all the field over, cursing me
and casting stones at me; Look unto it like a wise and a discreet man, and that
he depart not in peace out of this world. That which David commanded his son
Solomon to do, was not commanded to one who was deaffe, for if he did command
him to kill two, he did kill three or four, that is, the infant Abdonias, the
captain Ioab, Simei, and the Priest Abiathar. In all his kingdom David had no
captain which had done him so great service, nor no servant which had loved
him better than old Ioab, yet nevertheless, he had more respect to revenge the
injuries done to others, than unto their services past. If David had not been
well-beloved, and by Scripture commended, his Testament should much have
scandalized us, seeing that at the time of his death when men forbid injuries,
he commands by his Testament to take away men's lives. It is to be believed,
that he being so acceptable to God as he was, that he had consulted with God,
for otherwise being in so narrow a straight as he was in, it was more than time
for him to prepare himself to confess his sins, than to command the death of
his enemies. O how unlike David's Testament is unto Christ's, for David
commanded in his to revenge other men's deaths, but Jesus Christ our Redeemer
commanded his own proper death to be pardoned. How happy we be which be the
inheritours of Christ, and how unhappy they be which be the successors of
David, which is easily seen by their Testaments, for David's soul goes out of
his body, saying, Filine ignoscas illis, and Christ yields his last breath,
saying, Pater ignosce illis, What similitude is in this, when the one
commands to slay Ioab, who never once touched so much as his garment, and
the son of God wills to forgive those which took away his life? How would
David forgive his own death, seeing he commands to revenge another man's?
will thou see the difference betwixt the charity of the one, and the goodness
of the other? Thou may see it in that, that king David would not pardon Ioab
and Simei, whose sins were so old that they were forgotten: and meek Jesus
did pardon the Jews, whose wickedness was new and fresh. How would thou have
the wounds of him who pardons, more fresher, and the wickedness of those
which are pardoned more newer, but to have them at the same time crucifieng as
he is pardoning. Aymon says, Much good may David's Testament do him, which he
made being anointed, for I will hold with that which Christ made when he was
crucified, for the one seeks out those which are culpable to kill, and the
other seeks out faults to pardon. Saint Augustine upon our Lords words
says, O how much better it is to fall into the hands of God then into the
hands of men, which is easily seen in the death of king David, and in the
death of the son of God, where the one commands to slay his own servants,
and the other wills pardon to his cruel enemies. Hugo de sancte victore
says, I do not envy king Solomon for the kingdom which king David his father
left him, nor for his will which he commanded him to accomplish, because he
left him the heir of his kingdom with such a condition, that when he should
give the last gasp, the other should presently begin to murder and kill. In
the same day and in the same hour that good king David died, as the captain
Ioab was in the Temple a praying, kind Solomon sent immediately to sley him,
insomuch that before they could put David in his grave, they took away poor
Ioabs life. O my good Jesus, the conditions of thy Testament be not like unto
these, seeing that in the last farewell on the altar of the cross, thou did
not command thy successors to revenge, but to forgive, nor to take away men's
lives, but to pardon injuries, so that as the Synagogue was a house of buying
and selling, so thou made thy church a house of pardon. Christ himself did
whip those who bought and sold in the Temple, and the selfsame son of God did
pardon those whom he found in his house of pardon: whereof we may infer,
that he is no inhabitant of his house, who dares revenge an injury. Christ did
show himself to be the son of David, in being meek as he was, but he
showed it not in being vindicatiue as he was, for when he died upon the cross,
he did not leave in all the world any one sin to forgive, nor any injury for
his heirs to revenge. If as David did command to revenge the misdemeanour
which his servants did him, Christ should have commanded to revenge the sins
which the Jews committed against him, it had not been possible to have been
done, because the sinners had too many sins, and the tormentors wanted
torments.

CHAP. III. Of the difference betwixt the blood of Abel and the blood of
Christ, and how unlike their cries unto God are.
ACcessistis ad sanguinis aspersionem, melius loquentem quam Abel, says the
Apostle writing unto the Hebrews, chap. 9, as if he should say, We are very
happy which believe in Christ, and receive his gospel, seeing we be redeemed
by his death, and bought with his precious blood. And because thou may the
better esteem of the price of this blood, know thou that it cries before the
eternal father better than the blood of Abel, because that cried Justice,
Justice, and the blood of the son of God cries Mercy, Mercy. S. Jerome
says, The Apostle does highly set forth the blood of Christ, whose sovereign
price and high merit he would not compare with the other bloods of the old
Testament, but with the blood of the first just man that ever was in the world,
the blood of the holiest saint that is in heaven. Origin says, The Apostle
should have done Christ great injury, if he should have compared his blood
with the blood of calves and goats of the old Testament, because the blood of
those beasts did serve to no other purpose but to defile the stairs, and to
take away their lives: but the blood of the son of God does wash and make
clean offenses, and save our souls. The first blood with the which God was
offended, was the blood of Abel; and the first blood with which God was
pleased, was the blood of Christ; and that which is most to be wondered at is,
that the blood of Abel did benefit but himself alone, but the blood of Christ
did profit all the world. S. Ambrose says, What blood can be compared unto
the blood of Christ? for the blood of Abel did stir up, and not appease,
seeing that thereby he lost his life, and his brother his soul: The blood
which thou did shed for me O sweet Jesus, did not stir up, but appease,
because it did pacify the fathers anger, took away thy own life, and
redeemed my soul. Anselmus says, The blood of Abel is blood, and the blood of
Christ is blood, the one the blood of a just man, and so likewise the other;
that was shed by envy, and this shed through envy: But the difference was, that
the blood of Abel cried from the earth, and the blood of the son of God
prayed from the cross. Weigh well this speech, Clamabat ad me de terra, and
also that, Melius loquentem quam Abel, and thereby thou shall perceive how the
blood of Abel does cry for vengeance upon his brother Cain, and the blood of
the son of God does pray for mercy for all the world. Consider well of this
word Melius loquentem, that is, that the blood of Christ should have been but
of small profit, if he should have died for none but for those of that time.
The Apostle does not say, that the blood of Christ did then speak only, but
that it does speak now, and will speak until the worlds end, and thereupon
it is, that we do represent this blood every day, and offer it in our prayers:
for otherwise, as there is no day in which we do not commit some sin
against him, so there should no day pass in which we should not suffer some
punishment. Saint Basil says, His offense is very great which commits a
fault, if he do not immediately help himself with the blood of Christ, for
if it be frosen for Pagans and Heretics, yet it is fresh and whot for
Christians and sinners. It is also to be marked, that the Apostle says not
Accessistit ad sanguinis effusionem, but ad sanguinis aspersionem, which speech
he used not for the wicked Synagogue, but for the holy mother church, because
the Synagogue was in the time of shedding of blood, but the holy church came to
the sprinckling and gathering of it together. O how happy we Christians be, and
how unhappy the Jews were, seeing that they came Ad sanguinis effusionem, to
the shedding of blood, and we Christians Ad sanguinis aspersionem, so that they
shed the blood of the son of God and did not gather it up, and we gather it and
did not shed it. S. Augustine upon S. John says, By this speech of Aspersionem
sanguinis, the Apostle does let us understand, that the blood of Abel had no
other force the^ to be shed upon the earth, but with the blood of the son of
God all the catholic church was as it were with Isope sprinckeled, so that
all the blood of the Synagogue was but shed and cast on the ground, but the
blood of Christ was shed, and imparted amongst us. Cyrillus upon Leuit. says,
The church was at the sprinckling of blood, but the synagogue at the effusio^
of blood, seeing that of the blood of the Synagogue there was no drop gathered,
and of the blood of the church there was no drop lost. S. Barnard says, As for
the blood of Abel let it be lost, but as for the blood of the son of God, it is
not lawful that any should be lost. And he goes gathering it drop by drop, who
by little and little does imitate Christ's life, he does gather one drop who does
imitate him in one virtue, and he does imitate him in two drops who does follow
him in two, and he does gather many drops who does bestow himself in the
getting of many virtues, insomuch that as on the cross he gave it in
recompense of wickedness, so he does now give it in exchange of virtues.

CHAP. IIII. Where Christ complains on the Christian man's soul, because she
was ungrateful for the benefit of her creation and redemption.
VVlnerasti cor meum seror mea, vulnerasti cor meum sponsa mea, in vno oculorum
tuorum, and in vno crine colli tui. Cant. 4. as if he should say, Thou have
wounded my heart, O my sister, thou have pierced my heart, O my spouse, and the
cause of my captivity was, because thou did behold me with one of thy
eyes, and because I did behold one of thy hairs. Origin upon these words
says, Such sweet words and such pitiful complaints as these are, from whence
should they proceed but from a man sorely grieved, and with heavenly love
greatly enflamed? The loving words which Christ speaks unto the soul, and
the anxiety and grief which the soul utters unto Christ, who can better
declare than the soul which is familiar with Christ? Such deep reasons, such
pitiful wounds, such true complaints, and griefs so lamentably uttered, as
these are which are contained under these words, how is it possible for my pen
to write, or my heart to taste of? How sweet our Lord is to the soul which
seeks him, and how delightful unto the soul which calls upon him, and how
pleasant unto the soul which does keep him, is so high a language, that none
is able to understand, but only that soul which does deserve to taste of the
same. First of all it is here to be noted, why Christ does call a holy soul
once sister, and another time spouse: for if she be a sister she cannot be a
spouse, and if she be a spouse she cannot be a sister. The mystery of this
secret is, that she is called spouse because of the faith which she took of
Christ, and she is called sister, because of the flesh which Christ took, in
so much that Christ is our bridegroom in that, that he is our Creator, and he
is our brother in that, that he is our Redeemer. Twice the bridegroom
complains to have been wounded of his bride, saying, Thou have wounded my
heart my sister, thou have wounded my heart my spouse: for in respect of two
loves he has compassion on her, and in respect of two loves he suffered for
her, that is, for having made her to his likeness and semblance, and for
having redeemed her with his blood. For Christ to say twice. Thou have wounded
me, thou have wounded me; is to say, thou have been unthankful for the favor
I did to create thee, and thou have been ungrateful for the benefit which I
did thee in redeeming thee: insomuch that to be unthankful unto Christ for
these two benefits, is to wound Christ's heart with two deep wounds. S.
Barnard upon the Canticles says, Note well that Christ does not say [thou have
broken my head] but [thou have pierced my heart] to let us thereby understand,
that all the offenses which we commit against him, and also all the services
which we do for him, do reach until his heart, as he does love us with the
heart. Anselmus to this purpose says, Our Lord does jest with no man, nor will
not be iested at by any man, and thereupon he loves us with all his heart if
we be in state of grace, and hates us with his heart if we be in his
disgrace. By reason whereof, there is no offense which we do commit against
his Majesty, which goes not to his heart, nor there is no service which we do
to him, but he does keep it in his heart. Origin says, The cause why the
bridegroom does complain upon the bride, and not the bride against the
bridegroom is, because the soul has no cause to complain upon God, and God
has scarce no cause to be pleased with the soul. The bridegroom complains
that the bride wounds him in the heart, because that one heart cannot be hurt
but of another heart, because that that cannot be called a fault, but that
which does determinatly proceed from the will. Then thy heart does pierce and
wound Christ's heart, when reason does teach thee that thou should not sin,
and yet notwithstanding thy will does determine to sin, whereof God does
not so much hold himself iniuried of that which thou do, as of the heart
and will with the which thou do it. Thou do so many times wound Christ as
thou do consent unto sin, and therefore he says that thou have wounded
his heart, because his injuries and offenses proceeded from thy heart. It is
much to be noted, that he says not, thou have killed my heart, but thou have
wounded my heart: for seeing that we see some die only because his heart is
moved and stirred, it should be greater reason that they should die having
their heart wounded. If a grief of the heart be hardly cured, how shall that
heart be healed which is wounded? If it be so, that all the wounds in the
heart are mortal, and not to be cured, why does Christ say that his lover had
wounded his heart, and not confess that he had killed him? By this is known
the difference betwixt offending God and offending man, for a man dies with
every wound because he will never forgive and pardon, but holy Jesus does not
complain that they kill him, but only that they wound him. Giving us thereby
to understand, that at the same instant when a soul does repent her of her
offenses, he does hold himself satisfied for that fault. What should become of
us, if Christ should say that we do kill him as he says that we do wound
him? What other thing were it to take Christ's life away, but to sin without
hope of mercy? God speaking with the Angel says, Interfecisti cor meum, and
speaking with man says only, Vulnerasti cor meum, because the sin of the
Angel had no remission, but the sin of man obtains every day pardon. O
good Jesus, O creator of my soul, how much are we bound unto thee in saying,
that we do wound thee, and not that we do kill thee, because that by this
high speech thou do let us understand, that the wounds which we give thee in
the heart, and the offenses which we commit against thee, are as easily cured
as they are easily amended. Let no man despair, let no man be discomforted in
thinking that he shall not be pardoned, and that there is no remedy for his
offenses; seeing that the son of God does confess, that we have not wholly
slain him, but only wounded him: of which wounds he then begins to be
cured when we begin to amend. O infinite goodness, O great charity of thine,
O my good Jesus, tell me I pray thee, what did thou see in my sinful
soul, that thou should trust the weapons in her hands which she may wound
thee with, and also the medicines with the which she may cure thee? what are
the weapons with the which she does wound thee, but the faults which she does
commit against thee? And what is the medicine with the which she does cure
thee, but only the amendment of her own life? Christ says further, that the
weapon with the which the bride did wound him was one of her eyes which she had
in her head, and with one of her hairs which hanged at her throat, so that her
eyes served her for arrows, and her hair for bindings. Origin upon this place
says, O how tender the heart is which is wounded with the only sight of an
eye, and what small force and strength he has who is bound with a hair. The
heart which is touched of our Lord, although he be stronger then Sampson, and
lighter then Asael, yet in loving of God and tasting of Gods holy love, it is
easily taken, and suffers himself to be bound without resistance. We have
two eyes in our head to see with, and we have two eyes in our souls to love
with, whereof the one is the eye of love, and the other is the eye of fear,
and when our Lord says that we look upon him with one eye, he says that
sometimes we serve him with fear, and sometimes with love. Men of high
perfection do look upon him with the eye of love, and men of lesser
perfection with the eye of fear, and the difference is, that with the sight of
the one there is no alteration at all, and with the sight of the other she is
presently delighted. What can there be in the world more sweeter to the taste,
or wherein our soul may receive greater recreation, tha^ to fix all our
intention to behold and look upon God, and serve him with all our heart. When
do we look upon him with one eye only, but when for love we serve him, and not
for fear? What can Christ speak more tenderly unto our soul, or what more
sweeter words can his holy mouth utter unto the soul, than to say that she had
wounded him with one eye, and tied him fast with one hair? O infinite love of
thine my Creator and Redeemer, tell me I pray thee if thou be so easily
satisfied with a soul that does but once behold thee, what will thou do by
her which does behold thee every day, and serve thee all her life time? S.
Barnard says, He does bind God with one hair who thinks on God and nothing
else, and he does wound him with the sight of one eye, who loves him and no
other, so that it lies in our own hands to serve Christ and attain unto his
bliss and felicity.

Trino and vni laus.
FINIS.

