A Combat betwixt Man and Death: OR A Discourse against the immoderate
apprehension and fear of Death.

Written in French by I. Guillemard of Champdenier in Poictou.

And Translated into English by EDW. GRIMESTON Sargeant at Arms, attending the
Commons House in Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL St. THOMAS RICHARDSON Knight, Sargeant at Law, and
Speaker in the Commons House of Parliament:
And To all the Knights, Citizens, and Burgeses of that honorable Assembly.
Most worthily honored:
BOund by your many bounties to some public service of acknowledgement and
gratitude; I could not in all my poor faculties, find any so near fit for
your grave acceptance, as this last of my aged labors. Which, though a work
far from all worth of receipt and countenance, of so many exempt and
exemplarie Judgments, and learning, for elocution, and substance; yet for the
good suggestion of the subject and object; I presumed you would not disdain
it, even your own noble names inscriptions. Good Motives beget good actiues;
and the speedy way to proceed deaths victor in the contemplative man, is, to
practice in the School of the Active. There is no such school as yours, to
teach the conquest of corruption and injustice; which every man must first
subdue, before he conquer their conqueror. I suppose therefore, I set all
men's steps in the way to his conquest; in showing them your Olympus (where all
equal and Commonwealth Combats are consummate) in my therefore bold
dedication to you. Besides, when combats were anciently intended; Hercules (the
Father and Fautor of combats) was inuok't; and all your united virtues,
composing one Hercules; in exploring and extirpating, all the privy Thefts and
violences of inhumane injustice, (whose conquest is necessary Usher to the
Combats and conquest of death:) to whom but to your Herculean faculties, could
this Combat, with so sacred decorum be consecrated? And your still willing-to
bee-well-employed old Servant, holding these humane readings and writings, no
unfit contentions for his age to sweat in; he hopes your most honored and
liberal imputations will allow him; not to carry your club idly, nor for
only office or fashion. But be this allusion held too light for your
grauities. My humble endeavor to serve you worthily, I am sure is serious
enough. And therefore, (even for the divinity of his President that accepted
the Will in his weak servant for the work) I thrice humbly implore, your
religious imitations; resting

Ever your most dutiful bounden, ED. GRIMESTON.

The Preamble.
We read of a certain Philosopher called Egesias, who had so great
dexterity to describe the mournful face of this life, and such grace in
setting forth the smyling countenance of death, as all men went joy fully unto
it; yea, many (ravished with the love thereof) did hasten their ends: Such
Philosophy at this day were very seasonable if ever; these hideous Eclipses in
the firmament; these rainie clouds in the air: this contagious poison
dispersed over all; that intestine alteration which does silently murmr
within the bowele of Christendom; that thick cloud of the East which
threatens bourely to f^ll upon our decayed houses; are so many defiances, which
Death sends to mortal men, to summon them to the Combat. All men must undergo
it, of necessity, no man can free himself by flight; there is only one
remedy which offers it self unto us, that speedily and without delay we make
a feigned Combat against death, to have some happy presage of victory: As
Alexander the Great did, from a duel performed at pleasure, conceiving that he
should get the victory of Darius; for that the soldier which acted his person
did vanquish him of Darius. In like sort let us try; at the least this trial
will teach us what we can d^e, or rather what we cannot; to the end that
after the knowledge thereof, we may have recourse to him who makes perfect his
power in our weakness; to the Eternal, who alone can rescue us out of the
paws of death. He will teach us moreover, how much many are to be blamed at
this day, which live in the light of the Sun of Justice, to be so fearful
at the time of death, when as poor Pagans were so resolute.

But you will say unto me, What doctrine can we expect from Pagans? by whom
man's life is not instructed but ruined, as says Lactantius; and who are the
Patriarchs of Heretics, as Tertullian does witness. I answer, that if we
had put on Christ after the perfect stature of a Christian man, this labor
were in vain: But for this we may not utterly condemn all humane Philosophy,
but the truth which it has spoken, must be pulled away as from an unjust
detayner, says S. Augustine. Moreover, long since the maxims of Aristotle and
other Philosophers, were allowed in the school of Christ, namely, in that
which concerns natural things, in which rank natural death is Humane
Philosophy in so much as she has yielded herself a servant to divine truth,
has not been rejected but embraced of the first and most clear sighted
fathers; of Lactantius I say, who has written that Philosophy does not hurt
when as the spirit is seasoned with religion: Of Clemens Alexandrinus, who
says learnedly, That although the Doctrine of our Savior be of it self
sufficient, seeing it is the power and wisdom of God; yet by the doctrine of
the Grecians, if it be not more fortified, it is yet unable to repel the
insulting of Sophisters, and to discover their ambushes; It is the bedge and
rampar of the Lords vine. These great spirits, (says he, in another place)
being free from passions, are accustomed to aim point blanke and hit the marko
of truth: Thus he speaks, and therefore Lipsius did not forbear to call it
the means Manud. lib. 2. c. 19.
and reconciler of divine and humane Philosophy. To conclude; that great
Divine Nazianzene, as if he had undertaken the overthrow of this present
objection, teaches that this Doctrine should not be basely esteemed, Orat.
fune in Basil.
for that it seems so to some.

But we must hold them sinister and impertinent Judges, who desire to have all
men like unto themselves, to the end they might hide themselves with the
multitude, and avoid the censure of ignorance. Finally, we confess, that in
the mysteries of Christ, he that will follow the opinion of Philosophers, shall
stumble continually. But the first death, whereof we treat, is no mystery of
Christ, but a thing as common as life: What Ensigne-bearer then shall we follow
in this; Plato, or Aristotle; (...) or Seneca? both the one and the other, but
our own advice above all, and above our own advice the holy Philosophy of
the Word of God, Ariadnes clue to guide us in this labyri^th: Let Seneca
undergo his own Law: I have freed my self from all, says he, I carry no
man's Epist. 45.
books. I yield much to the judgment of great personages, so I attribute
something to my own.

Horace says, I am not bound to swear to the words of any master; whereas the
gale of my reason shall drive me; there will I cast Anchor; he speaks like a
Poet in an extacie. Seneca with a mo^e settled spirit will say, That the
election and direction we Epist. 76.
must take in this point, is from perfect reason, by the which we exceed
brute beasts, and come near unto God: ^e might as well have named the
Evangelical faith, the true consu^ation of reason, but he understood not the
name.

But before I conclude, I beseech you Gentlemen read the whole Discourse, and
then give your censures; for as one Swallow makes no Summer, but many flying in
diverse places, and at several times; so if one reason shall not seem
sufficient unto you, many joined together will chase away the apprehension of
death. I mean not all apprehension, but the excess; for it is the end of this
Combat, which tends to no other end but to reduce the extreme fear of death,
to a just mean, and to sweeten the imaginary bitterness: but wholly to pull
this fear up by the root, is neither possible nor profitable, to the and that
no man deceive himself: It is not possible, for that man being naturally
subject to passion, he cannot disrobe himself utterly of all passions but
with his humanity; it is the work of death: why then should we fear it?
seeing that by the benefit thereof we cast away all fear. Neither is it
profitable during this life; for, as Architas says, Virtue springs from
passions, and prooceding from them, dwells with them; even as the best harmony
is composed of a sharp Superius and a grave base: even so fear, like to other
passions, being reduced to a mediocritie, to the seat of true reason, is
converted into valor, a virtue most necessary in a man. Moreover, a wise and
understanding man must not cast Stobae. Sermon. 1.
himself rashly into dangers; for he cannot eclipse himself of this life,
but to the great prejudice, (not of himself) but of the Church or Commonweal.

Finally, I expect not herein to please all the world; I have b^ene long of
Solons mind, that in a matter of importance it is a hard thing to please all
men, but I will add, impossible: On the other side I know that Momus the
Cynick will shoot against this butte the blackest arrows of his envy and
disdain: yet I entreat you Gentlemen, not to believe his saying, until that
he has done better upon this subject; otherwise (as you know) he is not to
be admitted in his opposition. There are twelve hours in the day; if this
Discourse be forced to hide it self at the first, it may be it will have
passage at the last: and admit it should not happen; that which one spoke
bravely, I will protest freely, It is enough if I have few readers, enogh if
one, and enough if none at all: for in this matter the advice which Seneca gave
to his friend Serenus, for a point of tranquillity, pleases me, and I w^ll
depend thereon. What need is there (says he) to compose books, which last
whole Lib. de tranquil. vir. c. 1.
ages? will thou break thy brain that posterity may speak of thee? Thou art
borne to dye; funerals without pomp are not so full of trouble: wherefore if
thou do compose any thing, let it be in a plain style, to employ thine i^le
time, and for thine own use.

Even so I have joyfully employed my self, (according to my poor faculty) to
gather together the points of reason dispersed here and there, against the
fear of Death; if it be for no other then my self, yet my labor shall not
be in vain; and having done what I could, I shall be acquitted.

But I had almost forgot to defend my self from the i^uectiue of some severe
Areopagite, to have produced the strongest objections of the most ^rofane
against the immortality of the soul: These are (he will say) stinking
irruptions of pestilent excrements, which should be buried in the bottomless
pit of hell, and not infect the pure air of our Horizon: To thi^ crimination I
oppose four reasons for my justification; the one is, that the air of our
Horizon is not pure, but much infected with such contagion, he that does not
feel it nor hear it: is a lepar and deaf. There is one has written above
20. years since, that impiety which before did but whisper in the ear, and
mutter betwixt the teeth, presumed now to come into the Pulpit and to pour
forth her blasphemies; and do we not see and hear in this age, (which is
much impaired) that the most profane are in most favor and authority?

In this latter plague at Paris, the chief Chirurgians of the City assembled
in their College, where they published by writing all the poison of this
malignant disease, and have according to their Art, propounded counterpoysons
to quench it; who will blame them? nay, who will not thank them? The plague of
the souls, the damned doctrine of her death, is propounded and refuted by
sollide reasons, who will repine at it? The second is taken from the thing it
self, which is, the immortality of the soul. Truth will not be flattered nor
disguised, she contents her self with her own constancy, and her natural
Ornaments; she is like the Palm tree which the more it is pressed down, the
higher it grows: It is like gold, the more it is tried the brighter it shines.

He that doubts of his cause likes not many questions; we doubt not of the
immortality of the soul; the more she strikes against the stone of contention,
the more the fire of her immortal extraction will appear. The third reason
comes from them that contradict the truth; if you suffer them always to brave
it, in the end they will proclaim a triumph. It is not the part of a brave
soldier, but of a coward, to suffer his enemy to keep the field; he must chase
him away, and vanquish him if it be possible. Answer the fool according to
his folly, says the wise man, to the end, he esteem not himself wise.

Finally, the order of my disputation has held me unto it, the equal Law of
duels binds me to withstand all the attempts which my adversary shall devise
to make against me; I entertayn^ him in the chief charge of the fear of
death: I am b^nd to do it in the accessory of the immortality of the soul,
least I should be held a Preuaricatour, a turnecoate and a perfidious
dissembler of the cause: But it may be some consor will reply, You plant
distrustful thorns in the hearts of the simple, which heretofore dia fly
joyfully upon the wings of the immortality of their souls.

I answer, That to pull up the thorns which Satan and his adherents have
planted, to resolve difficulties propounded by S^phisticall reasons, is not to
plant. Moreover, simple souls which have bin taught in the Lords School, the
honor which they owe unto him, will not suffer themselves to be dazeled nor
deceived with the illusion of carnal reasons.

Thirdly, humane fragilitie is such, that these which now sail happily in the
sea of this world by the favorable wind of divine grace, may to morrow str^ke
against the rocks of incredulity have a contrary wind and suffer shipwreck,
and so have ^eede of the answers ^ere set down. To conclude, counterp^ysons
are not for the sound, but for the sick and infected: these confutations are
not for them which be clean in heart and sound in spirit, but for such as
irreligion and presumption of humane wisdom have bewitched.

Othou the Cr^ator of all things, the Author of our life, the Inspirer of our
souls, the Father, Son and holy Ghost, one true and only God; I humbly
beseech thee, illuminate the eyes of my understanding, that I may plainly see
the happy issue of fearful death, that it will please thee so to purify the
thoughts of my soul, that she may fully apprehend the true causes of her
immortality: that it will please thee so to favor my pen, that it may write
worthily upon so worthy a subject; that the work finished, thou may be
glorified, the Reader edified, and my self fortified.

Amen.
The Combat betwixt Man and Death.
The first Argument taken from the Isntrumental cause of eternal life.
The only means to attain to the perfection of that good which the world so
much desires, should not give any amazement to the world.

Death is the only means.

Therefore Death should not give any amazement to the world.

THE first proposition of this Argument does plainly justify it self; for
without exception all men desire the happiness of life, the perfection of
Sovereign good, which is the beatitude of the holy Spirit, called eternal
life: I except not ill doers, for they err in doing ill, and either believe
that it is good, or the way which tends unto it. But there is but one way to
attain unto this good, which is death. Now then to abhor this death more
then horror it self, greedily to desire that good which only death can give
us; to desire health and reject the potion whereby we may recover it; to affect
the pleasures which (they say) are in those fortunate Islands, but without any
figure in that heavenly Paradise; to refuse to enter into that ship which
alone can bring us thither, were to mock at himself. Let us proceed and come
to the proof of the 2. proposition, for thereon is grownded the force of our
Syllogism: That Death is the only means to attain unto the perfection of
life, is manifest, in that the perfection of every thing is the enjoying of the
ends; all the lines of our dessignes, all the proiects of our enterprises, all
our sweating and toil tend, and aim at the end.

Who knows not that death is the first end of life? feels not but that life
in her greatest vigor drives him directly thither? all men may see that life
is united inseparably unto death, by the con tinuance of the same succession of
times, consider this time, whereof the enjoying is the life. There are three
parts, that which is past, the present, and the future: the present is the bond
of that which is past, and of the future: and as this article of the present
time runs as violently toward the future, as the Primum Mobile turns in the
heaven, so does ourlife run vio lently toward her end. This life is a very
way, as soon as thou do enter into it, and make but one step, it is the
first pace toward the end of the way, toward the end of life, which is death:
for the going out of the cradle is the beginning of the entry to the grave,
whether thou will or wilt not, whether thou think of it or not; yet it is
true, yea as certain as in an howre-glasse, where the first grain of sand
which runs is a guide unto the last to the end of the hour: Every day we
pass carries away some part of our life, yea as we grow, life decreaseth; this
very day which we now enjoy is divided betwixt Death and us: for the first
hours of the morning being past to the present (in their flowing) are dead to
us: wherefore Seneca had often this sentence very fitly in 2. Sam. cha. 14.
his mouth. Death has degrees, yet that is not the first,
Which diuides us in twain, but of the death is the last.


And it is the very reason why that wise Tekohite said unto David in the
present 2. Sam. 2, 14.
time: For certain we die, and slide away as the waters which return no more.
So many degrees as there are in life, so many deaths, so many beginnings of
another life: Let us examine them, and take special note of the first death,
to judge of the latter; for herein as in all the other works of wise Nature,
the end is answerable to the beginning.

The first degree of man's life is, when being fashioned and framed, he lives
in the womb of his mother; this is a vegetative life, a life proper to plants
only, wherein he may receive nourishment and grow; in this life he continues
commonly but nine months, at the end of which time he dies, but a happy death
whereby he gains the use of the goodly senses of nature, that is to say, of
sight, hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching: behold then the first death
when as the Infant by the force of nature is driven out of that fleshie prison,
coming from which place he strives and stretches out himself; he is angry
with nature, and cries incessantly, but he is ill advised; it is his good, and
the beginning of his perfection. Now follows the infantiue life, not
differing from that of beasts, which extends unto seven years complete; of
this life childhood is the death, which begins at eight years, and retains
nothing of the Infancy. As for the exterior of man, which is the body, not the
flesh, nor bones; not the four principal humors, if that be true which the
Physicians hold for a Maxim, that our bodies change all their substance every
seven years. And in truth how could our sliding nature so long subsist? if it
were not maintained by drink and meat, the which by a certain virtue infused
into all the members of the body, digested, purged, and applied, does
transubstantiat it self into our very bodies proportionably as the substance
decays: as appears by the words in the book of Wisdom, cap. 5. Being borne
we suddenly desist from that being wherein we were borne. It is no more the
first body which we brought into the world, that is dead; we have an other in
our childhood the third degree of life, which extends unto 18. years, at the
end whereof his death encounters him; in the which begins the 4. degree of
life, which goes unto 22. and then dies: but from this death rises youth, the
5. degree which florisheth unto 30. years, and then his flower falls and his
youth is lost; but a rich loss, seeing, thereby manhood the perfect age is
gotten, which being strong and vigorous climbes unto 50. years, and this is
the 6. degree of life. Then comes age the 7. degree of life, and the death of
manhood, at what time the spirit is fortified, and grows more ripe in good
Counsel, and wiser in his actions; this life ascends unto the decrepit age as
they call it, which begins at 70. years, where rests the death of age, and so
runs on unto the grave all the remainder of his life: and this is the 8.
degree of life. In the end succeeds in his turn the last, principal, and most
to be desired death; I say the principal, for that it makes an end of all the
other deaths that went before, and fears no more the miseries of life: I say
to be desired; for she alone does crown the actions of mortal life with
glorious immortality; it is the hand which sets upon our heads the flourishing
Diadem of eternal life.

It is the last staff of the ladder manifested unto Jacob by vision, ordained
by God, to the end we may thereby ascend up into heaven: It is that dun horse,
that is to say, pale and mournful to our Apoc. 6. 8.
opinions, but yet we must back him to run the carreere of death, to pass
unto that most happy abode. Poor man thou tremblest at the shadow of death,
thou do cry and howl when she lays hold on thee, even so thou did
when thy mothers strength cast thee out of her womb: if then thou had had
thy judgment neat as now thou have, thou would have held thy self happy
to have left a most filthy prison within the circuit of that round City: In
like sort if now, thou had thy understanding and Spirit Romans 12. 2.
transformed and renewed (as the Apostle speaks) thou should see plainly
that what does terrify thee, is that which should assure thee.

But yet if God has not imparted unto thee the light of his grace, take advice
of humane reason, call Seneca Epist. 24. and 103.
unto thee, who had but the eyes of a man, and consider what he says; thou
shall find that in it are no ambushes nor constraint, it is only pure and
simple nature, which speaks by reason; it is an undoubted Maxim, that nature
always tends and attaines for the most part to the perfection of her work.
Man is her Master piece, all other Creatures are made for him, the perfection
of man is his perpetuity in a most happy life, nature leads man by degrees to
this perfection. We see she fails not in the second degree* seeing that the
Infant borne is much more perfect then that which is newly engendered in the
womb: it fails no more in the third, nor consequently to the eighth, as I
have showed.

Let us conclude thereby, that it is impossible she should fail in the
principal, which is the ninth degree of life, which she must perfectly
finish: we must judge of the end of the work by the beginning and progress.
Finally, if the study of Philosophy be a kind of death, as Philosophers hold,
for that man is sequestered from the company of men, and the vanities of the
world, to have his spirit free and at liberty in his brave meditations: and if
in this estate man is more accomplished, and more perfectly happy, without
comparison, then they that trouble themselves continually with the affairs of
this active life; Oh what shall it be when as the soul purged from the
infection of the senses, freed from all commerce with the body, shall be wholly
in it self ennobled with a supernatural grace; illuminated with a celestial
flame, and inspired with an unspeakable joy: how beautiful, happy, and
joyful shall she be? To this death then let us direct our vows, and our
eyes: let us take acquaintance and be familiar with her; she is our friend,
since that Jesus Christ did vanquish and subdue her for our sakes; she is
prepared for us as a way, into which we must of necessity enter, to go into
our Country which is heaven: It is the only means ordained of God, to go
unto that most blessed Mansion. Let us then stretch out our arms courageously,
and with a smiling countenance (when we shall see her turned toward us, making
sign that she will embrace us) let us receive her; for she is a necessary
gift to our cortupted nature, which we must not reject, but embrace, as Saint
Chrysostom says. In 10. Mat.


The first Objection.
Every end of a work is not the final cause; therefore it follows not that
death is the final cause of life, although it be the extreme end.

THere are three conditions Arist. l. 2. Phys, c. 2.
necessary to a final cause, the one is, that it be the last point of the
operation; the other is, that the work be finished for the love thereof: if
the first be found in death, the second (which is the principal) falls, seeing
that the actions of life tend not unto death, as to their dear and best
beloved. Answer. I said not that death was the final cause of life, but the
way; yea, the only way which leads us unto it, and that for the love of that
great and foueraigne good, which is joining to the gate of death, we should
desire it, and not be amazed at it, after the example of S. Paul, who writing
to the Philippians, desired to be dissolved, c. 1. v. 23.
and to be with Christ, the which was far better for him, that he might be
crowned with a crown of Justice, 2. Tim. 4.
and enjoy that unspeakable good, as he says elsewhere. But some Infidels
will say, I demand proofs hereof favorable to my reason. I answer, that he
has put the flame of reason into thy understanding, who does illuminate every
man which comes into the world, has presented his grace unto thee in the
Gospel to believe, and there is nothing but the bar of thy sins that does
hinder thee: neither is this Gospel concealed from any, but such as have the
eyes of their understanding blinded by the Prince of this world. But if thy
reason, being blinded, cannot apprehend the sovereign Good which is in death:
yet shall you plainly see a mere privation from all miseries; an absolute rest
and a tranquillity which cannot be interrupted; and therefore if there were no
other but this reason, death should cause no amazement, but rather give
contentment, considering the estate of this life.

The second Objection.
All demolishings carry deformity, and cause horror.

Death is a demolishing of man; therefore death causes horror.

Palaces, Temples, and other buildings, yield a pitiful spectacle when we
see them ruined: and what shall man do, who exceedes in excellency all
buildings; yea, the earth, the heaven, and all that we behold? what can he
do, lying upon the earth in death, but perplexe our minds?

To this I answer by distinction to the similitude, and then I flatly deny the
application. I say therefore to the first proposition, that there are two sorts
of demolishings, the one is necessary, and wisely undertaken for a better
structure; the other is prejudicial and indiscreetly done, by revenge for a
total ruin; I confess that this in its deformity, should give cause of
horror, but I cannot confess that the like is in death, in the demolition of
man, but only the first: for as a wise master of a family, when he sees that
his house threatens ruin, that it sinks in many places, and the walls open,
commands it to be pulled down, that with the ruins and materials he may
raise another to continue many years: even so nature, a most expert.
Architectrice, seeing man lade^ with wounds, dejected with misery and
melancholy, consumed with age, and grown cro^ked with the gou^e, and catar^es,
sowe^ him co^uptible in the grave, that 1. Cor. 15. 42.
after many changes, she may raise him incorruptible by the powerful voice of
Christ. Ioh. 5. 25.
If the earthly habitation of this mansion be destroyed, says the Apostle S.
Paul, we have a dwelling with God, 2. Cor. 5.
that is to say, an eternal house in heaven, which is not made with hands: and
therefore we sigh and desire so much to be clothed with our mansion which is
in heaven, and this is for our soul, expecting the Resurrection of her body:
And this body, says the same Apostle, being sown in dishonor, shall rise
again 1. Cor. 15. 43. 44. 45.
in glory, sown in weakness shall rise in strength; and sown a sensual
body, shall rise a spiritual body. What the^ can man produce against this, but
only some murmuring of his Incredulity, that it exceedes the bounds of reason,
without the which he will not assure himself of any thing? I answer, that the
full persuasion of that which is written in the holy word, is well grounded
upon faith, a particular gift of heaven to all true Christians, touching the
returning of our bodies: as for the reasonable conjecture of our future life
after death, I deny that this has been altogether unknown to men guided
only by the instinct of nature, and I will prove my assertion sufficiently in
the 39. Argument, if God so please.

To this first consolation, we will add a second, that is, nature finding the
declining and wasting of the substance of man, came by a sacred marriage to stay
some portion in the matrix of his dear moity, and to fashion and bring forth
many other reasonable creatures, at diverse times, creatures which have the same
flesh and bones of father and mother. And if it be true, that a good friend is
a second self, what shall a good son be, but himself without any addition?
whereby is plainly manifested, what Macrobius says, that the body Lib. 7. of
his Saturnales.
recoiues three advantages of the reasonable soul, that is to say, he lives,
he lives well, and in succession of time, he remains immortal: Ecclesiasticus
goes ^art her, saying That if the father of a child dies, it is all one as if
he were not dead; for he has left his like behind him, he has seen him,
and has ioyed having left one who shall take revenge of his enemies, and
requite his friends.

And this was it which moved that great Lawgiver Plato, to make a law, that
every Lib. 4. c. 30. de Legib.
man at a comperent age should marry a wife; else he should be called before
the Judge, condemned in a fine and declared infamous; for that (as he
afterward says) every man should consider in himself, that there is a certain
power and efficacy of nature, which makes men to purchase an Immortality: he
would infer, that whosoever leaves children does revive in some sort in them.
It is an order of nature which we must inviolablie observe, ingendring we
perish of the one side, but we begin again of the other. If our parents by
their fading and dying substance had not given us life, we could not have
entered into it of our selves; what wrong is it if nature does that of us for
our children, which she bath done of our Parents for us? Moreover death (which
is a privation of life) is a beginning of life in nature, remaining in the
first matter, by the which she disposes her self to a new form, not to
continue still at this deformed spectacle. Thirdly, wha^ great deformity see
you in death, which is not in him that sleeps? Fourthly, that deformity which
may be, is not seen by him whom it concerns, it is to the suruiuor^ that it
should be hideous: but most commonly they find it pleasing, reaping by that
means large successions, elboe room, freedom from comptroll: and if it were
otherwise, the world would not be able to contain us. And thus much for the
first part of the objection; As for the 2. which resembles the demolishing of
building to death, this similitude has no proportion, yea it is contrary to
the state of the question; for what makes a ruined building deformed? It is the
disorder we see in it, it is but a heap of stones and timber; the stones are
not laid in order one upon another, neither is the timber raised as it ought to
be: It is then the form that wants when as the materials remain: but in man,
or rather a dead carcass, the soul which is the form receives no blemish, she
is freed from the surprises of the grave. Thou do not complain that the
egge-shell is broken, when a chicken comes forth: neither is the body of man to
be lamented when as the soul flies away. But what great difformitie do thou
see in a dead body? thou see little or no difference at all with one that
sleeps; this does not terrify thee, why should the other amaze thee?
especially if thou do consider that the body which is dead, is truly
asleep, the which is a subject of an other discourse, as we shall see if God
please. But all things have their period, the ladder his last staff, and life
her last degree. Thou did ascend joyfully, so must come down again with
the like content, if in the last step or in the midst thou be not carried
away accidentially by some violent death; but to return to the place where
thou have been taken, thy nature does exhort thee, yea it forces thee. If too
unjust, thou do not willingly give thy consent: look into the degrees of
life, and this contemplation will give thee consolation against death: when
thou were borne into the world, there was found in thee an appetite to some
substance or meat without thy self, the which having been supplied thee, and
sent by the mouth into the stomach, was converted into a conco^ted juice, and
then transformed into blood by the liver, refined into spirits by the heart,
and finally fitted to thy decaying body: thou did receive nourishment, force,
and Joy, these are the first degrees of life: then climing higher thou have
extended the five faculties of thy senses, thine eye to see beautiful things,
thine ears to hear melodious sounds, thy nose to smell pleasing sents, thy
mouth to taste wholesome and delightful savors, and thy hand to handle smooth
and well polished things; these are other degrees of the same life: At length
the reasonable soul comes to play his part, the understanding desires to know
whatsoever the senses apprehend: whatsoever his eye sees, his ear hears, his
hands touch; and moreover what they neither see, hear nor touch, reason flying
to his age gives some light, contributes discourses and lends him Counsel;
Memory a faithful register keeps a Iournall book of all; and will quickened
by the goodly object which presents it self to the understanding, gives her
consent and keeps all joyful: so as by the Imagination which is always ready
at the first sommons, that which has once pleased the mind is often repeated;
and these are the last and goodliest degrees* of life, after which a wise man
should prepare himself to decline, and it he will not do it willingly, his
own temper which had raised him, will draw him and force him thereunto maugre
his resistance: the natural heat diminishes, the Imagination (which consists
in a certain point of heat) grows weak, the radical moisture consumes, and
the memory is lost; reason doats for that the memory is not firm enough, nor
the Imagination strong* to conclude, the will can no more love any thing, she
is still wayward and displeased, and the understanding does nothing but doa^e,
for that the vigor and virtue of the senses is decayed; they which were wont
to make a faithful report of al things in this world unto the soul, have no
more any power, the sight grows dim, the hearing hardened the smelling very
dull, the mouth without taste, the body without appetite, the hands knotted with
the Gout. Finally, it is no more what it was. And how then should these
building of the body, subsist? seeing the foun dations decay daily. This
faculty which desired and received sustenance is altogether distasted, that
fiery virtue which did concoct it, suffers it to go down all raw; finally,
that power which did nourish and give strength unto the body, is now become
unable, so a^ the body withers, grows crooked and lean, and in the end
dies. Thou do imagine (O (...)) that this last period of ^y bodies failing
is very horrible, thou do believe it* but thou art deceived, seeing it gives
a final end to all other defects which troubled thee and made thee wayward.
Alas would thou always live and languish in this pitiful infancy, to
which thy many years do reduce the? remember what thou sometimes desired,
seeing these old men twice children, when as thy reason and judgment (being
^ound and perfect) made thee conceive what a pity and misery it was to live
in that estate: remember (I said) that thou desiredst not to live so long, now
the effect of thy desire, the end of thy life offers it self, which thou
can not, nor may in reason refuse.

The third Objection.
The Loss of Happiness causes an insupportable grief.

Death is the loss of happiness. Therefore, etc.

THe rest of the mind is the happiness of life, to the which man i^ led of
himself, if he does not wretchedly resist it; for his own reason makes him
easily and distinctly to know his soul, his body, and those thing which are
for his body: she teaches him that only his soul is his, and that his body
and those things which concern it, depend of an other; and therefore should not
affect them but so far as they are profitable: and not be troubled for any
accident that shall befall them, as not concerning him, seeing it touches not
the soul: so as the spiritual and bodily infirmities to which the body is
subject, as poverty, reproach and disdain of men; which may happen to a man
without de^rt, should be indifferent unto him, seeing they are out of his
power. As for that which is in his power, as to allow, desire, poursue the
good and good things which are honest and according unto reason; and
contrariwise to hate and fly the evil, he applies himself (...) ^o eas^y,
(...)* (...) he (...) cont^ unless (...) death comm^ between do^ inter^pt
this happi^, and (...).

The Answer* It is true that the (...) of (...) does (...) in (...) parts* at
all (...) and in ^uery place. And it is also true that the very means ^o
attai^e unto it is ve^ue* But it is likewise (...) that (...) the one nor the
other can be obtained in this life* all we can have is but a shadow of the
one and the other, as far different from the ^ffect as night is from day; for
night is the shadow, and the day is the light of the Sun: which is (...) cause
that they which in (...) o^ a (...) full of dagerous beasts, being surprised by
night, desire nothing more (...) to see day appa^ so (...) that are in this
life should desire nothing but to see the day of the Lord, and the Sun of
Justice to shine upon them* I^ they (...) it no^* they are not true ^n but
^tish, having taken the habit of beasts. But to answer more categorically to
these S^oicks* (...) especially ^o Epict^ from whom this objection is drawn,
to say that the body and those external things which happen unto man, should
not be respected of him, it is the farthest from reason that can be, even to
the vulgar fort, who wholly run after honor, riches and pleasure: and to
say that a man in some great Infirmity either of body or mind feels no
pain, were to make a jest of himself. Aristotle (called the ^ye of reason) is
not of that opinion; these are his words in his Book of Manners: It is Elbi.
ad Nicoma^. L. 1. c. 8.
impossible (faith he) or very hard, that any one should do well without means
and preparation. Many things are effected by friends, by wealth, by credit and
authority; and they that are deprived of these things blemish their
happiness, like unto them that are issued from obscure parents, who neither
have children, nor good children, or that are crooked.

For he is not perfectly happy that is deformed, of a base race, and without
issue. This is too much; see what Antipater one of the great authors of the
Stoics says, who attributs something, although but little, to exterior things.

But what says Seneca? the Seneca. Epis^ 92.
wise man writes, that he is happy, yet he can never attain unto that
Sovereign good, unless the natural Instruments be propicious. And although
the body, and the exterior things be not the soul which is the principal sea^
of happiness, yet are they accessories, Instruments and means which God has
ordained and united; and therefore they should taste of the happiness of the
soul, if there be any, as the fire d^sperseth his heat in the air that does
enuiron it. As for the other ground of this imaginary felicity that man does
easily apply himself to seek that only which is honest and according unto
reason: it is a greater Parodoxe then the precedent; for the most virtuous man
in the world has a continual combat against vice, and is never at truce; how
then has he any peace or rest? The eye o^ his understanding is dazeled at the
shinning of his ^oueraigue good; his will straies from the true end, or in
aiming mistakes one for an other: and therefore most commonly if he be not
directed and animated from above, he follows that which he should fly, and
flies that which he should follow, so as he shall never hit the white, now win
the Crown of Justice, which is the true felicity of man. Let us then conclude
with S. John That what 1. John. 3. Coloss. 3.
we shall be does not yet appear; with S. Paul, That our life is hidden in
Christ: That it is in safe keeping, and that the end of this mortal life is
the beginning of the immortal. Let us say in the end, that all things have
their Periode, that we are borne to live. We live to die, and we die to live
again, but without any more turning, for the Circle shall be returned to his
point and the light of the body shall suffer no more eclipse: Come then O
gentle death, which do make an end of the miseries of this world, and
beginnest the happiness of Heaven; which do free us from mortal pain, and
bring us to enjoy immortal good, which do convert our tears and toils
into joy and rest, which do change our fantastical treasure into that which
is certain, and our temporal into spiritual and eternal. Retire then O you
deceitful vanities, for the charm of your pleasures cannot prevail with me
who am resolved to die; hold your tongue also O vain deception of Philosophy
and humane tradition; for I am taught by the death of my Savior, and by his
resurrection, that my greatest perfection is, to acknowledge my imperfection,
my blindness, my death in my sins: and that my greatest happiness in this
world is to obtain remission of my sins, and to mortify my corrupted
members, to the end, that a good death may soon bring me to the haven of
salvation, and eternal life,

Amen.
The second Argument taken from the vicious fruits of the extreme fear of
death.
That which breeds many inconveniences in the spirit and body of man, must
be speedily pulled away.

The extreme fear of death causes great inconveniences*

Therefore that must be speedily pulled away.

SOme one said truly, (speaking of the excessive apprehension of death,) that
it is the ordinary object which troubles the understanding of man, makes him
to lose his Judgment, to abandon all duty, and to cast himself into a
shameful forgetfulness of himself. Let us. see how: He that fears death
vnmeasurably, he must of necessity fear every thing that may bring it, that
is, all that he sees, and what he cannot discern; whereas death lies in
ambush, whereby it happens that this man does easily fall into many errors, as
into foolish superstition, thinking by his voluntary submissions* by m^toring
of words not understood, by adoring of stocks, and stones, to move God to pity
him, and to turn away death, which he imagines upon the least accident, the
flying of a bird, or the croaking of a Crow should take him by the throat. So
we read of Arislodemus King of the Messeniens, who being in war against his
subjects, the dogs howled like Woolues, and an herb called Dogstooth grew
near unto his Altar; the which being interpreted by his Soothsayers to be an
ill presage, he concoiued such a fear as he died. And as this disordered
motion of fear, makes men credulous to the words of Satan, so does it make
them incredulous to the assured promises of the Eternal; the which provoking
the wrath of God, in the end he does execute upon them his sentence pronounced
against the fearful and incredulous, casting them into the Lake burning with
fire and brimstone, which is the second death, Apocal. 21. O how fitly then did
Saint Augustine say, that by too much fearing the temporal death, they did
ingulfe themselves in the eternal: a fearful man not only makes himself a
slave to fantastical divinity, but also a bondsman to any one that is subject
unto him* said King Lew. 11. who to assure himself against death shut himself
up solitary at Plessis near Tours, yet could he not be confident; the
opening of a door amazed him, he hated all those he suspected, and he
suspected all the world: his most confident were dismisss and put from his
person, and he remained alone melancholy, dreaming, froward, and chollericke,
nothing pleased him but only displeasure: he grew jealous of his sonne-in-law,
of his own Son and his Daughter; only his Physician possessed him, controlled
him and kept him in awe with his words threatening death; I know well, said he,
(swearing a great oath) that one of these mornings you will send me away with
the rest, but you shall not live eight days after; Thus this imperious servant
kept his King captive.

Thus this King lost his liberty more precious then his life, for maintaining
whereof, good men should always strive. Whereunto Seneca had Epist. 71.
reference when he said, that the vilest death was to be preferred before the
honestest servitude, for that this liberty cannot safely confish but in the
contempt of death; as Agis King of Lacedemon taught him that demanded an
assured liberty of him: and in truth ^hee that fears not, death; may pass
freely like a Knight without fear, who shall hinder him: seeing the extrem^*
dangers* of death cannot amaze him? Moreover fearful persons are the ruin of
States and Commonalties; for in the least dangers, through fear and the
threats of great men, they yield easily to a mischief, and subject themselves
to the favor of the wicked and the will of the base multitude. Thirdly, a man
that trembles so at the apprehension of death, runs into assured misery,
which depriues him of all pleasure of life, makes his facewrincle, and grow
pale before his time: Which the Italian Gentleman will verify, who being
imprisoned upon a certain accusation, and receiving news that without all
doubt he should lose his head the next day, the fear of one night did so
trouble his brain, and distempered his body with shaking, as he became all
gray and worn. But o miserable men, after all your shifts and escapes, in the
end you must come and yield your selves at the Port of Death: So much the more
miserable, (I do not call you miserable for that you are subject unto death,
but for your extreme fear) that many thinking to free themselves from death,
have run headlong into it: some thinking to escape, have cast themselves out
at a window and broken their necks; others flying their pursuing enemies
swords, have leapt like fishes, (but without fins,) into a deep river, as into
an assured Sanctuary, where they have been drowned. Nay, besides all this,
they which thinking still to delay and escape that which they fear so
extremely, when they see themselves in the bed of death, then do they vomit
out their rage against heaven, and exclaim injuriously against the true God;
and being desperate they cast themselves into the infernal gulf.

Let us conclude with Seneca, That the fear of death 1. de Tranquil. 11.
will never profit any living man, but drawing him into many miseries which are
much more to be feared then death it self, will make him in the end
insupportable and offensive to all kind of people, yea to himself: For having
his nose groueling to the ground like a hog, he will never be able to lift
up his eyes nor his spirit to heaven, where all perfect and assured contentment
is to be found. If yielding to all this, you will ask me the means how to
be freed of this fearful terror, I will tell you that it is to know what
Deathis, as it is taught in the 13. 14. and 20. Arguments; and not to rely upon
doubtful and false opinions.

An Objection.
Every root bringing forth fruits worthy repentance should be carefully
preserved.

The fear of death brings forth fruits worthy of repentance.

Therefore the fear of death should be carefully preserved.

Whatsoever thou Eccles. 7 the last verse.
say or do, remember thy end, and thou shall never sin, says the son
of Syrach. Answ. the continual meditation of death to him that knows it
rightly, helps wonderfully unto virtue. And Seneca says, Epist. 121
that man is never so divine as when he does acknowledge himself to be
mortal. Yea it auailes in Christian duties; but that the fear of death is
profitable to any thing, I cannot comprehend.

I will not deny but that many have been wonderfully stirred up to piety by the
fear of death, as among others, the history makes mention of Peter Vualdo in
the year 1178. who in the city of Lions sometime, being assembled with many of
the chief of the City to recreate themselves, it so happened that one of them
fell down suddenly dead: Vualdo a rich man was more moved then all the rest,
and seized with fear and apprehension, he addicted himself more to do
penance, and to meditate true piety.

But who does not see that it is not properly death which causes this
inclination to piety, but the judgment of God, which we discern through
death as through a glass? that it is the worm of Conscience which does awaken
us by the contemplation of Death, and stirs up sinners to justice and
sanctity? It is the ignorant confusion of the second death with the first,
which does so strongly amaze men. Finally, it is a servile fear and not
commendable, yea, condemned of the Pagans themselves, to forbear to do evil
for Horace Oderunt peccare mali fohmidine poenae.
fear of punishment. Let us conclude then, That this first death, which is
natural and common to all men (seeing that her poison has been quenched in
the blood of Christ, as Tertullian speaks; seeing that the Cross: of Jesus
Christ has pulled away her sting, triumphed over her, and given a
counter-poyson for the poison of sin) it is not evil, but the greatest good
that can arrive to mortal men: and to fear to obtain so great a good is a
vice and no virtue, before all upright Judges.

The Third Argument drawn from the Impossibility
That only is to be feared that lies in the power of man.

Death lies not in the power of man.

Therefore not to be feared.

VIce only should he feared, to be avoided; but nothing that is without the
power of man is vice, as Epictetus says in his Enchiridion. Moreover, that
fear is good that can prevent an imminent danger; but to that which can
neither be remedied nor foreseen, fear serves but to advance it: Man may
prevent and avoid that which he holds in his own power and will: as the
approbation of vice, the hatred of goodness and of true honor, rashness,
passions, unlawful love, unrestrained heaviness, excessive joy, vain hope,
damned despair, etc. But all that which blind man by his opinion does affect
or fear so much, as wealth, poverty, the honor or dishonor of the world,
life and death, are not tied to his will, nor subject to his scepter; And
therefore the Philosopher will Arist. 3. Ethic. 6.
rightly say that neither poverty, nor sickness, (let us also add death) nor
any thing that flows not from our own malice, are to be feared, let us
follow the Doctors Tac^t. 4. Histor.
of wisdom (says Heluidius in Tacitus) which hold honest things only to be
good, and dishonest bad: power, nobility, and whatsoever is without the spirit
of man, reputation, riches, friends, health, life and all things that depend of
the free will of man, flow necessarily and perpetually from the decree of the
Eternal: and to seek to hinder their course, were to strive to stay the
motion of the heaven and stars. This providence of God dispersed throughout
all the members of this Universe, has infused into every mooueable thing, a
secret and immooueable virtue, as Boethius says, by the which she does
powerfully accomplish all things decreed in its time, and place and order; To
seek to break the least link of these causes chayned together, were as much
as to run headlong against a rock to ouerturne it. I will that thou know
the hour and place of thy deceasse, that to avoid it thou flyest to a place
opposite unto it, that thou watchest the hour; yet shall thou find thy self
arrived and guided to the place, at the hour appointed, there to receive thy
death: and that which is admirable, thou thy self insensibly would have it
so, and did make choice of it. To this force let Julius Caesar oppose all
his Imperial power, let him scoff at Spurinus and his prediction of the 15.
of March, the day being come, he must understand from his Sooth-sayer who was
no liar, that the day was not past; he must come to the Capitol, and there
receive 23. wounds, and fall down dead at the foot of Pompeys statue. Let
Domitian storm for the approaching of five of the clock foretold, yet must he
die at the hour, and for the more easier expedition, one comes and tells him
that it had struck six; he believes it with great joy: Parthenius his groom
tells that there is a packet of great importance brought unto him: he enters
willingly into the Chamber, but it was to be slain at that very instant which
he feared most.

But if these histories seem over worn with age, who remembers not that
memorable act at the last Assembly of the Estates at Blois, of that Duke who
received advertisement from all parts, both within and without the Realm, that
the Estates would soon end with the ending of his life? even upon the Eve, one
of his confident friends discovered the business unto him; going to dinner he
found a note written in his napkin, with these words, They will kill you. To
which he answered, They dare not; but they failed not. Oh God how difficult is
it to find out thy ways! Let us then conclude that the hour of death
appointed by the immovable order of God, is inevitable, so that (as one says)
We shall sooner move God then death: So the Pagans, who erected Altars to all
their counterfeit Deities, did never set us any to death.

This firm decree of all things gane occasion to the Pagans to figure the
three Destinies, whose resolution great Jupiter could not alter, no not to draw
his Minion Sarpedon out of their bonds. Let us speak more properly; God can
do it, but he will never do it, or very seldom, to show his infinite power by
miracle. Let us in the end say, That seeing death is inevitable, it must needs
follow, that the fear of it is unprofitable: On the other side, let us add,
that ma^s life is not to be cut off before the time: and therefore a careful
waywardness to prolong it, auailes nothing: the Destinies which have resolved
immutably to spinne it out till such a time, they will do it, fear it not:
and in the danger of death, will rather show a miracle to preserve thee, as to
the Poet Simonides, who supping with Scopas, in a Town of Thessalie, word was
brought him, that two young men were at the door to speak with him: the Poet
went forth, but found no body at the door, but he heard a great noise of the
chamber which sunk down, and smothered Scopas and al his guests in the ruins.

We read that Gelon then a young Infant, but appointed to live longer, to
govern Sicile, was drawn out of the like, but a stranger danger: for as he
was at school in the presence of his master and many of his companions,
behold, a great Wolf enters into the school, comes to Gelon, lays hold of his
book, and draws it by the one end: Gelon without amazement holds fast, and
rather suffers himself to be drawn forth by the Woolfe then to let go his
hold; and in the mean time the building happened to sink, and overwhelmed
both Master and scholars.

Thus God shows his providence, preserving by his Angels those whom he
pleases from present and most eminent dangers. So would he save Lot and his
family from the fire of heaven, almost against their will: For it is written,
that the Angels took them and thrust them out of Sodom; yea, it is written,
that the Angel executioner, to show the force of providence, told Lot, that he
could not do any thing until he were retired into a town adjoining, which
was afterward called Zohar; into the which he was no sooner entered, but the
Eternal powered down fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorah.

We read of Titus Vespasian, that two famous knights had conspired to kill
him, whereof he was advertised; but making no show thereof, he took them by
the hands, led them forth to walk, and having called for two swords he gave to
either of them one, as provoking them to that which they had resolved but being
amazed both of the manner and of the Emperors courage. You see (says he) that
destiny does justly hold the principality of the world, and that in vain men
practice murders against it, be it through hope to purchase greatness, or for
fear to lose it.

Let us therefore acknowledge, that it is not of us, but of the word of
destiny, which God has pronounced, that the lengthening, or shortning of our
lives depends. The great God is to us a God of strength to deliver us, and the
issues of death belong unto the Eternal: and therefore the Apostle said, that
Christ is dead and risen again, that he might have power over the dead, and
the living: and therefore this vexing care of life, nor that great horror of
Death cannot profit us any thing. Let us then leave these things, and finishing
our course resolutely and ioyfuly, let us yield al into the hands of our soue
reign Master; neither to tempt him, nor to despair of him, for both the one
and the other are equally hateful unto him: and if our soul puffed up with the
vent of temptation be desquiet within us: let us say unto it with David. My
soul, return unto thy rest, fear nothing. Every kind of death of them that
are beloved of God is precious in his sight, very precious says S. Bernard,
as being the end of labor, the consummation of the victory, the port of
life, and the entry to perfect felicity.

The first Objection.
If Death did flow from the enchayned order of destiny, we should not see it
without order sometimes to go slowly, sometimes to run headlong.

But that is usually seen; Therefore it seems not to flow from destiny.

THe unequal Issue of The Answer.
life which we see happen to men, does not alter, but rather corroborate
destiny: it is the immutable decree of the Eternal, he sees who should amend
or impair in this life, he that has made all for his glory, even the wicked
for the day of calamity: And therefore he soon took up Enoch to himself,
lest that malice should corrupt his spirit, says the text. Contrariwise, if
Constantine the Great, who was cruel in his youth, had been cut off, he had
not bin a Christian, neither had he so much extended the kingdom of Christ.
There is yet another reason, which is, the deliverance of good men from the
miseries of the world, when death comes: I will gather thee up with thy
fathers, said God, to Josias the good King, 2. Kin. 22.
to the end thy eyes may not see all the miseries which I will bring upon this
place. On the other-side a long life is a great languishing to the wicked: So
Caine after his parricide committed, was cursed of God, and living, so pursued
by the Judgment of God, as he often cried out Genesis 4. 13.
that his punishment was insupportable, and therefore he should wander upon
the face of the earth, and that whosoever should find him would kill him: but
God provided, setting a brand upon his forehead, to the end no man should slay
him. But how comes it that the death of some is sudden, as the shot of an
harquebuze cannot be more sudden; and so long in others which languish of
some long infirmity? I answer, that to search into the Counsels of God,
(which is properly the destiny whereof we speak) is more infinite then to seek
the bottom of a gulf. That great Apostle rapt up to the third heaven, finds
nothing but depths, incomprehensible Judgments, and ways impossible to be
found out. Romans 11. Moreover I do not see (to speak truly) that death is more
sudden to one then to an other is it to them that being sound and vigorous,
are so strooken as they die presently? Yet being thus strooken they know not
whether they should survive it or no, seeing some one has escaped being thus
stricken. Wherefore I do not see that death is more slow to one then to an
other. Is it to them that lie bedred 10. or 20. years? yea, and what know they
whether they shall die the first day they take their beds?

To conclude I say, that seeing the coming of death is imperceptible, and that
it is impossible for any man to say assuredly I am dead, or I shall survive;
that death cannot be sudden or slow to any man, other men judge after the
event, but not before. And therefore it seems to me that the question which
is made, whether a languishing death or a sudden be most to be desired, is in
vain, for that we shall find that death is sudden to all men, seeing it
comes so swiftly as no man can feel it: For so was the will of the Eternal,
to the end that mortal man should be always ready to die, and not delay when
he feels it, for it is insensible.

The second Objection.
It is a vain and pernicious thing to give ear to Astrologers, in their
predictions.

The former discourse seems to persuade a man unto it.

It is therefore vain and pernicious.

EXperience has and does daily verify, that they which have easily given
credit to the predictions of future things, are for the most part in the end
deceived: Niceas King of Syracusa found it true to his cost, for confidently
believing his divines that his death was near, he wasted his treasure in all
kinds of excess, and lived in want all the remainder of his life, which did
far exceed the term of his prediction. Above all the lamentable taking of
Constantinople by the Turks is memorable: The Grecians bewitched with a
certain old prediction, that the day would come when a mighty enemy should
seize upon most of the forts of Constantinople, but being come to the great
place called the brazen Bull, he should be represt and driven out by the
Inhabitants, who to resist him had seized upon this place: The
Constantinopolitanes giving credit he eunto, having abandoned their strongest
defenses, retire into this place, where they attend the Turk; but they falnt,
are put to flight, slain and sacked, and so to the great prejudice of Greece,
the Imposture of their Prophecy was manifest.

Answer: I grant the Mayor of the proposition, and do confirm it by the Law
of God. Let no diuiner be among you using diuinations, nor regarders of times,
nor any that use predictions, nor Sorcerer, etc. Whosoever uses any such thing
is abominable to the Lord. And what should not Christian Magistrates do herein,
seeing they are forbidden by infidels Mecaenas, speaking to Augustus the
Emperor, of the government of the Common weal, says; That there ought not to
be any Soothsaier in the Common weal, for all such kind of men in speaking
sometimes truth, most commonly lie, and are the cause of Innouations and
troubles. The Turks Empire observe the like prohibition, according to the
Al^aron which says, that all kind of divining is vain, and that God alone
knows all secrets.

But according to this deposition I deny the Minor, and add, that in all my
precedent discourse, there is not a word which tends any way to the maintayning
of Astrologers, to hear and believe them. I did produce some Histories to
prove that our days are so determined by God, as they cannot exceed their
bounds prescribed; and this doctrine is true, holy and divine. Behold the
Oracles: Man borne of a woman is of a short life, and fall of cares etc.

His days are determined, thou have the number of his months with thee; thou
have prescribed his limits, which he shall not pass: And David says unto God.
My times are in thy hand: and therefore Christ is dead and risen, that he might
command both over the dead and living, says S. Paul, Rom, 14. 9.

The Jews would have put Christ to death before his time, but they could not;
they sought (says the Gospel) to lay hold of him, but no man did it, for that
his hour was not yet come. The time of Iesabels death and the end of her
wickedness was accompli shed; the time of her death and the place had bin
foretold by the Prophet Elias: Iehu was chose^ to execute this decree, 1. King.
21.
he did it without any regard till after the event. He runs furiously into
the town of Iesrehel, where Iesabel was, after whom he sought: Iesabel thought
to stay him with her painted face, and with the charm of her affected looks
which she cast from her chamber window, but Iehu commanded 2. King. 9. 30. 31.
etc.
they should cast her down; which was done, and her blood rebounded against
the wall and against her houses: (the Scripture adds) being entered he did eat
and drink, and after said, Go now and bury this cursed woman for she is the
daughter of a king; but they found nothing remaining, but the skull, the feet
and palms of the hands, whereof they made report to Iehu; who said, It is the
word of the Lord which he had delivered by his servant Elias, say ing, that in
the field of Iesreel the dogs should eat the flesh of Iesabel. And as God for
the edification of his Church, would raise up Prophets to de clare his promses
or threats: so would he sometimes thurst on certain men to denounce his
Judgments to the world to make them amazed in their events: to these
fortellers whensoe^uer we find in them the Prophetical zeal of the Lord, we
ought to give credit as soon as they have pronounced the word. But to these
latter spirits (most commonly Liars) we must never give any credit, until
after the event of that which they have foretold. For the thing being past, it
is no more doubtful, we may then believe it, but not before; and this was the
meaning of the former discourse. Otherwise it is not lawful to inquire of
doubtful events of any Magitian, Astrologer and Mathematician: yet a wise and
judicious man may (without scruple of conscience) by certain conjectures
gathered from the reading of good books, from the use of things and the
observation of the like; he may (I say) conceive, presume or suspect which way
the destiny tends, and what his end is, but fearfully and without
confidence, not to make a profession of it. God only can search the bottom of
his decrees, and none other without his particular and express assistance, no
not the Angels neither good nor bad: the determination of our days is one of
his decrees, it can neither be known nor stayed by us. Behold letters from
heaven to the end we may doubt no more: Man says Solomon, knows his Ecclesi.
9. 12.
time no more then fishes which are taken in the net, and birds in the snare;
so men are snared in the bad time when it falls suddenly upon them: In vain
therefore do we fear that which cannot be corrected by us.

The third Objection.
If the cause of death be euitatabl^, the effect also shall be.

But the cause of death is euitable. Ergo.

IT is written that a wiseman shall rule the stars, for that finding himself
inclyned to some mortal disease by some malignant influence of the stars, he
will change the air, and correct that bad complexion, that it impair not. We
are also commanded to honor the Physician for necessities sake, by reason of
the Physic which he ministers for the preservation of life. Moreover, Gods
providence has not imposed any necessity in human actions, whereof he is
Lord, and especially of those which depend of his free will; as who can hinder
a man from killing himself if he please, as many have done? We read also in
the book of truth, that the periode of the ruin of Niniuie, assigned to 40.
days, was Jonas 3. 4. 10 Isat. 38. 1. 5
altered by their repentance. also the execution of the sentence of death
pronounced to Ezekias, was by his prayers and tears protracted 15 years.

Answer. Whatsoever it be, Destiny (as Boethius says) coming from the
immovable beginnings of providence, ties together by an indissoluble bond of
causes, all humane actions, and all their events, so as the divine providence
is always certain, and always infallible in her events, not contradicting
the means which the same divine providence has ordained, whereof some are
necessary, others co^tingent. The effects are necessary which have their cause
near, immediate, conioinct, and necessary: and they are contingent which have a
contingent cause, and whose effect may happen or not happen; if it happens, God
had so appointed it. Thou who foundest thy self subject to a dropsy, have
left the reumaticke air where thou were, have abstained from water, and have
employed the Physician, whereby thou have avoided the disease and death: God
had so ordained it, not only for the cause, but also for the means. Yet let
man determine in his full liberty, let him make choice according to his own
will; yet shall he not choose any thing but what God has foreseen and
decreed from all eternity. I say there is a gulf in this question, whereat
Tully suffered shipwreck, Lib. de Diuinat.
rather cutting off from providence, then diminishing any thing from humane
liberty; so as (wherewith S. Augustine does tax him) seeking to make men free,
he has made them sacrilegers; wherefore I will strike sail, for the very
name of Destiny was distasteful to Saint Augustine and Saint Gregory, for that
the Ancients did wrest it to the disposition of the stars: but if any one
(says S. Augustine) attributes the actions of men to Destiny, for that he
understands by that name the power and will of God, let him retain his
understanding and correct his tongue. Let us conclude with the Poet: Hope not
by your cries* to alter Destiny.


Thus after the Divines of these times, and the opinion of Chrysippus (having
been so purged, as there is no more any fear to stumble at it) may we use
this word of Destiny. As for the sacred histories objected, they contradict not
the doctrine propounded no more then the immutability of Gods decrees. That
which had been denounced to the Nineuits, to Ezekias, and to others, was with
a condition, if they did not repent; they submitted themselves: so as justly,
and without prejudice to the divine providence, the sentence was made void.

But you will say, Where is the expression of this condition? It is understood,
and drawn from an infallible consequence of the end of the denuntiation made
in the name of the Eternal by Jonas and Isay: Yet forty days and Niniue shall
be destroyed, cried Jonas: Dispose of thy house, for thou shall dye the death,
and shall not live, says Isay to Ezekias. Why were these trumpets, if God
meant to ruin them, and not to save them, in giving them warning? Therefore
the decree of the fatal time, both for the men of Niniue, and for Ezekias was
firm, seeing the denuntiation of their death was but a means to advance them
to the end and last period of their estate and life.

The fourth Objection.
If that which the divine prouidece has decreed to do, were immutable, in
vain then should we employ the means to advance it or hinder it.

But we employ them not in vain, for that God has commanded it.

Therefore what the divine providence has decreed to do, is not immutable.

IF all be so disposed by a fat all necessity, why then being sick, do I
call the Physician, and why am I commanded to honor him? And why, being found,
do I preserve my self from diseases, especially those which are contagious?

Answer, I deny the consequence of the mayor, for that the position of the
first and principal cause, concludes not the remotion of the isntrumental:
the reason is, that God to bring to effect his decrees, would also have the
second means and causes employed; he does witness it in his word, and in the
government of the world, and he has commanded us to use them. As therefore it
is not in vain that the Sun does shine and is darkened, nor in vain that
the fields are manured and watered from heaven: It is God which has created
light and darkness, and it is he that makes the earth to spring: In like
manner it is not in vain that being sick we call for the Physician, and use
his physic; it is not in vain that we avoid the infected air, and to
conclude, it is not in vain that we eat and drink: although that God be the
author of our health, yet it is the forsaking of (...) grace and virtue which
casts us into diseases. It is finally he, who is the powerful and sovereign
arbitrator of the length or shortness of our life: The reason is, that God who
by his absolute will and pleasure has predestined these ends, has withal
disposed of the means and ways tending to the said ends; so as it appears,
it is not our intention to take from man all care of his life, but only to put
away the superfluity, the immoderate excess, and particularly the extreme
fear of death, for that it is unprofitable, yea, hurtful unto him: and
therefore a wise man will willingly obey the advertisement of S. Basile, which
he directs to all Christians: Submit thy self, says he, to the will of God;
if thou do march freely after it, it will guide thee; if thou go back
thou do offend it, and yet she will not leave thee, to draw thee
whithersoeuer she pleases.

Be it the place, the time, or the kind of thy death, these three things are
uncertain unto thee, and out of thy disposition; and therefore thou should
rely upon him who Eccles. 3. 2. Psalm. 3. 9
alone knows the time to be borne and to dye, and who holds thee fast both
before and behind. Some one makes account to live long, but he shall dye
suddenly, as it is said in Job: yea at midnight a whole Job 34.
nation shall be shaken, pass, and the strong stalk carried away. As for the
place, some one shall return from bloody battles who soon after shall dye
in his house; finally, some shall escape violent contagions, who shall die of
slow fevers, as I have seen, and any man may easily see in every Country. Let
us then conclude this discourse with the verses of Cleanthes the Stoicke, which
Seneca has thus translated: Duc me Parens, celsique dominator poli,
Quocunque libuit, nulla parendi est mora,
Adsum impiger, fac nolle, (...),
Malusque patiar, quod (...).
Father and Ruler of the lostie Sky;
What way thou please, lead, and I
Will follow with my will, and instantly.
Grant I may follow with no grieved blood,
Nor like an ill man bear what fits a good.


Whereunto he subscribes saying, So we live, so we speak, and let us add,
So we die.

The fifth Objection
It is not possible but humane nature should be terrified with that which is
horrible of it self.

Some kind of death has such circumstances as it is very horrible of it self.

Therefore it is not possible but it should terrify.

MAny dissembling the fear which they have of death, when they come to think
and speak of some kind of sickness, drawing near unto death, and especially
of the plague, they cannot find black enough to set it forth, nor horror
sufficient to abhor it. But let us see what reasons they can pretend: It was
a great scourge, say they, of the wrath of God, executed upon the people for
David's ambition, so as there dyed 70. thousand in less then one day; threatened
in the Apocalipse to embrace the fourth Apoc. 6. 8.
part of the earth.

It is a terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Moreover, it
is an unspeakable pain to be burnt with the sore, to be strangled with the
plague, etc. Thirdly, it is a sorrow which exceeds all extremes, to be
abandoned of wife, Father, mother, children, friends, and kinsfolks. Finally,
it is a perpetual grief to die, and have no means to settle his estate.

Answer. These reasons are but goodly shows to shadow the fear they have of
death, and the shame which lies lurking in their hearts; for seeing they must
leave this life, what does it import them, whether it be by water, or by land,
or by any other, means? As for the first reason, David will answer for us,
that we must not judge rashly of the poor man in his torment: His son will
add, that none can discern whether he be worthy of love or hatred by that
which happens exteriorly: The Apostle will say, The judgments of God begin
by his own house: Job, the Apostles, the Martyrs will manifest by their
examples, that they whom God loves are most chastized in this world.

Finally, Jesus Christ will teach us, That in the blind man so borne, neither
his John 9.
sin, nor the sin of his father and mother, was the cause that he was
borne blind: that neither the Galileans so cruelly entreated by Pilate, nor the
Jews smothered in the ruins of the Tower which was in Silo, were more guilty
then those which had escaped this disaster. A faithful man is not tempted
above his strength, if affliction abounds, consolation will superabound. He
dies happily which lays down his soul with a settled spirit, feeling in
himself the peace and grace of God through Jesus Christ, in the remission of
his sins. And it is a thousand times better to be quickened by the light
affliction of the plague, and to carry away an inestimable weight of glory,
then to be smothered in the delights of sin, and in danger of a final ruin
both of body and soul.

The example produced of David makes for this against the Obiector. Who sinned?
David in ambitiously numbering his people: who is punished? the people: the
Grecians are plagued for the foolish Horat Quicquid dearant Reges, etc.
resolutions of their Kings, said the ancient Proverb. But where is the duty
of Justice, will you say? God knows it; his will is the rule of equity, it is
just seeing God will have it so: And on the other side, it was not the will of
God for that it is not right. But we commonly see that the plague lays hold of
the poorer sort (whereupon Galen calls it Epidemique, that is to say, popular;
whereof the baits are famine, sluttishnesse and stinkes,) rather then the
chief of the Town infected, who notwithstanding will be found much more
faulty before God.

Look upon that long plague which under the Empire of Gallus, and Volusian
continued 15. whole years, and which coming out of Ethiopia unpeopled all the
Roman provinces; read it and Zonaras Tom. 2.
judge of it.

As for that pretended pain, we must not apprehend it to be greater then in
simple swellings and Impostumes, or in Cauteries; the poison rather mollifying
then increasing the pain. But there are two kinds of plagues, as Physicians do
observe; the one is simple, when as the spirits only are infected by a
venomous and contagious air, which has bin sucked in by the mouth, or the
nose, or that has gotten insensibly into the body by the pores of the skin,
so as a man shall be stricken that shall not feel any thing: it may be, he shall
be more faint and heavy then of custom, but with very little heat and
alteration; so as he shall be sometimes smothered up before he feels any
pain. The other is a compound, when as the Contagion seazing the spirits, does
communicate his poison with the four humors, infects them, and alters them,
but without pain, for these humors are incapable: yet these humors being
infected and altered, infect and alter the parts of the body, in the which they
reside, as in the head, the heart, and elsewhere; and there grows the pain,
but no greater then in Feauers and swoundings; yea, less by reason of the
putrid vapor, which does dull and mortify the members, so as the pain is no
more then a small incision; yea, less then the pricking of a pin. The
greatest is a certain inflammation in the hypocondriake parts, in the bowels
which enuiron the heart: for as poison is the capital enemy of life, so this
enemy of life strikes furiously at the heart. The worst is a certain heat
whereof the Patient complains: as Thucidides observes in the plague which
happened at Athens, but what pain in this heat, that is not greater in the
burning of a little finger, or in a Tertian Ague? But if your opinion will not
yield to these reasons, inquire of them which have been touched with this
infection; they will answer that fear has been their greatest pain, and if
they had been assured of recovery, they had felt no pain. I know you will
reply, that there is a difference betwixt them that recover, and them that die.
But I will answer you, that the pain is equal, yea greater in them that
recover, then in them that dye: they that recover are more vigorous, and the
vicious humor stings them, and is more sensible then in them that are weaker,
when the parts less able to resist, are sooner gotten and lost. As a Leper,
having his flesh infected with Leprosy and rottenness, feels little or no
pain, in the most sensible pricking: even so a weak woman has less torment
in her delivery, although the throws be more dangerous; wherein appears the
admirable wisdom of Nature, which does not afflict the afflicted.

Now follows the third reason objected, the abandoning of wife, kinsfolks,
and friends. Answer. It is an accident which happens seldom or not at all this
day: hardly can that which life has united by marriage, consanguinity and
friendship be dissolved in death. Moreover, a wise man, who should have learned
to be content Plato 3. de Repub.
with himself in life, should not be discontented if he die alone. It was a
constant Doctrinein the resolute Stoics, that he is happy that is content with
himself, and depends not upon any other man, nor upon any thing in the world;
but like Jupiter, lives and moves of himself, rests in himself, gouernes
himself, and enioies his worthy thoughts, as Seneca says. And how can he be
happy, who (being subject to another Epist. 9.
command) is not master of himself? Let him drag after him fetters of gold,
yet he shall still be in fetters. We will not here commend the Stiloons,
Timons, and other haters of me^, which like wolves, fled from all company; but
those that offering themselves to company, and seeking their friendship, are
wretchedly chased away, and being forsaken of others, retire themselves into
themselves, lose nothing, but augment their felicity. So, as Seneca said
rightly, think and Epist. 20.
desire this thing above all the prayers which thou shall make unto God, to be
content with thy self, and with those things that may spring from thy self:
What felicity, says he, can be nearer unto God? Whereunto Saint Ambrose
subscribeth, In what Desert, says he, is not that man accompanied, that does
enjoy a happy life?

He then that can live alone, will never grieve to be aba^doned by men in death,
being accompanied by Angels, and by his Savior the true God. Thirdly,
Physicians, Surgions and other expert men employ themselves for thee, are about
they to assist thee, and to restore thee to thy health. Thy wife, thy children,
thy friends, with their tears would bathe thy bed, increase thy sorrow, and be
infected with thy disease; It this then better both for thee and them that they
be absent. Thou have proved their affection in living, why would thou try it
in dying? thou do leave thy worldly friends in death, but thou go to
purchase more faithful and better in heaven, even Jesus Christ, the Angels
and the Saints: whereat then do thou complain? thou a Christian, whereas a
Pagan rejoices? Mercurius Trismegislus (by the report of Calcidius) said when
he dyed, that he returned into his country where his kinsfolks and best
friends were. Finally thou accusest thy disease, for that it takes from thee
means to dispose of thy affairs. A wise man should not forbear to settle his
estate until the extreamitie of an in curable disease; for he has then other
matters to think of then worldly affairs: he should have foreseen it, and
provided in time; a good soldier when the trompet sounds to battle, does not
begin to discourse of his house, and to think of some piece of ground, but
prepares to fight for his life is in question. Even so a wise man at the point
of death should not once think of the world, but of the conflict which he has
against the Devil and sin; there is question of his conscience, of the life
of his soul of the inheritance of heaven, which he loses if he be vanquished:
our life is uncertain, many other diseases besides the plague, may cut it off
suddenly; the Apoplexy, Lethargy, Catarre, Squinancie, and many others, when
they come leave no place for affairs. Therefore during the time of health let
us compound our quarrels with our neighbors, and dispose of our estates with
our children and kinsfolks, that we may be ready at the first sommons of our
God, prepared at the first sign of that spiritual Combat which shall be given
us, to fight well, to live or to dye, as it shall please the Lord. Watch and
pray, Mat. 24.
said Jesus Christ to his Disciples, for you know not when that time shall be.
And, Let your loins bo girded, and your candells Luk, 12.
light.

The sixth Objection.
The loss of that which is happy and joyful, causes horror. Life is happy and
joyful.

Therefore the loss of life causes horror.

PLato is cited to prove the Minor, who writes 3. de Repu.
that man may enjoy felicity in his body, and that he is happy above all the
Creatures: therefore Gallen in his book of the parts of the body, does
wonderfully extol the author of nature, for having dealt so bountifully with
man: And David of more authority then all these, seems to sing the praises of
the Eternal for the good he has done unto man, saying:

Thou Lord have made him little less,
Then Angels in degree:
And thou have crowned him in like sort,
With glory, state, and dignity.
ANswer. All the Philosophers except Plato, Gallen and some few others, being
dazeled with the brightness of some guists remaining in man after his
shipwreck in the beginning of the world, did not pour forth such praises of
the condition of man, but in a manner all with one voice have called nature,
not a mother, but a cruel stepdame, for the many miseries wherewith she has
ouercharged man, as we see in Tully, and as Cic. lib. 3. de repub.
Saint Augustine reports. Even so Aristotle (who is held the Ensign bearer of
Stob. sermon. 69.
Philosophers) being demanded what man was, he is, says he, the pattern of
Imbecility, the booty of time, the sport of fortune, the image of inconstancy,
the balance of envy and calamity, the rest is nothing but spittle and choler.
Demccrites also required to give his advice of the condition of man, answered,
that it was a miserable fortune, seeing that the goods which were carefully
sought after, hardly came unto him; but miseries which were not sought for, nor
any way expected nor suspected, ran unto him: Wherefore the Comedian
Neoptolimus being demanded what admirable thing he did observe in Aeschilus,
Sophocles, and Euripides: Nothing, says he, in their words does amaze me,
but that which I have seen touching Philippe, who celebrating the marriage of
his daughter Cleopatra, and being at a stately supper honored with the name of
the 13. god, was the next day stabbed and cast upon a dunghill.

But you will say, This life wants no pleasures. Without doubt (if you observe
them well) they are poor pleasures, bitter, pinching, and intermixed with
displeasures; yea in laughing the heart shall be grieved, and his joy end with
care, says Solomon in Pro. 14. 13
his Proverbs. He also running over breefely in Ecclesiastes, the vanity,
toil of the body, vexation of mind, and heaviness of soul, concludes, That he
thinks him more happy that was never borne, then the living or the dead; for,
says he, he has not seen the bad works which are done under the Sun. As
for that passage of the Psalm alleged, it makes nothing to the purpose, for
that he considers not man as he is, but as he was in his integrity and
innocence in the earthly Paradise, or as he is Eccle. 4.
restored in Jesus Christ man, as the Apostle expounds it in the Epistle to the
Hebrews. Chap. 2.
That no man was for his transgression degraded from the rank he held, and
lost the privileges he had, it appears by the comparison of that which he
is, with the titles which are given him.

1. God had made man.

2. Sin had undone him, and all his natural life is but a spiritual death.
Ephesians. 2. 1.

3. That is to say, with a true, perfect and healthful knowledge of God, of
his will and of his works.

4. He has lost all that, and there has succeeded ignorance, blindness, and
strange darkness.

5. His desire and actions were conformable to the laws of God.

6. All that is depraved, and there is nothing but a horrible confusion in his
will and actions.

7. He was absolute Lord over all Creatures, which trembled at his look, and
brought him fruits according to his desire.

8. Now they rebel and assail him; yea the earth instead of good corn,
brings forth nothing but thorns and thistles.

9. He had frequent conversation with God, inspired of him, and breathing by
him.

10. Now the Prince of the power of the air, the unclean spirit, works
powerfully in the children of rebellion, which are all the sons of Adam,
Ephesians. 2. 2.

11. A glorious angelical and divine Majesty did shine in his face.

12. Now they cover their shame with leaves, they hide themselves among the
trees, and cry out, Mountains fall upon us and cover us.

To conclude, there is no greater contrariety betwixt day and night, then of
these famous qualities to the infamous blemishes of man, as he lived in this
world before his regeneration, in the which by little and little he recouers
this Justice, holiness and truth, Ephesians. 4. 24. But the fullness thereof is
reserved to heaven, whither death leads us, and therefore to be desired.

The Fourth Argument, taken from the efficient cause.
All that a good and wise mother gives unto her Children, cannot be hurtful.

Nature our good and wise mother gives us death. Death then cannot be hurtful.

THe first proposition of this Argument cannot be denied after the experience
which we have seen, after the comparison which God makes of himself with a
mother, who cannot forget her child, nor he his people: After that Jesus Christ
had said, No man gives a stone instead of bread nor a Scorpion for fish, to him
that he loves: And how then can nature the lively spring of so lively a love,
give any thing that is very hurtful, and fail at need and in the principal,
having never failed us in all the course of our life? Now to prove that the
second proposition is true, and that nature has ordained death for her
children, Seneca does teach Ad Polib. 3
us, saying, That death is a Law of nature, yea, that our whole life is but a
way unto it. S. Cyprian also does affirm that it is a decree intimated unto
the world, that whatsoever is borne should have an end: and from whom is this
decree? from God the Author of nature, the executioner of this decree: but it
is a favorable decree to such as Heaven favors.

It is a general Law, to restore that which is lent us; this life is but a
loan, we must restore it at the end of the time: it is a tribute we owe, for
we entered upon condition to depart when it shall please the master. Moreover
what is this life, but a harmony rising from the mixture of the four elements,
which are the four ingredients of our body? and what is death by the censure
of Hippocrates, but a divorce of marriage of these four Elements? This divorce
is as natural to man as it is natural that fire should be contrary to water,
and air to earth; for their contrariety is the cause of this divorce, which
is death. I know that it is not sufficient for humane life to have a body well
tempered with his Organes, and to have the power of life, but he must also have
a fist Effence; as a Lute well strung and well tuned, is not sufficient to make
it sound, unless there be a hand to play upon it. And I also maintain that
as the Musician cease to play when the Instrument is vnstrung, so the soul
cease to give life unto the body, yea, flies out, when it is destroyed: but
this destruction is natural, and by consequence death; and to that end Nature
has planted this body upon pyles which take vent, upon boanes not very solid,
caulkt over with soft flesh, glued with a viscous humor, which may easily melt
with heat or dissolve with rain; full of transparent veins easy to pierce;
watered with unwholesome water, tempered with contrary qualities, which a
certain temperature keeps at quiet for a season: but when every one desires
to command his companion, and time in the end presenting the occasion, the
common right being forced, the body suddenly falls. And this force is of
nature, who must needs effect the words of the Lord, spoken unto man: Thou art
dust, and shall return to dust; Sons of men return, but whither? From
whence you came, to the earth, to death; death then is of nature, and therefore
Thales the Milesian said, Laert. lib. 1 Binson li. 7.
that there was no difference betwixt life and death, for that they are both
equally according unto Nature; and as one demanded of him, why he was in life
and dyed not? For the same cause, answered he, that the one is no more
excellent then the other. It is also the reason why the Emperor Antonin the
gentle seeing his servants weep, lying sick in his bed, he said unto them,
Why weep you for me? and not rather the natural and mortal condition of all
the world, that is to say, Why do you not rather weep for life which is of a
mortal condition? The answer of Anaxagoras was more virtuous, who being
advertised of the death of his dear and only Son, said; O Messenger, thou
bring me no unexpected news, I know well I had begotten a Son that was
mortal: he was not insensible like a stone but he considered that nothing had
chanced to his son but what he had foreseen from his birth; his long
foresight and his sudden con sideration of the condition of all men for to
die, had te^pered all sorrow in him, and brought him to reason, which should
always hold the helm of this little world man. Like was the answer of
Lochades, father to Siron up on the like report of the death of one of his
children: I knew well (says he) that he should dye. We shall see others
hereafter, to the end Plut. in Lacon.
they may have no cause to say that this resolution was monstrous in the world.
To conclude, nature to make us resolve joyfully unto death, seems to direct us
to the sweet song of the Swanne, a presaging bird, consecrated to Apollo by
Antiquity, Cic. Tusc. Quaest. lib. 1.
the which dying, nature gathers together about the heart the purest and
sweetest blood, which makes him Iouiall and to sing a happy presage: to whom
Socrates, Plato and Tully send them that have so great fear of death.

An Objection.
Satan, Man, and Sin are the causes of death.

Therefore it is not Nature.

Answer; When it is said in the holy Scripture that Satan holds the empire of
death, that by one man sin entered into the world, and by sin death; finally
that death is the reward of sin; we must not understand it of the natural
death, whereof the question grows, but of the spiritual and eternal death,
as many of the ancient fathers do expound it: And how else could the
threatening of God against Adam be understood, touching the tree of knowledge of
good and evil? Thou shall not eat; for on that day thou shall eat of it thou
shall die the death: observe the words, from that day, for he died not that
day, but lived long after; but from that day being fallen from grace, he dyed
the spiritual death: then what does this Hebrew phrase to die the death mean
but the principal death, which is the eternal, the second death? But this
death brought in by Satan, by sin, by man, has no power over the children of
God, and good men (to whom this discourse is only directed) since that it was
subdued, bound and confined into hell by Jesus Christ our Savior (as
Athanasius has well observed) that as the waspe strikes violently against a
stone, but hurts it not by her incursion, but rather bruzeth her self and
loses her sting; even so death incountring Christ furiously who is life, she
could not hold him in her bands, but she has lost her sting, so as they whom
she terrified before, insult over her now. So then death simply, the laying of
the body into the ground, there to be putrified, the way to heaven, is good to
the good, and is given of God by nature; life and death are of the Lord, says
wise Ecclesi. 11. verse. 14. It is he that gives life and death: that maks us to
descend into the grave and to rise again, says the Prophetess Anna. 2. Sam.
2. It is then our good mother that calls us to death, let us follow and obey
her voice, seeing we can receive no harm and how can it be hurtful? seeing
it is the sepulcher of vices, and the resurrection of virtues, says S.
Ambrose: and how how can it be dangerous? seeing it is that Toadstone which by
his fecret virtue expels and rectifies all unclean things. And in truth, as
Toades when they are grown old and heavy with a fat poison, are set upon by
an infinite number of Ants, which suck him and devour him, so as nothing
remains but the said stone, which afterward they may freely handle, yea
profitably: So death having been purged from sin, is now by the almighty
power of the Eternal, converted into a most sovereign remedy, against sin.

The second Objection.
There is not any thing ingenerate in all Creatures by nature in vain.

But the fear of death is ingenerate in all Creatures.

Therefore the fear of death is not in vain.

FOr the proof of this Argument, shall suffice the approbation of all
Creatures great and small, which fly from death; the same reason is for man,
whom the complexion of his flesh, being proportionable to the quality of the
Elements, inclines him to love the world; he may be where he will, yet his
natural disposition will draw him toward his country, although in stead of
some sweet liquor which he promised to himself, he should drink wormwood:
So man being borne in the world, and accustomed unto it, can hardly leave it.

Answer. The nature of man does sometimes affect and abhor one and the same
thing, but for diverse considerations: if he beholds death nakedly, there is
great fear, as we may discover in many; but if he can have the judgment and
patience to see her attired in her precious ornaments, with virtue, with heaven
gates, by the which only we are brought in; of the assured joy and rest of the
mind, in the possession whereof she sets the soul; then do we affect it
and desire it: and this desire should be held more natural in man for that it
is more proper unto him, seeing it proceeds from the true judgment of reason,
which makes him man.

Moreover for a more clear solution of the argument, we must distinguish the
universal nature from the particular: universal nature is that virtue that
admirable and investigable proportion infused by God into the Universe, the
proper Instrument of the principal agent of this sovereign essence, which
having insinuated into this Chaos the first matter, has brought it in six
days too this goodly ornament, and has preserved it many thousand of years:
of this nature, we de nie that she plants in beasts the fear of that she
gives them, that is to say, death: but as to show unto the beasts of the earth
all the lights of heaven; as well the fixed stars as wandering, she turns about
the heavens; so to show unto heaven all the Creatures, she has given the
passage and returning of life and death: else it were impossible, if (as in a
tree the dry leaves falling give place to green that spring) so in beasts the
first should not give way to them that follow. As for particular nature (the
very complexion of every one) to whom death is so terrible, I say it is an ill
ordered fear. The Order is preposterous when as the particular does not follow
the Law of the general; and it is the ruin of States when as the private good
is preferred before the public. The Roman Empire did flowrish when as the
Popilij, Scipios, Fabij and others did choose rather to be poor in a rich
estate, then rich in a poor estate Even so is it in the society of mankind
taken in all ages; every one must dispose himself to follow this general
order of supreme nature, and whosoever shall contradict it, shall show himself
a bad Citizen of this great City of the world: and opposing himself let him
not therefore think to escape the inexorable destiny of his end, but as the
bird taken in the limetwig, thinking to free her self by striving, is caught
the faster; so man which is ensnared by death, the more furiously he torments
himself, the more he shall advance the object of his torment. Let every one
therefore look unto his duty, to his children, and to them that shall come
after, to prepare himself to give them place; here to tends that great desire,
the issue of particular nature to engender, that great care of fathers and
mothers in the nourishing, preservation, education and bringing up of their
children to the end they may sucoted them; and why then? having provided for
all, and left young olive plants in our old stock, hearing the bell sound a
retre^t, wherefore, I say, should we show our selves deaf, unwilling and faint
hearted? The fat all bird drawn by the sent of thy Carcass is perched over thy
window, and art thou still restie? do thou not feel thy seditious guests
with in thee which co^spireth thy infallible ruin? Nature will have it so, she
commands thee to depart; fear not, folthy good mother, and thou shall do well.
Let us therefore conclude, that although our particular nature, our complexion
makes us to abhor death, yet we must not believe her, no more then the
servant of the house which is borne to obey. It is the mistress, the universal
virtue of the world which commands us to depart, and to suffer others to enter:
let us follow and obey, all our trembling and horror is in vain. But to what
end is it (will you say) for me to have flourishing children, if in the mean
time I become worms meat? I answer: Thou art not all worms meat, for the
subtilest part of thee lives in thy children: all thy person is not food for
worms, for thy soul (the most excellent part) escapes: thou art not long the
food of worms, for another form; and it may be another soul shall be soon
adapted.

The Fifth Argument, from the end of Nature.
Every end whereunto the Law of Nature does direct all the actions of our life,
is for our good.

Death is the end whereunto the Law of Nature directs all the actions of our
life.

Therefore death is for our good.

IT is a wonderful strange thing so to fear that passage whereunto our
breathing and the course of our life seems to tend. For although the life be
but a swift course of some days, running swifter then a Weauers shettle, yet
the greatest part of the world desires to have them shorter, and would see them
as soon shut up as discovered: As we may see in plays, which for that they
hold their eyes and spirits captives, are very pleasant unto them, for that
they ravish their thoughts and senses, and expel all languishing conceits.
Inquire of a Dancer, a Tennis-player, a Dicer, or a Courtier, why they live,
continually in a Dancing-schoole, a Tennis-Court, in a Dicing-house, or in
great men's houses? They will answer you (if they vouchsafe you answer) That
the time would be tedious if they should not spend it in some thing; and even
we our selves being more retired, if some more profitable employment did not
make us to spend the time, we would say, Oh, how long this day is, when will it
be night? And if this slow night came not to interrupt our complaints, they
would break out into mournful lamentations: and in the mean this night
presenting herself unto us the longer through death, we are quite confounded,
her countenance defaceth the remembrance of all our former misery. What
inconstancy is this? we will and we will not see our end, we desire that
every day should pass away swiftly, else we complain, and we will not have
our life to slide away, for then we howl; and yet our life is nothing but a
multiplying of many days whence comes it? It is for that this waywardness
which cleaues unto us by reason of this slow course of every day of our life,
proceeds from our nature, who finds neither her appointed abode, nor her
settled perfection here: and this pale fear which seazeth upon us at the
discovery of the gate of death, proceeds from the corruption which has
happened to our nature. For proof whereof, the table of Natures innocence in
the beginning, which is, described unto us at the entry of the Bible, does
testify sufficiently: for Adam and Eve in Eden were always cheared with
delights and pleasures, they had continually the use of an hundred thousand
wonders, never thinking of the future, nor desiring presently the end of the
day which held them: they had their happiness in the present life; the which
has been hidden in heaven by reason of their transgression, whither we must
ascend through death to enjoy it: thither our nature does call us, from the
which our corruption does divert us. Were it not then better to obey nature so
officious toward us, then a pernicious deprauatio^ which has possessed us?
And therefore the Ancients to tax this unreasonable desire of living here
without end, left us in their pictures how that Tithon beloved of Aurora,
obtained of the gods, at the entreatie of the Goddess, that he should not die;
But this man being tired with a million of sundry calamities, and ouerladen
with a burdensome old age, so as like unto little Infants, he was saine to be
bound up, swadled and rockt, he besought the Gods that he might be suffered to
die like other men. Whereby they show that death has been granted by the gods,
as a favor unto men, as being the safe port of all the tempest of this world.
Nature has set a measure and fullness to all thing, we find it in the
greatest pleasures which continuing long are in the end distasteful unto us:
Even so has she done in life, wherefore there are old men which would not
willingly return back to the first beginning of their Infants life, upon
condition to Lib. de Senect.
run the same dangers which they past; the which Tully affirms of himself,
that if any god would give him force to become young again, he would refuse
it: no (says he) having finished my course, I will not be brought back from
the end to the beginning; for what commodities has life, nay what toils has
it not? And admit I should confess that it has pleasure without any distaste,
must she not have her full measure and saciety, who can contradict this?

The sixth Argument taken from the Vntuersall Law.
All freeing from a common misery carries in it self consolation.

Death is a freeing from a common misery.

It therefore carries in it self consolation.

THe consolation of the miserable is to have companions, says the old
Proverb; for men by conference of their common misery, reap some ease and
discharge, as if they carried a heavy burden in common: Now o you which dying
think your selves debarred of felicity, consider how death with an equal
foot beats and overthrows the Castells of Princes and the Cabinnes of
Sheepheards: Search Solomon, and you shall find that neither wisdom nor riches
could preserve him from death; nor Sampson his force, nor Absolon his beauty;
Hercules with all his exploites, is laid in the grave, Alexander with his
Empires, Caesar with his happy victories, Craesus with all his pomp is gone,
Xerxes is vanished with his miraculous bridge upon the sea of Helles pont; all,
all gone to the Palace of Ruin, whereas death commands. Call these great
Princes, in whose ambitious hearts their greatness had stirred up envious
vapors, we have them all for companions in death, the Oracle has said it,
and experience does show it. You are gods, but yet you must die: You Princes
you shall pass like to one of us. Behold a great man who dying said with a
mournful voice, Helas, I am rich; powerful, and mighty, and yet can I not
wrest the shortest term from pale destiny. It is a great consolation, says
Seneca to Polib. c. 21. to think that whatsoever shall happen to us by death
has been suffered by all, and all must suffer it; and therefore he cries out
in the beginning of this Chapter in these terms, What man (says he) is so
full of artogancie, and yet so unable, that will exempt himself or his from
the necessity of nature, calling all things to one end*

In life men are unequal, but their beginning and ending are equal: all are
borne with one poor nakedness, and all dye with a stinking cold, and living,
no man is more certain of the next day then his neighbor; he only is happy
to whom the most miserable kind of life does not befall. Happy then are we if
we compare our selves with those people of Aethiopia called Acridophages,
Strab l. 17. Diodor. l. 3. c. 3.
or caters of Grasse-hoppers, who living far from the sea, and being
destitute of all succors, have no other meat but these Grasse-hoppers, which
certain hot winds from the west, raise up and bring unto them, the which they
powder up with salt and live thereon; for that growing old, which is not above
forty years, they breed in them certain lyce which have wings, and stink;
the which in a short space eat their bellies, then the breast, and in the end
the whole body; their pain begins with an itching intermixed with pleasure in
scratching, which increasing by little and little leaves him not until that
having torn himself with his nails he has made an issue for the lice and
stinking matter, which come forth in such abundance as there is no
possibility to be cured, and so through the vehemency of their torment they
end their miserable days with horrible cries. But let us return into our way,
and say with the holy writ; Death is the highway of all the earth, all enter
into it, let us follow them by the tracke. And you to whom the Ruler of the
world has given the Empire of life and death as it were at pleasure, abate the
frowning of your brows; for what a poor man may fear of you, the same is
threatened to you by the great Master of all, says the tragical Poet Seneca.

Object not unto me the beauty of your Palaces, nor the magnificence of your
Sepulchers, for the Philosopher Seneca will maintain that Senec. Epist. 91.
we ought not to take measure of your tombs, which seem to take another
course: but one and the same dust makes all men equal, if we be borne alike
we must dye alike: that great Establisher of humane rights, has made no
distinction in our nativity and extraction with others, but in the time
wherein we live; when we shall be come to the end of mortal men, then
farewell ambition, thou must be like to all that the earth does cover. Let us
comfort our selves in the death of great men, and therefore let us hear the
last speeches and commandment of great Saladin Sultan of Egypt and Syria: I
will (said he in dying) without any other obsequies, they carry an old black
iuppe upon the end of a lance, and that the Priest cry out aloude all the
people hearing him, I have vanquished, I have lived a great Prince; but now I
am vanquished by death, and my life closed up; I have been rich, now I have
nothing but a mourning weed. To this goodly table let us add a second, which
the pensill of antiquity has drawn; Cresus being upon a burning pile is
preserved from the fire by Cyrus, but rather reserved to another season. Cyrus
made his profit of the words of Cresus, that no man could account himself
happy before his death: he thinks of it, and wills, after his death others
should think of it with him, when as he caused these words to be graven upon
his tomb* I am Cyrus which conquered the Empire of the Persians; let no man
envy this little piece of ground which couers my poor carcass. What follows?
Alexander comes hunting after new worlds, and stumbles upon this tomb; he
reads and considers of the words, and compassion made his heart to grieve
(says the History) for the inconstancy of things, why? for that he must in
like manner dye, and soon after he dyed. Let us conclude and say with the
Apostle, that it is decreed that all Heb. 9. 27.
men shall die once, that no man is exempt, no, not Emperors, Kings, Princes,
Lords; no, not Popes, Cardinals nor Bishops, neither rich, strong, nor
healthful; and thereby let us take comfort.

An Objection.
Any thing that is cause of strange accidents is strange.

Death is the cause of strange accidents.

Therefore it is strange.

THis reason tends to confute the precedent Argument: For that death
overthrowing the highest mountains, degrading and vnthroning Kings and
Emperors, and consining the^ into obscure caves, with simple mourning clothes,
which rot in the end upon their bodies, seems wonderful terrible. Answer. The
Monarks of the world have their private consolation in death; yea, I will say,
that the greater they are, the greater favor they receive in death. A Kings
life is an unquiet life, full of ten thousand cares and troubles: he must watch
for the quiet of his subjects, and against the surprises of his enemies; he
has not an hour free from amazement, and eats not a bit without fear of
poison: and therefore that King of Persia did justly exclaime^ against it; O
Crown (said he,) he that knew how heavy thou art; would never take thee up
where he should find thee: Say not, O ambitious, they are bare words only,
which never give the effects; many great men have spoken it and done it. That
famous Emperor Dioclesian, rejecting the Roman Empire, shut himself in the
Gardens of Salona, to manure them with his own hands. That great King and
Emperor Charles 5. protested, that he had found more pleasure and content in
one day in his solitary life, then in all his royal and triumphant reign.

But to conclude, the experience of all ages does teach us that the greatest
gates are most subject to wind, the highest tops of Mountains are soonest
shaken, and the greatest Emperors are most assailed, and have no rest but in
death only.

The 7. Argument from the commendable e^fect of the contempt of Death.
Every thing that makes us valiant should be precious.

The contempt of death makes us valiant.

Therefore the contempt of death should be precious.

THere is nothing that has in it so great force to make a man valiant as the
contempt of death; he that fears it not makes himself master of the most
strong and vigorous life in the world: Seneca says, that death is not to be
feared epist. 24. 41. Epist. 4.
that by the benefit thereof any thing is to be preferred, or avoided.
Agesilaus being demanded of one how he might purchase great fame, If thou
contemnest* death (said he.) He whose spirit is seized on with the fear of
death; will never perform any memorable thing in war this passion will benumme
and withdraw men's hands from the goodliest exployts in the world. Plut. in
Lacon. Alexander said that there was not any place so strong by nature or by
art, that was safe for cowards. We read that Philip king of Macedon having
ma^e an irruption into Peloponesus, and that one stepping forth said, That it
was to be feared the Lacedaemonians would endure many miseries, if they did not
compound with Philip: to whom one Damidas answered; O Dwarf, said he, what
harm can happen unto us that fear not death? Epictetus also teaches us, that
to attempt nothing basely we must always have death before our eyes, to make
her familiar and friendly unto us; where of we shall have sufficient proof in
a soldier of Antigonus band, who finding himself touched with a deadly
infirmity, had death in such disdain as nothing amazed him, yea he was
fearful to the most hydeous fear. The king saw him among the rest and
admired him, and observing his pale color he inquired of him, the cause of his
palenes, and was informed of his disease; the king thinking that by his cure
his force and valor would increase, caused his Physicians to recover him: but
the effect proved contrary, for the soldier being cured had no other care
but to live, and this care made him to fear every thing, yea the shadow of a
leaf; his furious humor was gone down to his feet to fly away. Where fore we
must therefore think of death, know, it and contemn it. To this end the
ancients did set dead bodies at the doors of their houses to be seen of
passengers; for the same reason the Egyptians did cause an image of death to be
carried about in their bankets and set upon the table, not to strike terror
into them, but rather a disdain by the frequent beholding of what it is. And
so it was at Constantinople in the election and creation of a new Emperor, they
were wont to breathe into his heart virtue and valor, when as being set in his
highest Throne of glory, a mason came near to him and made a show of an heap
of stones of diverse forms, to the end he might choose which did best please
him to build his tomb. It is the same reason why at the Coronation of the
Popes, when as he that is new called, passes before S. Gregory's Chapel, the
master of the Ceremonies holding an handful of flax at the end of a dry
reed, setts fire to it, and cries with a loud voice: Pater sancte, sic transit
gloria mimdi. O I would to God that both they and we did think seriously of
this: that remembering how lightly this life passes away, we might make haste,
for fear to be suddenly surprised, every man to do his duty according to his
vocation; even as they do which live at Court, being set at the table make
what haste they can in feeding, least the meat be taken away before they have
dyned. Why stay we then? Let us make have to attain to that royal dignity,
which he deserves best that is most at liberty; and he is most that least
fears death. Behold what a tragical Poet says:

He is a King that conquers fear,
And th'ills that desperate bosoms bear;
That in his Tower set safe, and free,
Does all things underneath himsee:
Encounters willingly his Fate,
Nor grudges at his mortal state.
From those golden verses the golden memory of Heluidius an ancient Romain shall
for ever shine, who seeing the ancient liberty captiuated, by Vespasian, and
being commanded by him that he should not come into the Senate, he answered,
That whilst he was a Senator he would come unto the Senate, Vespasian replied,
Be in the Senate and hold thy peace. Heluid. Let no man then ask my opinion.
V^sp. But I must in honor demand it. Heluid. Then must I in justice speak
what my conscience commands me. Vesp. If thou speak it, I will put thee to
death. Heluid. You may do what you please, and I what I ought.

Let this example be always before our eyes, and especially to us Christians,
that of the twelve Apostles, who never yielded to the cruel assaults of death,
but always rejoiced with an invincible courage (as the text says) to be held
worthy to suffer reproach for the Act. 5. 41.
Name of Christ. Wherefore above all the world they have purchased a most holy
fame, yea their twelve names are written in the twelve foundations of the
celestial Apoc. 21. 14.
and eternal City: O what a worthy reward for so great valor in the contempt
of death!

The eight Argument taken from the work of God.
The reward wherewith the Eternal does sometimes recompense them he favors,
cannot be evil.

Death is that wherewith he does sometimes reward them he favors.

Therefore Death cannot be evil.

IF that be true which Silenus (in Tully) and others, with reason report, that
the first degree of happiness is, not to be borne, and not to fall into the
dangers of the present life: That the second is, to die in being borne; without
all doubt the third must be, not to continue long in the miseries of the
world, but having beheld the works of God, the wandering couse of the stars,
the swift motion of the heavens, the inuariable changing of day and night,
presently to die. Say not that thou art taken in thy youthful age, that is a
privilege which God gives thee, to free thee from a thousand Combats of vice
which thou should endure; or it may be thou should be conquered, as
Solomon was by voluptuousnsse, or as Nero by cruel ty. Look upon the
insolency and corruption of that time, it will appear that thou have more
cause to fear, then to hope in living longer, said Seneca to Marullus, epist.
^00. If this were in those times, what shall it be in this age, which is as
many times impaired, as there have since slowed years and days. And admit
thou were assured to continue always virtuous and victorious, yet should
thoube continually covered with dust, altered with thirst, full of bitterness,
and old with anguish. Enoch pleased God, and was beloved of him, he was rapt up
into heaven* that the malice of the world should not change his understanding,
says the text. c. 44. Cleobis, and Biton, religious and dutiful children,
for that they took the yoke and drew the Chariot of their deceased mother up
the hill, for want of Mules, and the hour of the interment pressing on, they
received the night following in recompense of their singular piety a happy
death. Marcellus Nephew to Augustus Caesar, adopted by him: Marcellus upon whom
the hope of all the Roman Empire did depend, dyed in the 18. year of his
age; a thousand others, yea innumeraable have been cut off in their vigorous
youth, the most excellent (as the ripest cheries) are the first taken, it
happens to these timely wits as to the ripest fruit, they fall first; and Homer
writes that the Heroes and Demigods never extended Odyss. l. 13
their days even unto the threshold of old age. Seneca reports that his
predecessors had secne an infant of great stature at Rome, but they saw him die
presently, according to the opinion of every man of judgment; whereupon he
adds that maturity is a sign of imminent ruin, that whereas the increasings
are consumed they desire the end. Moreover, he abuses himself much, which
thinks he has lived long, because he has past many years if he show no
other signs, but his pale face and his gray head.

Behold what the wise man says; Man is not gray for that he has lived many
years, but for that he has lived wisely: long age must be measured by the
honest conditions and manners, not by the number of days. It depends of
another (says Seneca) how long we shall live, but of our selves how good we
are: the importance is to live well, and not long; yet many times living well
does not consist in living long, says the same, Epist. 10^. That the injury of
times do anticipate and interrupt in show the lawful course of our days, our
apparent virtue will make our life more complete. Yea, but God does promise
long life to Exodus 20.
them that shall honor their parents. I answer, That God does promise
prolongation of a happy life to them that shall obey him. This happiness is
not in this world, it is only to be found in heaven; it is therefore of
heaven, whither his speech tends: And although the literal sense be of the
land of Canaan, yet was it a figure of the mystical and chief abode; that is
to say, of he auenly Paradise, which was the mould of this land, flowing with
milk and honey, and all sorts of blessings. And if any one against this
probable reason, will understand the promise to be general of the whole earth,
we may answer, that God (like unto Physicians) grants unto men that have sick
spirits, not what is most profitable, but what they importunatly and ignorantly
desire. Otherwise I will never yield that this life (with what singular and
extraordinary happiness soever it be favored from heaven) is better then the
life eternal, whereunto death does infallibly lead the chil dren of God. It
is the only cause why it pleased the Eternal to take just Abel unto him by
death, and would suffer cursed Caine to languish long. It is also the reason
why Jesus Christ does not promise long life (as the Law does) to those that
shall honor him and follow him, but the Cross, yea death it self, Mat. 10.
Mar. 13. It therefore remains true that the Oracle says, Just men are Esaias.
58.
taken away from the evil, enter into peace, and they rest upon their bed,
etc. And in like sort it is true, that death cannot be ill, seeing it is the
reward that God gives unto his for their faithful service; or at the least, it
is the beginning, if it be not the total.

The Ninth Argument taken from the rule which should measure all the desire of
man.
Man a reasonable Creature should not desire any thing but what is seasoned
with reason.

The estate of this present life is not seasoned with good reason.

Therefore man should not desire the estate of this present life.

THe mayor of this Argument cannot be denied, by any reasonable creature, to
whom I speak: the minor is justified by the numbering of the three degrees of
life, vegetative, sensitive, and intellectual; either of which being
considered apart, or all three together, they have no vaileable reason to move
us to love them: but let us examine them in order. In the vegetative life is
chiefly observed a faculty, drawing, retayning, concocting and expulsing, to
nourish and make grow; so as the chief end in the Indiuiduum is growing, in
this growing what reason of love? and in this what has not a tree more then
man? yet no man desires to be a tree: yea, should he exceed in height that
at the Indies, which the Portugalls eyewitnesses, sailing to Goa, say to be
higher then a crossebow can shoot; what auailes it man to be of a monstrous
height, but for a hindrance? Witness Nicomachus the Smyrnean, who growing to
such a prodigious height, that being but young he could not remove out of one
place, had continued an unprofitable stock, if Aesculapius by strict dyets and
violent exercises, had not abated him. In this then we see no reason to desire
life: Let us come unto the sensitive; we perceive in creatures five senses,
answering to five sensible objects, which are in the world. And let us observe,
that the perfection of the sense is when it enjoys his proper object; as the
perfection of the eye is to see colors, of the ear to hear sounds; of the
nose, to smell sents; of the mouth, to taste savors; and of the hands, yea, of
the whole body, to touch tactible qualities. The sight in colors observes the
sorting and mixture of diverse varieties, the proportions and exact dimensions.
I deny not but man may take pleasure therein, but it is a brutish and
unreasonable pleasure, if it be not referred to the honor of the Author of
these colors; if it be religiously referred, man will desire an increase of
sight, both of body and mind; the which he finds in himself to be obscure,
short and so weak, that at the brightest colors it melts and is dispersed as
the lightning. This desire cannot be perfect but in the new casting of the
body by death; and therefore David, said, Turn away mine eyes lest they behold
vanity: Psalm. 119. they had seen it in Bersabee and elsewhere, he had been
almost lost: But yet if in the sight lies the point of the reason of life, why
is not man another Linx, to pierce through stone walls, and to see without
hindrance whatsoever is in the world?

The hearing, in sounds distinguished, conceiues a harmony, which is no other
thing but an air beaten with many and diverse tunes, followed with a just
proportion and happy encounter here upon earth, since that sin was brought in
by man.

Man of this Lute (the world) being special string,
All the other nerves, does into discords bring:
And renders now, for an enchanting air,
A murmr so offensive to the ear,
As Enion would amaze, Enion the rude,
That the ancient ^arrs the Chaos made, renewed.
Here then there is no reason to desire life, but rather the end, to go and
hear the mellodious sounds, which are made in heaven, divine in their measured
times and proportions, which even the poor Pagans have acknowledged. Smelling
of sents seems a certain exhaling vapor, tempered of heat and moisture, but
he is soon loathed be it never so delightful; as of musk, some cannot
endure it, but sound at the sent of it: But besides all this there are in the
world many pestiferous vapors, which make man sick, yea die; and therefore by
consequence herein there is no more reason to desire life then death.

Taste feels the savors which are made by the seasoning of diverse liquors, but
in those man does soon find a distaste and repletion, if he use them without
measure or discontinuance. Where is then the true reason of man's good, which
must be taken without measure, without interruption and without satiety? the
more it is taken, the more it is desired, and the more complete it is, the
more it does rejoice and content. In the end comes touching; the pleasure
whereof cannot be but in the feeling of smooth and polished bodies: This
pleasure as of the former sense, if it be continued without intermission,
becomes very unpleasant, and the most excellent point thereof slides sooner
away then it is perceived: this pleasure which the greatest hold to be so
great, at the very instant it passes, and gives to man two dangerous checkes,
one to the soul, which it depriues of understanding; the other to the body,
which it drives into a falling sickness. Aristotle does witness the first,
Hippocrates the last.

These are the differences which distinguish a living Creature from a plant,
the sensitive life from the vegetative: If sensible things perceived by their
sense were of themselves to be desired, without doubt the more excellent they
were in their kind, the more pleasing they should be: yet contrariewise we see
that the thing that is most sensible offends that sense most which is proper
unto it. The fire burns with touching and does stupefie and takes from it his
sensitive virtue: the thunderclap dulls the hearing, troubles the brain, and
by a long continuance of a great noise makes him deaf, and so of the other
senses.

Moreover, if the reason of life consisted in the senses, who would believe
that man were the more perfect creature, seeing that many exceed him in sense?
for the spider in the subtlety of touching, the Ape in the bounty of taste,
the Vulture in the force of smelling, the Boar in the ventue of hearing, and
lastly the Linx in the seeing faculty exceeds him far.

Thirdly these Organs of the senses are ordained only by nature for the
vegetative life, that is to say, either for the preservation of the Indiuiduum,
by eating and drinking, or of the Species by generation. It is true that man
applies them also to other ends then we have observed: but those Creatures
which have nothing but the two first degrees of life, whereof we treat, employ
their senses to no other end, but to entertain themselves, or for generation.
So the Lion will start at the sight of a stag, but it is for that he sees his
preie prepared, and not simply for that the stag has such variety of colors.
The Nightingale, will answer with a melodious sound; hearing another sing; it
is not for any delight it has, for in a true declaration it suffices not that
the sense take pleasure in the object; which is proper and proportionable unto
it, but this proportion must also be inwardly apprehended and conceived; the
which is neither found in the Nightingale, nor in any other creature destitut
of reason. And whence then comes (will you say) the cause of this sudden
answer to the voice heard? It proceeds from the complexion of the Nigh tingale,
to the point whereof it mounts, when as the sound which beats the air, strikes
his ear, and enters thereby into his head: as we find by experience in our
selves; whenas hearing any one yaune, we are moved to do the like; hearing one
sing, we sing; seeing the world run we run after it, yet know not whither:
the Quail by example will be moved at the singing of the masle, not for any
delight she takes, but from the motion to generation which she feels kindled
in her self. The Dog will faune and leap upon his master, whom he had lost;
and yet this does not proceed from any natural instinct, and tends to no other
end but to be kept, defended and fed by his said master. Finally he that will
duly observe it, shall find that all the senses of unreasonable creatures have
no other end, but preservation, and generation an end intimated in the
vegetative life; a life (we saw) had no sufficient reason to move our desire;
how then shall the sensitive have? Moreover, if reason and the desire of life
consisted in the pleasure of the senses, why have they which were most given
unto it, had wretched ends, and ignominious lives? the Emperor Vitellius
Spinter thinking to find his felicity in it, incountred his ruin; he was
given to lust and gormandize, so excessiuely, as at one supper he was served
with 2000 sorts of fish, and 7000 of foul. And what was the end of this life?
He was suddenly slain, pierced through with small darts, drawn naked through
the streets, and cast into Tiber, after the eight month of his Empire, and
before the sixtieth of his age.

To this we will add one in our fathers time, Muleasses King of Tunis, who
although he were banished from his Realm, and had succors denied by Charles
the fifth, yet he was so drowned in the delights Paul. Iou. l. 44. of his Hist.
of sensuality, as he spent a 100 Crowns for the sauce of a Peacocke: and
the more to be ravished with music, he caused his eyes to be banded, and to
delight his smelling he was continually perfumed with Musk. What happened? He
was defeated in battle by his own Son Aminda, and as he fled disguized, he
was followed by the sent of his perfumes, discovered and taken, and his eyes
put out with a hot Iron by his own Children. O cruelty! but a just judgment
of God, for his voluptuousness.

Then comes the sight so piercing and passionate after the fair faces of
women, and stays not there only, but (O shameful sight) it will see the
bodies naked, the which is condemned both by God and man: Romulus condemned
that man to death which suffered himself to be seen naked by a woman; how
much more is that woman to be condemned, which lays aside all modesty with
her smock, as Giges said in Herodotus? The Emperors Lib. 1.
Valentinian, Gratian, and Theodosius, religious obseruers of chastity, did
forbid upon great penalties that none should show themselves naked in public;
but to Tiberius, Caligula, Heliogabalus and others, who took no delight but to
defile their eyes and bodies with such shameful spectacles, God did show his
horrible Judgments in their deaths.

Finally voluptuousness has not only been the cause of the ruin of men
alone, but of whole Estates: Sybarides a Town seated betwixt two rivers, in
old time strong and flourishing, did rule over four bordering people, had
under their obedience 25. Towns, and could bring to field 300. thousand men
armed: yet by the dissolution of the Sybarites; in two months ten days she
was spoiled of all her felicity and greatness, drowned and quite ruined. The
like excess was the overthrow of that mighty Roman Empire, as we may easily
read in them that have written of that subject.

As long as Curious and Fabricius led Du Bartas in Iudic. lib. 6.

The Roman Armies, that for dainties fed
On boiled turnops; and the cresses were
Amongst the Persians, the only delicate cheer,
In peace both led their lives retired still,
And (feared in war) did with their Trophies fill
Almost all earth: But when of the after seed,
(Of Syrian Ninus) Persians learned to feed
On sugar delicacies; and that Rome,
(With pleasure of their bellies overcome,
In Galba's Rule, Vitellio's, Nero's living),
No less for glory in their dishes striving,
Then if in conflict, they the field had won
Of Mithridates; and Alcides son:
All justly saw themselves, by nations spoy'ld,
That they long since, had fought withal, and foiled.
Warning those Realms, that take their courses now,
Lest they their earth, with equal ruins strew.
The Objection.
The moderate use of the senses in worldly things is pleasant and lawful.

Therefore it is reason to desire life.

ANswer. The word moderate shows of it self that this reason is very
moderate and weak, yea that there is contradiction in the adioinct (as they
say:) true pleasure admits no moderation, it tends always to the eminent and
sovereign degree, and will always be continued without interruption or
satietie: This is not found in the senses, in the enjoying of worldly things;
not the first, for the supreme degree of the sensible thing offends, yea ruins
his proper sense, the which is contrary to pleasure: not the second, for if
the senses be not interrupted in their actions and tied by sleep, they
euaporate all their vigor, and their action becomes odious unto them: Neither
in the third, for presently our senses are glutted, and the thing is tedious
unto them by a long stay, as experience does plainly show. Moreover, vanity
is so fixed to the senses and to the sensible things of the world, since that
sin entered, as the beloved Disciple of Jesus Christ cries incessantly to the
ears of Christians Love not the world nor the things that are of the world; if
any one loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him: for (says he)
all that is of the world, that is to say, the desire of the flesh the
covetousness of the eyes, the ouerweening of the life, is not of the Father, but
of the world. And it is the reason why S. Ambrose has made a book of the
flight of the present world, to conclude, that whosoever will be saved, must
mount above the world, as he speaks. Let him seek the verity with God, Let
him fly the world and leave the earth, for he cannot know him that is, and is
always, if he do not first fly from hence. Wherefore Christ meaning to draw
his Disciples near unto God the Father, said unto them, Rise, let us go from
hence. We must then sequester our selves, and if he that cannot (as Ioha. 14.
the same author says) soar up to heaven like the Eagle, Amb. c. 5. of the
flight from the world.
let him fly to the mountain like a sparrow, let him leave these corrupt
valleys of bad humors etc. Voluptuosnesse is the Devils pillow. Let man beware
how he sleep upon it, lest he be smothered. If these divine words do not
move them of the world, at the least let them give ^are to that which a Pagan
aduiced his friend: The greater the multitude is says he, among whom we
thrust our selves, the more we are in danger; there is nothing so pernicious to
good manners as to be in Theaters; by such pleasures, vice does more easily
creep into us: finally, it it is his end to sequester man from the delights of
the world.

But finally, if the pleasure of the senses contained any reason to desire
life, the displeasure which accompanies them contains reason to make men
loathe it, seeing it is certain that pleasure and pain are linckt together;
pleasure begins and passes away lightly, pain follows and continues long:
the which Boissard has in his 38. Emblem represented excellently by a hiue of
Bees, to the which an indiscreete maid comes, being desirous to taste of the
honey that was within it, she thrust her hand rashly into the hiue; the Bees mad
angry, stung her, so as for a little sweetness, she had a sharp and durable
pain. Even so that man (says he) which indiscreetly casts himself into the
sink of voluptuousness, retains nothing but grief and long repentance.

The tenth Argument. taken from the Intellectual life.
If the life of man has any reason why it should be desired, it is found in
the intellectual life.

But it is not found.

Therefore there is not any.

We have searched deep enough into the vegetative and sensitive: Let us now
sound the Intellectual, and prove the truth of the Minor of our Argument. It
is by the understanding that we are neither plants nor beasts, but a most
excellent creature; that is by reasoning which we understand, and
understanding is the proper work of man, in the which Aristotle has fixed his
last and sovereign felicity. If then there be reason in humane life, for the
which it is to be desired, L. 10. Ethic. (...). 7.
it must be drawn from hence: But humane life is for her actions. Of
Intellectual actions, we have three degrees, the apprehension of simple
things, as a stone, a tree, a horse, a man; in this single apprehension there
is neither good nor evil, pleasure nor displeasure, reason nor absurdity.
Then follows the second operation of the intellect, the composition and
division of things like or dislike, whereby the truth or falsehood is made
manifest; which truth or falsehood is better known by the third operation of
the understanding, which is the discourse, inferring by one thing another, and
concluding the truth.

Here certainly should the true good of man be found, if he could attain to
the knowledge of the sovereign and first truth, seeing (according unto Jesus
Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life) That is eternal life to know
one true and only Ioh. 17. c
God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent: But who can do it of himself? seeing
that the only means to attain unto it is folly unto the Gentiles, and
scandal unto the Jews, as the Apostle says. No man can do it of himself,
no more then fly to heaven: he alone obtaines this knowledge, who illuminated
from above, has made his reason captive to his faith. But yet all that man
knows of this first truth, is but obscurely, and as it were by a glass; which
cannot but stir up a desire to dislodge out of this life, to be with Christ,
and to see God face to face. As for the knowledge of the things of this world,
which is gotten only by the strength of Nature, men attain unto it but in the
declining, when as their eyes are darkened with age, and their spirits
distempered with a thousand languishings; beginning then only to learn when
as life begins to leave them. And yet after they have swette, washed, and
studied, where are they? That is, knowing, or thinking to know something, they
find they are ignorant of ten thousand; and if they fix the point of their
contemplation in the essence of the thing which they think to know, they shall
find that the greatest part is hidden from them: And it is that which
Ecclesiastes teaches, saying, I have observed that man cannot give an account
of any work of God which he has done under the Sun; the more he shall toil
in it, the less he shall understand, how wise soever he boast himself.
Conformable hereunto, Democritus said, that truth was hidden in the bottom of
a deep well. The same reason armed the Emperors Valentinian and Licinius
against learning, as against a public plague: Faustus also Proconsul in Asia
put all the learned men he could get to death, for the only hatred of learning.

Tully by the report of Valerius, who had so much cherished learning, as he
had purchased the title of The Father of Bloquence, did in the end contemn it.
And what was the cause that Aristotle (called the miracle of the world, the
spiritual man, for his rare knowledge) did in the end cast himself headlong
in the flood Euripus, but that he could not comprehend the flowing and ebbing
twice in 24. hours?

It seems that all the sciences (as has bin observed by others) are but the
opinions of men, though confidently delivered like unto the decrees of a Court
of Parliament; as hurtful as profitable, more pestiferous then wholesome, bad
rather then good; imperfect, doubtful, full of errors and controversies; by
reason whereof Socrates the wisest in the world, will say, that he knows but
one thing, which is, that he knows nothing. This saying is common to the
seven wise men of Greece, Nothing too much. This is of Archilochus; The
understanding of men is such as Jupiter sends them daily: And Euripides says,
What wisdom do these poor men think to have? we understand not any thing,
let every man do according to his own will; and in another place, Who knows
whether to live here be not to die, and that to die be not reputed life to
mortal men? O worthy speech of a Pagan! And what shall we say of the
Pyrrhonicques, who make profession to doubt all things? Reject them not without
hearing, seeing that Seneca laments their error; seeing 7 Quaest. natu. c. vlt.
St. Augustine vouchsafes to write of them, that they hold that man cannot
attain to the knowledge of things belonging to Philosophy. As for other
things they follow appearance, not affirming, not consenting directly. See what
a Divine of our time says, conformable to this, Charron in his book of
wisdom; And to the end, they should not be censured to doat without reason;
these are the considerations which they produce.

The 1. is taken from the different complexions of men and beasts, and of men
among themselves.

Hemlocke is the food of Quails, it is poison to men* Demophon warmed
himself in the shadow, and quaked in the Sun: Mithridates after long custom
made poison so familiar unto him, that he could take it without any fear,
peril or danger*

The second is taken from sensible things, the which differ of themselves,
according to the diversity of the senses: An apple shall be pale to the sight,
sweet in the taste; and they say commonly that the thing which is sour in the
mouth is sweet at the heart: Yea, they shall be diverse to the same sense. Of
an egg the yolke shall be hot, and the white cold; of some herb the root
hot, and the leaf cold. The 3. is taken from the alteration of men in health
and sickness, in their sleep and waking, in their youth and age; a change
which does suggest diversity of judgment upon the same thing, so as that
which pleased him does offend him: and thereof comes the proverb that he which
was an Angel in his youth, is become a devil in his old age. The 4. is taken
from the contrariety of Laws and customs, which make that honest in one
place, which is vicious in an other: In Turq^y plurality of wives is honorable,
in Christendom it is a sin: At Sparta it was allowed to steal, so as they
were not surprised in the theft; in Europe it is a vice punishable howsoever
they be taken. Finally, by Lycurgus Laws, Adultery was allowed, and by those
of the Persians incestuous marriages, with the mother, sister and daughter; and
by Platoes Laws the commonalty of women, sodomy, and such vices as are at this
day odious to be named. The 5. is drawn from the mixture of diverse things, and
of the diverse situation where they are set* so the purple color seems to the
eye to vary in the Sun, the Moon, and by a candle: So a Pigeons neck, or the
wing of a cock takes the color of gold, silver, green, blue, or any other
according to the place: So the Camelion takes the color suddenly of that
which does enuiron and touch it. The 6. is from the want of experience of men,
by reason of their short life; for sometimes we give a rash judgment of
things, whereof if we had duly considered, we would change our opinions. The
7. All our knowledge is grounded upon the uncertain supposition of certain
principles, which if they were changed as they might be, al our knowledge would
be converted into mere ignorance. The 8. the same things shall be great and
small, square, and round, plain, and rough, if they change place, and be
contrariwise compared. The 9. is derived from our want of custom, who admire
many things which we had never seen; and the Sun which exceeds all the wonders
of the world, is not admirable unto us; for that since our birth we have
always beheld it. Finally, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Hippocrates, and others
affirm; That there are many things in the world which cannot be discerned by
any of the five senses, no not by the understanding; and what knowledge then
can we have? And who is assured that there are not many worlds? as many wise
men maintain, not without reason, seeing that the power of God is infinite,
and that he is not idle until he can do no more. And if there be but this
world only, as others hold, who can comprehend that infinite Vacuum beyond the
heavens? These are bottomless gulphes.

Now what assured knowledge is there in so many doubts of worldly things? What
constancy in that which is so wavering? And if in the most easy sciences
appear so many objections, oppositions and obscurities, what shall it be in
those which are more hidden and remote? Let Physics come, the most easy
science to be apprehended; at the very entrance you shall find such a
conflict of Philosophers, as all the air is darkened, and the eye troubled in
his judgment. Thales Milesius maintains that water is the principle in this
science. No (says (...),) it is the air. Heraclitus the Ephesian affirms
that it is the fire, Leucip pus that they be the Atoms: Empedocles, love and
hatred: Plato the Ideas; Aristotle (like a new star) he will set matter;
form and privation: and he that has contradicted all that went before him,
shall be refuted by his heirs, who will maintain even by the deposition of
Aristotle him self, that Principles which have equivocation, should not be
accounted for true principles: such is privation, and therefore in steed
thereof some Peripaticiens will set motion, which ties the one unto the other.
I, but motion is an accident, and an accident cannot be a principle to a
substance; and therefore the Hebrew Philosophers have added spirit to matter
and form. Upon so many contrarieties in the foundation, what strength can
there be in the building? Let us observe the like in History, which is much
more easy; As many writers as you shall read upon one subject, so much
contradiction shall you find. Will you for confirmation of the Pops Primacie,
assure your self what time S. Peter came to Rome? some will hold that it was
at the beginning of Claudius Empire: No, says S. Jerome, it was in the second
year; and the Bundel of times replies that it was in the 4. The Passionall on
the other side will passionatly maintain that it was in the 13. Will you also
know the certentime of the death and passion of our Savior? Tertullian says
that it was in the 30. year of Jesus Christ, and the 15. of Tiberius; but
Ignatius and Eusebius witness, that it was in the 33. year of Christ and the
18. of Tiberius: Onuph rius, Mercator and other late writers will swear, that
it was in the 34 year of Jesus Christ; and if we yield some thing to
antiquity, we shall believe that Jesus Christ was 50. years old when he was
crucified, and that it was not under Tiberius, but under Claudius: and to this
the Jews discourse tended, Thou art not yet 50. years old, and yet thou
say thou have seen Abraham. If in this so holy a thing, where there is not
any cause of blind passion, there appears such apparent contrariety, what
shall we think of History, where as the pen puffed up with passion, and
transported with flattery or slander, has either aimed too high or too low,
at the white of truth, the only commendation of an history? And admit we
should find writers void of all passion, the which seems impossible, (if we
except the secretaries of God, who were guided with the holy Spirit) yet their
Histories should be uncertain for the most part, for that they have not been
spectators of the times, places and persons, necessary circumstances in a
History; and how can they know them, seeing that many times that which is done
in our own Town, in the street, yea, in our house, is concealed from us?
Nay, the most exquisite and most certain science, is nothing but vanity and
trouble of mind, says Solomon: Eccles. 1. c.
And if we shall rightly observe it, we shall find the most learned most
disquieted, and the most unlearned most at rest. S. Augustine has seen it and
was amazed, crying out with S. Paul, The unlearned rise up and lay hold of
heaven, and we are plunged into hell with our learning. It is the reason why
Nicholas de Cusa has written books of learned Ignorance, where he commends
them that make not so great account to know and understand many things, as to
do well and live well.

Knowledge then, being for the most, ignorance in this life, cannot contain
any subject to love life: And therefore we will conclude, That seeing in all
the degrees of life there appears no sufficient reason to desire it so
vehemently; that this desire is not commendable but to be blamed, namely, in
man; who being man, for that he has a reasonable faculty, should not will
any thing, much less affect it with passion, but by a true judgment of
unpassionate reason.

An Objection.
All that is ordained for the service of God, is grounded upon good reason*

Life is ordained for the service of God.

ANswer. That life is good which in all her motions, actions, and meditations,
seeks nothing but the humble service of her Creator; but it it a chief point
of their service, that man living should do that honor unto his Lord, to give
certain credit unto his oath, and to the writings of his testament sealed with
his blood. Verily I say unto you that whosoever hears my John. 5. 24.
words, and believes in him that sent me, has eternal life the which is
repeated in many other places: Whosoever has this certain assurance of faith
in him, what can he fear? death, nay rather desire it, seeing that in heaven
by this death, (which serves us as a bridge to pass thither,) we shall be like
unto the Angels, and shall do the will of our heavenly Father, obtaining the
Petition which we should daily make unto him, by the express command of his
Son, in the Lords prayer: Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Let us
say, the will is good, which aims directly at the honor of God, so long as it
shall please him to keep it in his favor; but yet death is better which the
Eternal sends, to give us thereby a better life.

The 11. Argument taken from the description of Death.
No Cessation from a labor unprofitably renewed is unpleasing.

Death is a Cessation from a labor unprofitably renewed.

THere is no need of Eagles eyes to pierce into the truth of this argument,
the least attention will comprehend it: For what is this life, but a daily
weauing of Penelopes Webb? it is finished in the evening, but the night undoes
it, and in the morning we begin again with as great eagernes as if it had
never been. The which made Seneca to pour forth Epist. 24.
these complaints: When shall we cease to weaue daily one work? I rise, and
then go to bed: I hunger and then fill my self; I am a cold, and then I warm
me. There is no end, the head and tail hold fast together, whereas the same
things in their courses do incessantly approach and recoyle again: It is day,
and night comes, so^mer appears, and winter does advance, and still they walk
one round: I neither see nor do any thing that is new. I do but go about
this wheel, says the same Philosopher. If I be laid, I say, when shall I
rise, and when will night fill up her measure to glut me with distemperatures
until day? says Job Chap. 7. It is the true body of the infernal shadow of
Ixion, who tied unto a wheel turns about Epist. 78.
perpetually.

There is not any one so dull but sees this earthly Labyrinth, and yet no man
will leave it: Even so they that are borne in a prison affect not their
liberty; so they that dwell among the Cimmerians in darkness, desire not a
clear sky. So the children of Israel would not leave the house of bondage,
they quarrelled with Moses who spoke unto them, they cursed him, and being come
forth they would have returned often: what was the cause? custom which was
become another nature, fear to find* worse in their journey, and ignorance a
cruel beast. No man will leave this miserable earth, fearing to fall into
greater misery; so much does the love of the place and custom retain the
inhabitants in their miseries, says Seneca; Many floate miserably betwixt the
torments of life and the horror of death; they will not live, yet know not how
to die; like to Ulysses in Homer, who took fast hold of a wild Fig Tree,
fearing to fall into bottomless Charybdis, but yet ready to leave it, if the
fear were past. So Tiberius confessed that he held the Empire as a Wolf by the
ears, the which if he might without danger have abandoned, he would
willingly do it: So Seneca; and Epist. 4.
so experience does teach, that many keep themselves close in life, like unto
them whom a violent torrent has carried into some rough and thornie places.

But let us learn of a silly woman, That death is the calm port for the
storms of this sea, to the end, that with her we may take pleasure in it:
Monica speaking to her son S. Augustine, used these words: As for me (my
son) I take no more any pleasure in any thing in this impure world; what
should I do here longer in this base estate? I know not why I live having no
more to do: here to fore I had a desire to live, to see thee live to Christ; I
see it, why then stay I longer here? and soon after yielded up her soul to
the Spirit of all power. Even so, O mortal men, live as long as you list,
exceed the many years of Nestor, or the 969. of Methusalem; yet shall you not
see any other thing in this world, but those four great Princesses, the four
seasons of the year, holding hands together, and dancing this round
continually, sometimes showing their gracious aspects, and sometimes their
backs deformed, as Philo the Jew speaks. It is like Sysiphus stone, which being
thrust up by force to the top of the Mountain, returns presently back again
to the foot of it; and like the Sun which has no sooner touched one of the
Tropikes, but he suddenly turns to the other. To conclude, it is Danaes tonne
pierced full of holes, they may well pour in water, but they shall never fill
it: These are fictions, but they have their mystical hidden senses.

The holy Scripture has Parables, and Philosophy figures; let no man
therefore reject them, for so did the ancient Philosophers shadow their
Philosophy. And as mercenarie laborers toyling and sweating in the longest
day of Summer; rejoice when they see the Sun decline and near his setting:
so we after such painful travail whereunto this life does force us, let us
rejoice when we draw near unto our declining; and let us not refuse being
weary and tired, to rest our selves in the sweet arms of death, to the which
without doubt, there is no bed in the world, how pleasing soever, to be
compared. There is nothing here but ignorance that keeps us back. If the
Israelites had truly under stood the beauty and bounty of the land of Canaan,
if they had been assured of the enjoying thereof, they had not so often
murmured against Moses, being ready to stone him; they had not wished for the
oynions and leekes of Egypt, they would have taken courage in the midst of the
desert.

Let us then conclude, that there is nothing but the blindness of man which
hinders him from seeing the joys of heaven, whereunto death is the way
Wherefore let us open the eyes of our understanding, and not grieve for the
gross food of this world, for in heaven there is prepared for us the meat of
Angels.

Objection.
Any exchange from a place that is pleasing and certain for one that is
uncertain, must needs cause trouble and vexation.

Death is the exchange of the world which is pleasing and certain, for a place
wholly uncertain.

MOst part of the world when the Lamp of this life is almost wasted, are so
perplexed, as they do lose themselves. In the chief City of Aragon, upon a
Knights tomb this Epitaph is written in Latin: I know not whither I go, I
die against my will, Farewell suruiuers.

The Emperor Titus dying, said, Alas! must I die that have never deserved it?
There is to be read at Rome, upon the stone of a Sepulcher of Sextus Perpenna
to the Infernal gods, I have lived as I list, I know not why I die. Whereunto
may be added the verses which the Emperor Adrian a little before his death
made unto his soul:

My pretty soul, my daintiest,
My bodies sociable Guest:
Whither is my sweetest going;
Naked; trembling, little knowing?
Of that delight depriuingme,
That while I lived I had from Thee.
Many at this day in the light of the Gospel, show by their actions, that they
are no better resolved then these were, although that shame will not suffer
them to confess it, when as death approaches.

Answer. We deny the Minor of the Argument; for it is not true that death is
of it self to be beloved: if it appears so, it is but in comparison of some
extreme misery, which we apprehend in leaving it; for the living are (as we
have said) like unto them which are carried away violently with a stream, who
(to save themselves) lay hold of that which comes first to hand, yea if it were
a bar of burning Iron. If you will then ask them how pleasing that estate
is, you may easily guess what they will say, That if they were as certain (as
it is most certain) that there were no harm in death (as shall appear) they
would not break out into such complaints. It is also false that this place is
certain. Gorgias the Rhetorician will not depose it, for Stob. sermon. 115.
being demanded if he died willingly: Yea, said he, for I am not grieved to
leave a lodging which is rotten and open of all sides. And Epicurus had often
in his mouth, that against any thing in the world we might find some place of
safety: but we all lived in a City which was not fortified against death: and
in truth this body is but a little plot of earth, commanded of every side,
flanked of none, having furious enemies without, and mutinous within. Ingeners
have made many impregnable forts, but never able to resist death. Physicians
have drawn out Maxim ser^ 36.
the quintessence of their spirits; if they have any time found a delay, yet
must they in the end yield and pay the interest. Fabulous Aeson returned to
youth by the Sorceresse Medea, and true Lazarus raised again by the Savior of
the world, have not yet for all that escaped death.

But you will reply, It is that which we would say, that without death, life
should be certain.

I answer, that you know not what you say, for life as it is made here, and
whereof our question is, cannot be without death: to desire to be a man, and
not be willing to die, is not to desire to live; for it is one of the
conditions of life, as shall appear in the following Argument. Moreover I
add, that what incertainty of the future Estate soever you pretend, doubtless
it cannot be so miserable (except the reprobate) as that of this life.
Thirdly, admit that life were certain, yet the pleasures would not be so, but
rather the displeasures certain. That wise King of Macedon saw it, feared it,
and protested against it. For news coming unto him of three great
prosperities, that he had won the price at the Olympike games, that he had
defeated the Dardanians by his Lieutenant, and that his wife had brought him a
goodly son; he cried out with his hands lift up to heaven, O Fortune; let
the adversity which thou preparest for me in exchange of thy favors, be
moderate.

But I will sommon you Merchants which make a profession of traffic: There is
a bargain offered unto you; in the which you find of the one side gain to
be made, and of the other loss; I demand if like a good husband you will not
weigh the loss with the gain, to the end that finding the loss the greater,
you may break off the bargain. And why should not man observe the like in
life, which is much more important? Why should be not balance the pleasures
with the displeasures, and finding these greater and more grievous, why should
he fear to lose the pleasures, to avoid the displeasures?

A Poet speaking of a solitary life said, That if there be not so great joy,
without doubt there is not so great pain: If death have not the joys of this
world, it has not: the torments of life which are far greater. Observe it
for a certain Maxim, that there are three things here below, which march
equally with an inconstant pace: the estate of the air which they call time;
life, and the opinion of man. And that which is worse, there are more cloudy
days then clear, more miserable days for man then happy, and more changes to
bad then good.

But that which should fully assure us going out of this life, is Jesus Christ,
who protests That no man shall pull his sheep out of his hands, Ioh. 10. We
know whose we are by the faith that is in us, by the which we are fully
persuaded that God will keep our pledge until that day, 2. Tim. 1. Moreover
we are assured of the end, by the beginning, for to him that has, shall be given
more. Luc. 19. Finally, we doubt no more: For the holy Spirit does witness
with our Spirit, that we are the children of God. Romans 8. 16. This is certain;
but admit that it were not so, there is no pleasure in the world, be it never
so short, but it leaves behind a venomous sting of serious repentance. I see
thy large possessions, thy stately houses, the amiable aspect of thy children,
thy treasure, the greatness of thine honors, finally all the pomp in the
world, raise thee up with their goodly shows; but believe me, these things are
not so happy as thou do hold them: for proof, look upon them that have
them in a higher degree then thy self, if notwithstanding they be not
miserable, they be transitory things; if thou leauest not them first, they will
leave thee; if thou do affect them more then as an exercise for thy spirit,
thou have neither wit nor judgment. This understanding which makes the man,
should not crouch under these carnal things: it must raise up himself to
those which are eternal, to the beauties, bounties and exquisite workmanship
of this universe. All the pinching care which thou take for the world, is but
a toil to the body, vexation of mind, and a loss of time: do what thou will, enjoy all the possessions of the earth; but know this for certain, that
one only hour can take them from thee. Do thou not see that all runs to
change in this world, like unto the Moon, which immediately does govern it?
Art thou mounted to the highest degree? thou must descend again: he that loves
thee, will hate thee; he whom thou have saved, it may be will kill thee (as it
happened to Julius Caesaer:) thou do laugh to day, it may be to thou shall
weep to morrow. Do thou triumph to day? an other day thou shall be led
Captive: finally art thou alive to day? another day will carry thee to the
grave: and not knowing what day, if thou art wise thou will suspect every day;
like unto that good old man Messodan, who being invited by one of his friends
to a feast the next day, said unto him Do thou put me off until tomorrow,
who after so many years did never hold any one day assuredly mine? but I have
held every day as if it had been my last; a resolution which differs much from
these young old men, who having one footein the grave yet think they may live
one year more at the least, and the year being past, yet another, and so
always: what is this, but against the order of nature to think to live ever?

The 12. Argument. from the condition of life.
No man should hate any essential condition of that which he pursues.

Death is an essential condition of life.

Therefore no man should hate Death that seeks life.

IT we consider of death, not in her introduction, but as she has been blessed
by God since by his grace, it is no fearful pain to life (as we conceive)
but an inseparable quality. Life is a burning Lamp, the body is the cotton,
the radical humor the oil, the natural heat the fire; this fire consumes
the oil and cotton by little and little, and in few hours had devoured it
all, if nutriment supplied and changed by a secret virtue did not keep it
repaired: yet can it not preserve life from natural ruin but for a time, for
that the virtue ingrafted into all the members of the body, wearing by degrees,
in the transubstantiation of meats, and application thereof to the fading
substance, comes in the end to waste, the humor dryes up, the fire is
quenched, and death follows: and seeing that we see death enclosed in the
body of life, he should be very indiscreet that would seek life and hate
death; and he wise and virtuous, that will no more regard death then life,
seeing it concerns his duty.

Hear what Pompey the Great (returning out of Sicily with Corn to famished
Rome, in a great storm) said unto the Master of the ship; being half dead:
Gowe, go we; the question is not to live, but to go. This great personage did
consider that it was as natural for man to dye, as to live: and in truth all
that have lived are dead, what force soever they pretended to oppose, the most
puissant beasts in the world the Elephants go to dust; yea Nature willing to
show how little that is which here seems great, and how upon the least
occasion all force decays, she suffers the Elephant at the sight of the
least and basest creatures, of a Mouse or an Ant, to be so seized with fear,
as he trembles strangely.

The Tyrants were smothered with lightning in the Phlegrean fields. The Tyrant
Maximine with his 8 foot in length, with his great thumb carrying his wives
bracelet for a ring, who drew carts laden, brake an horse teeth with his fist,
and did split trees with his hands: Although he thought himself immortal, by
reason of his force, yet he lies slain by his subjects.

In the same estate is Marius, whose fillips were like blows with a hammer.
Among the Moderns, George Castriot Prince of Albania, valiant and fortunate in
his exployts, who with his own hands had slain 2000, Turks; who never gave but
one blow to cleave a man in two, and to overthrow the strongest; yet in the end
death subdued him, and laid him in his grave. Let the Idolatrous Turks search
his Tomb for his bones, and from those relics draw an invincible force to
themselves; yet he is dead: does not this suffice? Behold Cities, Commonweals, and kingdoms, they have their youth and vigor; so in like manner their
age and death: where is Thebe^ that great City, whereof the name is scarce
remaining? where are those (...). Cities of Candie? where is Sparta and Athens,
whereof there remains nothing but the base ruins? And thou the Queen of
Nations, falsesly held to be eternal, where art thou? destroyed, ruined,
burnt, and drowned; in vain do they seek thee, for thou art not where thou
were built; And you Constantinople; Venice, and Paris, your day will come, and
why not? Seeing that whole Monarchies run swiftly to their ruin, the
Assirian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman are perished. You Turks; you flourish
for ^lme but, behold (...) Sc^thians prepare to wrest the reins of the world
out of your hands, and what wonder? if that riues which by nature is apt to
tiue, if that which is easy to melt, melt, if that which is corruptible
decays, and if that which is of a mortal condition dies. Without doubt if
there be any thing to be amazed at, it is how we are borne, how we subsist,
amiddest a thousand deaths, which reign upon us; we have but one narrow entry
into life, but we have an infinite number to go out, which are very large and
slippery; And yet (o strange brutishness) we wonder how we die, and not how we
live: Let us then conclude with the Spirit of God, That every man is dust, and
shall return to dust, for such is his condition.

The 13. Argument taken from the benefit which the thought of death brings.
Whatsoever does multiply life should be precious to them that love life.

The Meditation of death multiplies life.

Therefore the meditation of Death should be precious to them that love life.

A Great Philosopher observing the uncertainty of the time of death and finding
that life must infallibly fall, by a bullet, by iron, by a dart, a stone, a
hair, as Fabius the Praetor was choakt in drinking milk; with a kernel, as
the Poet Anacreon; with a fly, as Pope Adrian. 4. with a splinter be he never
so well armed) as Henry 2. the French King, whom a splinter of Captain Lorges
lance flying into the beuer of his caske, wounded in the head, whereof he dyed:
by the rush of a door, as Iterenius the Sicilian: in the Venerian act (a
ridiculous death) as Gallus Pretorius, and Titharius a Roman Knight, who were
smothered in the bed of lust; By the holding of their breath without
constraint, as it happened to Common: by delight, as to Chilon, who hearing his
son commended for that he had won the prized the Olimpike games* was so
moved with affection as he dyed; yea, in laughing, as old Philemon, who having
seen an Ass eat sigges upon his table, he commanded his servant to give him
drink, whereat he did so laugh, as he fell into a hicke^ and so dyed. Yea,
life is ruined by the prick of a needle, as in Lucia the daughter of Marcus
Aurelius, who pricking her self dyed: By the tooth of a comb, like to
Rufynius the Consul, who combing himself, hurt his head, and ended his life.
That great Philosopher, I say (considering that so many accidents, and ten
thousand others not to be foreseen, might in an instant take away life) gave
this wholesome counsel, That we must dispose of every day in such sort as if
it should close up our life within the compass of the twelve hours. Consider,
says he, how goodly a Sen. Epist 31.
thing it is to consummate life before death, and then to attend without care
the time that may remain: and the better to induce us thereunto, let us
remember the advice which Jesus Christ gave unto his Disciples of him self: I
must do, says he, the works of him that sent me, whilst it is day; the
night comes and then no man can work, Ioh. 9. By the day he signifies life,
by night death; and his will is, that whilst we live we should do our duties
without any procrastination, for that night is near, that is to say, death:
But when a well settled soul (says the same) knows there is no difference
betwixt a day and an age, she then beholds (as it were from above) the days
and success which shall follow her, and laughs at the course and continuance
of years. The same Seneca does also make a pleasant discourse of Pacu^ius the
usurper of Syria, who being at night buried in wine, (as as if he had prepared
his own funeral) caused himself to be carried from the table to his bed,
and in the mean time his friends clapping their hands, danced and sung; He
has lived, he has lived; and there passed no day but this was done. And the
Author adds, what he did in an unseemly manner, let us do with reason; that
night approaching and ready to lay us in bed, let us sing with joy, I have run
the course of my prefixed life, and if God does add an increase of tomorrow,
let us account it for gain. In doing so, every day shall be a life unto us,
and by the multiplication of days our life shall be multiplied, and why not?
seeing that in what day soever we dye, we dye in our own proper day, as the
fame Seneca says, calling the present Epist. 70. and 120.
day, that proper day; seeing the days that are past are no more ours, being
so lost for us, as they can be no more restored: As for the future, we cannot
call them ours, being not yet come, and may be wrested from us in an instant
by many accidents: Moreover, what is there in an age, that we find not in one
day, the heaven, the earth, the inhabitants thereof, the day and night by the
revolution of the heavens?

But you will say, This pensive thought of death, hammering continually in our
heads does hasten our death. Answ. You are deceived, a wiseman thinks quietly
of it; and in thinking of it aduanceth nothing; no more then the mariner in
seeing the sails still, and the wind to blow; it is by the wind and sails,
not by his looking that he is carried into the Port: So by the waves of this
life, not by the meditation of death, we are carried to the grave.

Let us then end with the saying of the Philosopher Musonius, That he imployes
not the day rightly, who resolves not as if it were his last.

The 14. Argument taken from a Simile.
Every sweet and sound sleep is pleasing.

Death is a sweet and sound sleep, Ergo.

A Naxagoras said, there were two excellent instructions in Death, the one in
sleep, the other in the time going before our birth. Let us now consider of
the first instruction. We see that most of the heathen Philosophers have
saluted death, with the name of sleep: Plato in the end of his Apology of
Socrates: Tully in his book de Senectute: Obsenie, faith he, there is no
thing so like unto death as sleep.

Homer faith, that sleep and death are brother and sister twins. Let us
observe with Plutarque that Homer shows their similitude, terming them
twins, for they that are so do most commonly resemble. And in truth we
cannot deny but there is betwixt them great affinity. It is one of the causes
of death, the cold vapor, undigested, and quenching the natural heat, a
vapor which appears upon the superficies of the body, which they also call
the sweat of death. Sleep proceeds from the fume which the meat digesting;
causes: this fume mounted up and thickened by the coldness of the brain,
descends again and disperseth it self over all, enters into the nerves, by
the which both sense and motion is distributed throughout the whole body: so as
death makes all the actions of the body to cease, even so sleep does all the
feeling of the sinnewes, of the senses, and all motion of the exterior members:
For as we do often find children lying asleep upon the ground, thinking
they were dead; so man dying does often deceive them that stand by, being not
able to judge whether he be dead or sleeps. Man cannot always watch, he must
sleep; neither can he live for ever, he must dye: and as he grows idle that
can take no rest, so he is madd that thinks, not to die.

As he that stooping to his work does stemm with traffic Boat along the
shore the stream, and pouring out himself in watrie sweat breaks all the
bancks in uproar: In retreat made to his Cottage, from the laboring light,
strecht on the straw sleeps soundly all the night.

As man after that he has sweat with tedious labor; being broken and grown
crooked with age, after that he has tossed and turmoyld, and kept a great stir
in the world, being laid in the earth rests in death; he that goes to bed puts
off his clothes; he that dies vnclothes his body; and his soul departs. And
as he that has eaten and drunk freely feels in his stomach a gnawing and
cruditie which hinders his rest; so he that has busied himself too much with
worldly affayers, feels upon the approaching of rest a remorse of conscience,
and an irresolution, which will not suffer him to embrace death quietly, sleep
seazeth upon m^n lying awake in his bed insensibly, so can he not observe the
very moment of approaching death; when sleep comes he feels no pain, no more
that the very instant of death) If men be froward and cry out when death
approaches, so do they, especially little children, who cry most when sleep
comes upon them; Finally as in our soundest sleep we feel no pain, and we
hold it a wrong to be awaked; so let us assure our selves we shall feel less
pain in death, seeing her sound sleep cannot be troubled, nor interrupted in
any sort: and therefore Diogenes taken with a sound sleep a little before his
death, the Physician inquiring if he had felt no pain, no, answered he, the
brother comes before his sister. So Gorgias Leo^tinus, being near his end, his
body without strength, he had many slumbers, so as a friend of his demanding
how he found himself. Well (says he) the brother begins to deliver me
into his sisters hands. Moreover, Nature which has made nothing in vain,
seems to assure us of this proportion, by the Dormouse, which sleeps all
Winter so foundly, as it will rather endure all extremities then awake: I have
seen a man of good credit, put one into water boiling on the fire, the which
did not awake, but only move the hinder legs a little; yet in the Spring it is
nimble and leaps from branch to branch: a goodly sign of the Refurrection of
the dead.

The fifteenth Argument, taken from former experience.
Not to be yet, and to be no more, are alike, yea the same.

We ^ere in peace and rest when we were not yet.

Therefore when we shall be (...) more^ shall be i^ peace and r^st.

IT is an humane Argument which takes matters at the ^orst, and death for the
(...) privation of the wh^le man; yet without preiudic^ of his right, if there
be any found* Of necessity (says P^o) Plat. Apol. of Socrat. in the end.
death must be one of these two, a withdrawing or extinguishing of al sense,
and of the soul likewise: or a transmigra tion (as they hol^) into some other
place: if death does extinguish all, and be like unto sleep, the which most
commonly when it is not troubled* with dreams and fancies, bring a ^uiet rest;
O God what a gain is death (...) etc.

But if it be true (which some say) that death is a ^ransport ^o the happy
regions, that our souls having shined in these mortal bodies, on this bare
earth, go to shine elewhere: as when the S^nne aft^ that he has enlig^ned ou^
horizon, desc^nds to give day unto an other, and then returns to make his
course anew: what decease is there of the soul more then of the Sun, which
runs his course through our horizon all the day, and at night seems extinct
and dead to us? Or suppose there were an utter extinguishing and decease of the
Soul, as well as of the Body, what cause were there of fear in this
extinguishing? since not to have been at all, and to cease to be, is all one;
because the effect both of the one and the other is, not to be* Then why should
we fear that now, when by the experience of above five thousand years, when
we were not, that is to say, that we were dead, we never felt any kind of
pain? Hereunto king A^asis had re guard, observing one who lamented much for
the loss of his son: If (said he) tho^ did not mourn when thy son was
not at all, neither should thou now grieve that he be no more.

Let us conclude with Seneea, That (according to the opinion of all the world)
he Eipst. 7^.
carries the supreme degree of folly, that weeps for that he lived not a
thousand years since, so he does second him which grieves that he shall not
be here the like ^e o^ o^ it i^ all on^, ^ou ^d no^ be, and You have ^ot ben^.
So spak^ the wi^e man by the mouth of m^, saying, We (...) as if we (...) not
b^*

Objection.
Not to ha^ had ^llent things, and ^o (...) lo^ them after the enioyng them a
time are very different.

^t he that has not been, is like to him that has ^ot had those ex^llent
things, life and the (...) thereof; and he that is no more, like him that has
lost them, after the enjoying of them.

Therefore not to have bin, and not to be are very diff^ things*

THe very word ^o los^* i^ of it self (...) he tha^ after a cl^ fight, (...)
lose his (...) ^ then he which has lo^ (...) knowledge of his senses, o^
reason an^ (...) ^out the which we had not bin? Wha^ is (...) into this (...)
not see himself swallowed up in a gu^ of darkness ^ay, in eternal horror^?
And therefore S. (...) (...) the name o^ the faithful ^aith 2. Cor. 5. That we
which in this lodging groan under the burden, desire not to ^e unclothed,
bu^ to be clothed again; to the end* tha^ mortal may be swallowed (...) by
life: Which shows that the desire of man is to be, and if he enclines to de^h
it is (...) assured ^o^sideration, that by ^ath he enters into a (...) and more
perfect being; els^ he would always (...) not to be, that (...) to say, death,
i^ we take it as the argument gives it.

I answer: That if there be a great difference not to have been, (...) to
be, he ha^ the (...) ^nefit that is no more; for he has this aboue^ the
other, that he has enjoyed life and the fruits thereof, which the other ha^
vnles^ you will deny that h^ which has bin admitted into the Kings Chamber,
(...) ass^ (...)* ^th not any (...) ab^ue ^im that has not been admitted at
all, and that he which has been a Mayor or a Consul in a free City, is not
more honored then he which has never been. But the Obiector supposes one
thing which is not, That this life is adorned which most excellent gifts; being
full of most sharp agonies, as is justified in the 18. Argument: and the^fore
I deny the consequence of his Minor, and to prove the falsehood, I produce
that which Solomon says, Eccles. 4. that he more esteems the dead, then
those which be living; yea he esteems him that has not been, more happy
then the one or the other.

Secondly, the loss of fight, of senses, of the habit of s^iences, is grievous
to a living man, who has enjoyed them for a time, for that he is capable of
sorrow: but to make it a conclusion to a dead man, who should be more grieved
to have lost all this, and life it self* there is no consequence, for that
death is incapable of sorrow and mourning; wherein the Proverb of Hesiodus may
be verrified; The moitie is more then the whole, the loss of senses and reason
are more grievous, and more to be lamented then the privation of life.

Thirdly, I deny that man dying loses any thing, he was but Vsufructuarie of
life; God the proprietarie demands it, and he restores it, what loss? Thou art
not angry if any curious sercher of the most exquisite rarities of the world;
if having suffered thee to see his Cabinet he afterward draws the curtain,
thou will take it patiently how great soever thou art: If the Seigneurie of
Venice has done the^ the honor to see their stately treasure, and have dazzled
thine eyes with the glistering of those 14. Pearls, of their Ducall Bonet, of
the 12. Crowns of gold, and of other most rich ornaments; would thou not
take it patiently to give place after some hours? Know then that it is
reasonable, that the Lord of Lords, having brought thee into his house, there
to behold the golden studdes which adorn the firmament, and to observe the
diverse motions of the 7. Planets, and among the rest, of the Sun, the eye of
the world; to touch and comprehend the 4. Elements and other infinite goodly
creatures; if it be his pleasure and he make sign unto thee to give place to
others that survive, it is reason thou should dislodge, and thank the Lord
for his favor.

Finally, I maintain, that the depth and horror is as great to reason, to
live perpetually here without end, the same life which we now breathe; (for
our discourse is of this life) as great I say and greater then to be dead.
depth; for who can perfectly comprehend a life without end? horror, for who
would always live with the fear of a hundred millions of horrible miseries,
which may happen in a hundred millions of years, not making mention of the
vices and sins whereunto man is subject and which a good man should fear more
then death. As for the authority of S. Paul, it is not nature only, but the
heavenly grace, which makes him to speak so; and they that shall be partakers
of this grace in the same degree, may brave death with S. Paul* and say unto
him, O death where is thy 1. Cor. 15.
victory, O grave where is thy sting? and. And if S. Paul in this place did
contemplate in spirit the excellent ornaments which he had seen in the third
heaven in his extacie, and on the other side touched to the quick with the
venomous sting of sin, he makes no mention but of the simple deliverance, as
if it had been sufficient for him.

O wretched man that I am (says he) who shall deliver me from the body of this
death* He makes mention of deliverance, for that he fel^ Co^bate in himself,
and found himself prisoner to the Law of sin, as the verse going before does
declare* But you will reply, There is nothing to be compared to life, it is a
natural desire and common to all men.

Ans^* Man desires not only to be and to live, but to bee^t ease: else what is
he, that like to Ixion in the Poet, would always live, to be fastened to a
whe^le? Who would always live the damnable life of Satan and his angels, in
the midst of an unquenchable fire, but mad men and fools? And in truth the
desire we have to roll on always from day to day, is, that by an abusiue
hope, we promise unto our selves some future pleasure and content: The Apostles
desire (better ordered and grounded) was to put off this mortal body, and to
put on one that was b^essed and immortal; not upon earth where it is not to be
found, but in heaven, and by a divine and celestial power. But that does
contradict this assertion, That man desires as much or more to end the miseries
of this life, as to continue this miserable life; and therefore certain wise
men of the world, did settle their resolution unto death upon this Dilemma,
saying, Either we shall be happy in death, if the soul escapes; or else we
shall be without pain or misery, if all remain: No small advantage doubtless,
seeing the greatest point of happiness in this life, is to beeleast unhappy.

The 11. Argument taken from two resemblances of Death.
S^ounding is a kind of Death, and the shadow of the body is an Image of it,

But in swounding there is no pain, nor in the shadow any amazement.

BY Syncope. I understand the strongest and most extended swounding, not that
which is gentle, which happens sometimes at the opening of a vein, in the
which the patient neither loses feeling nor speech, but that which carries
away all the forces of a man, his natural (I say) and principally his vital.
Sleep is nothing to represent death in regard of this symptom, for it is
death it self; only there is in this sometimes a returning to life, and there
none. I have seen it and observed it in my father being an old man. I have
conferred it with some that were apparently dead, yet could I not find any
difference; he lay without any show of soul in any of his ^ects,
notwithstanding that he was continually rolled up and down in a chamber; his
pulse, was not to be felt, he was in a cold swet over all, the extreamities of
his body were exceeding cold: And these are the very signs of a right Syncope,
by the which the truth of our Mayor is justified, that to fall into the
Syncope, is to fall into death; for as death is a cessation from all action,
and motion, so the Syncope interrupts all motion, and all the functions both of
sense and life. And that in this accident there is not any pain, experience
does witness: and the report of such as revive is to be credited, and serve
for as good a testimony to the curious and incredulous, as if they were ^isen
from the dead. They depose and will depose, that in the incursion of this
death, there is nothing but quiet rest, so sound a sleep, as the natural is
nothing in comparison of this. And in truth when my father was restored to his
health, and as it were returned to life again, he was much amazed, to see the
company which came to succor him* and his first words were, What is the
matter? Be ing demanded if he had felt no pain, he answered, No, and did not
remember that he had any accident; so as all the time betwixt the first
access of his disease and his separation, was without his feeling or memory.
Thus if the body becomes so insensible, that the soul (although it be present)
suspends her action and agitation, what shall it then be in death, when being
separated, she shall have no communion with it, how much more shall it be
without pain? As for the bodies shadow, there are none but little children
that are afraid, being not able for the weakness of their judgment to know
what it is* But they that have any understanding; and take a little leisure to
observe this obscure* Image; moving at the shaking of their bodies, find that
it is only a privation of the light; in the air opposed to their bodies: for
the Sun, the candle, or any other thing that shines, not able by his beams to
pierce through a solid body, is forced to fall upon the Superficies, so as it
cannot lighten the air, which is beyond the said body. Whereupon it remains
obscure and without light, and is fashioned according to the proportion of the
body.

Man therefore being assured that death is nothing to the body but the
privation of life, by reason of the le^ which happens in the light of life,
which is the soul; the which notwithstanding (no less then the Sun, or a
Candle) does retain her life and remain immortal: Man, I say, being assured
of this truth, he should not fear death, no more then the shadow of the body;
for neither the shadow nor death have any settling of any thing, but only a
simple privation of another.

The seventeenth Argument taken from diversity, which is pleasant to man.
That wherein the nature of man is pleased, should not displease the mind.

The nature of man is pleased in diversity. etc.

WE prove the mayor of our argument, by the suffrages of many wise men. No man
can err says Cicero, that follows 1 de Legib.
nature for his guide. And again, To follow the conduct of good nature, is to
follow Lib. de Senect.
and obey God. Chrysippus does willingly hear nature, according to the which
we must live conformably, says Laertius, it is common nature and properly
human: whereunto Seneca will give his conse^^. Sen. de vit. beat. c. 8. Naturae
rerum asse^tior, says he: Moreover it is our intent to live ac cording to
nature; for, says he, to live according to it, and to be happy is the
samething. This common nature is interpreted by the Stoics to be God, as
Clemens Alexa^drinus does witness: The Stoics 2. Stroma. in decore ^aturae
says he, have settled the end of man to live according to nature, changing the
name of God into the beauty of nature. Let the world, says Philon, consent
and concur De mundi opi^.
with the Law, and the Law with the world. Let every good man as soon as he is
made a Citizen of the world, direct his actions according to the arbitrament
and will of Nature, by the which all this universe is governed: We are
afflicted, says Seneca, with diseases, but curable; de Ira. c. 13
for Nature which has made us perfect, if we demand correction, helps us*
Wherefore S. Jerome says, Ad Deme^
that in our spirits there is a certain natural sanctity, if 2. de^irrg.
we may so speak; the which being president in the fortress of the spirit,
exercises the judgment of good and evil: which is (says he in the same
place) that Law, which by the testimony of the Apostle is infused into al men,
and as it were written in the tables of the heart. Wherefore the spirit of man
should never part from the motions of this nature, according to which all this
world moves an^ (...) entertained. But to come to the minor of our (...), that
nature is pleased in diverse cha^ges, we see that this world does never sub^ist
any moment of time in one estate, not heaven, nor the seasons, much less the
earth our common mother.

For Nature having with a varied love Bartas in the 2. day of the 1 week.

Wounded the Heart; Not able to remove
The forms of all the fauor^ to one part,
And at one time; she takes into the heart
Form after form so; that one face embraces
Form by that Tract; a^ther form defaces:
But above all there is no poulpe nor Proteus so changeable as man for what
pleases him in the evening, is in the morning distastful; every day he lays
new foundations for his life, says Sen^ he reuiues new hopes, at the end, yea
before the last periode Epist. 13.
of the thing hoped for; he often changes advice, and turns to the contrary of
that which he pursued; and therefore life is to many a very sport, says he:
No man knows what he would have, and yet he is always in quest* still
desirous to change place, as if he might there plant his change, says
Lucretius: And seeing that man delights so Lucre. 3.
much in change, seeing that his particular complexion leads him and forces
him unto it, seeing that the vniuer sall nature guides him to it, as by the
hand: seeing that in this life (a death rather then life) he could not find his
contentment, but misery upon misery; why does he not run joyfully to the end of
this life, and seek to find a better?

Objection.
Man cannot lose that which is pleasant unto him, without displeasure.

But life is pleasant to man. etc.

IN this Theater of the world there is nothing so admirable as man, says
Abdala Sarasin: he may, if he will, take the part of God and be happy and
joyful in this world; for by his free will he may become wise, and be in a
good, happy, and pleasing estate, as certain Philosophers do show. I will not
(says Seneca to his Lucilius,) Epist. 23.
that thou ever want content, I will that it grow in thy house, which it shall
do, if it dwell within thee: other petty joys fill not the spirit, but make
smooth the brows, they are light, unless thou will hold him joyful that
laughes; the spirit should be cheerful, assured, and elevated above all: and
presently after he says, the joy whereof I speak is sollid, and the greater,
for that it is deep in the heart. And in another place, the spirit of a wise
man is as the world above the Epist. 59.
Moon, always clear and without clouds.

But what is this joy? it is De vit. bea. c. 3. 6.
(says Seneca) peace, concord, and greatness of spirit joined to mildness;
it is to be content with things present whatsoever, and to become a friend to
his affaiers: It is (says D^critus) to have Cic. 3. de finibu^ 3. Offic. 1.
his spirit free from fear; and the religious Doctor Saint Ambrose will say,
That tranquillity of conscience and assured innocence, make the life happy.
Finally, Solomon will cry out, than a joyful spirit is a delightful banquet* and
contrariewise, a troubled mind thinks always of things which are distasteful
and mournful.

Trust not to these mela^cholie men, to whom adu^ choler makes white things
seem black; those that are happy, unfortunate, and to fear where there is
nothing but subject of assurance. Life is as we govern it, good or bad,
pleasant, or displeasant; and therefore Epictetus said f^ly, That every thing
had two ends, and that by the one it was easy to bear, by the other
combersome.

If your brother, says he, has done you wrong, do not consider of ^t of
that side that he has done you wrong for then it is uneasy to bear; but of
the other, as he is your brother, that you have been nourished together, and
then you will find it very tolerable.

Du Vair, who like the industrious Be^, has gathered summarily together the
flowers of the Stoics, writes, that nature may say unto us, as the Philosopher
did unto his Disciples, What I present unto you with the right hand, you take
with the left, your choice tends always to the worst, you leave what is good,
and embrace the bad; Let us take things by the good end, we shall find that
there is subject of love in that which we hate. For there is not any thing in
the world, but is for the good of man; As for example, you have a suit with
your neighbor, when you think of him, your suit coms to mind, and then you
curse him and are disquieted: the reason is, you take it by the bad end; but
take it by the other, and represent unto your self that he is a man like to
you, that God by a resemblance of nature calls you to a mutual affection; that
he is in the same City, in the same Temple, and does communicate in the same
Laws, the same prayers, and the same Sacraments with thee, that you are bound
to succor one another reciprocally.

Finally, the Stoics hold for a Maxim, that a wise man is exempt from
injury, either to give or receive: he cannot do any, being borne only to
aid; and he receives none, for that being grounded upon virtue, he valiantly
contemnes all reproach and wrong, so as he is inuulnerable, as Seneca says;
not for that he is not struck, but for that, as he says, he cannot be
hurt.

Answer: I know that the Stoics (with whose feathers our obiector decks
himself) have sought to frame their wise man of that fashion, that he should
not be capable of any ill, but continually possessed of a sollide joy: but
whatsoever they have purtrayed was but a vain picture, without effect or
truth* like unto the Chimeres and Centaures. Who will believe that a wise man
put upon the rack, feels no pain! Who can say that the life of Metellus is
not more to be desired, then that of Regulus turned Cic. 3. de finib. 5. de
finib. Sen. epist. 66.
up and down in a pipe full of nails, and that they are equal favors? That
a wise man will joyfully hold his hand burning in the fire, like unto Mutius
Scaeuola?

Finally, that a wise man being burnt, tormented and put in Phalaris burning
bull, will notwithstanding say, O what a sweet life is this! Let them do what
they list, I care not. These and such like are the Paradoxes of these
Philosophers, who (as Cicero 4. De Finib.
says) carry admiration in their foreheads, but being stripped naked, they
give cause of laughter, and of themselves (as Plutarke says) they confess
their absurdity and vanity. And in truth, who would not laugh, when among other
things they say, that only a wise man is truly a king, rich and beautiful?
yea though he were a slave, a beggar, or a Zopirus with his nose cut off, etc.

But let us answer punctually to the reasons objected: The Sarazin Abdala
understands, that by some excellent relickes of thesoule, man is admirable to
the world; but he does not touch his felicity, for he has nothing of that
remaining; since his transgressio^, he is continually here below, miserable in
every degree: He had the gift of free will, to have enjoyed his own happiness
if he had would; but for that he abused it, he lost himself and his liberty,
says S. Augustine. He rules over all creatures, but a miserable domination, in
the which the meanest subject exceeds his Lord in felicity; and twice
miserable, in the which the Lord suffers more misery then the most wretched of
his subjects.

Read Plutarke, and then Homer, but above all the Spirit of God in the holy
writ, who knows what we are, and qualifies man with no other titles, but of
darkness, Ephesians. 5.
and foolishness to think a good thought of himself; a brutish man, who
comprehends not the things which are of the Spirit, and cannot 1. Cor. 2.
understand them, for they are spiritually discerned.

Finally, he shows him to Ephesians. 2. Coloss. 2. Math. 12.
be weak, sick, dead in his sins, a vipers brood, not able to do any good
thing, for that he is bad; and by consequence, cannot take part but with Satan
the prince of darkness, and the father of lies and all iniquity.

Moreover, if Seneca and others to retain men in life, teach them what they
ought to do, it is no argument that they divert them from death when she
shall present herself unto them: but contrariwise, Seneca does in a manner
Epist. 36. Epist. 24. 31.
generally protest, That death has no discommoditie, that it is not only
without ill, but without the fear of ill, and that it is a foolish thing to
fear it, etc.

As for life he calls it deceitful and vicious, for that it is always
imperfect. But see how upon this question he opens his heart to sorrowful
Martia for the death of her De consol. ad Mart. 32. Epist. 202. ad Mart. c. 20.
son; O ignorant men, says he, of their own miseries, which do not commend
death, as the goodlyest invention of nature! For whether that she holds
felicity enclosed, or excludes calamity; be it that she ends the satietie
and weariness of old age, or that she carries away youth in his flower, in
the hope of better things; be it that she calls unto her the most vigorous
age, before that it has mounted the roughest steps, yet is she to all men
their end, to some a remedy, to some a vow; and those are more bound unto her,
to whom she coms without calling. He goes on, but he cuts off his discourse to
come to the end of his life which was cut off: for being commanded by Nero to
dye, without any delay he willed his Surgeon to open a vein in his foot,
holding it in a basin of warm water, and saw with dry eyes his life fade
away. But S. Ambrose assures, that a good conscience makes the life happy; Be
it so, but forgets to add, That in the death of the faithful this happiness
is doubled, for it is precious before God: And in the end I deny that those
men, in whom a melancholy humor does most abound, suffer themselves to be so
abused in their judgments: for this humor is more advised then all the rest,
having some divine matter in it, as Aristotle says; and therefore more to be
credited then the rest, and particularly more then the Iouiall sanguine.

As for the admonition of the Stoics, it was easy for them to speak it, but
virtue consists in action: and I know not whether Epictetus did that himself
which he taught to others; otherwise (as the proverb says) I hate the
Philosopher which is not wise but for others, and not for himself. You will
that I take the most troublesome things on the best fide; yea, but I see no end
of that side: it is like unto occasion, which has long hair before, and bald
behind. Where is that end then? I cannot see it, and admit I should, I cannot
attain unto it, being borne under the planet of Saturn, and always taking
things on that side which is sad. I would have my neighbor and my adversary
observe your precept, and he would have me; and so neither of us do it: and we
continue by reason of the one and the other, in continual vexation.

Finally, the pleasure of this world is very small, and intermixed with many
displeasures: It is a Mine where there is gold, but it is so fastened to the
stones, as to draw one crown it will cost 12. So there is not one ounce of
joy, but does cost a pound of sorrow.

The 18. Argument taken from the miseries of life.
Every Estate that is full of calamity, should desire, and not apprehend a
change.

This present life is full of calamity etc.

THe field of this straight life is so spacious, and so full of great dangers
and extreme miseries, as the exchange thereof, to him that has any sense,
cannot be but delightful. Observe the diseases of the body, measure and number
their greatness and their great number: consider the tempests and storms of the
passions of the soul, the clouds and troubles of his understanding; and you
will conclude; that man must of necessity change this life, or to be
continually miserable in every degree. And therefore he was fitly compared to a
Bull, which leapt suddenly into his Masters garden, and by chance overthrew
sundry skepps of Bees, which being provoked came forth, assail him and sting
him on the throat, back, in the eyes, and generally all over. And it auailes
him nothing to pierce the air with his homes, to beat the earth with his
feet, to whippe his flanks with his strong tail, to roar and make a noise;
ye his stingings stick still-to him, and do not leave him: So man since that
in his Creatures garden, in the earthly Paradise, he durst presume to overthrow
and transgress his Masters commandments, there is no part of him from the head
to the foot, which is not touched and pierced even to the marrow of his bones
with many calamities: his head is subject to inflamed Phrensies, which make him
madd; to the Apoplexy, which like Lightening depriues him of all motion; his
eyes are touched with the Opthalmie or infla^mation: the Squinancie takes him by
the throat, which making the Muscles to swell with a congealed blood, stop
the passage of respiration: the inflamed Pleurisy stabs him in the sides; the
Fever burns him, the swelled Dropsy drownes him: the Iaundise makes war
against his Liver, pouring forth gall for pure blood; the ungentle Cholike
wrings his bowels, straitens the passages, and makes of his mouth a stinking
Iakes; the bloody flux excoriates his gutts: the hardened gravel staying his
urine in the bladder, pricks him most horribly: the Gout knits his sinnews
faster then bonds of Iron: the Canker burns his flesh more then fire it self;
the filthy and lousie Phtiriasis eats his skin: Finally, there is not any
member either within or without the body, that is not subject to many
infirmities; Who can comprehend them all, seeing the eyes alone by exact search
of Physicians is assailed with 113. diseases? And who does not see here that
the estate of man is very wretched? And that which does aggrauate this, is,
that even those helps wherewith they think to ease themselves the medicines are
converted into worse torments then the disease: the strict dyets, the bitter
potions, the cutting and burning of members, which they use in Cankers and
other ulcers; that tubbe wherein they boil the bodies of such as are infected
with the venerian scab, or the French pox; with a thousand other devices to
restore health and life to man: what torments, what agonies, and what cries do
they not cause unto the poor patients? These miseries are great, but those of
the mind are greater, which seemed for her noble extraction not to be subject
to any. Come and let us run over her faculties: the understanding holds the
chief place; at the very entry of life we see in infants a greater ignorance
then in brute beasts: Fawns as soon as they are borne know their. dammes, and
without help of any, go into the most secret places to seek the dug and
suck; whereas children newborn know not where they are, and being near the
breast, will cry and perish with hunger rather then suck, as S, Augustine
writes, and experience does teach: This ignorance Lib 1. de pec. mer. and
remis. c. 38.
has taken such deep root in the spirit os man; as to root it out, and
pass unto the sciences, there is found such difficulty, as most men had
rather live perpetually in darkness, then to take so much pains to learn.

Thirdly, (and that is most lamentable) man knows nothing of his last end, in
the getting of which knowledge consists his sovereign good; he goes always
astray, if God does not inspire him from above. Let all the sects of
Philosophers be witness, who by so many diverse ways have sought it, yet could
not find it.

Fourthly, the ignorance in man of his Essence, is a notable misery: the Angels
know themselves perfectly. The soul knows nothing less then it self: and
the body which was given it for an Organ of the Sciences, hinders it, that she
neither knows her self, nor any other thing; for the body which corrupts,
makes the soul heavy, and Wis. 6.
this earthly habitation pulls down the spirit, that it cannot raise it self
to think of many things. For a fifth point there is a curiosity or natural
itching, to observe the actions and errors of others, more willingly and
diligently then his own; this misery is great: for to know his own faults is
always profitable, and many times necessary; to examine other men's actions, is
seldom good, and many times pernicious.

There is for the 6. place, and for the deepest degree of the calamity of man,
the deprauation of his will: he wills not that which he should, and wills that
which he should not: that which he should do is conformable to nature; to
reason, and to virtue; whereof the Law is written in his heart, and the seed
cast in his spirit. Other creatures move speedily and easily, to that which is
proper unto them and seemly, and contrariwise they go unwillingly and by
force, to that which is repugnant to their nature. But men, they rejoice when
they have done evil, they take delight in their impious works, says wife
Solomon: Man Prou. 2.
drinks sin as the fish does water, says Job. Yea the corruption is so
general, as it is become a proverb, It is a humane thing to err: he thought
so, who to excuse his sin of adultery, said, The night, love, wine and my
young age, persuaded me unto it, etc. Finally, will you see a great sign of
great misery in the spirit of man, which is, that he is never content with his
condition, an other pleases him better. Other creatures apply themselves
easily to the course that is offered unto them, and seek no change: it is the
property of sick persons to affect sometimes one thing, sometimes an other, to
change beds hourly, as if in the bed only consisted the remedy of their
grief; they desire one kind of meat, and are presently distasted. We (says
S. Gregory) borne in Greg. hom. 36. in Eu.
the misery of this pilgrimage, are presently loathed, we know not what we
should desire; and a little lower: In the end we grow into a consumption, for
that we are distasted of every thing, and we are wonderfully tired with the
want of eating and drinkking.

Saint Chrysostom does also sharply censure this fitrious dainty, for that
every man does commonly complain of that whereunto he is most bound, as if it
were an insupportable charge, Homil. 60. Cleobulus in Plutarke, observing the
inconstancy and foolish demands of many, sent them for answer to the mother of
the moon: On a time, said he, the moon entreated her mother to make her a
little garment that might sit close to her body: And how is it possible, answe
red she, seeing that sometimes thou do increase, then thou art full, and
after decreasest? If now from this most eminent part of the soul, we descend
unto the sensitive, how many men are borne blind, or deaf, and dumb, or lame,
or in some other part counterfeite and monstrous? who although they were not so
in the beginning, yet are grown so: how few be there but feel it in their old
age? Look into, other Creatures, if you find these defects.

In man that faculty of anger, which was given him as a strong man at arms,
to repulse all that outwardly should offer to trouble him; behold how it seeks
to domineere over reason, how it treads it under foot, and turns man into a
madd dog to bite, and into a Scorpion to flatter and sting, and into worse then
that Let us proceed, and leaving those natural infirmities, Let us observe
the accidental; How many have endured an unspeakable torment by thirst, which
has forced them to drink their own urine, yea that of others? Then hunger,
which could not abstain from human blood, but has fallon upon dead
carcasses, and living men; not only upon strangers, but even mothers upon
their own children, deuowring them cruelly and greedily, whereof Lament. 4. 10.
the sacred history and Pagan is full.

Thirdly, there is so great pain to maintain this dying life, that man in
this world has less rest then a Mill Ass; Man is borne to labor as a bird
to fly, says the holy writ: and the Eternal cries from heaven; Thou shall
eat thy bread with the sweat of thy brows. Do not tell me that this is no
general Law: it is; for without exception, he that trauells not with his
bodio, travels in mind: think you that ambitious and voluptuous men, yea
thieves, are not more troubled and vexed then handy-crafts men? If you reply,
that at the least students are happy; yea, in com parison of them that are
more miserable: but being considered absolutely, they have their part of
misery by their sitting life, which is necessary to meditation; they have
sooner filled their bodies with diseases, then their souls with knowledge.
Moreover, he that adds know ledge, adds torment, says the wise man; and yet
most part of students have no sooner learned the tongues, the instruments of
sciences, nor the principles, but they must leave all, either through death,
which cutsthem off; or through age, which tends unto it, and which depriues
them of all ablenes, memory, industry, sight etc. Wherefore one dying
complaynes, that when he began to know many things and to govern his life
well, he was called out of life. Another begins his book with these words:
Hippoc. Aph. 1.
Life is short, the art long, the occasion hasty, the experience dangerous,
the judgment difficult: as if he would say, Miserable man, who cannot possibly
for his short continuance, for his week judgment, for the slownesse of his
flesh, for the slippery estate of the world, attain unto that knowledge which
is so necessary for him. But this is not all, we have yet but lightly run
over the miseries which man hatcheth in his bosom; they which assail him
without are more violent: He has his God and Lord interessed and angry
against him, we are all borne the children of wrath, the whole world makes
war against him; and what wonder is it, seeing that he that rules it is his
enemy? he is infe sted with the incursions of spiritual malices, which dwelling
in the most cloudy air, are always ready like carrion kites to fall upon the
prey of man. Man is always to man, and in all places a troublesome enemy, and
the ancient proverb says, That man is a wolf to man, and the more means he
has to hurt, the more dangerous he is; and in truth never Tigers, Onces, or
Lions, have so torn men in pieces, as the Phelares; the Business, the first
Emperors, the Massachiers, and Benz. l. 3. c. 5.
the Spaniards at the West Indies.

Fourthly, there is not any little Creature which does not shoot out the darts
of his poor spleen against man, being grieved to see such a Tyrant reign upon
the (...)

Fifthly the heaven, fire air sea and sand are armed against him, and dart out
against him their wenimous influences, lightening and hayle: They shake him
with their earthquakes, they swallow him with there opening; they drown him,
they burn him. If thou think in fair weather to walk into thy Garden, to
recreate thy self, the Aspike attends thee in ambush under ome flower or herb
which thou do intend to gather. If thou do enter into a strangers house,
the mastiue will take thee by the thigh; if into thine own, yet art thou not
without fear, for thine own dog may be madd, byte thee and make thee mad.
Finally, that which exceeds all these miseries, is, that when thou shall think
thy self most safe, a thousand unexpected accidents may overthrow thee: some
one returns from market (says S. Augustine) sound and lusty, who falling
breaks a leg, whereof he shall dye. Who semes better assured then he that is
set in a strong chair? yet upon some troublesome news, he may be disquieted,
fall, and break his neck; Another laughing eating and drinking, shall be
suddenly surprised with an Apoplexy rising from some unknown cause, and dye
presently. What receptacle seems more safe and commodious for hunters that are
weary and full of sweat and dust, then a clean house with a good fire? And
yet a Prince with his train, thinking to retire him to such a place, found
himself in such danger of death in the morning, as he could not escape without
the loss of his nails, that fell away by the vehemency of his pain, and two
of his company found smotheredin the morning whence, think you proceeded the
cause of this strange Accident? It was from the wall newly plastered, which
cast forth a virulent vapor, which together with the smoke of a great cole
fire, fumed up into the head, and dispersed his poison throughout all the
members of their bodies; Who could have foreseen this accident, but too late?
Ammianus Marcellinus reports tho like to Hist. lib. 5.
have happened to the Emperor Iouinian, who was found smothered in the mor
ning by the like poison. And to conclude, what seems freer from breaking, then
a head lying in the shadow far from any house? and yet it hap pened that the
Poet Aeschilus being so retired, an Eagle Val. Man l. 9. c. 12.
flying in the air, thinking his bald head had been a flint stone, let fall a
Tortose to break it; and to have the meat; but falling down it brake the
skull os poor Aeschilus.

The first Objection.
That which shall not happen unto us, is not to be accounted among our
miseries.

But these misfortunes shall not happen unto us, etc.

THese miseries (if it pleases God) shall not befall us, but where is that
warrant from heaven to assure us? The comicall Poet says, That man cannot be
exempt from any humane accident: No man living can say without warrant, This
shall not happen unto me, says Menander. What befalls to one, think it may
happen to thee, says Seneca; for thou art a man: and therefore retain Epist.
7. 19.
this and think of it, not to be dejected in adversity, nor puffed up in
prosperity, but have always before thine eyes, the liberty of fortune, as
being able to lay upon thee all the miseries she holds in her hand. Man is in
continual war upon earth: Is there not a course of war ordained for
mortal men upon Job. 7.
earth? says Job. If he be freed from his enemies abroad, let him beware of
some treacherous Syno^ at home: Be always ready said Jesus Christ, for you
know not the day nor the hour: no man is no more assured against death then
the bird is against the shot of a harquebuze; God would (says S. Augustine)
that we should watch continually. But if changing thy tune, thou think that
thy neighbor is not afflicted like thy self, and that he is much more happy,
thou art much deceived: Every man feels his own grief: Herodotus has seen
it and written it, saying, That if all men living Lib. 7.
laden with their own miseries, had brought them together upon one heap, to
exchange with them of their neighbors; having well weighed them and viewed
them, every man would willingly carry back his own. Without doubt this
present life is so full of miseries, that in comparison thereof death seems a
remedy. A long life is but a long torture, says S. Augustine. And what other
opinion can we have, seeing that Jesus Christ, who was given us for a perfect
president, is never propounded unto us laughing, but sometimes weeping? as when
he approached the Tomb of his friend Ioh. 11.
Lazarus, and when as he wept upon the ungrateful City of Luke 19.
Jerusalem: and therefore the Apostle says, That in the Heb. 5.
days of his flesh, he offered himself with great cries and tears to him
who could save him from death: What is that? but to show us that this life is
not worthy of joy, but of lamentation; not of laughter, but of crying: as the
Philosopher Heraclitus does esteem it, who always with a weeping voice did
lament the estate of this life.

The second Objection.
It is a cowardly consideration not to be willing to die, but to cease to live.

This reason has that consideration.

TO denounce death to end the miseries of this life, is (says one) to pro
pound a carnal end to the liking of sensuality: Upon death (says another) the
privation of thislife, there is no Cataplasme, but of a better life: for the
loss of earth, but the enjoying of heaven.

Answer. Death is the corruption of the flesh, and a privation of all the
senses: to the end therefore that the remedy may be proportionable to the
flesh, it must also be fleshly, sensible and palpable. I grant that in retiring
ourselves, we must not think only to fly from human miseries, but rather to
draw near to divine favors: But betwixt doing and duty, who does not at this
day see an infinite distance? That elect vessel of the holy Ghost, that great
Apostle Saint Paul, Romans 7. 23.
seeles a Law in his members fighting against the Law of his understanding: He
complains 2. Cor. 12. 7.
there was a thorn thrust into his flesh; the angel of Satan did buffer him:
what is this but the relikes of sin, of infirmity, distrust? what gloss soever
they will set of it. If Saint Paul were such a one, what then are we poor
dwarses, wavering and staggering? let us not flatter and seduce our selves, for
our works discover us; O God fortify us, and make thy holy Spirit to reign
in us; and attending the happy effect of divine promises, let us meditate of
the Testament sealed with the blood of Christ.

But if the horror of death which does threaten us of every side, comes to
hinder our holy meditations, let us vanquish it by the darts of reason: this
may be done, and it is that we ought to do; The Surgion which has sercht a
wound, has applied a fit Cataplasime, has made his patient without passion
or pain, is to be co^-mended. The Philosopher which has examined the natural
death, has found o^t the cause of the fear it gives, and has accomodated
reasons fit to take away this fear, and to assure man's courage; is not to be
contemned. I know well that he which through death has made us see the life
eternal: has done more; but this work is of God and not of men: and if the
sacred word of the eternal God do it not, no human voice can do it. But
do you say, there is no Catap^sme fit for the loss of a pleasant life, but
the hope of a better? Answer; You presuppose two suppositions here which are
not; First, that life is full of pleasures. Secondly, that in death we have a
feeling of the loss, against that which has been and shab be said; to the
which I will send the refutation: and in the mean time for witness of my
saying; I propound that great Divine S. Augustine writing that which follows:
The present life is doubtful, blind, miserable, beaten with the flowing and
ebbing of humors, weakened with pains, dried up with heat, swelled with
meat, undermined with famine, confounded with sports, consumed with sorrows,
distempered with cares* d^lled with pride, puf^ up with riches, dejected with
poverty, shaken in youth, made crooked in age, broken by diseases, and tuined
by (...) etc. Many great men who ha^ not wanted any thing for the enjoying of
all pleasures; yet would they in their life time have written upon the Marble
which should cover them dead, for a conclusion of the Epitaph, these last
words: The life and bi^h of mortal men is nothing but toil and death: as one
wave drives on another, so one misery thrusts on another: the one is no sooner
flying, but the other follows him: And as in the eye, one tear springs of
another, so one sorrow rises out of another: as Buchanan has learnedly
written in his Tragedy of Iepthe.

The 3. Objection.
It is not lawful of himself and without other some Command, to remain in a
place that is bad and troublesome. Life is a place bad and troublesome.

It is not therefore lawful of himself, without other command, to remain in
life.

THis long Iliade of calamities of this present life, seems to persuade man to
the doctrine of the Stoics, which is to depart when it is too troublesome: so
speaks Seneca, A wise man lives as long as he ought not solong as he could: he
will: see, how, with whom, and how he should live, and what he should do: if
many things fall out troublesome and cross his tranquillity, he frees
himself, and he does it not only in the urgent necessity, but as soon as
fortune seems suspect unto him, he co^siders that it imports not whether he
give himself his end, or that he receive it. Moreover that it is wretched to
live in necessity: but there is no necessity to live in necessity. Diogenes
meeting one day with Speusippus being sickly, and causing himself to be
carried by reason of the Gout, he called unto him in these terms, God give
thee a good day Diogenes: to whom he answered, But God give you no good day,
that being in this estate have the patience to live. With the sharpnes of these
Cynicall words Speusippus, was so moved, as contrary to the precepts of his
sect, he ended his own life. But let us produce (if you please) some reasons
by the which these men have debated there folly. The 1. Life and death, say
they, are indifferent things, and therefore man acoording to his commodity may
use them indifferently Lucret 3.
Wherefore says (...), As one that is invited, having feasted and taken his
refection, retyres himself so being glutted with life, why do thou not
depart? O fool why do thou not embrace: a pleafing rest? what interest have
thou that death should come unto thee, or thou go unto it? Persuade thy self
that this speech is false, and proceeds from an indiscreet man: It is a goodly
thing to dye his death, for it is always thy death, and especially that which
thou Sen. epist. 69.
have procured to thy self. The 2. Death is the goodliest port to liberty,
which is the fruit of wisdom. I will not serve (said that Laeedemonia^
child) and cast him down a precipice: Sene^. Epist. 26.
who learned to dye in contempt of servitude, he is free from all power: what
does a prison, a dungeon or fetters touch him? he has an open port. The 3.
Wherefore has nature given so straight an entrance unto life, and has
presented unto man so many large issues unto death, if it shall not be lawful
for him to depart when he pleases? On which side soever (said Seneca) thou
shall cast thy miseries, thou shall find the end of thy miseries: De Ira, 3.
c. 15.
do thou see this precipice by which they descend to liberty? do thou see
this sea, this river, this pit? there is liberty in the bottom: do thou see
this little tree, crooked, cursed? Liberty hangs at it: Do thou see thy
throat, thy heart? These be the fruits of servitude: Pliny says, that the
earth our common pare^t has (for pitties sake) ordained poisons to this end,
that being able to swallow them easily, we may with equal facility dislodge
out of this world: So in old time, Kings and great men did keep certain
poison ready for any sudden use in the doubtful events of fortune, as Titus
Liuius reports: and therefore many have poisoned themselves, being valiant, and
esteemed great personages: Zeno being 98. years old, yet strong and lusty;
returning from the School, he stumbled and fell; and being down he struck
the ground with his hand, saying, ^re I am, what will thou? And being come to
his house, he laid down his life of himself. Cleanthes having an Ulcer in
his mouth, and having abstained two days from meat by the advice of the
Physicians, was cured; Being then persuaded by them to eat again: Oh no,
said he, having past the greatest part of the way, I will not, I will not
return again; and so he died of abstinence. We could produce many others much
commended, as Lucrece, Cato, and others, if they were not sufficiently known.

Answer. I deny that the swarm of miseries of this present life, is a
sufficient cause to depart when we please; the great God which has placed us
here, must first come and take us away. Pythagoras in Tully, forbids to leave
the Corpse de guarde without commandment of the Captain: as a prisoner
breaking prison agrauates his crime, so the spirit violating his body, makes
himself guilty of a double torment. And he that has so strictly forbidden to
kill, meant it as well of himself as of others: And therefore Virgil
platonizing, sings unto us, that they which have inhumanly slain themselves,
hold the first place in hell: As for the virtue which they pretend in it, the
most quick sighted Philosopher has Arist. 3. Ethic. c. 7.
seen nothing but fear and foolishness, and thus he speaks It is the part of
a coward, and not of a valiant man, to dye by reason of poverty, of love,
Ethie. ad Eud. lib. 3.
or for any other thing that is troublesome; it is a faintness to fly
difficult things; and after, He suffers not death as a good thing, but flying
the evil.

Finally, he that murders himself, wipes himself for ever out of the book
of life; for that he dies impenitent, in the act of sin, never to have
remission after this life, nor (as Saint Augustine says) any indulgence of
correction. But to come nearer to our Stoickes, we will first appeal srom
Seneca to Epictetus; O men! says he, have patience, attend God until he
give the sign, that he has dismissed you from this ministry, then return
unto him. But for the present, support courageously, inhabit this region in
the which he has placed you; this habitation is short, easy, not burdensome,
etc. The 1. reason inferring, that life and death are indifferent, is false;
for it is to tear in pieces the sacred communion of the soul with the body,
of man with his neighbor, to kill himself. Man is not borne for himself, but
after God for his Country, which he depriueth of a good son, such as he ought
to be. Aristotle has Ethic. l. 5. c. vlt.
seen it, and has written it, saying, That he that kills himself does wrong
unto the Comonalty; but to do wrong is no indifferent thing: Moreover, it is a
sin against nature; for every man loves himself, naturally, (...) and
desires to preserve his being: also we do not see any other Creature, but man,
to kill himself through impaciency of paiue. The 2. reason which speaks so
much of li berty, is frivolous and ridiculous; for what liberty is there in a
dead man? who has neither the power nor the will to chase away a fly that
stings him; who is made subject to all sorts of worms, rottennes, and stench
what is liberty, but a power to do what we list? but death neither has will,
action, nor my power: it a ^s mos^ dry in my opinion to produce this defense.

As for the third, poisons are given by the earth rather to preserve life, the^
to destroy it, to make antidotes and preservatives against malignant and
venomous diseases, and a thousand unexpected accidents, by the biting of mad or
venomous beasts: omitting the true cause of divines, that the sin of man has
infected all, pouring forth his poison upon the Creatures which e^uiron him;
and therefore as Saint Paul says, they Romans 8.
sigh and long after their future restoration. Finally, examples bind us not,
but rules; we live not according unto others, but as we ought: the Law of God
is plain, sealed in the particular nature of every one, Thou shall not kill,
by the which we are forbidden the simple homicide of our neighbor, for that he
is of human blood; next the parricide of father or mother, for we are their
blood; which does much augment the hainousnes of the offense: 3. The murdering
of our selves, which exceeds parricide in a degree of horror. To this we must
have regard, not unto what Zeno, or Cleanthes have done. And the Stoickes who
in all other places so much recommend unto their Disciples, seemelines, honesty
and duty, seem to me in this point forgetful, blind and preuaricators: what
shall we then do? That which a wise Pagan Curt. l. 5.
did advise us; It is for valiant men, said he, rather to contemn death, the^
to hate life. Many times faint hearted me^ are driven to a base contempt of
themselves, through the wearines of labor, but virtue will try al things:
Seeing the^ that death is the end of all things, it is sufficient to go
joyfully un to it. To his words we add, That our intent is not to take away
life, but the terror of death when it comes: a wise man will live joyfully, so
long as it shall please the Lord of life: He will die also more joyfully when it
shall please the same Lord. This is that he ought to do, and doubtless man may
without sin desire, yea pray unto the Lord that he may live long for many
reasons, but especially for 2. The one concerns the glory of God, in the
administration of the charge which he has committed unto us; therefore the
Son of God in dying would save his Disciples, by that voice full of virtue,
which he used to the Roman soldiers and Jews, If you seek me, let them go:
the which preserved them long, especially his well-beloued S. John, whom he
retained in life unto ninety years. The other respects our children, parents,
and friends, of whom John 18. 8.
we may and ought in conscience have a care, seeing that (by the censure of the
Apostle) he which has not a care of his family, has denied 1. Tim. 5. 18
the faith, and is worse then an Infidel.

But besides these reasons and some others which do simbolize, I say that the
desire to live were not fit, if there were no other reason; sor there is no
ceasing from finne so long as life does last; so as the longer we live the
more ^lpable we are before God: So as I maintain, that the fear to undergo
death, I mean death simply, is always vicious, foolish and ignorant.

But to be a Murderer of himself, without comparison it is much more
execrable; the Laws of every well governed Commonweal have thundered against
it: yea the Grecians: in the midst of ^rmes, (whereas laws are silent) would
not in sign of indignity, burn the body of Ajax, according to their custom,
for that he had slain himself: The virgins of Milesia for that they had
furiously stra^gled themselves were drawn by public ignominy through the
streets of the City: and in such cases God does usually show visible signs of
his revenging wrath: So in Parthenay a town in Poitou, a certain woman in the
absence of her husband, was taken with a deuilish despair; she took the
little children, when she had smothered them and hanged them, then she came
unto her self, went up on a stool and hung her self, and and thrust away
the stool with her foot; but the rope brake, and she falling down half
dead, found a knife, (the Devil is a ready officer to furnish instruments to
do evil) which she takes and thrusts into her bosom; The next day, the
matter being known, all the world ran thither with the judges, who caused
her body to be cast out upon a dunghill near unto the town wall. Not far
from it there was a corpse de guard, and near it a place for a sentinel; the
guard being set (for it was in time of war) the sentinel heard a fearful
noise in the air right against this Carcass, and after a long stay was forced
to leave his stand: the guard also amazed with this noise, thought to fly
away: Thus the Devils made sport with this poor desperate woman.

The 19. Argument taken from the contradiction of man touching Death.
Not any thing that is sometimes called for by us with joy, being come, should
be trouble some.

Death is sometimes called for by us with great joy.

THe Pagans to describe the pitiful estate of man in this life, have fained
that Prometheus, mingling the slime of the earth with tears, made ^antherof;
whereunto a Latin Poet has alluded, saying,

Tears b^ the our Births;
(...) all inteares we live.
And Death in tears,
Many alarums does give.
But what need of testimony but the continual fear and fevers which spring
from the apprehension of those infirmities whereof we have made mention? Thy
bowels wroung with the cholicke, a thousand gripes and throws at every child
bearing, if thou be a woman; the pinching cares that trouble the mind, make
thee by interruption and soden exclaming to desire death; and not without
reason, seeing that the Prophet Elias serves 1. Kings 19
thee for a pattern, who not knowing how to avoid the ambushes that were laid
against him, did wish to dye. But let us cast our eyes upon those miseries that
make us to desire Death, not as we propounded them, nor as we have found them,
but as they make themselves known. If we shall indge of the stream by the
spring, what may we hope for of the life of man, conceived betwixt the urine
and excrements, borne naked and all in tears; but only a perpetual flux of
corruption, poverty, and calamities: and therefore it is not without reason
that S. Bernard said, That man is but a stinking sperme, a nourishment for
worms, a sack of excrements; and such should we see him within, if the
skin did not stay our sight outwardly. Do we doubt of it? seeing of this
living substance there are engendered worms about an ell long, and being dead,
serpents in the pithe of the back, as Pliny writes, Lib. 10. c. ^6.
and experience teaches. Plutarke reports that the king of Egypt having caused
the body of Cleomenes to be hanged, and the guard having discovered a great
serpent wound about his head, they called the people, who running to this
spectacle called Cleomenes as a demy-God. The like happened to a young man a
German, who would never suffer his picture to be drawn in his life time, but
only granted to his kinsfolks, (who importuned him) that some days after his
interment, they might take him up, and draw him as they found him: Being taken
out of the grave; they saw about the Diaphragma and the pith of the back many
little Serpents, to verify what the author of Ecclesiasticus faith, (...).
10. ve. 13.
When man dyerh he becoms the inheritance of serpents. The life of man is a
candle exposed to all winds, says Epictetus: His body is a storehouse of all
sorts of diseases, says another; his flower (his most excellent point of
glory) is such as he is always in pain and martyrdom; and this point passes
away, dazzling the eye like a flash, greatness and worldly riches are no more
sssured, then the waves of the sea; they flow suddenly, and ebb no l^sse
violently. Sesostris King of Egypt, causing himself to be drawn in a Chariot
of pure gold, by four Kings his prisoners, one of them held his eye fixed upon
the wheel, which did roll up and down by him; Sesostris observing it,
demanded of him the cause of his countenance; who answered, That looking upon
the wheel, and observing the spoaks to be sometimes aloft and suddenly
down again, I call to mind the rolling change of my self and my companions
Sesostris considers hereof, abates his pride, and gives liberty to his
Captives. Such is the estate of the affairs of this world, like unto a mark,
subject to infinite darts of adversity: No man knows what the night brings,
said one in Titus Liuius; the pleasures are uncertain, but the displeasures
most certain: Nature gives us a taste at our coming into the world, where we
enter weeping. And according to this instinct of nature, the Thraci. ns wept at
the birth of their children, numbering what miseries they should suffer in the
world! For the same reason the Getes (a religious people) held that it was
better to die then to live; therefore they lamented at their child-birthes, and
sung at their burialls. And wise Solomon says, that the day of death is better
then Eccles. 7.
that of birth. Look into Erasmus upon the proverb, Optimum non nasci.
Sophocles in like manner, gives advice, that it is more reasonable to weep at
the birth of their children, as being entered into great miseries; and being
dead, to carry them joyfully to the grave, as freed from the miseries of this
life. And who will doubt any more of this, seeing he that never lies, calls
this life death? Ioh. 5. saying, He that hears my words, and believes in him
that sent me, shall pass from death to life.

The Lycians law ordained, that they which would mourn should put on women's
robes, for that it did in no sort befit grave and discreet men to weep for
the dead, but for passionate women. Upon this law a Lawyer of Padoua grounded
his testament, although he be taxed by another. First he charged his heir
upon great comminations, to banish all black cloth from his Funerals, and
that he should provide singers and players on Iustruments, to sing and play,
going among the Priests, both before and behind the Corpse, to the number of
fifty; to every one of which he bequeathed half a Ducate for his pains.

Moreover he ordained; that 12. young virgins, attired in green, should
carry his body unto Saint Sophias Temple, in which he should be interred,
suffering: them to sing joyful songs with a loud voice, and for a reward he
bequeathed them, a certain sum of money to help them at their marriage: All
sorts of Priests and Monks might assist, except such as were barred with
black, lest that color should darken the beauty and cheerfulness of his
Funerals: he had seen with Heraclitus, that during the days of this
miserable life, there is no subject but of tears, and that at our departure we
should rejoice with Demoeritus. And therefore Plato does rightly call death a
medicine for all miseries: and Seneca esteems it the end of servitude.

Let us seal up this discourse with the memorable advice which Epictetus gave
to the Emperor Adrian, enquiring why they set garla^ds upon the dead? It is in
sign (answered he) that at the day of their death, they have triumphed over
the diverse assaults of this life. Let us then dye when it shall please the
prince of this life, to cease the tears and alarmes of this life, and to
begin the life of heaven, whereas God will wipe away all tears from our
eyes, whereas death shall be no more, and there shall be Apoc. 21.
no more mourning, crying, nor labor.

Objection.
If men call for death, and being come refuse it so much, it is a sign that it
is very horrible.

But the antecedent is true: Therefore the consequent is also true.

IT is reported in Laertius, that the Philosopher Antisthenes, tied to his bed
by a grievous disease, (and the more grievous, the more he loved his life,) was
visited by Diogenes; who knowing the man, had taken a naked sword under his
gown: Antisthenes perceiving him, cried out, O God, who shall deliver me from
hence? Diogenes answered presently, that shall this, showing him his sword: But
Antisthenes replied more suddenly, I mean from these pains, and not from my
life. It seems that most of those crier sout for death, make that their
refuge, when she approaches near them. Esope in the Apologue has naturally
described it by that old man, who being laden with a great burden, and falling
into a Ditch, he grew to despair; and calling for death, death came, and
commands him to follow him; O no, said he, I call thee to help me up with my
burden that I may return.

Answer. I know well that many fear death much, not for any desire to live,
nor for the pleasures they have in life (for the two examples objected show the
contrary) but for that they know not what death is. And thereunto tends this
Combat, to kill this fear of death in man. I therefore persist in my opinion;
that it is nothing but the fear, which man has to fall into some greater
misery (as we have showed) does make him so much apprehe^d death. But there is
no evil in this, as appears in the following argument: Therefore there is no
reason of fear, which reason should govern a reasonable man.

Let us not trust to those distrustful spies, which being returned from the
point of death, cry out Horror, horror; for they fail more in courage then in
body, and deserve the like punishment to them that went to discover the land
of Canaan, who being returned brought nothing but bad and slanderous tidings to
all the people as the holy Scripture does witness.

Let us rather believe wise and valiant men produced hereafter upon the
Theater, who (like unto Iosua^ spies) Chap. 2.
depose jointly, that God has delivered death into our hands, that it is
quenched for our sakes. Next, it is not true that all men fly death being
called, many have bin grieved returning to health after some great sickness,
which they thought should have swallowed up their life. Give me leave to speak
this truth of my self: being 120. leagues from my parents, about 14. years
since, studying in a town straightly besieged and famished, I fell sick of a
bloody flux, whereof many dyed, and whereof my master was dead. In this estate
I was resolved to dye, but when I found that God gave me force to vanquish my
disease, I was very melancholic in the beginning, and held it a loss to be
recovered.

And therefore notwithstanding this opposition, we will close up our discourse
with Seneca, saying, That In consolat. contra mortem. c. 20.
death is the cause that life is no martyrdom.

The 20. Argument taken from the removing of the evil of death.
No evil consisting in a falfe opinion and nothing in effect, is to be feared.

Death is an evil consisting in a false opinion, and nothing in effect. etc.

IT is a great advantage (as great Captains say) to have observed and measured
his enemy from head to foot: Let us in like manner observe and measure death,
and we shall find it is but an Anatomy, a vain name, a Picture, and Image, a
scarcrow, a babble, a fantastic fear, an imaginary fire, which some men see
in an evening walking in Churchyards: An idiot at the sight thereof would be
amazed, and swear that he has seen a spirit walking; but a wiseman will
understand that it is an oily exhalation, which by agitation takes fire.
Ignorant opinion makes man believe that death is very evil, when it is a
privation from all evil, he is amazed with a false alarm: So women and weak
spirits dare not remain alone in their Chambers, for that they imagine they
shall see spirits and apparitions; little children are afraid to see their
parents masked, Astianax could not endure the sight of Hector armed: but lay
aside these arms; take away the mask, and you shall convert their fear into
assurance, and their cries into joy: So pull away these false maskes of hideous
looks, and the trembling cries of them that die, they are but fained, or
sorrows grownded in the air of an imaginary evil. So Cassander did tremble
at the sight of Alexanders picture, dead long before; the table would not bite
him, yet he quaked, as if it had been some furious beast: the reason was that
his imagination being impaired, he thought that Alexander was wonderfully in
choler against him. Will you have an apparent sign, that in this horrible
apprehension of death man's judgment is troubled, and therefore suspected to
be false? The strongest and most vigorous, the youngest and most just, do least
fear the loss of life; who in reason should apprehend it most, if it were to
be feared, having more interest in it; but old men and such as are subject to
the cholike and stone, and malefactors, fear it without measure. Maecenas
tormented continually with a fever, was content to be cut and mangled, so as
with all his pains he might prolong his life.

How many Messales offenders would live in torture, or broken upon the wheel,
so as they might not end their lives: What is the reason of this? but that his
judgment is perverted, believing that all the pain he feels shall be doubled
in death. If he be a reprobate, and understands it of the second death, and not
of the first whereof we now discourse, his judgment is right; but for a good
man to think that there is any great pain in a natural death, he erres
much. It is not the death (said Aeschines) but the violent passion against
death, which is horrible. If they think there be any discomodity in death
(said the old man Bassus,) let Sen. epi. 30.
them know, it comes from them that die, not from death, which frees them of
all pain.

Pindarus says of man, that he is but the dream of a shadow; but let us
speak it (and with more reason) of death; a dream is false, and a shadow the
opposition of a sollide body to the light. So death the privation of life, is
an evil dreamed, and false. Good God, who can represent that which is not?
under what idea can the Painter imagine to draw it? he will present unto us
bones bound with sinews, without flesh and naked, having a sithe in his hand,
this is something; but be well advised, to think that death does subsist
beyond this representation, as a living man does subsist longer then his
picture, you should be foully deceived, for take away this representation, and
all other imagination, and you take away all that is of death; for it is
nothing at all, therefore the portrait is false. May a man paint a voice, the
which although it be invisible, yet it falls under the sense of hearing? but
death in what sense so ever you take it, is incapable of all sense; and by
consequence, not to be drawn by any pencel. What is death then? it is a word
of few letters, which has no subsista^ce but in imagination; nothing in
nature, nothing in effect. We laugh at the Bourgondian spies, who in their war
against the French King Jews 11. being sent to discover the Country, fled at
the sight of certain Thistles, as if they had discovered a troop of men at
Arms. If we had the understanding to know death, as the sight has to
distinguish thistles, we should find that they are more ridiculous, which fly
amazed from the encounter of death, for it is nothing at all; whereas thistles
are at the least pricking plants.

Let us then say boldly, That to fear that, whereof never any man yet felt the
sting; to draw from a wandering fantasy, proceeding from an unsettled brain, a
true and sensible pain, is a mere folly: Oh God! what pain can there be at
the very instant when life flies away, in a body deprived of all sense? Let a
sick body endure all the extremities of pain, yet in death there is none at
all: do thou not yet believe it? take the members of a living body cut off;
hacke them, burn them, yet they shall not feel any thing; no more shall all
the members of one body united in death. The which Diogenes has represented
wittily, although Cynically after his manner, discoursing of burialls, saying,
That being dead he would be only cast upon the ground.

But said his friends unto him; Will you be eaten by Dogs, and birds? Oh no,
said he, lay a^staffe by me, that I may drive them away: How can thou do it
(replied they) when thou shall have no sense? What then, said he, shall the
devouring of beasts hurt me, when I have no feeling? To conclude, it is an
apparent folly to fear death, for the love of this tra^sitorie life: for this
present life gives us unto death, and death unto eternal life, as S. Ambrose
teaches, and thinks it a pertinent reason, in his book of the happiness of
death, Chapter 8. And as we cannot rife up high in leaping, unless we strike the
ground with the soles of our feet; so the foul cannot mount up to heaven,
until she has given a blow to this body of earth.

The 21. Argument taken from the discommoditie of life.
Whosoever shall tremble for the loss of nothing, is unwise.

The life of this world is nothing.

IT is a sentence as much propounded in words by Cicero, as verified in effect
of it self, That all wise men dye quietly and willingly, and that such as dye
murmuring and unwillingly, are indiscreete. And in truth life is such, as none
but in co^siderate men, and such as mistake it, will grieve for it. According
to the holy Philosophy, life is but a shadow which takes life from heaven, and
is equal in her swift passage to the violent motion of the heavens; it is a
grass yesterday green in the field, to day cut up, dried and laid up: a
flower yesterday flourishing, to day withered; the watch of a night a dream, a
vapor which appears for time, and then vanishes again; And according to the
voice of man, life is a languishing death, a course from one mother to another
from a fleshly mother to a earthly, it is a bubble, a puff, a coming in and
going out etc.

As when an arrow is shot at a mark (says Sal. Wise. 5: 18.) the air which
is divided, suddenly closes up again in such sort as the passage cannot be
seen: So we after we are borne presently fade away: The Psalmist proceeds
farther, when he says, that who so should weigh man with nothing, he should
find that nothing were more weighty. But observe what Aristotle says, being
demanded what man was: He is the example of weakness, the spoil of time, the
image of inconstancy, the balance of envy and calamity, and the rest is
nothing but phlegm and choler: Finally both according to God and men it is
nothing. Behold how life (the which you will grant me) is the fruition of time:
and what enjoy we of this time, but the very present, which flows away
incessant ly? It is a moate which is indivisible and imperceptible, whereon
thou do no sooner think, but it passes away, and whilst thou art reading
these short lines many nowes are vanished. Make no accoumpt of that which is
past, nor of the future; for all the time that is past unto the first moment of
the creation, and all the time that is to come unto the last point of the great
and last day, have no being, but in your imagination: there is but this present
only that has essence, but it is a point which stays not, so small and so
swift as nothing can hold it but it will escape.

It is the very Saturn which deuoureth all it has engendered, pleasures,
honor, riches, life: make no rampar of pleasures, for they are as suddenly
changed into displeasures, Boethius has long since written it.

Of so frail Nature is all humane pleasure,
That sudaine griefs make there their sharpest leisure:
And evermore those men are most afflicted,
That most we see to their delights addicted.
This life the seat of fluent pleasures, changes inconstantly, like the
Moon, and more: for the change of the Moon is but i^ her accident all light,
her body remaining still; but living man changes from one substance to
another, there remai^s nothing but the name: The Moon (as they say) does daily
advance or retire three quarters of an hour, and so much of her light
increases or decreaseth, and is always different from that she was the night
before; and if our sight were sharp enough, we should see this change to be
made every minute: the like is of our fading bodies, which do change from
moment to moment.

Moreover, most part of the world exchange their lives for a very little; the
Soldier for a poor pay, the Merchant for a little Merchandise; and others for
loss: which shows that their life is nothing, or very little. Saint Augustine
seeing the City of Hippona bes^ged by enemies, who were (...) for the spoil
of it; seeing death to swim betwixt the eyes of himself and his countriemen,
was wont to say; That, man is not great, who holds the ruin of buildings, and
the death of men a great matter: You shall see that your life is no great mat
ter; yea nothing, if you compare it (how long soever it be) with all the time
in general that has bin, or shall be (said Seneca to Martia) you shall find
that all your age is not a grain of sand in regard of the sand of Affricke; a
drop of water in respect of the Ocean: for this is some proportion from one
grain to many, from one drop of water to the sea; but betwixt the life of
man and Eternity, there is none at all. And above all, that which shows most
plainly the unprofitableness, and vanity of the life of man, is, that a great
part of life flies away in doing evil; a great part in doing nothing; and all
in doing any other thing then well living, as Seneca does teach learnedly in
his first Epistle. If we observe it well, we will subscribe; for a great part
of our life is wasted in sleep, and walking; and in our infancy to deceive
and pacific our froward dispositions: and all in other things then in rest and
tranquillity, or the sweet enjoying of life and the pleasures, which present
themselves. Whereas fear and hope afflicting us, do possess every day, yea,
every hour of our age: So as the Philosopher Zenon said rightly, that man was
not so poor of any thing as of time.

Let us then conclude the same with Seneca, That it imports not much to live,
for slaves and stagges live; but it is a thing of great moment to die
discreetly, valiantly, and honestly: for none but wise men can do it; the
reason is, that the most ignorant (says Calicratides) live by the benefit of
nature, but to dye in the bed of honor, that is by the virtue of man. Plu. in
Lacon.

The 22. Argument. taken from things which do resemble.
All brave Comedians bend their spirits wholly to act their parts well, and
rejoice at the Comedy.

Men living in the world are Comedians.

Therefore brave men should bend their spirits to live well, and to joy at the
end of life.

THe Island of the Hermaphrodites begins his discourse with these verses: The
world's a stage, and man is a Comedy,
One bears the babble, the other acts the folly.


So Epictetus spoke to the men of this time. Imagine that you play a moral
Scene upon this Theater of the world, in the which you act what part it
pleases the master; if short, short; if long, long: If he will have thee
represent a beggar, or a lame man, a King or a rogue, thou must act it as
naturally as thou can, and only fear to fail; but in the end clap hands in
sign of joy. The good and the end are conuertible terms, says Plato in
Philebus. Aristonimus said, that the life Max. in sermon. 67.
of man was like a Theater, on the which the most wicked held the first ranks.
Aeneas Syluius writes, that our life is a comedy, whereof the last Leg. coment
de reb. gest. Alpbonsi.
act is death: He is then no good Poet, says he, that does not order all the
acts well and discreetly unto the end: he would say, that it is not sufficient
to live well, but we must die well, until which no man can be held happy, by
the saying of Solon, yeaeof Saloman; for man, said he, shall be known by his
children. Caesar Augustus lying in Sueton.
the bed of death, and feeling himself at the last periode of life, said often
to his friends. Have I acted my personage well in this place? have I pronounced
my part well? had I a good grace? What think you? Go then, give a Plaudite
and clappe your hands. This life is a very stage, on which some mount up to be
actors, others stay below to be spectators; and then after the Catastrophe,
every one must make his retreat into the last house. If the ancients in their
simplicity had reason to use this comparison, we in this age have much more;
for we live not at this day but by shows and fictions, and in most the outward
countenance is the mask of the inward man, dissembling, which has ever
increased, since the Kings time, who would have his son learn no other
Latiue but these words, (Quinescit dissimulare, nescit regnare) not to defend
himself carefully, but to practice it seriously, during his whole reign.

In old time they detested that speech of Lysanders, That when the Lions
skin will not serve, we must sow on the Foxes: but at this day there are
none more esteemed and honored, then such as can cunningly offer their service
upon all occasions; who can make a show of friendship to allure; who have
their welcome, and at parting many submissions and humble conges. But it is to
lull him asleep, and to practice some supercherie; they wilkisse the hand,
which they would gladly see burnt. Let every man take heed of his most inward
friend ^aigh Jeremy, c. (...). Trust not in any brother, for every brother
makes a practice to supplant; and a bosom friend goes away detracting: If
then, how much more now?

Let then our courteous Courtiours be suspect unto us, and see what the fore
named treaty of Hermaphrodites says in the Chap. of the Entregent. This
book represents to the life, the wicked abominations of France, if we
understand it as it is written, the prohibition for the allowa^ce, mean thy
antiphrasis. Finally, at this ^day the most peopled town are full of Monsters,
which counterfeit the voice of pastors, to draw men unto them, and eat them
like bread Oh what safety is there among so many wolves disguised like sheep?
among so many enemies carrying the face of friends? Upon this occasion Solomon
cries out in his time, That he had beheld all the wrongs which were done under
the Sun, and seeing the tears of them that suffer wrong and have no comfort,
for that they which do the wrong are the stronger. Ecceles. 4. In these times,
the oppressed not only find no support, but they meet with deceitful men,
who under the color of Justice, devour the remainder of their substance: Oh
whatsafety? This peruers age is a very Sodom: God attends but our retreat to
rainedown fire, brimstone, and burning flames. Let us beware when the Angel of
the Eternal shall take us by the hand; when the voice of God shall call us, let
us not look back again like unto Lots wife, by a treacherous grief for this
treacherous life: but rather let us sing with joy, the song of the Lamb, who
has given himself for our sins, to Galat. 1. 4.
the end he may retire us out of this wretched world: as S. Paul speaks.

The 23. Argument taken from the effects of Death.
Whosoever has a will to be sacred and inviolable, should affect death.

Every living man should have that will.

THIS Argument is drawn from the Law of nature, which speaking by Chilon and
Solon, does pronounce the dead to be very happy, and forbids to curse the
dead; and in truth a man cannot wrong his honor more, then in speaking
injuriously of him who cannot answer? It is the fact of cowards to fight with
the tongue against them that can make no reply, and to pull a dead man out of his
grave. It is a duty of piety to hold Laert in the name of Chilon.
them that are departed out of this world, sacred and inviolable: If the last
words of a dying man be blessings, as Job does witness, desiring them to come
upon him; as Job 29.
Jacob did practice it upon the Patriarchs, as Saint Ambrose Amb. de bono mort.
c. 8.
does expound, as and experience does teach: what esteem should we make o
him, whose soul being separated from the body, does converse with Angels in
he^n?

And is it not very reasonable not to deprave them which cease to be, seeing
they are not to be laid hold on? but it is most just to make an end of hatred
by the death of thine enemy. Pausanias King of Sparta understood it, and did
practice it; who having slain Mardonius Lieutenant Herod l. 9.
to the King of Persia in battle, he was advised by Lampon a man of great
authority, to cause him to be hanged, for that he had done the like to King
Leonidas: No, no, said he, that were to dishonor my self and the Country
which thou do so magnify; if I should be cruel against a dead man, it
were an act befitting Barbarians, and not Grecians, who cannot allow of such
disorders. And in truth it is the act of fearful confusion, to tears in
sunder the skin of a dead Lion: It is an act befitting the fain the arted (...)
before Troy, to insult over dying Hector: But it is the property of a generous
Lion to resist them that make head against him; and to passeon, and not, to
strike him that falls flat to the earth like a dead man (...) (Nature speaks
here,) It is a villainy and an unworthy foolery to fight against the dead; it
is for apparitions, shadows and walking spirits, to wrestle with them.

The statue of Nicon the wrestler borne at Tasos, did witness it, without
words, when as one who had envied and hated Nicon, at the sight of this statue,
fell into his old spleen which he had borne him living; who taking a staff
laid upon the image, to despite the memory of Nicon; the image to be revenged
Suidas and Pausa. l. 6.
of this affront, fell upon him with all his weight, and crushed him to death:
This was an accident, but it was well and justly ordained. But behold another
more evident; Fabia wife to the Emperor Heraelius, Being carried dead to her
tomb, it happened that a maiden (by mischance) did spit out at a window upon
the body; for which she was taken and burnt in the same fire that was prepared
to reduce the body of Fabia to ashes: In such recommendation they had in those
days the honor of the dead. The rage of Sylla is justly held detestable, who
not content to have done all the violence he could to his enemies whilst they
lived, after their death would draw their bones out of their graves, and cast
them into the river.

The death of the Saints is precious before God; let us also say, the death of
virtuous men is precious before men: and if any one has been blemished in his
life, it should be buried in his grave. Lewis 11. of France, a great King, has
verified it in his own person, toward his enemy the fair Agnes, whom some of
those times supposed that the Kings Father had entertained: After her death she
was into^bed in the Church of the Castle of Laches; and by reason of a certain
rent she gave unto it, her body was laid in the midst of the Quire.

Lewis coming thither some time after, there was suite made unto him by a
Priest, that he would suffer them to remove that Tomb to some other place,
for that it did incomodate them. The King being informed who lay there,
answered, That which you demand is unjust; although this woman were in her time
very opposite unto me, yet will I not violate her Sepulcher: Moreover, I cannot
conceive that you have laid this body in so eminent (...) place, without some
rich present; perform that to your Benefactor being dead, which you promised
her being al^, and remove her not from thence: and to bind you more strictly
toward her, I give you for an increase, six hundred pounds starling.

If this were done in a life which was blemished, what shall it be in one that
is all pure and untainted? If it be observed toward them that dye a dry
death, how much more toward them that are unjustly slain by Tyrant^ Behold a
memorable history among many, which intimates that God has a watchful eye
over them. Perdinand fourth, M^g of Spain, transported with choler, upon a
suspicion ill grounded for a murder committed, commanded two brethren of the
house of (...), to be thrown headlong from the top of a rock: Going to their
execution, these Gentlemen protest and cry out, that they dye innocents; and
seeing the Kings ears were shut up to their just defense, they cited him to
apear within 30. days before the sovereign Judge: The days run on, and the
King is careless, until that upon the 30. day he found himself seized at
the first, but with a light infirmity, but it increased so suddenly, as he
dyed the same day.

Consider hereof you to whom honor is more precious then life, and who living,
feel the stings of Envy and slander, more then your bodies are followed with
their shadows: Take comfort herein, for God by your death, will prevent
these unjust pursuites, and make an end of these injurious taxations.

Envy assaults the man living, but lying in the bed of death, she leaves him at
rest, Ovid. Pascitur in viuis liuor, post fala quiescit.
as the Poet says: and then due honor is given to men of merit. O you which
meditate day and night on your learned writings, writings either to chase away
ignorance, or to reform men deformed with all sorts of vices, in this debaucht
age: faint not for any malice they bear you living; death will smother this
rancor, and consume this envy; we see it daily, and before us Cate the Cenfor
did tax it sharply: I know, says he, that many ignorant of true honor,
will traduce my writings if I publish them; but I let their babbling fall to the
ground (meaning the grave) whereas the sharpest stings of slander are abated
and buried: and the books, which during the life of their Authors, durst not
look upon the light, no more then Owls; after their death fly out like young
Eagles, and behold the Sun.

Objection.
Whatsoever God and men hold to be evil, is evil.

God and men judge death to be evil. Ergo, etc.

THIS Argument is grounded upon the Divine Oracle pronounced to Adam: That day
thou shall eat of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou
shall die the death; and the Apostle says that Death is the reward of sin. As
for men, in Cities well governed, their laws impose the punishment of death for
thieves, murderers, sedicious, etc. I answer: That death in her beginning is
bad, but not in her deriuation; but it is good, in respect of his power and
wisdom, who draws light from darkness, good from evil, and life from death;
for now by the blessing of God, death serves as a ladder to the faithful to
ascend up into heaven. So the diversity of tongs sent at the building of the
Tower of Babel, proceeded from the fury of God kindled against the builders, to
frustrate their enterprise: Yet the same tongs have been since imparted to the
Apostles, upon White-sonday, by the favor of God, thereby to have the
mysteries of the Lord declared. So garments were invented in token of the loss
of our naked Innocence; and yet in continuance they are become an honorable
ornament for our bodies, as we see Even so in the beginning God sent death in
his fury; and since he sent it in favor to Enoch, to Josias, and to all them,
he loves. The holy Ghost speaking by the pen of Solomon, says, that he
more esteems the dead which are already dead, then the living which are yet
living. As for malefactors, death is not inflicted upon the^ as it is simply
death, but for two reasons adiace^t; the one is, that depriving them of all
motion, it makes them cease to commit any more evil, and frees the Country of
such vermin. The other, that it is imposed for a public infamy, and therefore
they are set upon scaffolds and gibbets in public place; and this deserved
infamy is the true torment of the punishment, death is but an accident: and do
we not see many delinquents desire an honorable grave more then life? the
which they would not do, if they held death to be the worst of evils, and not
rather an extreme dishonor, in which they feel their souls to suruine. Bias
therefore did answer wittily, being demanded which of all kind of death was
the worst, That, says he, which the Laws have ordained: inferring thereby,
that a natural death is not evil, but that which crimes have deserved, the
which is not given by nature, but by a hangman: and yet not so much by the
execu tioner, who is but the instrument, as by a villainy perpetrated, which is
the true cause. So said S. Peter, Let none of you suffer as a murderer,
these, malefactor, or too curious in other men's affairs: But if any one
suffer as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in that
behalf.

The 24. Augument taken from the testimony of wise men.
All wise men in the conflict of Death, depose that death is not evil.

But that is true which all wise men depose, etc.

THe troops of Christian Martirs and heathen Philosophers, marching so boldly
unto death, are so many witnesses without reproach, to convince them of
falsehood, which hold death to be so great an evil. Let us be careful lest
this blasphemy creep into our thoughts, that they were in despair or mad: No,
no, their very enemies dare not speak it, ha^ng known that they were for the
most part, men famous in piety, justice, virtue and wisdom, and for such as
were recommended by all men. The Ecclesiastical History is gored with
thousands of such Martires; the author of the tables has set down some in the
end of his first book of whom I make no mention. But behold the manly courage
of Blandina, who by her joyful countenance does summon us unto death,
whereunto she does march with such a grace and state, as if she had gone to a
nuptial feast: Then follows happy Tiburtins converted unto Christ by Urban
in the year 227: who marching upon burning coals, seemed to tread upon Roses.
These Christians with infinite others, as well ancient as modern, had never
any horror of death, but have desired it, yea sought it as a refreshing and
refection to their bodies and souls: but for that no man doubts but the zeal
of Christians hathmade them continue constant unto the death, and the divine
power had so fortified their resolutio^s, that neither their reason could be
swallowed up nor drowned by the horror of persecution; Let us come to others,
and of a multitude: let a few suffice. Socrates accused by the Athenians to
think ill of the Gods, for that he rejected plurality and adored an unity,
was condemned to dye; before the which he would first censure his judges,
saying: To fear death, O my Lords Areopagites, is to make show to be wise, and
not to be; for it is to seem to know death to be evil which they understand
not. He did so little apprehend death, as when as eloquent Lisias had given him
an Oration artificially penned, which he should use for his Apology, whereby
he should be absolved, he read it and found it excellent; yet he said unto
Lycias, If thou had brought me Sicionian shoes, admit they had been fit for
my foot, yet would I not use them, for that they were not decent for me: So
thy discourse is most eloquent and fluent, but not fit for men that are grave
and resolute: The executioner then presented him poyso^ in a cup, which
Socrates took with a constant hand, and demanded of him (as a sick patient
would do of the Physician to recover health) how he should swallow it: and
then without any stay drunk it up, after which he walked a little and then
took his bed; his boy uncovering him felt his parts to grow cold. Socrates,
being wak't, directed his speech to Criton, who above all others Eras. Lib. 3
Apoth.
wished him a longer life; and to make him think of it, had propounded unto
him his children and his dear friends, that for their sakes, if not for his
own, he would preserve his life, which was necessary for them: No no,
answered he; God who has given me my children will care for them; and when I
shall be gone from ^ce, I shall find friends, either like unto you, or better;
neither shall I be long deprived of your company, for you must soon come to
the same place. Then (as if he had by this potion recovered his health) he
cried ^ut, O Criton, we owe a Cock to Aesculapius, be not forgetful to
sacrifice unto him. Let us observe that in the last passages of life, he was in
no sort amazed, but dying joyfully, comforted his suruiuing friend: and let us
not doubt, but he who was the first among the seven Sages of Greece, knew
before Demosthenes, that which this Orator spoke courageously to Phi^ King of
Macedon, who threatened him to cause his head to be c^t off: Well, says he, if
thou give me death, my Country will give me immortality. And doublesse
Socrates lives, and will live eternally; so the suruiuing having seen the
assurance of his death, held him most happy, as going to live another life, and
in another place. And Aristippus (that joyful Philosopher) being demanded in
what sort Socrates was dead, In that manner (said he) that I my self desire.
Inferring that death was more to be wished for then a happy life. Let us hear
a second, that is, Laert. l. 2. c. (...).
Theramenes, to whom they presented a great cup of poison, the which he drank
resolutely, and returned the cup to Criti^, the most cruel of the 30. Tyrants,
which had condemned him; Theramenes therein alluding to the manner observed at
this day in Germany, which is, that he, which drinks to any one, sends him
the same glass full of wine that he may pledge him.

These deaths are full of courage: but behold a woman dying, who exceedes
Plin. l. 3.
them all, and that only to encourage her husband to die; it is Arria the wife
of (...). This woman being advertised that Petus was condemned to what death
he would choose, went unto him to persuade him both by word and the effect to
dislodge out of this life: she had a naked dagger under her gown, and giving
her husband he^ last ^well, she thrust her self to the heart, and drawing it
forth again with the like courage, she held it unto Petus, and spoke these her
last words unto him. P^, non dole^ Pete* O my dear Petus, it does not pain
me, and then dyed. Let us seal up these examples with two women, who commonly
do passionatly love the presentation of their children; yet a certain
Lacedemonian having heard that her Son fighting Plut. in La con. Apoth.
valiantly had been slain in battle, O (said she) this was a brave Son;
not lamenting the death of her Son, but rejoicing at his virtue. Another,
hearing that her Son returned safe from battle, and that he had ^d, shed
cried out unto him, There is a bad report of thee, thou must either deface it,
or not live; holding it better to dye, then to survive an Ignominy.

Objection.
If the greatest favorites of God have feared death, it is to be feared.

But David, Ezechias, and others favored by God, feared Death, and especially
Jesus Christ, the only and wel-beloued, Son of God, feared it, etc.

Answer. Neither David, nor Ezechias, nor the other servants of God feared
death, as it was death simply alone considered, but for that God threatened
them, in regard of their sins, by reason whereof it seems they had some
confused apprehension of hell, which is the second death. Doubtless my fault
is great (said David) but I pray thee save me by thy great bounty. These are
Psalm. 6.
the words of God to Ezechias, Dispose of thy house, for Esaias 38.
thou shall die shortly, and shall not live. We must note that Ezekias heart
was puffed up with glory, and God would humble him by the consideration of death
wherewith he threatened him: But these two, and all other the servants of God,
setting aside these threats, being in the favor of God, have with Saint Paul
desired to die, and to be freed from this mortal body, to be with Christ, with
God. Man here below should not apprehend any thing but the conscience of
another life, a life which, dying without repentance and grace, leads to death
eternal, as that of Saul and Judas; who being desperate slew themselves,
quenching the match of a vicious life, to kindle it in the fire of hell, where
there is a Lake of fire and brimstone.

As for the death of Christ, the great difference it has both in the cause and
the effects, from that of the faithful Christians, makes it to differ a world:
The reason is, Gods Divine Justice to revenge the injury which has been done
him by the devil in the nature of man, the which not able to do in him without
his total ruin, he has done in his surety, in Jesus Christ his Son, whom to
that end he sent into the world to take human flesh in the Virgins womb: It
is he that was wounded for our offenses, broken for our iniquities, Esaias 53. 5.
censured to bring us peace, and slain to cure us, as the Prophet speaks, and
the Apostles testify. The fruits, first the glory of God is manifested in his
love, in his bounty, and in his mercy toward us, to have so loved the world,
as to give his own Son to death for it, to the John 3. 6.
end that whosoever did believe in him should not perish, but have life
everlasting, as the same eternal Son does witness. Secondly, it is our
salvation, the redemption of the Church from sin and death; for it is the
Lamb of God which takes away the sins of the world.

And these are the reasons why Jesus Christ was terrified in death, feeling the
wrath of God upon him for our sins: But the death of the faithful is nothing
like; for in the greatest torments which Tyrants can inflict upon them, it
mortifies the sense and takes away all pain, by the abundance of his
consolation; as Ruffinus writes of Theodorus, and as our Annals Lib. 10. hi.
c. 36.
testify of the smiling death of Martirs in the midst of burning fires: for
God is satisfied, the passage is open, the venomous teeth of death are pulled
out, seeing that the Lord wrestling with her, has slain her, as S. Augustine
speaks; and like a most expert Physician, has made a wholesome Treacle to
purge our bodies of those corrupt, burning, stinking, and deadly humors; and
to make it sound, holy, impassible and immortal.

The second Objection.
Every just reward is proportionable to the pain.

The reward of Martyrsis great.

Therefore their pain is great.

THe holy Writ, and the ancient Fathers upon it, bear witness of the honor
and great triumph which the Martyrs obtain in heaven: if their conflict
against death be answerable to this triumph, as equity requires, it must be
exceeding great, and therefore it is no easy thing to dye; the which S.
Augustine seems to confirm, Si nulla esset mortis amaritudo, Homil. de verb.
apost. sermon. 3 5.
non esset magna Martyrum fortitudo: If (says he) there were no bitterness
in death, the Martyrs valor should not be great.

Answer. He is truly a Martyr, who for the honor of God, and for the love of
his neighbor, does constantly seal the contract of the alliance of God with
his own blood: and the true cause of Martyrdom is, to suffer death for
justice, and for the name of Christ, as Christians, Mat. 5. 1. Pet. 4. 1. Pet.
3.
and in doing well. This blood thus shed is the true seed of the Church, the
very Commentary of the holy Scripture, the Trompet of Gods glory, the true
Victory of the cruelty and obstinacy of Gods enemies, the holy Lamp to lighten
and draw to the Kingdom of Christ, those which are in the shadow of death,
etc.

In consideration whereof, these holy Champions of the faith, are honored in
heaven with a Crown of gold, clothed Apoc. 6.
with white garments, etc. Upon earth in the primi tiue Church, upon the day of
their suffering, which they called their birthday; the faithful assembled upon
the place of their Martyrdom, did celebrate their happy memory, repeated their
combats, and commended their resolution; exhorting the assistants to do the
like, if they were called to the like combat, as well by reading of their
bloody history, as by the sight of the place where their blood was newly spilt.
It is that which Cyrillus in the epistle to Smyrne, and the Paraphrase of
Rufynus does teach us: wherein Cyr. l. 6. Cont. Iul.
we may see, that it was not the death, but the cause of the death, which made
them to be so recompensed and recommended. And whatsoever they have had in
heaven, shall be given to all others which shall have the like will to serve
their master; though not the effect, the like Crown, nor the like garments. To
me, says that great Martyr, S. Paul, the Crown of Justice is reserved, 2.
Tim. 4.
which the Lord, the just Judge, shall give me in that day; and not only to
me, but unto all those that shall love his Coming: And what Christian is it
that desires not the coming of Christ? It is also written, that all the Armies
which are in heaven, wherein all the faithful are, followed the faithful, the
Apoc. 19.
true, the Word of God, upon white horses, clad in white Cypres.

Finally, in this inestimable reward (which God gives unto Martyrs) there is
not so great a regard had to the merit and grieuousnesse of their death, as to
the most precious blood of his Son Jesus Christ, and to his free promise:
wherefore this Objection is to no purpose; and if it were, it does incite men
more to desire then to refuse death, if it be true that the enduring of the
first death, in the Saints, is a freeing from the second, as Saint Augustine
Lib. 13. de Ciu. dei c. 8.
teaches.

The third Objection.
It is impossible but man should be touched with a great apprehension of every
sharp combat he is to endure.

Such is death.

MAn has three cruel enemies which present themselves unto him at his last
farewell; a sensible pain at the dissolution of the foul from the body: sin
represents unto him heaven gates shut, and hell open: and Satan tempts him, and
lets him see his criminal Indictment, whereof he is ready to execute the
sentence.

Answer. It is impossible that at the souls departure from the body, there
should be any great pain; the soul leaves the body, as the light does the
air, which it does inuest, as Viues speaks after S. Augustine: We must not
Lib. de Anima.
then imagine here a gross tearing of the soul from the body, as of a piece
of cloth: for the union of the soul with the body is spiritual and
incomprehensible; But of the pretended pain in death, there is sufficiently
spoken in the Objection following. As for the two other enemies, it is true
that the conscience presents unto a dying man the foulness of his sin: and
it is true that Satan tempts man to despair, to precipitate him into eternal
perdition. But for all this must a man that fears God, fear death? and fear
to lose the battle? No, but he ought rather to assure himself of the
victory, and present himself boldly to the Combat, as a valiant and fortunate
Champion, against one that is weak and unfortunate. They that are for us are
stronger then they that are against us: God which has begun, continues his
work in us, and ends it to his glory: the faith which he has pra^ted in us,
will quench the inflamed darts of the wicked spirit: the full assurance of the
remission of sins by Jesus Christ, dead for our sins, and risen for our
justification, will pacify the conscience, and show him Jesus Christ in
heaven, sitting on the right hand of God, and stretching out his arms to him.

Thirdly, the seals of the holy Ghost in us (for by it we are sealed to the
day of Redemption,) Baptism, the Communion of the body of Christ, and the
Spirit of sanctification, will terrify Satan and make him fly.

Finally, the good Angels which from our birth, and throughout the whole course
of our lives, have administered unto us, guided and comforted us, will redouble
their love and courage in the like offices, at our greatest need, and at our
last gasp. Let us not fear, seeing we have such assurance in the Word of God,
which does plainly witness, that the Angels are administering Spirits, sent
to serve for their sakes that shall receive the inheritance Heb. (...). Psalm.
91. Mat. 18.
of salvation. Here then is no subject of desperate fear, but rather of an
assured resolution.

The 4. Objection.
All pain is evil.

In dying there is pain.

EPicharmus (by the testimony of Cicero) said, Cic. lib. 1. Tus. quast.
that he would not die, but to be dead he cared not: The reason is in my
opinion, for that he feared the passage of death, not death it self, which he
thought with us had no pain. There are many at this day of this opinion,
abhorring death like an internal gulf, for that they conceive there is some
sharp and violent pain which they endure before it comes; and thereunto tends
the proverb: He is in bad case that dies: And S. Augustine seems L. 13. de
ciuit. Dei c. 6.
to attribute I know not what sharp feeling and force against nature, in the
diuulsion of the soul from the body which were united together.

Answer: If death be terrible by reason of the pain we apprehend in it, then
life by the same reason should be more; for in it some man endures more by the
cholicke, the stone, the sciatica, yea, by the tooth ach, and by many other
infirmities without death, then an other has felt in dying. And there is this
advantage in death, that it comes but once, whereas the above mentioned
infirmities are often reiterated in life. But to have a perfect view, if this
pain be so great, as opinion (a bad counselor) does make us believe: let us
search with reason into the immediate cause of that which does engender this
pain in our bodies.

The paths which lead man to death are infinite, but all bend to one of these
four high ways, outward force, subtraction of meat and drink, inward
sickness, and old age. These four kinds of death may happen to al men, yea to
wise men, although by injustice touching the first; by some rare accident, as
touching the second; concerning the third, by ordinary corruption of humors;
and by an infallible defect of nature touching the fourth. Pain (according to
the definition of learned Physicians,) is the feeling of some thing that is
offensive and troublesome to the nature of the body, for that it is contrary to
the health thereof; the which happens either by the dissoluing and cutting of
his continued substance; or by the alteration thereof, which alteration
proceeds from the intemperate heat or cold: for as for humidity and dryness,
they are rather passive qualities then active, whose operation is very slow,
and the pain in the member that is altered, is sudden not gentle; as if you
be exceeding cold and come to a very sensible pain, cold settles his pain in
disioyning, and heat in burning: and it is to be noted, that any sense may be
wounded, yet little or nothing is his pain, in comparison of that of touching,
the which is dispersed over the whole body, and from which no other vessel of
the senses is exempt; which is the cause that we sometimes feel prickings in
the eyes, and shootings in the ears, etc.

Let us now come to the application, Death which comes to man by extreme age,
can be no cause of pain; there being nothing in him that tortures his body,
nothing that does suddenly alter and change him by extreme cold, or heat;
but his life goes out presently (like unto a Candle that wants tallow) by the
loss of his radical humor, devoured by little and little since his birth by
his natural heat: and although this heat does yet strive as it has formerly
done, to convert the meat which is familiar and fit for the body, into
radical humor, to repair his loss, yet she can work no more, her virtue
fails her; every agent has his virtue limited, what soever does act, suffers
in acting: through use and in continuance of time this heat decays,
dissolues, is lost, and death ensues: So as it has been disputed in vain,
whether life might be continued, this radical humor being restored by some
fit nutriment; for that humor being at the first a certain ayery and only
portion of that seed which does reside in all the sollide parts, it is
impossible that such an humor, and so much as is needful, should be supplied
in it is place. The only fruit of the tree of life which was in Eden, had this
secret virtue, by the divine ordinance, to make man immortal that should eat
thereof; and therefore according to the opinion of the Fathers, God suddenly
after the sin, chased Adam and Eve out of Eden, least they should lay hold of
that fruit, and become Irenae. Hilarie. Greg. Naz. Theodoret. Chrysosto. and
others.
immortally miserable with the devils. In process of time there happens two
notable changes to this radical humor; the one in the quality, for that it
degenerates by little and little, and of natural becomes strange: the other in
the quantity, for that it is wholly wasted; whereunto man being once reduced, he
can suffer no pain: if he complains, it is rather for grief that he must
dye, or some other distemperature, and not the death, which does cause some
troublesome alteration in his sinews and sensible parts.

As for death which proceeds from diseases, there are some long, others short.
If they be long, the pain is little, for that nature does accustom it self
to that which comes by degrees; it turns to a habit, and he fears no
grief, or very little, there being nothing but the sudden alteration which
nature cannot endure: that which causes pain is that which changes the good
temperature, the which in very long languishing diseases comes slowly and
insensibly. As for example, in an Hectic fever they grow lean, and consume
away by little and little, and dye with pain, which is in a manner
imperceptible; there is nothing but an heaviness of the spirits, but in their
bodies feel no pain. It is even so of the pain of the Lights, whereon the
rheum distilling, it does consume them by little and little, as a spout of
water does a stone, so as in the end this infirmity brings the patient
insensibly to death.

As for short diseases, the pain is short: What great pain can there be in a
swoun ding? in an Appoplexie that happens by the sudaine dissipation of the
spirits? What great pain can a moment of time bring to man? But you will reply,
that there are diseases wonderfully sharp: It is true; but if you will observe
them, they are least dangerous for death, whereof our discourse is. Nature
giving death, knows how to mortify the members so well, and to weaken the
virtue of the sinews, as man cannot discern when death seazeth on him, no
more the^ when sleep surprizeth him. It is an Aphorism of Hipocrates, When a
sick body (says he) feels no pain, plays with the covering of his bed, and
pulls off the wool, it is a sign of death, and no likelihood of life and what
pain then, when as hoping to recover, and feeling ease of his pain, he shall
dye? As for famine and thirst, which quench the spirit of life, that happens
very seldom, and the Annals in 16. ages have scarce observed two, the one
under the Empire of Honorius, at what time in the Theater at Rome there was
this strange voice heard, You must set a price Z^zim. 6. Annal.
upon humane flesh. The other under Justinian, at what Procop. de bell. Goth.
l. 11.
time they did not only eat man's flesh, but even the excrements of men.

Here in truth is great horror, but little pain, neither can I believe
(whatsoever they say) that he which dies of hun ger feels no great torment:
examine it by your self; when you have fasted long, you shall feel a great
debility, and a great appetite, or a great heat in all your members, but no
great pain: it is in the sinews to feel where the pain lies, which sinews
do not suffer any thing in the extremity of hunger or thirst, but the
principal parts which receive the nourishment, therefore in this most
pitiful; and pity is here taken for the pain. Let the death of Charles 7.
the French King, be an example unto us, who being full of suspicion and way
wardnesse, and entertained in that humor by the daily reports of his household
flatterers, that they would attempt against his person; yea a Captain in whom
he trusted most, assured him that they meant to poison him; he gave such credit
to this advice, as he resolved neither to eat nor drink in which capricious
humor he continued seven days. But in the end being pressed not with pain but
by his Physicians, and house hold servants; who laid before him the danger of
life, whereinto he did voluntarily bring his person when he would have eaten
he could not, by reason (says the History) the passages of the stomach were
shrunk. Let us weigh these last words, and acknowledge, that this natural
fire in us wherewith the lamp, of our life is kindled, is like unto the
Elementary, always active; wherefore wanting his ordinary nutriment, he
turns himself violently upon that which bears it, upon the radical
humidity, the which it does waste and consume in a short time; and this
humidity being consumed, the members remain dry, and without vigor; so as
when they offer them the accustomed remedy, having lost their usual virtue,
they digest it not, but cast it up again.

It is the same reason why such as observe a certain hour for their meals,
when this hour is come they feel certain motions of an appetite in their
stomach, which requires meat: But if they pass this hour, either by fasting
or by diets, they lose their appetites, for that this heat being frustrated of
his ordinary repast, falls either upon the peccant humor, or that failing, upon
the vital humor; and as we suffer it to do more or less, so we receive more
or less prejudice. Now if in the first and most sensible touches of this
natural heat, we feel no great torment, as every man may try in the religious
fasts of the Church, which pass the ordinary time of eating three or four
hours: I conclude necessarily, that the longer they abstain from meat, the
less they suffer; for the heat decaying still, by the want of nourishment,
the active virtue also decreaseth, and his subject the body, suffers less by
such a languishing action; also the body which for his part decays in force,
is daily less susceptible of pain, until that all his humor being exhausted,
and his heat euaporated, he must die.

Last in rank come good men, who are unjustly put to death by Tyrants, to whom
the pain is sensible according to the horror of the punishment. But I answer:
First, that it happens seldom, God holding in his power the Tyrannous
resolutions of great men; that they may not execute their wicked designs
against his servants: wickedness shall never prevail so much, she shall never
conspire so strongly against virtue, but the name of wisdom shall always
remain sacred and venerable. Sen. epi. 14.
Secondly, God who suffers it, gives them ease in their torments, and knows
how to restrain and suspend their pains; (as he did to his servants, Sidrac,
Mizac, and Abednego in the burning furnace:) as they go joyfully to death, and
sing the praises of the Lord cheerfully in the midst of the fire, as has
been seen in the Martyrs: And thus much for this point. But if after all these
reasons they persist still in a fantastical apprehension of some great pain
in the article of death, we will add, that it is not fitting to accuse death;
it is life, the remainders whereof cause the pain, and death is the end.
Wherefore Diogenes being demanded if death were evil, How can it be (said he)
seeing we never feel it present? and that which is absent cannot be hurtful
to any man; whilst that man has feeling he has life, but if he be dead, he
has no feeling, and that which is not felt, is not hurtful.

And therefore he concludes, that it was not death which was evil, but the
way to death, which was miserable; which if we fear, what is all the life
(said he) but a path tending unto death? And S. Augustine above named, August.
de ci. Dei. l. 13 c. 9.
means no other thing: whilst they have feeling, they are yet living; if
living, they are rather sensible before death, then in death, by whose coming
all sense is lost.

The 25. Argument taken from the indignity.
That which is repugnant to one of the principal virtues, is unworthy of man.

The extreme fear of death is repugnant to fortitude, one of the principal
virtues.

WE mean not here to speak of bodily force, but of that of the mind, by the
which Caesar (but of a weak body) did more brave exployts the^ Hercules. There
is nothing more worthy of a man then Fortitude, a virtue whereunto he should
aim all the actions of his life; for that alone does never fail to yield a
recompense, either alive or dead, says Seneca, Epist. 81. and he does not
perish that dies adorned with virtue, says another. Saint Augustine confirms
this, when he Lib. 1. de li. arb. c. 13,
attributes the disdain of life, and the contempt of death, to the force of the
mind: The greater and more desperate the danger is, the more does magnanimity
increase in a generous mind, to free all difficulties, that he shall
encounter. And seeing that the end is better and more excellent then that which
tends unto it, he will conclude with reason, That he were better to lose his
life then virtue. But Fortitude, one of the four cardinal virtues, besides
the general, has a particular reason, why man should seek to preserve it in
her greatest perfection; for by it he enioyes the true tranquillity of the
mind, the which (as Cicero reports) is nothing else but a quiet, sweet, and
pleasing disposition of the soul, in all the events of life: Which carries two
Crowns; patience in pain, and resolution in death. By which the confirmation
of the Minor is inferred, there being nothing that does more oppugn, and in
the end overthrow all force and resolution, then the extreme fear of death.
Fear, and especially that of death, being destitute of reason and judgment,
wounds the soul with amazement, alienates his right sense, makes it idle and
without action; it does waste him, undermine him, and consume him as rust does
Iron, and the worm an apple. A man always shaking with fear, is without
heart and courage, but half a man; such as histories report Claudius Caesar,
the 5. Emperor to have been, whom nature had begun, but not finished, for
that he was base and faint-hearted.

Moreover, fear by the terrible object of death, causes the heat which is
the chariot of force, to retire into the bottom of the belly, in stead of
drawing it about the heart as courage does, so as the heart is always panting:
and which is worse, whereas it should extend it self by dilatation in his
natural motion, he shrinkes himself up against nature, whereby there follows
a great debility in all the members of the body, and sometimes death, as it
happened to Lycas; who upon the very report of Hercules force, was so
terrified, as being retired into the corner of an Altar, dyed there. But a
generous man resolute to death, will not fear any thing that shall present it
self to cross him in the course of his duty; like unto Anaxarchus, whom
Alexander threatening to hang, he said, Threaten thy Courteours, who fear
death; for my part I care not whether I rot above or under the earth. Socrates
also being blamed by one, for that he did a thing which would cause his
death, he answered, My friend, thou art not well informed, if thou think
that a man of honor should apprehend danger, yea, death in his actions; but only
consider whether they be just or unjust, good or bad. Such was the courage of
the Prophet Micheas, when he resisted King Achas, and told Israel of his
sins; being filled with virtue by the Spirit of the Eternal, with judgment
and with force, as he himself Mic^. 3.
speaks.

Thirdly, fear not only hurts it self, causing his arms to fall out of his
hands, and laying him open to his enemies darts; but like unto the plague it
infects others. And therefore King Agamemnon would not that a rich man and a
fearful should go to the wars of Troy; but to stay him, he would have sent
him a distaffe, if he would not eouer his shame honestly. But on the other
side, a valiant man finds means to free himself in the greatest dangers. So
Aristomenes a Lacedemonian, being taken prisoner and delivered bound to two
soldiers, he found means to burn his bonds and his flesh to the quick;
then falling courageously upon his guardes, he slew them, and so escaped. It
is a common saying among men, That virtue has no virtue, if it be not in
pain: and the greatest pain in the opinion of man, is when he is at the
point of death; then should a valiant heart show his invincible courage, to
va^quish this terror of death. It is this courage which made Saint Paul to
say* That if he did serve for an aspersion Phil. 2. 18.
upon the sacrifice and service of faith, he was joyful. It is the same
Spirit that made Ignatius to say, being condemned by Infidels to be cast to
wild beasts: I am the wheat of God, I shall be Iren. lib. 5.
ground in the teeth of beasts, to be made pure and clean bread.

If the Trumpet which sounds an alarm, be pleasing to a valiant Soldier, what
shall death be to a virtuous man, when she shall sound with her silver
Trumpet, ordained by God to call the assembly, the Church to heaven, Number. 10. 2
and to make men leave the earth, where they have no a biding place? what fear
we? They that have the chollicke and the gout, are not so much terrified with
the return of their pain; and can virtuous men so much fear death, which
has not so much pain, no none at all? seeing that what we feel when death
approaches, is of the re mainder of life, not of death* to what end serves this
cowardly fear? Fly an honorable death of the one side, and a shameful end
will find thee of the other. So Sisera left his Army and fled into Judge. 4.
the house of Iahel; but when he thought to take his rest, Iahel came and drove
a nail of the Tabernacle into the temples of his head, and slew him.

But to have this courage and resolution to resist the terror of death, it is
not sufficient to speak in the time of health, as Soldiers do of their valor
at the table: learned discourses (says Seneca) Epist, 26.
make no demonstrations of true magnanimity; the most fearful will sometimes
speak more boldly then they should. We must meditate seriously of death,
according to the objects which are presented unto us, and not make any
difficulty to go and comfort our dying neighbors; for it is better to enter
into the house of mourning then of Eccle. 7. 3.
seasting, says the wise man: To offer ourselves to al dangers of death, when
our vocation does call us; like unto Jesus Christ, who being dissuaded by his
Disciples from going up to Jerusalem, he said unto them, There are 12 hours of
the day: after Ioh. 12.
the example of the Apostles, namely of Saint Paul, who was thrice whipped with
rodds, 2. Cor. 11.
continued whole days and nights in the bottom of the sea, etc.

We ought to do it, for Christ is a gain to us both Philip. 1.
in life and death; for that dying, we change the dross of the world, for the
gold of heaven; we going out of life, as out of a deep pit of darkness, and
ignorance: and we ascend up into the heavenly University, whereas the deepest
sciences are learned; and we pass from a miserable servitude, into a most
happy freedom of spirit: Let us then quicken our spirits, and take courage,
and not be like unto the sko^me of the world, to whom dying, Nature makes this
reproach, which is read in Seneca: What is this? Epist. 22*
I have put you into the world without covetous desires, without fear, without
superstition, without treason, and without any other such infections: As you
entered into the world, so depart this life, without apprehension, fear,
vexation, or passion, which torment your souls. But especially let us be
careful to depart without fear of death, which among all human passions is
most desperate: it is done, if we once put on a Christian courage and
magnanimity, and shall not fly, but offer our selves, following our vocation,
to the greatest dangers: As good Macedonius did, who seeing two Captains march
to revenge the irreuere^ce done to the statue of Placilla, by the express and
unworthy commandment of Theodosius her husband; seeing them I say, run to a
great Massacre, meets them, stays them, and pulls them from their horses, and
by more then human authority, commands them to desist from such cruelty, and
to tell their master, That the greatness of his estate should not make him
forget that he is a man: that he seeks to tear that a sunder which he cannot
put together; deface lively Images which he cannot repair; and that this
outrage should touch the Creator. By the boldness of his words and by his
constancy, he amazed these Captains with the fear of Gods revenging wrath,
and makes them return toward the Emperor, who having heard them, pacified
his rage.

Objection.
Whatsoever is a gift of nature, cannot be gotten by art.

Fortitude is a gift of nature, etc.

Answer: It is true, that fortitude has her foundation in the irascible
faculty: but her culture, her instruction and increase is purchased by labor,
study, and continual exercise. If Alexander, Caesar, and other valiant
Captains, had not been continually thrust into arms, hazarded themselves in
war, and cast themselves into battles, they had never purchased the habit
of valor, nor gotten so many triumphs upon their enemies. In like manner if
we desire to conquer our selves, and our own passions, which are most
dangerous enemies; we must exercise our selves continually in these listes of
virtue, and weed out of our hearts two contrary vices; the one is dull
negligence, which lulling us asleep in the world, will not suffer us to
consider what this life is, how miserable, how vain and wavering; although we
suppose it be perpetual, contrary to that which experience does teach us,
showing us daily that either necessity does pull it away, or vanity does
swallow it up, or hasty nature does end it. The other extreme vice is fear,
which is the cause that we cannot once think of such necessity but with
trembling and horror. And as the eye viciated with some yellow humor, or
looking through a yellow glass, thinks all it sees to be yellow; yea, the
purest white: So our souls being infected with this terror, increased by
faintness, and fortified by cowardice, takes quiet things to be horrible, the
safest port and secu^est from winds, to be more dangerous then the Rock
Capharois: and finally, death (the happy end of all miseries) to be the
beginning of most horrible pains. But let us purge this peccant hu^, ^ast off
this (...) scart, and clothe our selves with this force, with this resolute
v^reue; and we shall visibly* see and judge with reason, that we have been
miserably deceived, taking our friends for enemies, the greatest safety for
horror, and (...) happiness (...) death for misery.

The 26. Argument taken from the isntrumental cause.
In every expedition the means must be proper unto it.

A good conscience is the proper means to the expedition of death.

Therefore we must have a good conscience.

IF we consider profoundly of the cause of this terror, which man has of
death, we shall find it is a natural feeling (though; dull, and some what
brutish) to have offended his Lord, thinking that he attends nothing but death,
to lay open the volumne of his faults, to indite him criminally, to pronounce
sentence of condemnation against him, and to deliver him over to Satan the
executioner, to cast him into a fire De^t. 28.
which is never quenched. Man has a confused apprehension of all this, he sees
nothing in life, he fears it in death, his conscience within accuses him,
and serves for a thousand witnesses: It is that which makes the wicked to
tremble when the leaf of a tree does fall, and lives no more assured then if
his life were tied to a thread, it is the Worm which never Esal* 66.
dies, but gnawes the wicked continually: It is a bad conscience (said
Diogenes) which keeps man from being courageous, and without fear. Let a man
be by nature hardy, yet a bad conscience will 8 tob. ser. 22
make him most fearful, said Pithagoras; yea he added, that the torments
which he shall suffer, will be much more sharp and painful then whipping
to the body, the diseases of the mind being far more grievous then of the
body; which gave occasion to Poets to paint the Furies armed with burning
torches, to burn the wicked. So was the Emperor Caligula entreated for his
cruelties, terrified with fear waking, awaked suddenly sleeping, always
troubled, never in quiet. Nero was in the same estate having slain his mother.
So Saul being forsaken by the Eternal, was possessed by an evil spirit; having
bad news of his speedy death, he trembles 1. Sam. 28.
for fear, forsakes his meat and drink, is much perplexed, falls down upon
the ground, as the Scripture does observe: for then the Injustice committed
against David (whom he had confessed with his mouth to be more lust then
himself) came to his mind. Wherefore if we will live without fear of death,
let us live without wounding of our consciences: for it alone in life does
never fear, said wise Bias: It is it Antonin. Melissa part 1. se^. 66.
that makes men live in tranquillity, finding themselves not guilty of any
thing. Periander said, that a good conscience Stob. ser. 22
made Agis King of the Lacedaemonians, triumph over Stob. ser. 1. de prudentia.
his enemies in death; for as he was led to execution by the Ephores, seeing
some (moved with compassion) to weep, Weep not for me, said he, for it is
against equity and reason that I am led to this death: they which have
condemned me are more unjust then I am. Inferring thereby, that he died well
and honestly, Plut. in Lacon. Apoth.
seeing they put him to death wrongfully, and without cause.

Plato does teach us, that Socrates was wont to insult over death, in these
terms; I have been careful, said he, to live well in my youth, and to die
well in my age: I am not tormented within me with any pain; I am not unwilling
to dye, for seeing my life has been honest, I attend death joyfully. This is
much, but it is nothing, in regard of Saint Paul, who protesting that he felt
not himself guilty in any thing, cried out with a bold spirit, that he was
assured, that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
powers; neither things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth,
should separate Romans 8.
him from the love of God. Let us the^ be careful to polish our souls, and to
settle our consciences; let us apply our selves to a well ordered equity: let
the body subject it self unto the soul, and follow her motions: Let the
inferior powers of the soul obey the commandments of reason: Let reason
guided by the holy Ghost, observe the Law grafted in every creature by nature,
especially in man, and most of all the Law of Moses. To do this is to be
virtuous, and to be virtuous is to have a good conscience. We must then direct
all our actions to virtue, if we desire to live in the world without fear,
without pain, in peace and joy: virtue does first of all make the soul
perfect in her intellectual part, disperseth the clouds of error and
ignorance, and illuminating reason, does adorn it with prudence.

Secondly, she labors to polish the will of man, and having reformed it by her
orderly course, she gives him the habit of Justice.

Thirdly, she does temper the angry part pulls away the extreme fear, and on
the other side prunes away the sprouts of rashness, and plants betwixt both
valor and ha^ die fear. Finally, it does also bridle the faculty of
concupiscence, and restraines the motions of voluptuousness, and makes them
obedient to the command of Temperance. It is in a few words, the true means to
get a pure and upright conscience, especially if we be careful to be as
honest in our private and secret actions, as if all the world did behold us:
Seneca does recommend this unto vt in many places.

We read of one called Virginius, whose History was written by Cluuius, who
presented it unto the said personage, and said unto him, If there be any thing
written otherwise then thou would, pardon me, and reform it: Oh no*
answered Virginius; Erasin. lib. 8. Apoth.
whatsoever I have done, has been done in that manner, and to that end, that
it might be free for all to write at their pleasures: a worthy speech of a
noble spirit, and content with his conscience in his actions. Julius Drusus,
when as one promised a great sum of money to his Master mason, that his house
might not be subject to the view of any man; and I (said he) will give twice so
much, if thou can build my house in that sort, as all men may see into it
what is done there: This was to save his conscience, and not to do more in
secret then before all the world. And what a madness is it in most men not to
fear God, nor their conscience, and yet to fear men who can do least in the
correction of their faults? What shall we then fear in this world? One only
God; for his fear will inspire our hearts with an hardy courage, against the
greatest fears.

The 27. Argument taken from the frequent thinking of Death.
He that will receive Death joyfully, must propound it often to his thoughts.

We all desire to receive it joyfully, etc.

SOme (says Seneca) come to their death in choler, Epist. 30.
but no man receives it when it comes, with a cheerful countenance, but he
that has long before prepared himself for it. Let us try this remedy, it
cannot be bad: In the night after our first sleep, in bed, let us presuppose
that we are dead, and by a strong imagination; let us settle our selves in that
sort, as having no sense, nor feeling, and that our soul and reason tells us
that it is even so in death, and that there is no other difference, but that
our soul is yet present in the body; and then let us go unto our friends, or
to any other that die; let us view them, talk unto them, and touch them being
dead; and we shall find that in all this there is nothing to be feared, that
all is quiet, that there is nothing but opinion that (...) abuse man.

Let us proceed; enter the Churchyards, and go down into their graves: we
shall find that (...) the dead rest in peace, yea^ so profound (...) peace* as
no living creature can interrupt them. Let us yet go on farther, there is no
danger; for by the saying of Plato, the knowledge of death is the goodliest
science that man can attain unto. Let us do like unto John Patriarch of
Alexandria, build our tombs and not finish them, but every day* lay one stone.
Let us have some Anatomy or Mo^mie in our houses, and let us not pass a day
without beholding it let us handle it, it is death. Little children by little
and little grow familiar with that which they did strangely fly, and in the end
they play with it, and know that it is but a dead image of copper* which so
terrified them: We shall also see in death, that it was but a shadow that so
amazed us. Let us yet do more; waking and not dreaming, let us dispose our
selves of purpose, as Philippe King of Macedon did by chance; who wrestling
upon the sand, after the manner of the Country, saw and measured the length of
his body, and admired the littlenes thereof, in the shape printed in the sand,
where he had fallen.

Finally, let us not forget what the Emperor Maximilian, 2. or 3. years
before his death commanded carefully to be done; that they should carry with
him a coffin of oak in a chest, with an express command, that being dead they
should cover his body with a course sheet; having put lime in his ears,
nosestrills and mouth, and then to lay him in the ground. Let us follow these
great examples, both high and low, and we shall see that when death shall
present her self unto us, it will be without amazement. But if we fly from
every image of death, from al thought thereof; if the ringing of bells (a show
of some man's death) does importune us; finally, if every word of death be
troublesome, (as there have been such) I doubt not but to them death is
wonderful terrible.

Objection.
If the most reasonable fear Death most, it is by reason to be feared.

But the antecedent is true; therefore the Consequent must follow.

SEneca, yea, experience does teach us, that Infants, Epist. 36.
little children, and such as have lost their judgments, fear not death.

Answer: We deny the antecedent: for making comparison of the most reasonable
men with other of less capacity, we shall find that the most judicious fear
not death; for that by their reason (as through a clear light) they see
plainly that there is nothing fearful or painful in death, but all quiet
and joyful.

But they whom the Philosopher means, have a reason that is blind, weak and
fantastical, apprehending Centaures, Furies, and Cerberus to be in death;
whereas there is no such matter, and therein they have less reason, then they
that have none at all. Miserable is the sight of the Butterfly, who thinking
through great error, that the light of the candle is the natural light of her
life, flies to it, and is there burnt: Miserable in like sort is man's Reason,
who imagining through error, that the vital life is the true life, which is
the death; the mortal body to be her proper lodging, which is the grave;
thinking then to preserve himself, he loses himself, and to live, he dies,
so as his reason does but trouble and deceive him: And to this does the Sun of
Justice aim, saying* He that will save his life, shall lose it; and he that
shall lose it for Iuke 14.
my sake, shall save it.

The 28. Argument taken from things conjoined.
Fear always as an inseparable companion, marches with hope.

But nothing can give man an assured hope;

And therefore not of fear.

HOpe is a desire, astriuing and elevation of the mind, to attain to some
future good, that is difficult and yet possible: if this good be virtuous, the
hope is commendable, and hereof a good man shall be always replenished, and it
will never suffer him to faint in the mid dest of adversities, but will raise
him up to better things, as Apolodorus said, and more holily S. Paul, that hope
confounds not, for that the love is infused into our souls by Romans 5.
the holy Ghost. Finally, having our anchor-hold upon God, from whom she
feels all motions within, we may assure our selves to obtain all things
necessary, how difficult soever; and to repel whatsoever shall be hurtful unto
us, how painful soever: Neither shall he ever fear, but greedily desire
death, as the end of his carreer; whereas they that have run and combated,
shall receive the Crown of glory kept, promised and hoped for. But if this
good he but an imaginary good, as the glory of the world, of the earth, and of
this present life; then shall the hope be doubtful and deceiuable, and joined
to fear to lose that which we enjoy (a fear which does always inseparably
accompany hope:) she will let go the floods of troubles and disquietnesse upon
miserable man, and will still vex him with fearful apparitions of death.
Wherefore if we will not fear death, let us not hope for the prolongation of
life: Thou shall cease to fear, says Seneca, if thou do leave to hope* It
is so, my friend Lucilius; although these thing seem to be contrary, yet are
they tied one unto another, as one chain does the Sergeant to the prisoner.

So these things which seem contradictories, are alike: the greatest cause
both of the one and the other, is, for that we do not measure ourselves, and
stay our selves upon present things, but let fly our thoughts far before us;
so as fore sight, the goodliest ornament of man, is hurtful unto us. Beasts
fly apparent dangers, and being past, they retain no shadow of them, but
live in all security and rest; and we trouble our selves for that which is to
come, and for that which is past. This is true, for either the remembrance of
some wrong, or some pha^tasticall reproach past, does vex us to the heart; or
the future fear of dangers troubles our souls: only the present time which
we hold, and which is only ours, and should chiefly concern us, seems not to
touch us; wherein the stupidity is as wonderful, as the apprehension is witty.
Let us then know, as Solomon does admonish us, That there Eccle. 3. 22
is nothing better for man then to joy in that he does, for that is his
portion: For who will bring him back to see what shall be after him? But we
have spoken enough in general of the proposition of the Argument: Let us come
to the second part. Doubtless, he that shall cast his eyes upon that which
does present it self every day, and shall lend his ear to hear what has
been said, cannot doubt of the Minor of our Syllogism: we see daily (if we
will not shut our eyes) the effect of Senecaes speech, saying; That it is a
Epist. 102.
great folly in us to dispose of our age, when we have not to morrow at our
command. O how great is their vanity, says he, which enter into long hopes! I
will buy, I will build, I will lend, and then I will rest mine old age in
peace. O poor man, who can promise any thing to himself that is to come! Who
does not seem to hear the Apostle Saint James contesting against covetous
merchants, and saying, Now you that say, Let us go this day and to morrow to
such a City, and continue there a year, let us traffic and gain; and yet
you know not what shall befall the next day: for seeing the thing which we
hold does often slip out of our hands, and that of the very time we now
enjoy, a part of it is subject unto hazard; it were to dream without sleeping,
to hope in the incertainty of life, as Plato says, and after him Aristotle;
for that such as future hopes do lead, promise to themselves many things,
which in the end prove vain: these hopes figured in the shadows of the
future, wrest out of our hands the present, and make us run like unto Esops
dog after the shadow of a thing; and like unto those who having dreamed they
had found a treasur, when they awaked found nothing but straw in their bed:
they are netts to take the wind. I will not buy future hope with the price of
present time; the Ter. Adel. 22 Hor. Car. 5.
reason is given by Horace, the short line of life forbids us to begin a long
hope: Even at this instant night, the ghosts and Pluto's straight Mansion will
hasten thy end: We hope, says another, for some great matter by affection, but
it may be to morrow will close up our destiny, and so deceive our hope, and
mortify our affection.

Man's life is like unto a game at dice; if thy chance falls not to thy desire,
thou must rest contented, for thou can not correct it by art; and therefore
hope not for any thing, but what thou do presently enjoy: otherwise if thou
make any assured account, that this or that shall happen unto thee: I will
tell thee, nay common chance will thee, that it may be it will not succeed.
But the divine Oracle pronounces a curse upon him, that puts his trust in the
strength of man. And hereof ages past and present do furnish us with thousands
of examples; but I will produce but two for all the rest. Pyrrhus who might
have lived a happy King, and have enjoyed that which the time did present unto
him, yet he, transported with a hope to subdue all Italy, was graciously
informed by Cineas, a servant of his, but a judicious Orator, after this
manner: Sir, if the Gods make us Victors, what profit shall we reap by this
victory? We shall have an easy means, says he, to conquer all the cities
that are upon the consines of Italy: and this done, replied Cineas, what shall
then become of us? Sicile, answers Pyrrhus, will willingly submit unto us. Shall
Sicile then (pursued Cineas) be the end of our wars? Who shall then hinder us,
said the King, to pass into Afric, to Carthage, and from thence into the
kingdom of Macedon? Whereunto Cineas, Well, my Prince, when all this shall be
made subject to our power, what shall we do in the end? Pyrrhus smiling,
answered, We will then rest quietly at our ease, with pleasure and content.
Cineas having brought him to the point he aimed at, made him this last reply:
Sir, seeing we enjoy all that can be desired in a happy and contented life,
who can now interrupt our quiet, and trouble our felicity? and not defer it
to uncertain days, and lay it upon dangerous hazards. This was more then
enough to move Pyrrhus to content himself with what he had, if vain hope had
not made him insensible; but he must hazard himself, and fight against the
Romans, and then he must be besieged encountered and slain by a woman. Go
you Princes, propound unto your selves these haughty hopes of glory, but expect
nothing but smoke: flatter not your selves in your fortunes, she is
treacherous; the more she smiles, the more she is to be feared. Julius Caesar
is the second example; she was his friend for a time, but in the end she
betrayed him: when as he should have contented himself with that great Roman
Empire, he conceived new hopes of subduing the Parthians, and makes his
preparatiues; but in the mean time his Citizens conspire his death, and fail
not. So Esops Falconer, whilst that he is watchful to take the Foul, a
viper which he casually trod upon, turns, and bites him by the foot,
whereof he dyed.

Manilius cries out, That good is always mixed with evil here below, tears
follow vows, and in any thing fortune never keeps one course. The safest
remeady not to be troubled nor infested with so many unquiet events, which
follow one another in this life, is to quench in us the baits of them, which
are two, hope, and fear: for we floate betwixt these two continually, and
always depending upon the accidents of fortune, we either suspect them or
affect them. What then, will you say, must we wholly despair? No, it is not
my meaning; there is a mean betwixt all hope and all despair, the which
Seneca propounds unto thee: Hope not, Epist. 105.
says he, without despair, neither despair without hope. Otherwise (as he
does wisely advertise thee) it is like the life of a fool, which is
ungrateful, Epist. 13.
trembling, and always tending to the future: Ungrateful, for that he makes
no account of that which is past, nor of the present: trembling, for that it
fears more and sooner then it should: and in the end it bends to the future,
for that it relies not upon the present good which presents it self; does not
taste it, nor make any account of it, but either joys with hope of the future,
or else pants for fear. And this future, how short soever it be, yea, the
night following, it may be, will conclude thy life. Hear what God said to the
foolish covetous man, who through hope to live at ease, to eat, drink, and
make good cheer, resolved to build Barnes, to store up his Corn, promising
afterward to himself great joy and long life: But O fool (said the
Eternal,) Luke 12. 19. 20.
this night thy soul shall be taken from thee.

Objection.
To thrust a wretched man into despair, is a cruel thing.

To take all hope from a wretched man, is to thrust him into despair. etc.

THe Philosophers Elpistiques held opinion, that there was nothing did more
mollify the bitterness of miseries in this present life, then hope; And by
the saying of Thales it is the most common thing to men: for it never flies
away with other transitory things, but continues with man even unto the end.
Pindarus terms it the nurse of old age; for be he never so much broken and
decayed, yet he hopes to live one year at the least. Yea, some one (as the
Poet says) hanging on a gibbet, will not lose all hope to escape; she is so
faithful a companion even unto death. Plato calls it the renewing of all good
fortune.

Finally, some have described it by a hog, which thrusting his nose into the
ground and hoping to find something to eat, teaches us that passing on, we
should hope for better things.

Answer. I shall willingly grant the argument and the exposition, if they he
applied to the true hope, the nurse of faith; and grounded upon the divine
power and assistance, which even a wise man has at his death, says Solomon;
but of humane hope which has nothing to support it but riches, or humane
power, or health and strength of body, or some other worldly thing, I will deny
it constantly, and with reason: For there is nothing firm on Paradin. nil
solidum.
earth, all is wavering and frail; to hope in it, is to lean unto a tottering
wall, and to be crushed in the ruins: it is to ease himself being weary upon
a swords point, which will pierce him through. To warn man hereof, is not to
cast him into a gulf of despair, but to retire him; for who would not
despair, when having basely hoped for all prosperity, he runs into extreme
ruin? But when one cries out; Beware, trust not; they are then weary, and
seek some better assurance, so as nothing befalls unexpected, and by
consequence, nothing can drive him into despair. Let us set before you
Polycrates the most fortunate man in the world, who to shadow his fortune,
cast his richest Jewel into the sea, which within a short time was restored in
a fishes belly, that was presented unto him: Yet must Amasis King of Egypt, his
allie and friend, write unto him, That these prosperities were to be suspected,
and that this calm would bring a storm, in which he should suffer
shipwreck: And lost he should be engaged with him, he renounced all the
rights of friendship, which they had contracted together, according to the use
and custom of those times: The which fell out so; for in the end he was taken
by Orbetes Lieutenant to Cyrus, whom others say to be S^trape to Darius, and
tied ignominiosly to a gibbet. It seems S. Ambrose did meditate and make
proffit of this History, who having incountred a man who bragged that he had
never tasted any misfortune, he presently left him, saying, That he feared to
be lost with him, who had never felt any disaster: His conjecture proved true,
for presently an earthquake swallowed up the lodging, with this Mignion of
Fortune, and al them of the family, even in the sight of S. Ambrose, being not
yet far off.

Prosperity the stepdame of virtue, plants and waters whom she pleases, but
is soon wearied by the inconstancy of her love; she supplants, them not
without amazement; she applies her self unto them for a time by some
miserable happiness, but in the end she crosses them and overthrows them; and
therefore Valerius Maximus said truly, That greatness and riches were nothing
but frailty and misery, and like unto little childrens babies and toies; and
what hope then is there in such things? But some Idolatrous flatteror of
Princes, will persuade them that all things yield under their power, and
undergo what yoke it shall please them to impose. To this flattery I will
oppose the sincere confession made by Canute, a powerful King of England, who
adds words to the effect Camden History of England.
for a memorable example to all the monarchs of the world: Seeing the sea begin
to flow, he commanded his chair to be set upon the shore, and sat himself
down in it, and still observed the waves as they approached: Then the Prince
began this speech; Stay o sea, the Land whereon I sit is mine; thou art on it,
and in that respect thou do belong to me: never yet any one gaine-sayd me
but was punished; I forbid thee to mount any higher, beware thou do not
touch nor wet thy Lords garments. The sea had no more respect then ears, but
trembling at the voice of a greater Monarke, came on his course, and did wet
the Kings feet, which was the thing he expected; and then he added: Let all
the Inhabitants of the world know, that the power of Kings is so weak, as the
least creature guided by the Almighty, disdaines it. Whereunto the emblem of
Alc^ does allude, representing the Beetle a little and weak animal, yet
banding against the Eagle, finds means to revenge himself: for, creeping
into her feathers, he is carried by her into her nest, where he breaks her
eggs, and does extinguish the race. We read of Sapores King of Persia, who
having besieged Nifibis a Christian Town, he was chased away by an Army of
Hornets and Waspes; which succors they did attribute to the prayers of Ieames
the faithful Pastor of that Church. I omit the miserable Prelate of the Abbey
of Fulden in Germany, who was pursued and in the end devoured by rattes,
notwithstanding all his force and devices, whereof the Tower built in the
midst of the river of Rhine bears witness.

Pliny makes mention of Conies, which did undermine and overthrow a Town in
Spain. Moules ruined another in Thessaly, Frogs made the Inhabitants of a
certain Town in Gaul to abandon the place. But it is well known to all men,
how God incountered the arrogance of Pharao King of Egypt, with armies of
diverse small beasts* If the l^ast worms of the earth, opposing against the
great enterprises of great men overthrow them, and what hope then is there in
this world? What shall we say more, but with Lipsius, Lips. de constable. c. 6.
That the most shining Diamond of constancy, a virtue so necessary in the
inconstancy of Fortune, is not to be transported with hope nor fear? a
supernatural ornament, near unto God, which makes man free from passions,
exempt from the insulting of Fortune, and makes him a free King, subject to God
only, whose service is to reign, as the wiseman says.

The 29. Argument taken from the unprofitableness of life.
The freeing from a most vain vanity should not make man sad.

Death is a freeing from a most vain vanity.

Solomon a powerful King, wise and rich, having sought, examined and tasted all
that is excellent, pleasant and happy in this world, yet in the end he cried
out with a true voice, in the book of truth; Vanity of vanities, all is but
vanity. The Paraphrase upon this Sermon, does teach us, that the end of it is,
to let the world know, That they deceive themselves to their great confusion,
which either within, above, or under the world, hope: to find any thing so
firm, wherein there is assured contentment: no, says he, there is nothing
in the world but is inconstant, without stay, frail and most vain. And in
truth when man has past his youth, and leaves his passions, coming to a more
perfect age, his life promises felicity, yet upon condition, that he shall
employ himself with all his force, either to heap up store of riches, or to
purchase much credit, or to wallow in voluptuousness: but after that he has
toyled, turmoyled, and killed both body and soul, she leaves him empty and
lost, finding her deceit too late. For,

Had man of wealth such store,
That much still heap't up more,
And held in his free hold,
A spring of liquid gold,
His coffers seeing filled
With treasures, still instilled
Pearls, that best choises please,
Brought from the bloody seas;
And in rich labor could,
(To break his fruitful mould,)
A hundred Oxen yoke,
Yet would desire still choke
His throat with thirst of more.
And yet of all the store,
His heart affects to have,
He carries nothing to his grave.
Even as Boethius exclaimes against senseless greediness; for in truth all
she has is nothing; she desires all she has not, and that is infinite: she
gapes always after gain, one lucre sommons another, and she holds al lost
that she cannot attain unto.

Finally, Covetousness is the anuile, whereon are forged the chains of
iniquity, to bind and ^ast covetous men headlong into hell: these chains are
four; Impiety, Inhumanity, forgetfulness of Gods Judgments, and Distrust;
whereby we may infer^e, that in stead of happiness, there is nothing here but
misery.

Now comes the second, Ambition, which knows no bounds, and has neither end
nor mean; if she possesses this day a whole Country, to morrow she will
seek to conquer a new Kingdom, and after this conquest she would seize upon
all the world, and the^ pierce through the earth, to find new words; a strange
thing, as Valerius says, that Val. Max.
man should think his glory has too streighr a lodging in this world, which
notwithstanding was sufficient for all the gods: but it is more strange that man
should be so tormented for the enjoying of a handful of earth, who has the
fruition of the Sun, the heaven, and of all the elements; in regard whereof
this earthly Globe is nothing: for the Sun alone by the just computation of
Philosophers, is a 166. times bigger then the earth. Why should a little
portion of this little earth breed him so much care? He that has more, should
he care for less? Man has the common enjoying of the principal of life, of
the sea, heaven and stars; and must he for a little point of earth, deprive
himself of the quiet enjoying of al these things, which be far greater? An
ambitious man is always shaken with fear, and mus^led with envy; he fears
continually the crosses of fortune, his enemies terrify him, and his friends
are suspect unto him: he eats not without fear of poison, he sleeps
unquietly, for that his adversaries watch for his mine.

Envy filing over the triumphs of other men, stings him continually; he
thinks himself as much dejected as another is advanced; Thou think him
happy, and he holds himself miserable, and would confess it to thee if his
ambition did not stay him: and if he feared not by this confession to make
himself contemptible, the which he most abhors, he would show thee, that in
his greatest banquets, he has no more assurance the^ he, over whose head there
hangs a naked sword, stayed only by a horse hair, as in old time that of the
Tyrant of Sicile. But the advertisement given to Philip King of Macedon grown
insolent for the victory of Cheronee, by Archidamus King of Sparta, after the
Spartane manner, is notable: Philip, said he, measure thy shadow, if thou
find it bigger then of custom: as if he would say, Why do thou thus
insult over thine enemies, who in thy person have received no increase, unless
it he care and fear?

Then follows Pleasure in eating, drinking, and in the venerian act: this
pleasure if it keeps not the bounds of necessity and honesty, it is infamous
and unwholesome; The throat has slain more (faith a Physician) then the
sword. Intemperance is the very bayte of an impure spirit, which delights in
vnpure and undigested humors: drunkenness depriues a man of the use of
reason, and transformes him into a beast, yea, a furious beast apt to commit
many mischiefs. And therefore Saint Augustine speaks of drunkenness, that it
is the mother of all villainies, the subject of offenses, the root of crimes,
the diste^perature of the brain, the ruin of the body, the shipwreck of
chastity, the loss of time, a volu^tary rage, an ignominious languishing, the
corruption of manners, etc. Either of these voluptuousnesses is like unto the
biting of serpents, which they call Tarentula: They that are touched, laugh,
sing, and dance; but it is a Sardonian laughter, which brings them to a fatal
end; and what pleasure? As for the act of venery, out of the due of lawful
marriage, it is by the testimony of Diogenes, wine mixed with poison, Laert. lib
6
which in the beginning seems sweet, but presently after it makes him feel a
deadly bittemes: it is the mire wherein man does deuolue ruin, and lose
himself: It is in this act only, says Saint Jerome, that God did never touch
the heart of his Prophets. Thrice, and four times wretched Ixion, who think
to embrace in thy arms the goddess Juno, and 7. Ethic. 11
it is but a cloud thou do hold: The pleasure of this world is but a vain
shadow of felicity, the substance is in heaven. To be short, we must abhor
voluptuousnes, like the Sirenes, as the Ancients have mystically painted them
out: all that is seen of them is exceeding fair, they glister with the
shining of sparkling Diamonds, they cast forth a sweet sent of Musk and
Amber, their green eyes dart flames into the coldest heart; gold binds up
their flaxen hair, their necks are circled with rubies, a Cypres of silver
wauing over their shoulders; their breasts of Alablaster open, whose pappes
like two round curds of milk, did seem to leap: on their foreheads were
fixed two of Cupids bows; their cheeks were crimson, and their mouths
little, but their tail which is hidden under the water, is pointed, with teeth
spotted, and venomous; finally, hideous and fearful, and they that are once
stung, die without help; and what pleasure? These are the three carreeres
which men in this world run by troops: heereunto the most active of mind and
body, strain their sinews, and bend their spirits, who shall have most, and
al for an imaginary happiness; Some in the beginning of the course fall to the
ground; others end in the midst, and these not able to judge of the vanity of
the world, are perished in the midst of it; The last being come unto the
end, find (but it is in the extremity) that r^ey have embraced the shadow
for the body, vanity for felicity, and desolation for consolation? then they
cry, O deceitful world, O miserable life! But before they can come to
consider wherein the happiness of life does consist, and settle themselves in
a course to attain unto it, death seazeth on them.

Objection.
It is no good consequence to argue from the abuse to the thing abused.

Your argument proceeds from the abuse to life.

THey laugh at Lycurgus, causing the Vines to be pulled up, for that some men
were drunk; and he were more mad that would cut off his nose because he is
troubled with rheum: and what were he that would take away life, under color
that one uses it to covetousness, another to ambition, a third to
voluptuousnes? Let us banish the abuse, and retain life; that knowing with
Diogenes the goods of nature to exceed them of fortune, let us refuse
Alexanders silver, if he will deprive us of our liberty, and the true use of
the Sun. Let us imitate Xenocrates, who gravely answered his Ambassadors, who
had brought him 50. tallents, or 30000. crowns, That he had not use for so
much silver.

Finally, will thou be rich? Do not labor to multiply thy wealth, but to make
a substraction of thy concupiscence. As for the other abuse of ambition, let
Socrates prescribe us a Rule, who hearing a relation of his praises in a
discourse composed by Plato, interrupted him, crying out, Oh what lies this
young man speaks of me! Let us consider rhat glory is mixed with the honey of
Trapezonde, whose violent vapor does strangely confound the spirits of such as
use it, and makes. them forgetful of God, Apostates to the faith, and void of
all natural reason.

For Voluptuousness, let them cast their eyes upon the Curij and Fabricij, who
will be more then content with turnips and beans; yea upon Epicurus, who with
water and a little rice, would contend with Jupiter, for his felicity. Let
Cyrus, and Zaleucus King of Locres, be also heard; the first against the
excess of wine; the other against whordome: Cyrus being roughly demanded by
his father in law Astiages, why he had refused to drink the cup which he had
presented unto him; For that, said he, I conceived it had been poison,
remembering that at your last feast, every man that used it, did stagger at
every step, and his spirits so confounded, as he could not understand any
thing, nor speak to purpose. Zaleucus made a law, that the Adulterer should
lose both his eyes; wherein he was so strict, as his own son being convicted,
he underwent the same punishment, and by a fatherly compassion, pulled out one
of his sons, and one of his own eyes.

Answer. I yield to all this, and do willingly give my voice, having never
insisted but for the abuse; neither that we may deprive our selves of life for
any misery: Yea, I have maintained the contrary against the Stoics heretofore.
It is the excess of the fear of death, I strive to prune and root out;
showing that vanity and corruption is so united to life, that all which live,
yea the greatest spirits, wallow in this mire: and therefore death which gives
an end to this vanity and corruption, should cause no fears to reply, that it
is the abuse and not the life: we may answer again, that the abuse is
general, since the fall of the first man, no man can be exempt, if he be well
observed.

Let Diogenes go suddenly with a torch lighted into the most frequent market
of Athens, nay into the most famous royal Fair of France, to search; yet shall
he not find one: and I know not whether he himself which could so tax others
will be found without blame; and whether he (as it has been reproched unto
him) did not more glory in his Tub, then Alexander in his Empire. Oh how easy
it is to speak and lie! Virtue consists in practice and action: there will not
any one be found in this age, that is not tainted more or less with one of the
above named vices, or with all three; we can give no instance. All men suffer
themselves to be led to some vain hope which they attend from day to day,
which in the end deceiues them; and death delivers them from this deception,
why then should it be so terrible unto them? But represent one out of ten
thousand, who has learned wherein the true end of life does consist, that is
to say, in the tranquillity of the mind, in continual action according unto
virtue, yea according unto piety, as he knows, and strives to have the
spirit of a wise man (whereof Seneca speaks epist. 60.): that is like unto the
world, above the Moon always clear. Yet must he confess, that he is in a
wondeful co^bate, yea in insupportable pain, being tossed with contrary winds
of diverse passions, which never leave him, no more then his body or flesh:
Sometimes the immoderate love of transitory things stings him, sometimes the
hatred of eternal things sollicites him; or profane joy, or the melancholy of
the mind, lays hold of him and consumes him: if vain hope leave him, then
furious despair gets hold, or boldness thrusts him on to mischief, or fear
retires him from good, and furious choler transports him beyond the bounds of
reason: so many passions so many cords to bind him, so many assaults so many
pains, if it succeed not well; and most commonly it proves contrary to his
project; for this heavy flesh, this sensual concupiscence which he is to
encounter, dawes him still to the ground.

But harken how that great Apostle, more virtuous then all the Philosophers
together, for that he had the gift of the Spirit of God, in a higher degree:
hear how in the like conflict he cries out; Miserable man that I am, Romans 7.
v. 24.
who shall deliver me from the body of this death! If this servant of God
living the life of Jesus Christ, yet for the mortal assaults which he felt,
terms this present life death, and were death a deliverance; what fear we
in death, that we do not salute it rather as the safe port from all the
storms and tempests of this life, full of baits and snares? as S. Augustine
says. Let us feale up this discourse with the ring of Seneca, De (...). vit.
c. 19.
which is, That the condition of all men employed is miserable, and that most
miserable which attends no other thing but his employments: he taxes the
greatest part of men, who (like unto Liuius Drusus,) from their infancy, to
their dying day, give themselves no truce, always in action, in travel of
mind or body; if they meet with any pleasure, they pass it over lightly
without taste; if with displeasure, they are touched to the quick.

Finally, they run so swiftly, as they look not to their way; they think not
of their life, and cannot say what it is: all actions shall be pleasant, but
that which is proper to man, which is, to have the spirit purged, given to
Philosophy, and to the meditation of that which concerns man in the world. Let
us then say with reason, O vanity of vanities, this is nothing but vanity.

The 30. Argument taken from the restoring of mankind.
Whatsoever being lost shall be powerfully restored to us again, should not
trouble us in the loss.

Life being lost shall be powerfully restored, etc.

IF thou be a Christian, Christ commands thee, and thy faith does bind thee
to believe the Resurrection of the flesh; in the which, by the powerful voice
of the Creator, raising them up which sleep in the dust, the life which thou
had left, shall be restored unto thee again, with most precious interests.
But if deprived of the eyes of this faith, thou can not see the beginning of
the creation of the world, seeing that by faith (as the Apostle does witness)
we Heb. 11. verse 3.
understand that the ages have been ordained; yet as a miscreant thou do
believe the eternity and fatality of the world, let us admit this supposed
truth to be true: know then, that the limited revolution of the heavens being
ended and all the order of causes chained together, returned to the same point,
in the which they hold all things balanced in an equal weight: know I say,
that this same concatenatio^ of causes by a necessary revolution, will restore
thee to life, yea to the same estate, in the same place, and in the same
positure thou art in at this present* so as you which read these things, or
hear them read, shall be the same, at the same time, reading or hearing. It is
the true extraction which moved that great Zoroastres to assure, that one day
al men should take life again. Plato was of the same opinion, saying, That
after the return of the eight sphere, which was in thirty six thousand
years, all things should in like manner return.

The reason; there is nothing made new under the Sun, and there is nothing, but
what has been and may return hereafter. So the Sun withdrawing his quickening
influence with his body from our Zenith: the trees being The^pomp l. 1. c. 17.
withered remain without fruit, without any verdure and without leaves: If
thou had not seen it the years past, yet thou may in some sort believe
that the Sun should return, and by his return give that vegetative virtue,
that springing sap, and sweet smelling spirit to herbs and trees, which thou
did hold deprived of that power (and so they were, for this life which is in
them, in the beginning of Winter descends from the branches to the body, and so
to the root:) but the same gracious Star, which by his retyring had caused
this death, returning, draws back by a wonderful regression and revolution of
nature, this vegetative virtue, from the earth to the roots, to the body, and
to the branches; and makes it to be seen and smelt by the buds, blossoms,
leaves, and fruits. A dead man and one living is all one (said Heraclitus:)
he Plut. in consol. ad Apollon.
that watches and the sleeper, the young and the old; for that being past, it
becomes this; and this being past, becomes that. Like unto a potter, who of one
lump of clay may make beasts, and then confound them into a mass, and then
fashion them again, which he may continue incessantly: It is art that does
this, and art is but an imitation of nature. Thus nature sports it self in the
common nature of all Creatures; she makes them and undoes them again, and then
makes them again, and afterward dissolues them: of water she makes snow, and
of snow water, and so incessantly: of grass she makes pasture for sheep, the
sheep make dung, the which is cast upon the ground, and grass grows again;
and so by circumuolution in all other Creatures. Wherefore comfort your selves,
you that are discomforted in death; for what you have and what you love, shall
be given you again.

And the Proverb of the living is not admitted in death; That the term is
worth the money: that the revolution of so many thousands of years to return
unto the point, which they hold at this present, will put you out of patience,
and so vex you, as it will far exceed the little content of so short a
life: This is not in death, where there is a full cessation of all
distemperatures, and of observation of times, and expectance; whereas ten
millions of years cannot last so long, as one night of twelve hours, which
you shall pass in a deep sleep; and yet notwithstanding the length, in the
morning you will think it to have been very short: and in like manner the
5000. years from the Creation, which have past when you were not, were they of
any continuance to you? your reason then should assure you of the like for that
which is to come.

Objection.
All that passes (according to the hazard of fortune) by a 100 thousand
changes, cannot be restored to the former estate.

A dead body according to the chance of fortune, passes by a hundred thousand
changes.

OF bodies some shall be devoured by birds, or beasts of the field; others
reduced to powder; and some eaten with worms, serpents, and toads: These
serpents and toads after some days are extinct, and of them a new thing is
made, and so in infinitum: By what reason then can that be restored to the same
estate, which has all these changes? Moreover, it is to fall into
contradiction to mainetaine this doctrine: The beasts which have been and
shall be, are infinite in number, according to their infinite forms, which
have given them being. But the common substance, the receptacle of forms, is
finite and limited; by what arithmeticke then can she furnish the bodies of
those infinite creatures, which have bin in the world, during so long a time?
For it may be that a small portion of this common matter, has served to more
then a thousand creatures: in the restoration, to which of these shall it be
subjected? If but to one, then what shall become of the rest? You have
propounded an example of the clay, I accept it, and let you thereby see the
impossibility of your assertion: take a piece of the bigness of your fist, and
fashion a man: undo it, and make an horse, then make an Ape; then dissolve it
to his mass, and frame an Eagle: behold four creatures fashioned of one ball
of clay. Now come and make your restitution, and strive (without adding any
thing to this clay) to make this man, horse, ape, and Eagle, all as great at
one instant; and you will find your self confounded, there being substance
but for one of the four. Even so it is of this common substance, by the
consent and testimony, both of Christian and Heathen Philosophers.

Answer. This doctrine is drawn from the Stoics, who attribute unto the
world, a certain period in his continuance, after the which there is a
renewing and restoring of the same plants, creatures and men that have been at
infinite times in the Eternity of the world, which after a long age resumes by
deluge, or an universal deflagration, her first face: all this continuance
from one term unto another, is called the great year, which Macrobius
extends to fifteen thousand years, Firmic us to 30. thousand, and others to
more. Behold what Seneca says to Polybius Consul. ad Polib. init.
of another sect; Some (that is to say, the Stoics) threaten the world with an
end: this Universe which contains all things both human and divine, shall
be dissolved in one day, if it be lawful to believe it: One (...) Not.
quest. (...). ^9.
day shall plunge this Universe into his Chaos, and first darkness. And
Berosus who has interpreted Belus, says, that this must be done by the course
of the stars, yea he maintains it so confidently, as he assigns the time
of the conflagration, and of the Inundation; for he holds the earthly things
shall burn, when all the stars that now hold diverse courses in the firment,
shall be gathered together in the sign of Cancer, being set in such a
station, as a straight line may pass through them and their heaven. And the
Inundation shall then be, when the like assembly of the stars shall be in
Capricorn; there is the Solstice, here the winter; that is the sign of
burning summer, this of moist winter. If you enquire how this can be done, the
same Author will answer you, that it may be done without any great force; for
that, says he, nothing is difficult to nature, when as she runs to her end:
she is sparing of her force, in the first framing of things, but their increase
being come, she disperseth her self to a sudden ruin, and desce^ds to it
with violence. What a long time is required, after the seed is received, to
bring the Infant to light? with what trouble is he nourished and bred up? But
how easily is he dissolved? Cities which have had a whole age to build them,
are ruined in an hour: a forest which has been so long in growing, is
consumed to ashes in a moment. Numenius says, that the Stoickes hold, That all
things after a long time vanish and perish, being dissolved in a celestial
fire.

Tully has also spoken of it: After the inflammation 2. de not. Deor.
there shall remain nothing but fire, by the which, and of the which there
shall be the renewing of the world, and the same ornaments shall appear. And
Numenius in Eusebius adds, That after the fire the world should be settled and
made perfect again, as it was before, yea the same men; and therefore Seneca
says, That Epist. 36.
death which we so much fear and fly from, does not ravish away, but only
suspend the use of life; a day will come which will restore us to light.

Moreover, such periodicall conuersions happen from all eternity, eternally,
and without ceasing, as Numenius says. And to conclude, let us know that this
opinion has not been held so absurd among Christians, but that Octauius has
used it against the Pagans, to refute the objection which they made, That the
Christians did prescribe an end to the stars, and to heaven: It is a constant
opinion of the Stoickes, says he, that after all humor is consumed, this world
shall burn: and Nature by whom this revolution is made, seems to give us some
notice, in that the fields being burnt by the labourer, or drowned by water as
in Egypt, as in pooles dried up, and when the sea is retired; in that I say,
this earth remaining, is found renewed, fat and producing many Creatures, yea
great and perfect, as they write namely of Nile after it is retired.

Now under the wings of these great personages I come to maintain this
combat, and refell the reasons of the Obiector: We have in our Argument
touched two points simbolizing together, although the one be Christian, and the
other Heathen; the first is the Resurrection of the flesh, which we extend to
man only, not of other Creatures: And let us say, that he who of nothing could
make all, may easily overthrow the imagined difficulty, and raise up and
restore to the same estate the bodies of dead men: for he that can do more, can
do less without all controversy; and he that could of nothing make that
which was not, may repair that which was undone.

But how shall this Resurrection be made, and what assurance shall we have?
Behold how: In the presence of all the world, of Angels, of men, and of
devils, (with unspeakable joy to the good, and incomprehensible horror to the
wicked) the Lord shall come with a cry of exhortation, and the voice of (...).
Cor. 15. 1. These. 4.
the Archangell, and the Trumpet of God; these are the very words of the text.
By the sound of this trumpet all the dead shall awake and rise out of their
graves; and they that shall live and remain at this coming, shall be suddenly
changed, and of mortal shall be made immortal, by his force and efficacy, Phil.
3. 2^
who can make all things subject unto him, as the Apostle says. The bodies of
the children of God shall rise again; like the glorious body of Jesus Christ,
impassible, spiritual, and yet fleshly, shining like stars, subtle, light,
transparent; and full of all happiness: behold the letters of heaven: Idem.
We attend the Savior, who will transform our vile bodies, and make them
conformable to his glorious body.

We know, says Saint John, that after he has appeared, we shall be like
Ioh. 1. (...).
unto him: God will wipe Apo. 21. 4.
away all tears from our eyes, says he; death shall be no more, there
shall be no mourning, cries, nor labor: The body sown in corruption, shall
rise spiritual, 1. Cor. 15. 45.
says S. Paul, for that no sollide thing can hinder it, it may without help
or wings, fly into remote places; as Jesus Christ after his resurrection, did
manifest it more then sufficiently in A^g (...). Adimant. c. 12.
his body: finally, he shall be spiritual, for that he shall be readily and
willingly obedient to his glorified spirit.

In this flesh and not in any other shall I see my Savior, says Job, c. 1. 9.
For this mortal body must put on immortality, says the Apostle. Thirdly, they
which have bin 1. Cor. 15. 13.
understood (says Daniel 12.) shall shine like the heavens, and they that
bring many to Justice, shall glister like the stars for ever.

Also the glory of the Sun is one, the glory of the Moon 1. Cor. 25. 41.
another, and the glory of the stars is also different; even so shall be the
resurrection of the dead; whereby it follows that the bodies raised again shall
have no gross substance, but shall be transparent like unto glass.

Fourthly, being raised again, we shall be taken up 1. These. 4. 17.
into the clouds before the Lord, and being ascended into heaven, we shall
have unspeakable joy, such as the eye has not seen, the ear not heard, nor
has entered into the heart of man. These are wonderful things, but what
assurance? the Spirit of God does assure thee, if thou be of God; for God
does seal up an earnest penny 2 Cor. 1. 22
of his holy Spirit in their hearts that are his, as the Apostle teaches.

Secondly, If the soul be immortal, the body must one day rise immortal, to
the end, that this soul being created for the body, may give it life again
being reunited. Moreover (as Saint Ambrose teaches) it is the order and cause
of Justice; De fid. resur rect, c. 19
seeing that the work of man is common to the body and soul, and what the
soul does fore-thinke, the body effects; and therefore it is reasonable that
both should appear in judgment, to receive either punishment or glory.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is risen for us, and to assure us that by the same
divine power that has drawn him out of the grave, we also shall be raised. I
prove the antecedent by above 500. witnesses, 1 Cor. 15. 6
which at one time have seen Jesus Christ, living after that he had been
crucified by the Jews, as the Apostle shows: and Joseph also who was a Jew,
does witness it, lib. 18. c. 2. and 4. of his Antiquities. He was seen
precisely by women, believed by the incredulous: and for a full assurance
thereof, he would (contrary to the nature of his body, which aspired nothing
but heaven) converse forty days upon earth: Here is reason sufficient in this
matter of faith, whereas reason should yield her self prisoner; and yet to
make it appear visibly, and to free all doubt, God would both in the ancient
and new alliance raise up some that were seen and admired of the people. So
Lazarus being called out of his grave, was beheld of all men, and the malicious
Pharisees took counsel to put him to death as well as Jesus Christ.

The same God would manifest a plot of the future Resurrection to his Prophet
Ezechiel, when as he had transported him into a field full of Ezech. 37.
dry bones; which when he had seen, and prophesied over ^em, behold a
motion, the bones draw near one unto another, and suddenly behold they had
sinews upon them, and flesh came, and then the skin covered it; and in the
end after a second d^untiation of the word of God, the spirit came, and then
appeared a great army of men.

As for this point which concerns an article of our faith, the Resurrection of
the flesh, the Obiector dares not deny, but there is matter sufficient in this
world to furnish for the restoring of all the dead bodies; not since an
imaginary Eternity, (for we are now upon terms of divinity, whereof we must
believe the principles, and not question them,) but from the first man unto the
last that shall be: Herein there is nothing that inuolues contradiction.

The other point was, that suppose the eternity of the world, after the
revolution of all things, and the encounter of the same order in all points
that is at this present, there shall be the same Superficies, the same
creatures, and the same men that are at this present: this also has no
implicity, seeing we affirm not, that all things, the same creatures, which
have bin and shall be for ever, shall be restored together at one instant, but by
degrees, and every one in his turn. Behold how this first matter perishes
not, and is not reduced to nothing, but flows daily under new forms. This
matter is bounded, the stars and the heaven which roll about it, make it to
bring forth creatures continually, and man sometimes; but by some rare
constellation, as the Naturallists speak. The heavens, I say, are bounded, and
their motions limited: Wherefore I maintain, it is not impossible, that in an
eternity of time, that which is limited and bounded, and has once met and is
joined, may yet again meet and be reioyned: if we consider that it is not by
chance, but by fatal necessity: that this Universe roules without ceasing; as
al they among the Pagans which have had any understanding have acknowledged:
Yea one of them said, that who so would demand proofs thereof; must be
answered with a whip: but behold a most certain proof; all creatures, even
those that have no understanding, tend always to their ends propounded, and
all encounter in one universal end: If there were not a certain providence in
the world, which prescribes to every creature that end which it knows not,
and makes it contain it self; the world should not be a world, that is to
say, a most excellent and well ordained composition, but the greatest confusion
that could be imagined. Seeing then that the heavens in their motions, the
stars in their conjunctions, the causes in their order, even unto the last,
may encounter together: so those things which wholly de^d of them, may be red^
(...) the same estate. (...) is a maxim in Physics, that the matter and the
Agent have such power after the death, and destruction of the creature, as they
had during his life: what then can hinder it but by the position of the same
causes, and the same circumstances of time concurring, the same effect may be
repaired?

Moreover, the thing which is no more, is no farther from being then that which
has not been; and there is no impossibility but that which has had no being,
may come to light; neither is there any repugnancy but that which has been once
living, may come again to life; yea, and who knows whether that which is now,
has not been often heretofore? I should believe it, if I did give credit to
the eternity of the world. As for the similitude of clay, which the Object or
(not understanding me) does press so strongly, it is very fit in this matter:
for the workman which has made a man, and then has wrought it to make a
horse, and then confounded it to make an ape, and in the end an Eagle; may if
he please, return and make the same man which he had made first; and having
undone it, may make a horse, and so consequently one after an other in
infinitum, not that he can make them all four subsisting at one time, therein
the Obiector fights with his shadow, and not with my saying.

And to demonstrate the power of Nature turning about her circle, and returning
back to the point where she had begun, and passing over all the circumference
of the circle, to repair that in place and time which she had dissolved; she
would leave for an earnest penny, the Phoenix, the only bird of his kind, which
is seen in Arabia; and which the Egyptians in their Hierogliphicall letters
painted, to describe by his long continuance, the immortality of the soul.
This goodly bird after many ages past, to renew himself, casts himself upon
a pile of sticks laid together, the which he does so beat with his wings,
and with the help of the Sun, which hangs perpedicularly over him, as it takes
fire, and consumes the body: out of which springs a little worm, and of that a
little bird; which being covered with feathers, in the end flies away, and
becomes the same Phoenix. You will question the truth hereof, if the same Nature
did not as much or more in the silke-worme, whose egg is no bigger then a
grain of millet; it discouers a little woolly worm, the which without dying
transformes it self into a moth, and that changes into a fly which has
scales, and this becomes a butterfly, which beating it self continually lays
eggs; of these eggs come little worms, and so consequently by an infinite
circulation.

Wherefore these diverse changes and forms happening in our bodies, should not
amaze us, but rather assure us, that having bin carried far about, they shall
return to their first estate, seeing that their walks and this Universe have
their limits and bounds, and seeing (by the testimony of the wise Ecc. 3. 15.
man) that which has been is now, and that which is to come has also been:
God calling back that which has past, that is to say as the Divines expound
it, that God by his administration, makes the Creatures succeeding one an
other, return in their order, as if they went about a wheel; which kind of
speech is taken from the celestial Spheres which govern the seasons,
signifying that those things which happen by time, are wheeled about with the
revolution of time, which contains them. These are the words of no vulgar
Divines, whereby we may see how much they yield to this opinion.

The end of the first Book.
The Second Book.
The first Argument taken from the Immortality of the soul.
That which is free from Death in the principal part, should not fear it.

Man in his soul (his principal part) is freed frem death,

Therefore he should not fear it.

IF all men could understand without doubting, and persuade themselves without
wavering, that their souls at the departure from their bodies are happily
immortal, there is not any one, without contradiction, but would go,
cheerfully and resolutely unto death, considering the miseries of this life,
and the heavy burden of the body; for it is the sepulcher of the soul, as
Plato said. The soul is a plant transported from heaven into a strange soil,
into a body of earth, where it sighs, pines away, and desires to depart.

The greatest thing in the world (says Periander) is contained in a little
space: Socrates maintained, that the true man was that within, which is lodged
in the body as in an Inn. S. Bernard exhorts the body, to know it, and to
entreat his guest which is the soul) well: The which Ser. 6. ae. Aduent.
Anaxarchus did apprehend, who being beaten in a mortar, did cry out
courageously to the tyrant Nicocreon, Beat beat, O hangman, the flesh and
boanes of Anaxarachus* So M. Laeuius seeing Galba a great Orator with a
deformed Erasm. Apoth.
body, said, That great spirit dwells in a poor cottage. But S. Paul shows it
better then all these; If this earthly lodging be destroyed, if this body
return to ashes, 2. Cor. 5.
we have a mansion with God. And the body is the clothing of the soul, the
which Esop objected to one who abused the beauty of his body: He are my
friend, said he, thou have Max. ser. 44.
a fair garment: but thou put it off ill. Man is a caualier his body is
the horse, the spirit is the rider: if the horse be lame, blind orresty, says
one, the rider is not in fault. The body is a ship, the spirit the Pilot, the
ship suffers wrack, but the Pilote saues himself by swimming, or upon some
boarde, the body dies, the soul saues it self upon the table of faith and
repentance. The body is a Lantern, the soul the Candle; if the glass be
clear and transparent, the light is the greater: so by the disposition of the
body, the soul is known more or less. Man is a bird shut up in the shell of
the egg, expecting until the shell break of it self that he may come forth;
so does, the soul that the body my be broken, to the end she may fly to
heaven.

There are three places assigned to man, the first is the matrix, the second is
this world, and the third is heaven; the first is short, the second a little
longer, and the third is without end: In the first he cries at the coming
forth, for that he is ignorant of the goodly spectacle of the world which God
(as a table covered with all sorts of meat in a great Hall) has prepared for
him: In the second, he apprehends and desperately fears his departure, for
that he knows not this third heaven, the seat of Jesus Christ, of the
Angels, and of the blessed, which is prepared for him, infinitely more
excellent then this base earth; where he shall remain everlastingly, and
perfectly happy. And these are the lively similitudes with many other likewise,
which are continually in the mouths and writings of such as treat profoundly
thereof; whereby man may see that he has no subject to fear death, seeing
that by it his soul, his principal part, and by which he is man, receives so
great a benifit: And what shall it be when the holy Ghost shall assure his
Spirit, that his body being laid in the ground, as in a sacred pawn, shall be
restored to him immortal, in the great and last day?

But attending this incomparable good, let us prove this immortality byreason;
and first of all: The soul reuiues, and fortifies it self in the greatest
agonies of death. So Testators witness, that they are sound in mind, though
very sick in body: so the disposition of a man at the point of death is of
more weight, for that he has a better conscience, and a more lively feeling
of his soul. And Hippocrates gives advice Lib. 1. de prognost.
to observe, if in diseases there appear nothing that is Divine: meaning that
we should observe the sighs, and the gestures of the sick patient; for if
they be unaccustomed of heaven, or of God, it is a sign that the soul begins
to discover it self, seeing it thinks of heaven her proper mansion. So Cyrus
(being in the bed of death) caused his children to approach unto him; to whom
he gave Xenoph. lib. 8.
goodly admonitions; but among others he told them, that he could never be
persuaded, that the soul lying in the body did remain after the death of the
mortal body, as if he would say, that until then he had studied to assure
himself, but now he did not doubt of it. Nay, we shall sometimes see ignorant
Countrymen, discourse exceeding well at the point of death; as we read of a
certain labourer altogether unlearned, being nee^e unto his death, had
recommended his health, his wife and children, with as great Rethorike as
Cicero could have used discoursing before the Senate.

This reason was taken as a strong defense against death, by the King of
Arr^gon, and ^anorm. l 4. de Alphons.
represented by Seneca to all that are fearful in death, saying, This day
which thou fear so much, as the last, is the birth day of eternity.

The 2. is taken from religion, and from the homage which man does owe unto God
for the immortality of his soul; not in one Country but in all; not in one
age, but for ever; not in one person, but generally in all by some adoration,
prayer, of sacrifice, in what fashion soever, man will sooner forget his King,
his father, yea himself, then his God; yet he makes no doubt but there is a
King, he sees him, he knows him, he honors him: and that he has a father, of
whom he holds his life, and with whom he does converse daily, and whom he is
bound to love; finally, he tries himself, grows conceited, and many times
abuses himself with the great love of himself; and yet he holds himself
more bound to God, then to all these: he will not fear to displease them, if
he can no otherwise please God; and will hold for Maxims, That it is beter to
obey God then men: that he which does not renounce father or mother for the
love of God, is not worthy of him: he that does not renounce himself, and
take up the Cross of affliction for the service of God, deserves to be
renounced of him. The uncivil wars which have swallowed up so many men in
Christendom, within these 50. years, had no other pretexts then these
sentences; and they had no other foundation then the conscience of the soul,
that immortal seal, which God did grave in the soul when he did infuse it
into the body of man, as Chrysostom says. Let us observe it in some examples,
but great in every respect. Alexander the Great, being incensed for that the
Jews had denied him succors, marched with his Army to ruin them, if the high
Priest Iaddus with his ornaments, and his holy troop, had not gone out to
meet with Alexander: Who when he saw the high Priest, he admired him, and fell
down at his feet; whereat his people were amazed, and troubled, and his most
confident Parmenio came unto him: How comes it, says he, since that you
worship a man, you whom althe earth is ready to acknowledge for a God? It is
not he (answered Alexander) but God in him, whom I worship, who appeared to me
in vision in the like habit in Macedon. Whence came this sudden
forgetfulness of his own revenge, and from whence this acknowledgement to the
Immortal? but from an immortal soul. As Antiochus held Jerusalem besieged,
the feast of Tabernacles drew near, and the Jews being resolved to celebrate
it, they sent an Embassage unto him, to demand a truce for seven days, that
they might attend the holy worship of their great God. The soul of this great
King being touched with religion, not only yielded to their demand, but also he
himself turned to this homage, caused oxen with gilded horns to be conducted
to the City gates, with great store of Indense, and sweet smells to be
sacrificed. In which action whether should we admire most, either the patience
of this great King, willingly and devoutly hindering his ready victory? Or the
forgetfulness of himself, suffering those sacrifices that he knew to be
undertaken against his honor, his fortime, and his life?

And what does not this confused apprehension of God work in the immortal
spirit of man? Cybels Priests will geld themselves, thinking to please their
goddess; the Athenian Priests will drink Hemlocke to live chastely; the
Virgins will lie upon certain leaves fit to mortify their lusts; and Cicero
will cry out to countenance the^, that they must come chastely to the gods:
Yea, Agam^mnon will sacrifice his daughter Iphigenia to pacific Diana: Adrian
in Egypt will sacrifice his Mignion Axtinons: Vialerian will use the
superstitious custom to offer up children; the Hetrusci had that institution
in their Country; and the ancient Gauls in Prouence, in Gaguin. lib. 19.
hist. of France.
the City of Arles, had two pillars erected, and thereupon an altar of stone,
to offer human sacrifices.

The third is taken from the wise ordinance of nature, which in many millions
of things has made nothing in vain; nothing that wauers or leanes sometimes
of this side, sometimes on that, as Erasistratus said: how then should it be in
man, her masterpiece, in the soul the principal part? Has she planted a
vehement desire of immortality, the chief point of her excellency? has she
given her a taste in this miserable life, to leave her altered for ever?

The fourth is from the continual action of the soul which never takes rest
day nor night, like unto the Sun: sleep does not shut her eyes as it does the
bodies, neither by consequence, death. Consider it, when as the body is in a
found sleep without motion, not in the beginning of his rest, when as the
vapors of his disgestion fuming up into the brain, trouble it; but after
midnight, and especially at the point of day: Then when the soul her
faculties holds free,
From serving bodily variety;
Then when alone, and dead, to life (in fort)
Saved from days waves, she enters nights calm port.


It is then, that being raised above time, she reads in future (which is
present: to her) the things which God is ready to do. So Asti^ges last King of
the Medes, in his dream saw the stock of a Vi^e coming out of his daughters
belly, which covered all Asia with her branches. The Interpreters being
consulted with, they answered, that his daughter should have a son, which
should enjoy all Asia, and dispossess him of his Kingdom: the event failed
not, notwithstanding all the opposition that Astiages could make. Tertullian
Tertul. lib. de anima. (...) de somno.
reports, that the daughter of Polycrates dreamed, that her father raised up on
high, was washed by Jupiter, and anointed by the Sun: The event expounded her
dream soon after, for that Polycrates being hanged, the rain washed him, and
the Sun m^ing his gr^ase anointed him.

But who is ignorant of Joseph's dream of his future greatness? of Pharaohs:
touching the fertility and famine which should follow in Egypt? of Daniel
touching the four Monarchies of the world: of ^ilats wise upon the false
accusation of Jesus Christ the just, and of infinite others; yea, and of our
selves, if we have observed them: For what is he, says Tertullian, so void
Idem.
of humanity, that has not sometimes felt in himself some faithful vision?

Thus the Eternal does unto the good, to assure them of the immortal action of
their souls; and to the wicked, to terrify them with his eternal judgment,
send such dreams of future things, to amaze or assure according to his good
pleasure. So he spoke by his Prophet, Your sons and your daughters I^el.
(...):
shall prophecy, your young men shall see visions, and your old men shall
dream dreams. Let us conclude with Tertullian, That seeing Tert. de resur.
carnis.
sleep the image of death cannot seize upon the soul, that the soul being
always lively and active, can not fall in Veritatem mortis, into the verity of
death.

The fifth. Man in this life is more miserable then any of the creatures, and
more capable of felicity, then any of them, they being all made for him, who
never here upon earth attaines unto his sovereign good, which he most
desires, as Aristotle and Theophrastus have acknowledged, and as every man is
a good witness in himself. Who will not then think but his true place is in
heaven, and in it his sovereign good? And what part of man can fly thither
but his immortal soul, which in a moment, not parting out of the body,
transports it self thither in Idea? Tully in his Tusuculans, and others.

The sixth complaint of Theophrastus (of nature as of a stepmother) seems
most just, to have given a long life to no end, to certain creatures; and to
have denied it unto man, who might thereby have attained unto wisdom, the
greatest good in this world, if the soul dyed with the body; for then only we
begin to be wise when we dye, and many times were prevented by death: But
nature has done nothing but most wisely; and therefore she has satisfied
this complaint another way.

The seventh is drawn from man's conscience, which being good makes Innocence
to lift up her head by the feeling of another life; and to look down for an
offense by the apprehension of a future judgment.

There is no light so clear, nor testimony so glorious, as when truth shines
in the spirit, and the spirit is seen in truth, says Saint Bernard. In Cant.
sermon. 85.
A good conscience is stronger then a brazen wall, said Horace. Let him speak
boldly and confidently for himself, that has not offended, says Plautus; and
with the shaking of his chinne, retort Hic murus aheneus esto nihil conscire
sibi, nulla palles cere culpa.
the false reports of a bad fame as Ovid speaks. This did embolde^ innocent
Susanna against the two old men; choosing rather to dye then to offend God: This
made Joseph rather to leave his robe with his mistress, then his heart.

Finally, it is that which in the midst of many deaths, gave resolution unto
Cato, Phocion, and many other heathen: as to Philip King of Macedon, who being
animated by some to take revenge of such as spoke dishonorably of him; O no,
said he, I will make them all liars in doing well.

On the other side, there is nothing that does more terrify and torment then a
bad conscience. Let the most resolute wretch that is, come, and I will make him
confess in some sort howsoever; his crime committed in secret, in the night,
without witnesses, and without any accuser; yea although he had his pardon, or
were acquit before men, or were so advanced as he were not justifiable before
any man: yet he must needs confess that he is inwardly troubled, and
furiously tormented: the Swallows by their importune noise will publish the
parricide attempted by a cauterized conscience, as has happened in old time: Or
imaginary flies, will buzze continually in the ears of the servant that has
killed his master, until the fact be revealed. Whence is the spring of this
lively feeling in the soul, but from the apprehension of immortal pain? Gods
will being that for the love of justice, judgment should rather go against the
life of the body, then that which is hidden should not come to light.

Objection.
Counsel given by favor, upon weak conjectures, does rather shake then
support a right.

Such are these reasons.

THE steps of such as bring good tidings are pleasing and welcome; and they
that bring bad, distasteful and rejected: So the 400. Prophets which promised
victory unto Achab against (...). Ki. c. 22.
Ramoth of Gilead were welcome; but only Miche^s, who pronounced the contrary
was put in prison: and yet they were false, and this true. Let us beware of the
like, least that favor and grace deceive us in this matter. Let us take the
balance of equity, and weigh the reasons propounded; if they be good they will
weigh down whatsoever shallbe opposed; and if they be current, they will
endure the touch: let us then try the first.

Huart, a great Philosopher of Spain, maintains that the understanding has
his beginning, his increase, and his constitution, and then his declining, like
unto a man; (he means his body, for the understanding is the most excellent
part of man) and like other Creatures, and plants: And for this cause, he that
will learn at what age hi^ understanding is most strong and vigorous, let him
know that it is from 33. unto fifty, at what time the gravest Authors should be
made, if during their lives they have had contrary opinions: He that will write
books should compose them at this age, neither before, or after; if he will
not retract or alter them.

Hitherto Huart, which experience does confirm; for we see that as a man does
advance in age, he grows in wisdom; and Jesus himself made true man,
advanced in wisdom and stature. Contrariwise, age declining, the spirit
decaies in memory, in quickness, in understanding; so as man being very old,
he becomes twice a child, fumbling with his tongue, and doting in mind. As for
that the Testators say, that they are sound in mind, it is to show that
neither age nor sickness has as yet made them lose their spirits; and
therefore it is a true sign of their decay, concluding contrary to the
intention of the Author.

And whereas the labourer spoke so divinely, it did not proceed from the
neerenesse of death, but from the alteration of the temperature of his brain,
grown whot in the first degree by the force of his infirmity: so some women
have prophesied and spoke Latin, yet never learned it, by the same reason of
the temperature required, and yet they die not suddenly in this estate.

To the 2. Religion proceeds partly from nature, partly from institution; from
nature who to rule all Creatures, Prim^s in orb Deos fecit timor.
and to make them follow the train of his order, graves in them al a certain
terror and indistinct apprehension; The Creatures fear man, and by this fear
are contained in their duties: man fears a hidden superiority, and maintains
himself in society, and many times he fears he knows not what, nor
wherefore; and therefore it happens that women who are commonly more fearful,
are more religious. Yea they report of certain brute beasts which adore the
deity as Elephants; yet they do not say that their souls are immortal. From
institution, for as vessels do long retain the sent of their first liquor
wherewith they are seasoned, so children maintain unto the end the religion
wherein they are bred and brought up, although it were the most fantastic and
strange in the world: yea, if in stead of saving it should damme them; as we
may see, if we will open our eyes, in these times so fertile in religions.

To the 3. If the soul be mortal, it follows not that nature has made any
thing in vain; if she has hope or fear to be immortal, it is to encourage
it to virtue, that is to say, to the preservation of that goodly order, and to
terrify it from the infraction thereof, if she dies, her alteration of the
immortality dries away. Nature has also given unto the Bat a desire to see the
light of the Sun, and yet this desire never takes effect. Finally, every
creature flies death, and desires life, not for a time but for ever; and by
consequent, in their kind desire to be immortal, and yet they attain not to
it.

To the 4. The heart beats continually and is immortal; Dogs sleeping dream,
and are mortal; therefore the unquiet and incessant action of the soul, can
be no certain sign of her immortality.

To the Fifth. John de Seres, almost throughout the whole course of his history
of France will answer, That man finds no misery but what he seeks The
philosophers yea Divines will say, that felicity proportionable unto human
nature, consists in an upright disposition of his will, to carry himself
according to the reason that is in him, toward all things that shall present
themselves, to make his profit of al things, not to trouble himself with any
thing that can happen in this world, and to nourish the seeds of virtue which
are sown in his mind.

To the Sixth, Solon will answer, that it is a hard matter to please all men:
some complain of the shortness of life; if we observe it, these are such as
have prodigally consumed the^selus at cards and dice, and have not found it
but toolate.

Others complain of the length, and cut it off before their time: But Seneca
wiser then either, well say, that we must not be careful to live Epist. 94.
long, but enough; to live long is a work depending of destiny, to live
enough is of the mind.

The life is long if it be full, and it is full when the spirit affects her
good, and tranfers her power to her self. O excellent speech, he that has
ears let him hear. Let us proceed; certain creatures live longer then man, and
which? Ravens, Stags, the Phoenix. I doubt it much: as for the Phoenix, it is a
fabulous thing; for Stags, we know not any thing but by a writing which was
found about a Stags neck, Caesar gave me this: if it were the first Caesar, it
is long since, but it might be some other, whilst that the Emperors reigned
in France, and that is not long. As for the Raven a most importune and
unfortunate bird, who has tried it? But admit this were true, there were but
two or three excepted out of the general rule of nature; which is, that man
her chief work lives longer then any other creature; and it is her pleasure
to except from the general, as we see else where: ceasee then to blame that
which you should commend and admire To the Seventh and last, simbolizing much
with the second, you must receive the same answer. And moreover there is not
found any generous instinct in the soul of man, which appears not as great in
brute beasts, for the preservation and defense of their young.

As for the confession (pretended so easy) of an offense committed, the
diverse kinds of tortures invented to wrest it out in justice, belie it: but
you will say they are inwardly tormented; how know you that, who can see
nothing but the exterior part?

Answer: The doctrine of the human soul depends of a superior knowledge,
that is, of the Metaphisicke, whereof the rule is the Canon of the old and new
Testament: man must not presume to think he can fully comprehend it; her
perfect intelligence is reserved for us exclusinely for ever, when we shall
behold it in heaven in the glass of the Trinity and divine unity: here this
is an Article of our faith, understood in the resurrection of the flesh and
life eternal. When there is any question of faith, reason must be silent and
yield; and therefore S. Bernard confesses that In the dedic. of the Temple
Homily. 5.
when he thinks of the estate of the foul, he thinks to see two things in it
in a manner contrary: if he beholds it with his human discourse, as she is
in her self, and of her self, he can say nothing more certain but that she is
reduced to nothing etc.

Next, it was affirmed that man was very credulous to ^uill, and incredulous
to good: suspirion turns always cun ningly to the worst part, said an
Ancient; he swallows down slanders and impostures sweetly, and distrusts
honest and virtuous things; such is his misery. If he think that the
immortality of the soul cannot be grownded sollidly upon any human
argument, let him also think that there cannot instance be given to the
contrary, which is not easily overthrown, so as he bring a spirit that is
tractable and not preiudicate. And above all, that he do not persuade
himself that he may see it or feel it, as the smoke or heat going out of
the fire, so the soul going out of the body; for it is a spirit, and
therefore not possible to be comprehended but by reason and understanding,
which are spiritual operations, but let us answer him to every point.

It seems the Obiector takes an ill presage of the immortallitie of the soul;
for that she is favorable: as if it were not the nature of man (if he be not
brutish) to court those things which are worthy and excellent, as the soul of
man is above all the world. All men applaude men in great authority; we esteem
precious things, as siluergold Pearl: what a sot or rather a madd man is he,
that will have a concoit that the thing is not excellent, because it is
respected? As for the 400. Prophets, they spoke unto the King according to
human sense, and were found false; Micheas according to the word of God
revealed unto him, and it was true. The Obiector reasons according to carnal
sense, and he shall be taxed with falsehoode; We speak according to the spirit
of God in his holy writ, and we shall be found true. He desires in the end (or
makes a show to desire it) that we should balance our reasons. I am content,
and I protest it will be to his confusion; for the Father of light will not
suffer Satan the father of lies to triumph over the truth. For the first
instance then we say, that Huart does not mean the soul by the under
standing, but the intellectual spirits, whereof she has need to argue and to
understand the things of this world, and to write worthily; and these
intellectual spirits holding of the vital body, it is not strange if they be
more vigourous according to the estate of the body; and contrariewise if they
perish, when the body perishes: for although they be of a celestial
substance, exceeding wh^t, exceeding light, and most substantial, that they
may be more ready to serve the soul, yet are they mortal: but the soul in
her substance receives no increase nor diminution) since the moment of her
creation, and infusion into the body; at all times, yea in all men she is
equally perfect, as complete in the Idiot as in the learned, in the coward as
the courageous: these are the diverse instruments of the body, whereof she
makes use, which make her diverse in her effects; and these instrument (...)
diverse, for that they are diversely mixed of the four first humors. Moreover
this Spanish Philosopher defines the immortality of the soul against Gallen,
which he calls a substantial act and form of a human body. Cap. 7. of his
Examen of spirits: Here the impostor: does impertinently confound mortal
spirits with the immorall spirit: and our reason grownded upon this, that the
soul (the body dying) thinks of the delightful places in heaven, and
foretelles things to come with much certitude, according to the opinion of
Tully and our own.

To the Second. This general submission of all menin, all places, and at times
under a powerful Majesty, shows the natural bond which man has to do his
homage by reason of the immortality of his soul; and that he does rather
worship, vain, ridiculous and abominable things, then none at all: does not
deface this bond, but confirms it more; yet showing, that he wanders in the
darkness of this world, and in steed of taking the way of the East to go unto
heaven, if he be not guided and directed from above, he takes the contrary
way, and wanders far: The which we yield; but it is a terror (answers he) to
keep man in his duty: it is true, and therefore; religion is not in vain,
for without it, for one disorder man would commit ten thousand; it proceeds,
say you from nature and institution. I answer, it is from nature only that she
takes her beginning; education does manure it and better it; but what do you
understand by nature? For the Philosophers have been accustomed to signify 4.
distinct things by the same name, which yet symbolize together; the lowest is
the temperature of the 4. humors in the body of man: The 2. is the soul which
gives motion unto the body; The 3. is the ordinance and rule which God has
established in the world: The 4. is God himself, called by some in that regard
nature naturant. If the Obiector means that fear and religion proceed only
from the temperature of the 4. humors in the body of man, he is condemned of
falsehood and contradiction by his own saying, in that he attributes fear to
other creatures, the which he knower differ from man, in the same temperature
and in truth, it is in the soul that the reverence of the De^ie, that is, of
God, is graue^, it comes from this universal rul^ and whereas he would
infer that in women great fear causes great religion, he must understand
that religion in man has conscience for her chief, foundation, which applies
the natural apprehension of a superiority to an acknowledgment there of; and
for accessories she has contemplation in the superior part, and fear in the
lower. As for the principal foundation, it is common to men and women; the two
others are diverse: Contemplation is greater in men, and fear in women.
Contemplation does stir up the will to the service of God by two
considerations; the one is of the divine power and bounty, to have had will and
power to give life, when as we dreamt not of it; to have drawn us out of
endless dangers, and to have continued the course of his graces,
notwithstanding our ingratitude. The other consideration is, from the
baseness, and weakness of man, which makes him to feel his imperfections,
and to repair unto the fountain of all good: fear does stir up to
humility, to contrition of heart, to confession of mouth, and to satisfaction
by works. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, says the wise
man. Man then being raised a degree higher then woman in contemplation, if he
does use his knowledge rightly, submitting himself wholly to God, he shall be
much more zealous to his service, as it happened to S. John the Disciple which
Jesus Christ loved above the rest: but for that they are often puffed up they
abuse it, for pride is a spiritual poison which spoils all, as it happened to
Beelzebub; and therefore most of our learned men are not so religious as women
and ignorant people, who being governed by a moderat contemplation, do husband
with all humility their moderate knowledge of God; and the affection in this
feminine sex is commonly more zealous then in the other.

Finally, by the reverence which is stronger in him, this sex fears to offend
God, and to make the holy Ghost heavy, by whom he is sealed until the day of
redemption, as S. Paul speaks: it is not fear only then that begets
religion, for then Dear, Conies, and other fearful Creatures should be more
religious.

Moreover, it is no general rule that women are more religious, if it be not
at this time, which is as barren in devout men, as it is fertile in many
religions: for we shall find as many men recorded for Martyrs as women; and
in the Catalogue of the Apostles, the first Architects of the Christian
Churches, we shall not find the name of any women: they are not suffered to
speak in the Church. And if the Elephant does therein seem to imitate man,
they are but shows and gesticulations, having no devotion in the heart, which
is the essence of religion: and what he does, is by the instinct of his own
temper, which approaches near unto that of man; And what does Aelian and
others report so memorable of him, but that he turns up his s^out toward the
Sun and Moon, as if he did worship them? and does not the flower called
Heliotropium more? it being weighty, turns round about lightly as the Sun
goes.

To the 3. The impostor says, that the soul is kindled with a desire of
immortality, to the end it may be stirred up to vortue: it is well spoken, for
true virtue in this world, is the sole and true good of man, which makes him
worthy of the heavenly beatitude, which lays hold of a virtuous soul; but
this virtue without this immortality is a poison to man, keeping him from
running headlong to all carnal and vicious pleasures, so as they be
delightful; and as many Philosophers and men of God, as shall cry out against
the riots of the flesh, they are so many tormenters: but the soul is immortal,
and virtue is or should be requested: and therefore one said long ago, That a
man were better to cast himself headlong into the sea, then to be tyrannized
by vice; And on the other side Plaustus will say, that there is no price so
excellent as virtue, that it marches before al things; liberty, health, life,
goods, kinsfolk, country, and children are defended and maintained by it: And
Claudian sings, Ex (...) mortalia despicit arce.
that from a high Tower she laughes at mortal things, for that she is certain
of her immortality.

Finally, she is rightly painted treading death under her Cur tibi mors
premitur? ^sciosola mori.
feet, for she alone swims, and is assured to escape spoil and shipwreck, as
the Philosopher Stilpon did fitly teach King Demetrius, who enquiring of him if
he had lost nothing in the wars, No, said he, for that virtue which I esteem
above all thing, is not subject to pillage. But beasts, replies he, fly death
also. Answer. To speak properly beasts fly not from death, for they are
wholly ignorant what it is: they will see the knife made sharp to cut their
throats and not be moved; but being endued with the sense of feeling as with
the other senses, they will cry and struggle when they feel a pricking, or
cutting, or any other pain.

Some beasts of pleasure, some birds for delight, are cunningly taken by men,
to be nourished daintily; the which in their taking will torment themselves
more, then if they had the stroke of death.

To the 4. he says, that the heart, (let us add to help him) milles, clockes,
and such like, are in continual action, which notwithstanding cease in the end
of their motion: but let us answer, that there is difference betwixt a
natural action or one that is artificially forced, and that which flows
freely and voluntarily without intermission or rest; such as is the action of
the soul in her thoughts and desires, which we maintain to be a true sign
of her immortality: and as for that which we did allege of her continual
Vigilance, whilst the body sleeps, when as by assured dreams she falls
upon the time to come, he cannot reply any thing to this but that dogs dream.
I deny it: Their barking and the other actions they do sleeping, as well as
waking, proceed from a certain temperature, into which they fall; as in our
selves in the brutall part, by the gathering together of certain gross humors
about the heart, being pressed, we are forced to cry out.

The objection to the 5. is his confirmation; for if man abused by his
imagination, seeking the good encounters that which is bad, he is twice
miserable in his dessignes and in his events. True it is, man is subject to so
many miseries in this life, as at every step he meets with a thousand; if he
thinks to have found any pleasure, it is suddenly drowned with a flood of
tears: this did the Comedian Plautus understand, saying, that man's age is so
composed, In Amphi.
as it has pleased the gods, that pleasure should have care for companion;
yea, if any good happens, presently some discommodity follows in greater
abundance: And Ovid said, it was a virtue to abstain from a smiling pleasure:
Horace, he bids chase away pleasure, it cost too dear.

And this made Lucretius though an Epicure, to blame men who were too greedy of
this life, in these words: What is there here, (O man) of such delight,
Whose want so ruthlesse seems in her despite?
Thou fear (O fool,) and shak'st at thought of death,
That through al tempest brings where blows no breath.


Our adversary goes on, and presumes that man may live happily in this world if
he will.

Answer: Without doubt he would, for no man takes counsel, if he shall be
happy, he never troubles himself to choose felicity, but for the means to
attain unto it, as Aristotle says: he never desires Lib, 3. Ethic. c. 2. and
3.
any hurt but under a show of good, for that goodness is the proper object of
the will, the devil chooses our evil for his own good, holding it a great
benefit un to him if many perish Man then by this desires to be happy if he
may, (by the discourse of the adversary) how is it possible that no man in the
world, neither has nor shall be truly happy by his own faculties? The true
felicity of man is to be perfectly complete, by the aggregation of all sorts of
happiness; but there was never any such seen, neither shall there be in that
estate; he shall always want more good things then he does enjoy, as the earth
does not bear all sorts of fruits, nor man enjoy all manner of good; if he
abound in some gifts of the mind, he is defective it others: gifts are diverse,
as the Apostle teaches, 1. Cor. 12. yea contrary one unto another, as a great
judgment to a great memory, and both these to a great imagination. Moreover,
if he have a viuacity of spirit, he has a debility of body; if he be
fortunate to the good of this world, he is barren of heavenly graces so it has
pleased God to entertain humane society, not to make man happy in all points
Nemo est ab omni pa^? beatus.
as Horace has said.

Now if to this defect of good things, we make an addition of an infinite
number of badde which cross him, what shall become of this poor man? But he
will reply with the Stoics, that virtue may so frame and dispose the soul of
man, as he will not be troubled at any thing that shall happen unto him, but
will apply all to his own good.

Answer. This is not so easy to be spoken, but it is as hard to be performed.
If virtue were not difficult to learn, to what end does S. Augustine speak of
so many Schoolemasters, so much severity, rods, whips, and so much discipline?
and why does the holy Scripture say, that we must often whip the well-beloued
child, lest he should become stubborn? and then it will be hard, yea,
impossible to tame him.

And farther, what signify those notable punishments invented by our Elders,
the Scaffolds, gibbets, strapados, wheels, fires, and others, but that such
severity is necessary, to suppress the sury of man to vice?

Finally, there is nothing so difficult as virtue, says Aristotle. 2, Ethi. e.
3
But that which is worst of all, when we think after a thousand crosses to
have attained to this throne of virtue, what a combat do we feel in our
selves, seeking to put it in execution? now we will, and instantly we will
not the same thing. What a monster is this, says S. Augustine, and whence
comes it? Consess. l. 8. c. 9
If the spirit commands the body, it presently obeyes: but if he commands
himself, he finds nothing but resistance: and in the chapter following, I had
disposed my self, says he, after a good resolution to serve my God and Lord;
it was I that would, and I that would not: I neither had an absolute will, nor a
full power to resist; wherefore I had a battle within me, and was divided
within my self, and this division happened in despite of me. Hitherto S.
Augustine: that good man so fashioned to virtue, confesses to be in a
continual war, and where there is war there is no peace nor rest.

Moreover we must not wonder at these rodomontadoes of the Stoics; they have
spoken others more strange, but more unsavory. A wise man, says Seneca, is
always joyful, active, quiet, and assured Epist. 59.
as a rock; and living equal to the gods. Cicero playing the Stoicke, A happy
life, says he, subsisteth by the 2. De nature. deor.
virtues, like unto that of the gods, and yielding in nothing unto them but in
the immortality, which is of no moment to live will. But behold the fullness of
folly: There is something, says Seneca, Epist. 53.
wherein a wise man surpasses God; he is wise by the benefit of nature, not by
his own: a strange case, to have the imbecility of man, compared with the
assurance of God. So Crysippus both impudently and flatteringly, compared Dion
of Syracusa to Jupiter his sovereign God, and maintained that he was not
inferior unto him, neither in knowledge nor in virtue.

These are goodly fantasies, or rather frenzies, I will advise such people not
to take Elleborum, nor to purge, or never to awake out of their doting dreams:
for being in health or awake, they shall find themselves naked and miserable;
like unto the mad page, who thought himself to be the greatest Emperor in the
world, and that all Kings were his vassalls, and did him hommage: but being
cured, he found himself to be only but a poor Page, and bound the next day to
serve him whom he would not have accepted (being sick) for his lacquay.

In the sixth objection he auerres, that Solon has determined how hard it was
to please all.

I answer. That Solons meaning was to speak of man to man, whereas the
defective work is often censured by a weak brain: but of God it is
otherwise, his work is so excellent, as there is not any thing but is
admirably commendable, and not to be censured in any point, but by fools; And
if man had not in his soul another life, then this terrestrial, the most
resined brains would be to seek, for that man the most excellent of Creatures,
is of no more continuance; but he doubts of this proposition. He doubts of
that which all the world hold for certain: if the Phoenix in his first
breeding, and in his sole Indiuiduum be strange, yet it follows not but that
there may be such a bird, most rare, and very long lived. Moreover, the Stagge
found in the Forest of Senlis, during the reign of Charles 6. whereof Belle
forest makes mention: Admit we should take the computation, from the time
that the Emperors reig ned in France, yet should we find five hundred years,
which is the age they give unto a Stagge. As for the Ralien, Virgil assigns
him Alipicem Cervum ter vincit Corvus.
much more age. He thinks he has well satisfied when he says, that it is
natures sport to make exception in general rules: For as true as it is in
matters indifferent, of small donse quence, and without prejudice to the
creature that is found excepted from the generality; so is it as false in
matters of great consequence, and which turn to great harm.

I will then that the divine providence be observed, sporting it self to make
Laws, and to give exemptions, that all beasts have the ends of their hair
bending toward the tail, and that the Origes is exempt, having it toward the
head: that all beasts can move their ears, and not man: that whatsoever flies
has feathers, but the Batte has none. Finally, that all things in the world
are in perpetual motion, the earth not.

But what does this import? But for the last instance, which God would have for
the great good of the earth: She should rest firm still in her fixed fight,
Not to her left hand stirring, nor her right.


As it is in the 104. Psalm. But man if he have nothing but this life, he
has need of a very long life: Who shall see and judge of this goodly frame,
this goodly order of the world, but man the goodliest workmanship of nature?
and how can he do it but by along life? he does not equal nor exceed the
long continuance of the celestial motions, before they be returned to their
first point; motions which give life to every thing by their diverse course^.
How can he in his soul get wisdom, so necessary for the conduct of life,
seeing that use engenders it, and memory brings it forth, as Afranius says, if
by a number of years he gets not the use and experience of so many affairs
inuolued in this world? Also how can he preserve his bodily heath, or restore
it being decayed, if he have not the knowledge of Physic, seeing it is a
long art, and life is short? says Hippocrates.

Lastly, he lightly passes over the last and strongest reason of conscience,
for that I assure my self his conscience did belly, his pen; and therefore he
will entertain us with a certain instinct of the unreasonable creatures,
which he co^cludes in a manner to be Conscience.

Answer. Creatures without reason and without teaching, are skillful from their
first being, in that which is profitable unto them, to affect it, seek it, and
find it; and to abhor and fly from that which is hurtful: and in that they
are so courageous to defend their young, proceeds from the blood of the
arteries, moved with the hearing or sight of their adversaries, which they do
naturally apprehend: for then the blood being moved, it runs luddainly to the
heart, and does quicken the power of choler, and thrust him on to resist and
revenge: all which proceeds from the temper of the beast. But conscience is a
divine virtue engraven in the soul (which S. Paul calls the spirit of
understanding, Ephesians. 3.) which applies the knowledge of our spirit to the
work, witnessing To. 1. quaest, 79. art. 13.
for us, or against us, of that which we know we have done, or not done;
whereof grows the proverb, That a man's conscience serves for a thousand
witnesses: she withholds us, or thrusts us on, we as shall think the thing fit
to be done, or not. Finally, she does excuse us or accuse us, as we shall
judge to have done well or ill: This quality, or rather act, is not found but
in a reasonable soul, and is a true sign of her immortality, and of an other
life, where she is to give an accoumpt of all her actions. And although that
in a wicked and depraved man, this inward and immortal Esaias 66. Marc. 9.
worm bo so deeply hidden; as they must sometimes have outward tortures to
draw it out; yet this does not argue but he has it inwardly, and that in the
end it will appear in despite of him, when the apprehension of an ighominious
punishment shall cease a little. Yea most men confess, before they come to the
torture; and therefore what the Obiector has opposed does nothing infringe our
reason.

The 2. Argument taken from the goodly order of Nature.
It is not possible that goodly justice should fail in the principal point.

If the soul of man were mortal, this goodly justice of nature should fail
in the principal point.

It is not therefore possible, the soul of man should be mortal.

EVEN as in this world there is no Catbuncle more glistering, not virtue more
eminent then Cic. de offic. c. de Iusti.
justice; and as man is the goodliest piece in the world, and contains in
himself the model of all the perfections of other Creatures, it is reasons
will that this Justice should adorn and beautify this head of the world; and
yet it is in him, (if we well observe it) that she is most obscure and
blemished; in all other things (man only excepted) she shines and glisters.
The heavens and their Stars observe the law of the Eternal inuiolably, in
their motions, in their influences, and in their alterations; the Elements
change themselves one into another, to preserve the sundry kinds of plants and
Creatures in the world, and obey their Creator religiously: Plants and
unreasonable Creatures have always effects and virtues concurring with the it
proper essence. It is that which moved David to say, That the heaven, the Sun,
and all the host of heaven, did declare the power and wisdom of God, Psalm.
19. And in the 148, the water, fire, trees, and unreasonable Creatures are
stirred up to praise the Lord; the which being faithfully performed by them man
should die with shame, that he alone is defective in his duty, being most
bound unto it.

And hereof God complains by Esaias, Harken you Isay 1. 5.
heavens, and thou earth give care; for the Eternal has spoken, saying, I
have nourished children and have bred them up, but they have rebel led against
me. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his master crib etc.

And the Philosophers propound for an infallible Maxim, That man is the most
unjust of all Creatures, and they search out the causes: the grossest precepts
of justice, are, to live honestly, to do no man wrong, to give every man his
own: no man is ignorant hereof, his natural reason being more then sufficient
to instruct him, and yet who does it?

Yea they are all made abominable, and there is not any one that does good,
says the Oracle. They are given over to the covetousness of their own
hearts, to filthiness to pollute their own bodies, says the Apostle. If this
complaint were true and just then, it is a thousand times more at this present:
I call you to witness, who traveling have past through Italy, Spain, and
France: I say to witness, of the adultery, Incest, Sodomie, and filthynes, you
have seen there; or if your chaste eyes could not endure the sight, yet what
you have heard. Then the robberies, spoils and injustice, under the cloak of
justice, which reign now in this realm, and their goodliest houses are built
upon these foundations. But it is not at this time only, but has been in all
ages; for from the infancy of the Church, there never wanted some swelling
iniqui tie, and a patient justice, says S. Jerome. As for murders, Epist. to
Castritian
they were never so frequent; to kill a man is but a sport, and great men make
it their pastime. But that which is worse, they not only commit such injustice,
but they also allow of it, they favor it, and they are advanced to the highest
dignities. The mischief is committed sometimes furiously, when as blind rage
commands; but the approbation proceeds slowly from a settled spirit, and is much
to be condemned, so as S. Paul does rightly make it the second degree of
Injustice. Romans 1. 32.
But come and lift up your eyes, see and judge who they be which hold the seat
of justice; they are for the most most part the most disloyal, the most
impious, the most unjust, and the most malicious among men.

It is not in this age alone that this Injustice has spro^g up, it has been
in all seasons. I have seen, says Solomon; under the Sun, Impiety in the
place of judgment, and iniquity in the fear of Justice: Offices be the
reward of such as make straight things crooked, says Terence. In Phorm^one.
Ovid. Meta Iuuen. 6. Seen. in Octa.
Other Poets using the voice of the people of their ages, cry out that Pity
lies desolate, that the virgin Astraea, that is, justice, has bin forced at
the last to yield to Mas saores and extortions upon the earth. This is not all,
there is a third degree yet more abominable, and more injurious to Justice;
when as good men are oppressed by the wicked, and Justice trodden under foot by
Injustice; what good or just man is there but sees it and feels it? Why do
thou hold thy peace, said Abacuck to the Lord, the wicked oppressing Abacuk, 1.
the just? So Caine slew Abel, so Esau persecuted Jacob: so the Paga^s have
always mo lested August. l. 1 c. 9, de, ciuit. dei.
the Israelites and sought to ruin them: so the Jews and Infidels have
afflicted Christians: so the Arrian Heretics did with all violence persecute
the Catholics; Pompey with the just Senate was vanquished by Caesar, Cato
murmures, and despayring kills himself. So the Roman Emperors have even
glutted their rage upon the innocence of Martirs; so the Goathes and
Barbarians tormented the Romans as soon as they were become Christians:
Theodos. l. 5
Thirty Tyrants invade and ruin that goodly Commonweal of Athens: The Turk
at this day holds the reins of the Empire of the world, triumphing every where
over Christian armies: Finally, what are these great kingdoms, but great
thefts? as a Pirate did fitly object to Alexander the Great, who made him to
keep silence with Plut in the life of Alex.
shame.

This injustice being observed by many, has given occasion to think that all
things are turned by chance, as Claudian does represent it Graphically; and
David himself Lib 1. in Rusfin.
confesses, that he has been ready to leave the good way, and to forsake
the party of God: for that he saw the wicked in such abundance.

These men, says he, for all that they possess,
Are nothing worth; yet still we see they spend
There lives whole length in varied happiness,
Pampered with all things to their very end.
What shall we then think; yea, whereon can we assure Romans 2. 6. Apo. 22. 12
our selves without wavering, that the life of man in this world, is a List and
Careere, in which as he has wrestled and combated, so being departed, he
shall receive either the Crown of glory, or the shame of infamy? and this
shall be when as justice shall appear in her greatest beauty and luster. But
in the mean (...) this divine providence will that the good (as corn in the
air) be thrasht, fanned and sifted, to the end at their departure, they may be
laid up in the granier; and on the other side, the chafe, that is to say, the
wicked who have been always in joy, shall be cast into the fire, that is never
quenched. Affliction is the narrow way, into the which he must enter who
desires to come into the Kingdom of heaven: The reproach of Christ is the
honor of the child of God, the Cross of Christ is his Scepter, his stripes
and torments are roses and gilloflowers. So Moses, says the text, held the
Hebr. 11.
reproach of Christ to be greater riches, then the treasures of Egypt; yea he
did rather choose to be afflicted with the people of God, then to enjoy for a
time the pleasures 2. Cor. 11. 22.
of sin. So S. Paul did rather choose the trauells, imprisonments, beatings,
and death, then all the honor he could expect to be a Pharisian Doctor among
the Jews. So a million of Martyrs have rather made choice of chains fires, and
of death of serve Christ, then of Diadems, triumphs, and wordly felicity.

So Regulus did choose rather to be tormented in a pipe stuck full of nails,
at Carthage, then to give prejudicial counsel to his country. Socrates had
rather dye then adherre to Pagan Idolatry. Seneca preferred death before the
flattering of his vicious Prince, verifying by effect the words of his Epistle,
I love not torments, Epist. 67.
says he; but if there be question to suffer them, I desire to carry my self
bravely, courageously, and honestly. Cato spoke more, as the Poet reports:
Gaudet patientia duris, Letius est quories magno sibi constat honestum.
Patience most joys when most her cross abounds,
Most honor costs most, and most joy redounds.


But for what reason? S. Ambrose says, The wise man is not broken by the
pains of the body, nor vexed by the discommodities: in the midst of miseries
he is always happy, for that the happiness of life does not consist in the
tickling pleasures of the body, but in the conscience purged from all filth of
sin.

What will thou then do in this secure peace of the wicked, in this continual
ware-fare of good men? have a little patience; And thou in the'nd shall say,
with comfort driven,
Thy vows are heard, even from the highest heaven.


The Gods, says Homer, suffer not the sins of men to Iliad, l. 4.
pass unpunished, and although they deserre the punishment, yet by the weight
they recompense the slownes: If the divine wrath be slow, yet it is Iuut^al, Sa
tyr 13.
violent, says another. It is that which did most fortify Cyrus, in the
assurance of the Xenoph. lib. 8. Cyrop
immortality of the soul, seeing the wicked in this life to prosper, and good
men decay. And what shall we Christians then do. We will attend with David,
that the measure of sin may be full; and then when they have made an end to
fill up the measure of their fathers, they cannot avoid the judgment of Hell
fire, says Jesus Mat. 23.
Christ I know for a certain, says David, that God will Psalm, 140.
do justice. I know the Lord the afflicted will
Revenge, and judge the poor.


All these wicked ri^ men which have had their pleasures and abundance in this
world, shall have miseries in the other; and (...) ^se poor Lazares which have
been here diversely tormented, shall be comforted, and enjoy an eternal rest,
as the Evangelist Luke, 16.
speaks. Finally, the wicked after this life, changing opinion, and sighing
with the anguish of theirminds, will say among themselves: Behold him whom we
have sometimes derided, and made proverbs of dishonor; wemad men held his life
to be mad, and his death infamous; and how is he accounted of athe children of
God, and his portion among the Saints? Wised. 5.
And thus does a wise man discourse. We may therefore conclude, that seeing
lustice, this precious pearl, does east forth but sunbeams in this world,
upon unreasonable creatures: and that her body beautiful in perfection, is in
heaven, whither she was forced (flying the earth) to have recourse, there to
receive such as had cherished and sought her upon earth; and contrariewise to
banish for ever such as had persecuted her with all violence: We may, I say,
necessarily conclude That the souls of men are immortal, to the end that the
happy may be crowned with this justice, and the wicked cast by the heavy
burden of their injustice to the bottomless pit of hell. Amen.

Objection.
If the soul did escape the grave, she might fing the praises of God.

But she cannot.

THE Minor is proved directly by a text of the holy Scripture: There is no
mention of thee in death, who shall worship thee in the Psalm 66.
grave? says David, being grievously Ps. 115, 17.
sick: And, The dead do no more praise the Lord, neither they which descend
whereas they speak not. Ezechias fearing death, speaks Isay 38. 10.
thus unto the Lord: the grave shall not worship thee, death shall not praise
thee, and they that descend into the pit attend no more thy truth.

Answer: These holy men have never thought, much less spoken, that the soul
was mortal, but only that they whom death takes away, do no more declare the
glory of God to the living, and that a dead mouth cannot preach the wonderful
works of the Eternal: And for proof hereof, David does assure us in another
place, where he says, I shall not die, but live, and declare the Ps. 118, 17.
works of the Eternal; and, If I descend into the pit, what proffit shall
there be in my blood? Shall the dust praise thee, and preach thy truth? By
which words he shows that he meant not to speak, but of the praises of God
made by the mouth among the living.

As for Ezechias, when he delivered these words, he had been then assured to
live by Esaias; so as he makes it known, that whereas God prolonged his life,
it was to magnify him in the world, and to declare his mercy: and yet that the
Saints deceased sing the praises of God in heaven, appears by many texts, but
that in the Apoc. is sufficient, of the 4. beasts, Apo. 5.
and the 24. Elders, who sung a new song. Moreover those innumerable multitudes
of all Nations, Tribes, people, and tongues, attired in long white robes, and
having branches of palm in their hands, crying with a Apo. 7.
loud voice, Salvation to our God, who is set upon the throne, and to the Lamb.

But some one will reply, seeing the Saints in heaven sing most melodiously and
holily the praises of the Lord, how coms it that they allege this reason to
prolong this life, that they may celebrate the name of the Eternal? I Answer,
that the heavens have no need of these holy sounders out of the Lords praise:
that they have from the beginning the Angels which sing continually, Holy,
holy, holy, is he which-hath been, which is, and which shall be; and moreover,
the faithful deceased. But the earth is altogether desert, wherefore the
children of God desire to remain there the course of their prefixed age, to
the end they may publish the praises of God to the ignorant world: and although
it be to their loss, yet the service of God, and the glory of their Master,
is more dear unto them, then their own health, as Moses and S. Paul among
others have witnessed.

The second Objection.
If the soul being immortal, had been (as they say) infused into the body of
man, immediately from God, it is not possible but there should remain some
knowledge.

But there remains none.

IF the Soul be created immediately by God and infused into the body, from the
very moment of this creation and infusion, she is perfect in her essence, and
therefore should have a certain knowledge; but we do not remember our birth,
nor our Baptism, by reason of the great imperfection of our nature in that
age: If then (as those Infants, of whom Aristotle makes memtion, 11. sect. pro.
27.
who spoke as soon as they were borne) we had had the temper of the brain,
requisite to the understanding and memory, we should then have understood, and
we should now remember as well, as those things which we have seen within a
year, and since that time which brings al things to maturity, has ripened our
nature: But if the soul be immortal and not subject to time, and if from the
beginning of her creation, she has received her perfect stature, how can time
deface her understanding? and how is it that she remembers not any thing, no
not in dreaming, when she was put into the body? Some will reply, That this
sinful mortal body is the cause of this misery, but I may answer, that the
corporal cannot work upon the spiritual; and that the Divines hold, that man
by his offense has lost all supernatural gifts and privileges which were
freely given him; but not such as were natural, and conferred upon him by the
right of Creation; and who does not see, but that to understand and to
remember, are natural gifts?

Answer: The soul of man is extracted immediately from God, and being once
infused into the body, she receives not in any age, neither in her substance
or forces, any change, alteration, or increase. Yet by virtue of the sentence
of condemnation which God pronounced against Adam, and al his posterity, the
Creator not confirming the soul in her excellency and innocence, but leaving
it to it self, she has in an instant lost her dignity, is become ignorant
and vicious; and the infection of carnal senses which she has sucked up being
in the body, does augment her deprauation, so as she is not able to remember
any thing of this actio^ proceeding from God, in her creation and union to the
body: So Adam and Eve not confirmed in their felicity (as the Angels and
Saints are now in heaven by the benefit of Jesus Christ) as soon as they had
committed the transgression, were in an instant made mortal, ignorant and
vicious. A plate of iron flaming in the fire, has no sooner felt the fresh
air, but it loses his fiery color; Even so the soul is no sooner gone out
of the Eternall^ forge, but she loses her color and brightness, and the body
is as cold water to the burning, iron; so as now the soul has no knowledge in
the body, but what she gets by the senses: and they that are deaf by nature
are also naturally dumb; for being unable to hear the words di stinguished,
neither can they l^e them: And they that are borne blind, cannot distinguish
of colors, etc.

Let us conclude with S. Augustine, That the spiritual Lib. 12. de genesi ad
Literam.
light, in the which man had been created to know his Creator, himself, and
things that are profitable for him, was quenched by sin: Let us add with
Nicholas de Cusa, L. 9. exercitat.
That the soul of man sent in to a morrall body, is like unto (...) infant,
which as soon as it was borne was carried into (...) strange country, wholly
(...) of inhabit a^, and nourished by a she Wolf; being grown great he could
in no for^ know the place of his birth, (...) his father and mother. (...) had
a con^sed feeling of this truth, writing, that the soul which lived ^appy and
knowing in the company of the Gods, being confined into this prison of the
foul infected body, to frame it and give it life, has in stantly lost ^l her
happiness and knowledge, by reason of the bad temperature of the body.

The 3^ Argument taken fr^ the voice of all the world.
The voice of the people is the voices of God, and by consequent, of the truth.

But the Soul is immortal according to the voice of the people.

MAny writers have collected the opinions of people and of ages, upon the
judgment of the soul as Macrobius upon Scipioes Dream, Marsilius Ficinus,
and others: And among the Moderns Mons de Plessis, Crepet the Celestin with
others, to whom I send the reader; where he may see a wonderful consent of men
to conclude that the soul is immortal, as holding it not from any other
Master then themselves from their understanding, and from their conscience,
from which knowledge proceeds the love of justice, the desire of honor, and
the care of interring their bodies etc.

And as in old time, so at this day there is no nation but believes it. John de
Lyra in his voyage of America, writes, Chap. (...).
that it is constantly believed there; They have found the inhabitants of the
Western Islands to be very brutish, yet have they a taste of the immor talitie
of the Soul. Thomas Heriot in his History of the inhabitants of Virginia, a
country not long since discovered, writes that these people make the same
profession, and hold that presently after the soul is separated from the body,
she is carried away according to the works which she has done, either into
the ma^sion of the Gods to be there happy for ever; or into a Gulf, which
they call Popogusso, to burn eternally. Finally there can be no instance
given against this general belief of Nations, dispersed over the face of the
whole earth: If any one will oppose himself, it is the excrement and scomme of
the people; to which Hierocles a Pithagorean has long since given a holy
precaution, saying That a wicked man will not have his soul immortal to the
end he may not be punish ed for her offenses; but he preuents the sentence of
him that must judge him, condemning himself to death, and yet shall be therein
deceived, for whereas he thought this death would be without pain, he shall
feel it as sharp ly as it shall be long. But some one will object, that to
find out a hidden verity, one man's deep judgment is of more force, then a
hundred thousand that are mean, such as the vulgar have commonly; for that to
the understanding invention serves more then number; for it is not of him and
his virtue, as of corporal forces, the which may be united together, and take
up a great burden: wherefore to make a peace, says the Wiseman, many are
required, but for cou^ sell, one among a 1000. Moreover Seneca does still exhort
not to follow the multitude.

Answer: It is true, that the best things do not please many; and matters are
so ordained as one says, that we sooner follow the evil then the good. Yet
this does not impeach, but the general testimony of al men concerning the
soul, should be of great moment, for that there be no opposite parties here,
one for the mortality, another for the immortality: and not only the simple
people, but even the learned, assure the immortality of the soul. Moreover, it
is not an institution of life to survive, but a truth to believe; and therefore
this objection does in no sort weaken this reason of the immortality of the
soul.

Objection.
If the soul were immortal, no man would doubt, especially, the learned and
wise.

But many doubt, and in a manner none but the simple and ignorant believe it to
be immortal,

THe consequence of the proposition is good, for who is he that doubts whether
he be a man, a dog, or a wolf? Who seeing and feeling, doubts whether he sees
and feels? etc.

As for the Assumption, it is sufficiently verified by the^ that have not
doubted, but have constantly believed that the soul was immortal. We read
of Sardanapalus a powerful King of Assiria, who Atheneus l^b. 1. de dip
nosophistis
not only held this belief, but would have posterity know it, commanding that
upon his tomb there should be carved the Image of a woman, holding her hand
upon her head, and some of the fingers closed like unto them that sound their
cliquets, with this inscription, as if the Image had spoken it: Sardanapalus
Son of Anacyndaraxes, built Anchiale and Tarsis in one day: Eat, drink and
sport, for the rest is not worth the playing with the fingers: that is to say,
A point for all the rest.

In the Town of Brescia, there is another Tomb to be seen, whereon is
written, D. M. and among other profane words, these of a milder temper: I have
lived, and have believed nothing besides this life, and have wholly dedicated
my self to pleasing Ven^s.

The Antiquaries observe, that among the Pagans, such as held the soul to be
mortal, caused the doors to be hanged close shut upon their graves, and of
this sort there are many noted.

The Philosopher Aristoxenus (by the report of Lactantius) durst maintain that
the Lib. 7. c. 13.
soul of man was nothing, yea, during the time she was in the body; but as
the strings of an instrument being tuned make an accord, so in man's body, the
gathering together of the bowels, and the vigor of the members, produce all
that harmony which appears in man.

The Saduces in the Church of God, have denied the immortality of the foul.
Barbara wife to the Emperor Sigismond, in the year 1400. derided her women
for that they prayed and fasted, saying, that they must live merrily, and
embrace all pleasures, for that after death the soul did perish with the body;
And many at this day show by their lives, that only for ciuility and outward
honesty, they must confess the soul to be immortal.

And what a great wisdom is it to believe nothing inwardly? Du Bartas in his
Triumph of faith speaks of one:

I mean that Monster Theodorus hight,
Who shameless says, there is no God at all;
And that the wise may (when occasions fall,)
Be Lier, Traitor, Thief, and Sodomite.
And he adds that this killing offspring has past to Rome, from thence into
France, and that it buddes forth in the Courts of Kings, in seats of Justice,
and in the Church; finally, there are scarce any other impes that put forth at
this day: to have no God, and the souls to be mortal, are held equal things.

Answer: I should wonder at the admirable patience of God, to suffer that the
seed of Atheism should produce such branches of profanation, if I did not
see blasphemers and such as make a profession to deny God, parricides, yea,
devils to be tolerated by him, who with patience attends until the measure
of their sins be full: But to answer categorically, I deny the consequence
of the proposition: It is true, there has been such a one, who has doubted
whether he were a man; witness the Philosopher Pyrrhon, who makes profession
to doubt all, and maintain, that whatsoever we think to be, say, or do, is
but by an uncertain opinion. Moreover, you shall find some one so wounded in
the imagination, by the force of some deep melancholy, as he has thought
himself to be transformed into a wolf, and also has gone out of his house by
night, howling and imitating the actions of Vuierus l. 4. c. 23.
a wolf; the which bred the opinion of becoming wolves. In like manner I say,
that the dark fumes of voluptuousness, the depraved humors of wickedness,
may also overthrow the understanding of some men, and make them doubt of that
which they would not understand, the immortality of the soul; least that the
apprehension of an eternal judgment, should trouble their carnal pleasures.

As for Sardanapalus, he has also doubted whether he were a man, since that
he took upon him a woman's habit among his Courtisans, and handled a distaffe
with them. For my part I believe that he had the humor and spirit of a beast;
as Tully reports, that Aristotle having Lib. 5. Tus.
read this Epitaphe, said that they should have written it upon the pit of a
beast, not on the grave of a King: The same answer shall serve for the like
thing pretended at Brescia. As for the third, their ignorance and malice would
force a belief of mortality of souls; what others more honest and more wise
have done, shall serve to confute them: For the same antiquaries write, that
many caused to be drawn upon their tombs, doors half open, showing thereby
that their souls escaped from the tomb. If one Philosopher would dispute of
it, there are others, who to get fame have questioned matters more apparent; as
Cardan, the fourth Element of fire; Copernicus: the motion of heaven,
maintaining by the illusion of reason, that it is the earth and not the heaven
that moves: There have been always and shall be such fantastic humors, who
would make themselves famous, with the prejudice of the truth.

As for the Empress Barbara, he should have added that she was an insatiable
Letcher; and therefore she had great interest, (not to give an accoumpt of her
dissolute life,) to persuade her self that al was extinguished in death. Now
follows this depra ued age, into the which as into the bottom of a sink, all the filth of precedent ages have seemed to run; yet there are (God be thanked)
who believe it in their hearts, and deliver it with there mouths, that their
spirit is immortal, and they that speak it only with their mouths, it is
sufficient that natural shame will not suffer them to discover the villainy of
their hearts; and this bashfulnesse (an impression of God) is sufficient to
make them inexcusable in the great day of the Lord. Moreover, they that with a
furious impudency have believed that the soul died with the body, have for the
most part in their miserable ends made known the judgments of God, who
punished them for their frantike opinion; as Lucian, who was torn in pieces by
dogs; Lucre tius who grown mad, cast him self down a precipice: Caligula who
was cruelly slain; with infinite others: Or else they have showed it in their
confused and irresolute carriage, the distemperature and trouble of their
souls impugning their damnable opinion.

To conclude; As for Theodorus, and the swarm of his disciples, who in a
manner alone hold the chaires in all estates, I will suffer them to be led in
Triumph before the triumphant chariot of faith: that which Du Bartas says in
the beginning of the second song, is sufficient to confound them.

The 4. Argument.
That which proceeds immediately from God, is everlasting.

Such is the soul.

I will prove the consequence of the Mayor, for the rest is plain of it
self: whilst the Sun shall last he will cast fo^th his beams; whilst there
is fire there will come forth heat; whilst the heart beats in the body,
there remains life; for that the position of the sufficient cause, very near
and immediate, does of necessity establish the effect, the which continues as
long as the cause, if there happens no inpeachment: But God is a sufficient
cause, never hindered in his effects; he is the near and immediate cause of
the soul which he breathes into the body, as soon as it was disposed and fit
to receive that breathing; he is immortal, and by consequent the soul is
immortal. So he created the Angels, and the Angels shall subsist for ever; so
he made the heaven and earth, and they shall never perish. If they reply that
the heavens shall pass; and that God will consume them as a flaming pyle of
wood, as the Poet speaks after S. Peter: 2. Epist. 3.
The answer is, That it is not to be understood of the substance of the world,
but of the qualities, which being vain and corrupted by reason of man, shall be
changed, Romans 8.
and renewed by fire, to shine more purely like refined gold.

They may again object, That God with his own hands had molded and fashoned
the first man, who not with standing is dead. I answer, that God was the
efficient and immediate cause of man, but not the formal nor the material;
his substance was the slime of the earth, which might be dissolved; his form
was his soul, which might be separated: But in the soul, and of the soul of
man, God holds immediately the four kinds of causes; the efficient, for he has
made it of himself, without any help; the material, not that it is of his
essence, but that he has created it of nothing, as he did the world: the
formal in like manner, his continual inspiration retains it, as his
continual providence preserues the world from ruin; and therefore Christ
said, my Father works hitherto, and I with him. Finally, he is the final cause
for man lives to know and serve God. If they reply again, that God being a
voluntary cause in his actions, should not be numbered among the natural
causes, which necessarily produce their effects, if there be not some let: that
is most certain; but where the word of God is evident, we must not doubt of his
will; but it is apparent in the passages alleged, that the soul is immortal.
And therefore we may profitably and safely conclude, That if from the
sufficient and near cause the effect does necessarily flow, and that this
effect does continue as long as the cause, if there happen no lets: that
undoubtedly the soul is immortal, seeing that God her most sufficient cause,
and who fears no disturbance, is immortal; so as to deny this immortality,
is to deny the Deity.

Objection.
That which has bin always required to be sufficiently testified, yet has
been still denied, cannot be certain.

The immortality of the soul has been always required to be sufficiently
testified, yet has been still denied.

NO great joy does at any time accompany a deep silence. If the soul going
out of the body, felt it self immortal, (she should feel it if she were
so, for going out of the body, as out of a dark prison, she should have the
fruition of all her light:) if she felt her self, as I say, immortal, she
would witness it by some sign to the poor kinsfolks that survive, being
desolate by reason of his departure, to comfort, fortify and make them
joyful. And although the souls which are in heaven be there detained by a
voluntary prison, hindering them from coming down; and on the other side
those that are in hell, are tied there by a will that is captive, as one has
affirmed: But the souls that go out of the bodies which are yet on earth,
even upon the lips of them that die, why have they not instantly, before they
fly to heaven, being so often required, given some small proof of their
immortalitle?

Answer: This Objection seems subtle, but to speak truly it has but the
show and not the effect, for it is subject to many pertinent answers: First to
allege an inconvenience is not to dissolve the question. 2. It is a
consequence ill applied, to say Such a one has not spoken, therefore he is no
man.

We have dug very deep into the earth, and yet we never heard any of
them that go with their feet against ours; therefore there are no Antipodes;
So the souls speak not upon dead men's lips, therefore they have none: for
being thus hindered, is the cause they neither hear nor see any sign of their
life.

Thirdly, the tears of the dead man's kinsfolks are ill grounded: Socrates a
Pagan knew it well, when he said, that we must leave the soul at rest, and
not trouble it with lamentations. The holy Ghosts goes farther, and assures,
That blessed are the Apoc. 14.
dead which dye in the Lord: yea, for certain, says the Spirit, for they rest
from their labors, and their works follow them: this should assure and
rejoice, and not discomfort (by a foolish desire) that joy of the soul of the
deceased.

Fourthly, God will not that we should be inquisitiue of the dead, he forbids
it expressly in his law, and pronounces Deuteronomy. 18. Leuit, 12. Esaias 8.
abomination against them that do it. He has given Moses and the Prophets,
let us add the Apostles; if they will not believe them, neither will they
believe the souls of the deceased. If that the living are forbidden to
enquire, how then can the dead have leave to speak?

Fifthly, the souls are pressed at the departure from their bodies, to yield an
account of their administration in this life, undergoing a particular judgment.

This is believed rightly, and wholesomely, says S. Augustine, that the souls
are Llb. 2. de orig. animae, (...). 4.
judged at the departure from their bodies, before the coming to this
Judgment, at the which having taken again the same bodies, they must appear.
Also S. Hilary says, that immediately without Upon the 2 Psnl. at the end.
any delay, after death we undergo a Judgment, and pass into Paradise, or
into Hell.

Finally Solomon, to the end we should not doubt, says, That God will easily
render unto man according to his works, at that day of his deceasse; That the
affliction of one hour makes him forget all pleasures, and that the end of
man is the manifestation of his works.

6 S. Athanasiws says, It is not the will of God that the Quest. 15.
souls should declare the estate wherein they are, for that many should be
deceived, and many errors would grow; the Devils being ready to make men thus
abused, to believe what they would suggest; as 2. Tom. Lib 1. discourse 5, of
death and the im mortality of thesoule.
Crepet the Celestin does well observe: and he adds, that the like happened
lately to a poor woman of Verum, seduced by a devil which appeared unto her
in the form of her Grand father; persuading her to go in Pilgrimage, and to
do other things which were impossible. So S. Augustine writes that Vincentius
the Donatist was counseled Lib. 3. c. 11. arduers. Vincent. Donatist.
to write against the Christian religion, by a spirit which appeared unto him.

7. The Soul destitute of the Organs of her body, being not yet glorified nor
illuminated with the Celestial splendour, nor adorned with the supernatural
gifts, which God co^fers upon her for her felicity, cannot satifsie the will
of the kinsfolks that be present, desiring a testimony of her blessedness and
life: for the soul, says S. Athanasius in the former passage, as soon as she
has laid down her body, can work neither good not evil. And as for visions
that appear from the^, God by a certain dispensation, shows them as it
pleases him.

For as a Lute if there be no man to play of in, seems idle and unprofitable:
so the soul and body being separated one from another, have no operation. The
which Ecclesiastes does confirm, saying, Certainly the living Eccie. 9.
know that they shall dye, but the dead know nothing, neither do they get any
thing, for their memory is forgotten: in like manner, their love, their hatred,
and their envy perish, and they have not any portion in the world of whatsoever
is done under the Sun. Wherefore let us conclude and say, That the soul
(whilst that she gives any life to her dying body) with the last puff of
life, yeeldes a certain testimony of her joy and immortality, by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost; as it happens to many good men: But to demand
instantly upon death some token from the soul dislodging, were to tempt God,
to mock at the deceased, acd to be an unjust demander, and therefore justly to
be refused.

The 5. Argument taken from the aspect of the face.
Whatsoever is represented by a just mirror or glass, is true.

The immortality of the soul is represented by the just mirror of the face.

AS the soul of man is the Image of God, so the face is the Image of the
soul, and therefore the Eternal creating the soul of man, did breathe it
Genes. 2,
in his face, which the holy Ghost calls respiration of life: so the property of
man is to paint in his face by his diverse colors, the diverse affections of his
soul. Wisdom, says Solomon, cleeres the face of man, and his fierce and
sour Eccles. 8.
aspect is changed. The Latins have called it vultus, for that the will is
read in the forehead: the manners of the soul follow the humors of the body,
says Gallen; and if some one belies his inclination, it is a mask which he
puts on, and therefore Momus did unjustly blame God, for that he had not made
man with an open heart. Thereon is all the Art of Phisiognomie grounded, an Art
(which without this faining) every man would learn without teaching.

By the face that Diuiner Egyptian, familiar to Marc. Anthony, did know the
diverse dispositions of men. These marks of the face, are imprinted with the
seal of the soul: and he that will not judge by such marks engraven, of the
brightness and immortality of the soul, is without judgment.

Homer writes that Ulysses having escaped from shipwreck, was graciously
entertained and reverenced by the Pheagues, having no ornament then, but this
virtue and generous disposition, the beauty and excellency whereof appeared in
his forehead. Man in like sort carries on his forehead the marks of his
immortal soul: Whereof the first is the carrying his countenance straight up to
heaven, proper to man, at all times, to him alone, and to all the generation of
mankind; which shows his be ginning to be celestial and immortal: for that
only is perishable which is under the region of the Moon, and whatsoever is
above it, is not subject unto destiny.

The 2. is that foresight afar off, those beams, I say, cast far and wide
by the piercing sight, without staying upon that which does touch it, or
enuiron it near; which shows that the flight of the soul must go far. If
any one say, that certain birds, and four footed beasts see far; but it is
not to the same end, for man does it only for the pleasure of the sight, and to
observe the beauty of his celestial habitation: whereas other creatures are
sharp sighted either to observe their enemies, and to fly from them; or to
look after their prey, to devour it: not to heaven, to observe heaven, and to
send up thither by the beams of their sight, their most ardent vows, as man
alone does.

Moreover, this far flying sight of man, is a noble sign of his spiritual
knowledge, which uniting the time past to the present, does always casts her
goodly thoughts upon the future. The third is the reverent majesty of the whole
face, that sparkling fire of the eyes, striking a cold fear into the fiercest
creatures; and a flying amazement, which are eyewitnesses of some hidden
nature very diverse to that of beasts. We read of the Emperor Ma^imilian, I.
who being detained a prisoner by them of Bruges, and entreated unworthily,
reduced to extreme, dangers, and hourly ready to be slain, yet nothing
daunted, nor abating the greatness of his courage, his cruellest enemies durst
not behold him in the face; the most mutinous did him reverence, and the beams
of his eyes (says the History) did amaze, and pierce the consciences of the
Rebels, to the quick. We may say as much of the French King, Francis I. taken
prisoner at the battle of Pauia; for he had no prison, but a royal F^calel.
li. 3. of the french Mo^.
Court. What cause was there of such amazement in their victorious enemies, in
regard of their prisoners? if it were not that in them (being in that estate)
apeared marks of their royal dignity, of their spiritual unction, of their
divine Lieutenancie; which did melt and confound the hearts of their
adversaries. Let us say the same of man; for although he be a prisoner, sold
under sin, and slave to Satan, yet has he in him the divine character, the
breathing of the mouth of God, the lively Image of the living God, who gives
him a royalty over all creatures; who terrifies them with his only look, puts
them to flight by his bare words, and makes them obey and serve by his
commandment: And if at any time they make show to revenge themselves, they are
either pressed on by famine, or thrust on by fear to defend their lives; or else
God would have it so by reason of the sins of man.

The fourth are his goodly words, expressing the divine co^ceptions of the
soul, proper to man only: The speech is the Image of the soul; he that shall
mince and digest it, shows himself ^o be an hypocrite. See farther what
Serres says in the first Serre. epist. 115.
of the signs. Let no man object the speaking of parrots, for these words
found nothing of their intention, but rashly give again the sound of the words
which are tuned into their ears, without any understanding, As for Balaams
Ass, which spoke with sense to her unjust master, saying, What have I done
that thou have beaton me thrice? am not I thine Ass? have I* been accustomed
to do so unto thee? showing that there was some strong reason that forced her
to stay. It is so rare a miracle, as it may be neither before nor since, the
like has not happened: and therefore Moses says, that the Eternal opened the
Asses mouth, or framed by his pow er, a human voice in the Asses mouth.

As for the Oaks of Done and the Oxen which drawing at Plough in the second
Punike war, spoke these words (Beware Rome) either it is fabulous, or the
Devil spoke by them. But the most excellent. words of man, being set down
immortally in writing, or flying eternally in memory of men, shows that their
spring is immortal, as much as the effect can represent the cause. Oh God, how
could this knowledge of the immortality, this ardent desire thereof, the
expression of this desire by immortal words come into the thought of man, and
from man, if all in him were mortal?

And to finish it, we may add the quicknes of hearing, understanding the
singing of birds, the music of voices and the harmomie of instruments. Let no
man object other creatures unto me, they hear the sound, but not the ac cord
of tunes. Moreover this hearing of man is so persuaded by the charms of a
divine tongue speaking from a Pulpit of truth, as she would willingly leave the
world to enjoy the heavenly felicity; no small conjecture that the soul is
capable of immortality, seeing she has such power over the ear her Organ, to
make it understand and desire, at the declining of the dying body, See moreover
what John de Serres says, in the 45. proof of the immortality of the soul.

The first Objection.
Whatsoever is built upon an uncertain foundation, is doubtful and wavering.

The immortality of the soul is built upon an uncertain foundation.

IT seems that the reason of the preaching of the soul in her exe^ption from
the grave, flows originaly for that she vndersta^ds immortal things, and that
by the joining of time past with the present she infers the future; wherein she
is chiefly distinguished from beasts which are mortal: but this groundwork
is not sollid. Some one speaking of the soul, to show her immortality, says,
that they did not judge her eternal, for that no man could comprehend the
Eternity, that is to say, that long term past without beginning: If this be
admitted, the question is decided, and the soul will be found mortal, seeing
that she cannot perfectly comprehend the immortality; for it is as difficult
to conceive a continuitie to come without end, as it is of that which is past
without beginning. More over the difference of a reasonable man, has no
advantage by his continuance over beasts, seeing that continuance is but an
accident, and beasts are not longer lived then trees, yea shorter, yet are they
are as much above trees, as men are above beasts. Thirdly they whom we wholly
follow, as Aristotle, (that miracle of the world) Gallen the first favorite of
nature, Hippocrates surnamed the divine, and others, have spoken doubtfully, or
denied it flatly; Gallen, Aristoxenus and Dicearchus Aristotle's disciples, yea
and Plutarke himself do witness, that Aristotle denied it: Hippocrates said,
that the soul went always on unto death.

Finally, if she be of heaven and immortal, why does she not participate of
heaven and immortality? why are her thoughts fixed upon earth and perishable
things? The plant retains something of the soil, what has the soul of
heaven?

Answer, Man's understanding comprehends in a certain fashion a continuance
without end, and for proof, give him a term of an hundred Millions of years:
he will extend his spiritual sight an hundred Millions beyond that; and if you
will, as far beyond it, for that this visible force cannot be in any sort
limited by time. The heavens and stars in their substance shall continue
without end, yet in their quallities they must change; but the soul does well
comprehend this continaunce. Moreover it is no good consequence to say, Bulls
feel not the vigor of their force, therefore they have none. A man being
borne and bred in the bottom of a dark cave, thinks that he has no faculty
to see, is he the therefore blind? the soul being buried in the darkness of
a mortal body as in a grave, sees not her immortality, has she therefore
none? Thirdly, we do not say that man is immortal, for that he differs from
beasts, but for many reasons delivered and to be delivered. Fourthly, the
Philosophers above mentioned would see and touch the soul in her immortality,
and she is not subject to any sense S. Basile has seen it in spirit Lib. 2.
de anima.
and written it with his hand: The soul, says he, cannot be seen with eyes,
for that she is not illuminated by any color, nor has any figure or corporal
character. Aristotle knew it whengoing out of the fabrike of corporal nature,
he said that it was not the charge of a Physician to treat of all sorts of
souls, as is the intellectual, which he pronounces to differ from the
sensitive and vegetative, from which, he says, she may separate her self, as
the perpetual from the corruptible. Gallen had his eyes fixed only upon the
body (the subject of Physic) and therefore he said freely, that it did not
import him in his art, if he were ignorant how the souls were sent into the
bodies, or whether they past from one to an other; But if it please Gallen,
leaving the limits of his art, to take the fresh air of divine Philosophy,
presently his goodly conception is followed with these words The soul is
distilling from the universal Spirit, descending from heaven, etc.

Which having left the earth, recouers heaven, and dwells with the Moderator of
all things in the Celestial places. As for Hippocrates, his words sound more
of the immortality, then of the death of the soul, having this sense, That
the soul goes always increasing until the death of the body. But if you
desire effects and not words, what conceit could Aristotle, Gallen and
Hippocrates have of the soul to be mortal, who by an immortal labor have
purchased such great same throughout the world? and whose authority is the
cause that they are now produced, and maintained?

Finally, that which he objects of the souls thoughts, fixed for the most part
on the frail things of this passing world, it is no small sign of the
corruption of mankind; but no argument, that the soul is perishable, seeing
she retains still the immortal seal which God has set upon her in her first
creation.

The. 2, Objection.
The container, and that which is contained, should entertain themselves by a
just proportion.

The body and the soul are the container, and contained.

IF the soul be immortal, seeing the body is mortal, what proportion were
there betwixt the soul and body? How has nature (which does all things by a
just weight, number, and measure) joined things together which are so dislike?
It serves to no purpose to produce the bird kept in a cage, which as soon as
she can get out flies away; for he is kept there by force, and not as form in
substance.

Answer: We grant the whole argument, and we add, that it is sin which
came by accident, that has caused this great disproportion. Otherwise man
before sin, in his estate of innocence, had his body immortal: and therefore
Jesus Christ our Savior, like a cunning Logitian, drew the resurrection of the
body from the immortality of the soul, for that God was called the God of Mat.
22. 31
Abraham, of Isaacke, and of Jacob; but God says, he is not the God of the
dead but of the living. So says Saint Augustine, and Saint Bernard, that the
soul is so separated from the body, as there remains still a natural
inclination to resume it again, and to minister to his body; and this only
does hinder her, that she is not affectionate toward God withal her virtue
and force, as be the Angels; and therefore her blessedness is imperfect: For
the souls, o flesh (says Bernard) cannot without thee be accomplished In
sermo. 5. de festo omnium Sancto.
in their joy, nor perfect in their glory, nor consummated in their felicity;
and in the same place he distinguishes their degrees or places for the soul;
in this life as in a Tabernacle; before the resurrection in heaven, as in a
gallery; and then after the resurrection in the house of God. But you will say,
this answer is Metaphisicall, I desire one that is natural. Answer: This
goodly order which you recommend in nature required this ordering, that as
there are some Creatures merely spiritual, others merely corporal, so there
were some which were mixed, both spiritual and corporal, and that is man, who
in that small form represents all that is in the world, and who by his senses
does communicate with the Creatures, and by his understanding with the Angels,
giving his right hand to heaven, and his left to the earth.

The 3. Objection.
If reason loades us to the immortality of the soul, by the same means she
should guide us to the resurrection of the body.

But that is not true.

I Prove the Minor by this known Maxim of reason, That there is no return
from privation to the habit, nor (by consequence) from death to life, no more
then from stark blindness to sight. Wherefore they of Athens (where one writes
that the men are borne Philosophers) hearing S. Paul discourse of many points
of heavenly Act. 17, 32.
doctrine, they gave an attentive hear unto him; but when he came to the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ, they interrupted him, mocking at him as one that
doated. Ans. I deny it, that the resurrection of the dead is absolutely beyond
the apprehension of nature; The West-Indians who are without the Church of
Christ, believe it and practice it, as well by the ceremonies of their
interrements which aim directly at it, as by the usual entreaties they make
to the Spaniards, digging for the gold of their Sepulchers, that they should
not take out and carry away the bones, to the end they may rise again
speedily, as Benzo reports. Lib, 2. c. 20
At, Rome this Epitaph is yet to be read in Latin upon a Pagans tomb: The
public has given a place unto Aurelius Balbus, a man of an unspotted life; I
rest here in hope of the resurrection. But that which is most wonderful and
exceedes all credit, if they that write it were not eye witnesses and worthy of
credit, that in Egypt in a place near unto Caine, a multitude of people meet
on a certain day in march, to be spectators of the resurrection of the flesh,
as they say; where from Thursday, to Saturday inclusiuely, they may see and
touch bodies wrapped in their sheets after the ancient manner; but they neither
see them standing nor walking, 2. tom. l. 4. of the bisto. meditations. c. 13.
but only the arms or the thighs, or some other part of the body which you
may touch: If you go farther off and then return presently, you shall find
these members to appear more out of the ground, and the more they change
place, the more diverse these motions appear.

This admirable sight is written by Olaus Magnus, by certain Venetian
Ambassadors, by a Iacopin of Vlmes and others; but I leave the interpretation
free to the judgment of the reader. Thirdly, if it were a work without the
compass of reason, Plutarque, Herodotus, nor Plato would ever have been
credited in writing, that one Thespesius, Aristeus, and Erus, were raised up
again. Pliny, who believed nothing but what he saw; among many that were
raised up, he reports of a woman which was dead seven days, and raised again:
and that one Gabienus a valiant soldier of Caesar's, being put to death by
order of justice, and left upon the public place, was found afterward
speaking, and asking for Pompey, who came unto him and had much speech with
him. Melchior Flauian makes mention of a woman whom he had seen, whose name
was Mellula, near unto Damas in Syria, raised up again the 6. day after her
death, in the year 1555. God will bring such tokens, to assure the world of a
future and universal Resurrection.

As for the Maxim, that there is no returning again to the habit, it is
abusiue not only to God, who can do all, but even to nature, and to the order
of the world, which has his forces limited: So in a little child, whose teeth
have been pulled out, the vegetative virtue will bring up new.

So we read of a certain Abbess, who being an 100. years old, grew young
again, had her monthly courses, her teeth put forth again, her hair grew
black, the wrinckles of her face filled up: Finally, she became as fresh and
as fair as she had been at the age of 20. years. And if we may believe
histories, she was not alone, but followed and preceded by many others. The
natural virtue at a certain time, as trees in the Spring, did renew her work
even four times; as to that man seen in the year 1536, by the Viceroy of the
Indies, who examined it carefully, and found out the truth. Fourthly, that
which shows an insenfible impression of nature of the future Resurrection, is
the earnest and general care to bury the dead honorably, yea to keep them
from corruption, by balmes and Aromaticall sents, by images of brass, and
nails fastened in the bodies, for that brass has a special virtue against
corruption. There are yet other devices, which the Egyptians have, and do use,
and particularly observed by the^ of Arran, an insularie region, whereas the
bodies hang in the air and rot not; so as the families without any amazement,
know their Fathers, Grandfathers, and greatgrandfathers, and a long Ortel. in
his great Theal tab. 10.
band of their predecessors. Peter Martyr of Milan, writes 2. Decad. l. 2.
the same of some West-Indians of Comagra.

Moreover, I deny that man may always see the tail of that whereof he sees the
head; the resurrection of the body, seeing the immortality of the soul; that
he must needs see the consequent, if he discouers the Antecedent: for the one
hiding it self, the other appears, sometimes to the sight of the
understanding. And to conclude, I deny not but that it is true which man's
reason cannot verify, until it has found out why the Adamant does so
powerfully draw iron unto it, and holds it fast by an unknown virtue; and why
forked sticks of Elder are proper to discover veins of gold and silver? Why
long aftrr a man is dead, the blood will gush out if the murderer approaches?
Why if some desperate man hang himself, will there rise sudden storms and
tempests? Why the stone called the Amede, draws iron to it on the one side,
and reiects it on the other? with infinite other secrets of Na ture.

The third Objection.
We only fear that which we think should be hurtful unto us.

The soul fears death.

Therefore the soul thinks death should be hurtful unto her.

SOme make a question how the soul can be immortal, seeing she has so great
fear of death. Men laugh at the attempt of little children, be they never so
in choler; for that they cannot hurt them: why should not the soul the^ mock
at death? Does she not in like manner see the immortality, and feel it in her
self, without giving so great apprehension to the poore^ body, which, of it
self without her should never fear death, no more then a bruit beast? Why is
not the power of death dissolved, whereas the authority of immortality
intercedes? as Tertullian speaks in the first book of the Trinity.

Answer. This is a most evident sign, not of the mortality of the soul, but
that man is degenerate and corrupt. That her Port is no more so free and brave,
But casts her eye down, like a fearful slave.


He seeles in his Conscience, that he is guilty of high treason to God; that
this voluntary offense must soon or late bring a necessary punishment; he feels
in this life, some small touch; he fears and not without reason (if by faith and
repentance his pardon be not inrowled, and his absolution sealed) that at the
departure from this life, the executioner of divine vengeance should stand
lurking behind death, to take him by the throat, and to punish him according to
his merits. Wherefore if corruption did not generally possess al men, she
would suppress this fear, reverence her Creator, and do her duty unto him; and
then she should see that by that respective fear to offend her God, she should
be fully delivered from all other fear: she should see, that fearing only
the death of the soul, (which is only to be feared) she should not fear
that of the body, which is to be desired. But for that most men (as S.
Augustine does teach) fear the separation of the Tom. 2. in Psalm. 48.
soul from the body, and not the true death, which is the separation from God:
it happens, that fearing that, they fall often into this: So the soul being
willing to shake off this fear of the Creator, she must needs fear every
creature, even the smallest, frogs, mice, and flies; which flying about, awake
him suddenly, and many times trouble him much; but in the end death is above
all extreme fears the most fearful: And why is this? if like unto brute
beasts all dyed in him; and if in death there were nothing to be feared.
Wherefore Propertius says: The spirit is something death leaves it in store,
The palest shadows scapes to the burning shore.


But to conclude: The soul having been too familiar with the flesh, she has
gotten a habit, she has drawn such corruption, as being ignorant) of the
happiness which attends her in heaven, she cannot leave this valley of
misery, this obscure prison, but with great grief: being like unto the man,
which being carried away an Infant by a she wolf, was nourished by wolves, did
houle with them, and did live, and would live among them: and if he were taken
by other men, he would leave them to return to his wolves, as the History
makes mention of one, verifying the Proverb, That nourishment passes nature.

The sixth Argument from the efficient cause, of Immortality.
The elevation above time and place, is the efficient cause of Immortaliti.

But the soul is elevated above all time and place.

IT is without all question, that only time ruins all things, yet the
understanding is not subject to time; for the time past is present unto it: And
therefore man shall see an act played before him, and yet he shall have another
in his understanding, which was done 10. 20. or 30. years before: and shall
have it so present in his mind, as the spiritual intuition thereof, will
steal from his corporal eyes that which is presently acted before them. So
Scipio Affricanus said, that he was never less alone, then when he was alone;
why? For that his acts past, his armies led, and his triumphs, presented
themselves unto him in the most solitary walks of his garden. Observe a
horse; he does not see, seele, nor think of any thing, but the object that is
before his eyes: But contrarie-wise, the soul is there where she stays least;
she studies, and calls to mind what is past, and becomes wise for the future
before she sees; and of three times makes but one, for that she is not subject
to time; this is plainly seen in the Prophets, to whom the future is revealed
in the spirit as it were present, by him that has made time. And this is the
true reason why the Prophets speak without lying, of things to come, as if they
had bin done: So Esaias chap. 9. spoke of Jesus Christ; A child is borne unto us,
a child is given us; for he saw him borne with his Prophetical eyes, dead and
risen again. I would insist upon this Argument if it were not as plain as it
is firm.

As for the natural place of the Soul, she is not definite, for she is all in
the brain, all in the heart, all in the liver, all in the Matrix; and so of
the other parts of the body, not according to the total of her virtue; for
she is one in the head, an another the feet, another in the sight, another in
the hearing. But she is thus diffused according to the total of her essence,
which makes her in some sort infinite, and by consequent, immortal. It is not
then of her as of the moouer of a great wheel, which touching one part makes
all the rest turn; Nor as a King who sitting in his Palace stretches out his
hands to the farthest confines of his kingdom: But as God in the world, who is
in heaven, on earth, and all in all.

The first Objection.
All that is distempered by heat and drought, is perishable.

Such is the Soul.

GAllen thinking that the Soul burns in the body by a burning fever; is lost
with the great loss of blood, and that a strong poison does poison it, he
protests plainly, that until that time he had doubted what the substance of
the Soul was; but then grown wiser, as well by practice, as by age, he durst
boldly swear, that it was nothing but the temperature of the body.

And therefore calling Plato out of his grave, he demands of him, how it is
possible the soul should be immortal?

Answer: The heat of a fever, and the corporal force cannot work upon the
soul, neither can she suffer; and although the actions which the soul does by
means of the Organes of the body, be depraved or interrupted by the
deprauation and interruption of the Organes, yet for all that the soul loses
nothing of her virtue, nor of her ability.

He that even now played excellently well on the Lute, must not be held to have
lost his cunning, if taking a Lute ill mounted and with (...) string^, he play
ill; or if having no strings at all, he cease to play: It is even so of the
spirit in the body for in the sinews flowing from the brain, there distills a
certain vital spirit, as a beam of the Sun, of whose force the soul makes use
first, to handle the sinews, and by them the Muscles; which being afterward
moved, revive every member apart, and altogether. Now if any malign disease
come to deprave this subtle humor, the functions of the soul feel it, but
not the soul.

Moreover, as certain unclean spirits, remaining in some dark and filthy
house by reason of the vapors agreeing with their disposition; if it be
cleansed, the door and windows set open, if a good air, a comfortable Sun,
and wholesome wind enter into it; if it be inhabited by many, who pass the time
joyfully, and especially if they play upon many Instruments, these spirits quit
the place: So by a contrary analogy, the soul is kept and entertained in the
body by certain spiritual qualities and fit for her exercises; which coming
in time to change to the contrary, they chase away the soul, being glad upon
that occasion to dislodge from a place which was not to be held.

Thirdly, if the temperament be nothing but the Quint^ssence of the mixtion of
the four elements, whereof man's body is compounded as the harmony is the fifth
sownd, rising from all the parts in Music: and if Gallen means not to speak
but of this soul which he has felt in the touching of the pulse, in the
Anatomy of the body; I say, of the vegetative and the sensitive soul, we may
yield unto him; But of the reasonable soul which contaynes these two, within
her compass (as the fifth angle does a tria^gle and quadrangle) and which makes
use of the temper to the body, as of an instrument, to rule and govern it, as
the Pilot does the Helm to conduct his ship; that cannot be: for to confound
the instrument with the principal agent, the Pilot with the Helm were no
reason: In the actions of a vegetative and sensitive life, although there be a
mature te^perature required, yet shall they never prove, that this temper is
necessary to understand and contemplate, seeing that out of all question the
most exquisite contemplation consists in the sequestratio^ of the soul from
the communion of the body; for that contemplation is the more certain, the more
it is sequestered from gross circumstances of matter, place and time; things
which with their accidentarie attires are perceived by the se^ses, do often
deceive. How often has our sight and our hearing deceived us? thinking to see
and hear one thing, which proved another. But the sciences as the
Mathematics, which extract the Essences out of bodies, are never deceived
following their art; and much less the Metaphisicke, which co^templates the
pure spirits, free from any contagion of matter. But if the reasonable soul
were nothing but the temperament of the body, it could not be but among a
millio^ of beasts which are in the world, some one should be found which had
the same mixture of the the four first humors which are in man, and by
consequence, the same reasonable faculty: and if any reply that the chief
difference is in the brain, I will answer, that the Anatomy does not show any
difference of the brain of men and beasts.

The 2. Objection.
If the soul lived out of the body, she should have some actions without the
body.

But this is not true.

ARistotle says, that the soul in the body understands nothing, but by her
conversation with the Ideas, which the imagination represents unto her, whether
that she gets new knowledge, or contemplates that which is gotten. But the
Ideas perish with the body, and by consequence, the soul.

Answer. The excellent effects of the soul, suffice to convince her presence
and essence; as for the understanding it is double, passive and active; and
these two faculties remain still, although the figures which imagination has
furnished, be vanished. So a man in the bottom of an obscure Cave has not
lost his faculty of seeing, although he, cannot plainly judge of colors. But
the soul, you will say, understands not any thing being out of the body,
seeing that within it she understands not any thing without him. It follows
not. That great Workman, who after a manner incomprehensible to us, has united
and joined the soul unto the body, two such different natures, without any
apparent mean to reconcile them: that great workman, I say, is powerful to
furnish new means to her operations, when he has called it unto him: and
what? we shall know when it shall be fit. In the mean time, if we will
believe Thomas Aquinas, it shall be by the conversion (...). quest. 86. ^al, 1.
of the soul to things which are simply intelligible as the other spiritual
substances do.

Jesus Christ also has vouchsafed to teach us, that in heaven we shall be like
unto the Angels. Let us not then trouble our selves here no more, then for the
child coming into the world: In the mothers womb it lived by the navel:
this means is cut off by his birth, but nature has provided him a mouth,
another passage in another life. It is even so of the soul; it is nourished in
this corruptible life, by a carnal means, and in the heavenly by another,
which is spiritual. But you will reply, that the soul is to return into the
body; and not the infant into the womb. I answer, That it is sufficient the
similitude explaining the thing, shows it not to be impossible.

Moreover, it is not likely that in the Resurrection, the body which shall be
spiritual, should furnish the same means for the actions of the soul, as it
does in this life; but this business is too intricate.

Let us put in practice what S. Augustine propounds unto us; Let not the soul,
says he, labor do fore know it self absent, but to know it self well being
present, and how much she differs from other things: Aso, she has not taken
her form from Christ, but her salvation; and therefore the Son of God
descended, and took upon him man's soul, not to the end the soul should know
it self in Christ, but that she should know Christ within her self; for by
the ignorance of her self, her salvation is not only in danger, but by the
ignorance of the eternal word, as Tertullian does learnedly teach, lib. de
Car. Christ.

The third Objection.
If the soul of man were immortal, it should also be immateriall.

But she is material.

IF the soul be material, she is dissoluble into her first matter, with all
other sublunary things: but she is material if she proceeds from the Fathers
seed, as Tertullian, Origin, and other ancient and modern Divines think, and
mainetaine it by their written books. And in truth how can it be said, that
the infant is the son of his father, if he hold nothing from him but his
basest part, the body, not his form, not his soul: how could the holy Ghost
say, that all the souls which came out of Jacobs thigh, were 66? How can Genesis
46.
original sin flow from the father upon the son, which has no seat but in
the soul? And this made S. Augustine doubt in his fourth book of the
beginning of the soul, the which he did write being old; to doubt, I say, of
this beginning, not daring to deliver his opinion: and some more hardy have
maintained that she proceeded from the congression of the two seeds of man and
woman, as by the striking of the iron against the stone fire comes forth.

Answer. The principal foundation of the immortality of the soul is the word
of God: so they which have had more feeling of this word, have better
acknowledged it; as Zoroastres, Mercurius Trismegistes, Pithagoras, and Plato,
surnamed the Divine for that effect: but Aristotle, Gallen, and others, who
would measure all by human reason, have wonderfully deceived themselves in
matters which exceeded this measure, as in this Doctrine.

If then the Obiector will believe this witness, of whom he cites a passage,
the question will be soon ended: the holy Scripture says, that the Eternal
breathed the spirit of life into the nosestrills of Adam, he being framed of
the slime of the earth; the which is not spoken of any other creature: In
Ecclesiastes it is said, that the spirit returns to God that gave it: Jesus
dying cried out, Father into thy hands I commit my soul. He promises to the
believing thief, that he shall be that day with him in Paradise; finally, S.
Stephen dying made this prayer, Lord Jesus receive my soul; with a thousand
other passages. As for that which he speaks of the generation of the soul, we
first will oppose the authority of Tertullian, lib. de Anima c. 13. You
mothers, says he which are newly delivered, answer, the question is of the
truth of your nature, if you feel in your fruit any other viuacitie from you
but what your arteries do breath. And for this cause the infant is said to be
the true son of his father and mother, from whom the body with his Organes
proceeded; to make which perfect God infused the spirit, so as this spirit is
made for this body, and not the body for this spirit simply. Moreover, the
generation is not ended, nor consists in the production of the form or of
the matter only, but of all that is composed: therefore he that composeth or
that ioynes the matter with the form, the flesh with the soul, he does truly
engender man. But it is he that makes this conjunction, who disposes so of
matter and form, as the soul follows infallibly, and it is that which makes
man in the generation, and man and woman are the begetters of the infant.

As for the passage of Moses, who does not see the intellectual figure, who
means one thing for another, the body for the soul by reason of their strict
union? Finally, that which made S. Augustine doubt of the generation of the
soul, was, that he could not comprehend how the sin which dwells in the soul
of the father, does pasfe unto the son: But that is so plainly fet down by
the Divines at this day, as it is needless to speak of here, neither were it
to the purpose: It suffices that the Pagans themselves have acknowledged that
the soul came into man otherwise then from man. Aristotle says plainly, that
it is something from without us: Seneca, The soul, says he, if thou look
unto her first beginning, is not made of that mass of heavy flesh, but is
descended from the celestial Spirit: Epictetus calls the soul a branch pulled
from the divinity: Plutarque in the Platonicall questions says, that the
soul participating of the understanding and reason, is not only a work of
God, but a part of him, and not only made by him, but of him; these are
Hyperbolicall Elogies, but by them these personages have made it known how
reverently they did esteem of a reasonable Soul, having no thought that she
was material.

The 7. Argument taken from the effects of the Immortality of the soul.
Manifest effects do manifestly show their cause.

Consolation in the greatest heaviness, hope in the most desperate events,
fortitude in the sharpest assaults, are effects in man proceeding from the
immortality of the soul.

MAn floating upon the sea of this world, at every puff of wind of adversity
would swound away and perish, if the consideration of the immortal being of
his soul, as a most sure anchor, did not comfort and forti fie him they that
have struck against the rocks of adversity can witness it; and such as have
not, must prepare themselves for it; for prosperity which seems to be
married unto them, will cross them and overthrow them in the end, if they be
not very wary: for that her greatest happiness is miserably to supplant her
favorites; and therefore every man should in time make provision of a strong
Antidote against fortune: And the true Antidote is a full persuasion of the
immortality of the Soul. For happen what can happen, let the heavens riue,
let the earth open, let the waves ouerflow the world; such a man will Medijs
tran quillus in: vndis.
continue constant and undaunted. By this resolution, Crates, Diogenes,
Socrates, the Curij, Fabricij; Decij and others, desired rather to leave their
riches, Scepters, favors, the quiet rest of their bodies, yea their own lives;
then to abandon the least point of their duty and honor. By this belief
Regulus did joyfully suffer the inhumane torments of the Cathaginians to
maintain the Majesty of his Country.

Attilius stood vnstirr'd at death that grew,
And with a deathles spirit ouerflew
Foes highst inflictions: smiling in disdain
At all the terrors in the Punique pain.
It is also the only assurance which gives firm footing to the doctrine of
Christ, and makes a Christian hope in the midst of despair, which seems
howrely ready to swallow him up, either in the outward gulf of persecution; or
in the inward gulf of his flesh, of his senses, of his own reason; which he
must renounce to reverence this doctrines of the Cross of Christ, which is a
scandal unto the Jews, and folly unto the Gentiles; which offends the most
devout, and is rejected by most learned of this world.

How shall he hope (as some have said) in things so far from reason? what,
shall a man joy when he is a daptiue, and force his reason by the which he is
a man, to give glory to God immortal? Whence can it flow but from the spring
of his immortal soul? doubtless it was an admirable thing, that contrary to
the Edict of Nere (whereby whosoever confessed himself a Christian, without any
farther search should be put to death, as an enemy to mankind:) men and women
went by thousands to Christian Assemblies, and to death, not sadly but joyfully.

But this exceeds all wonders, that all thief miseries endured, have no other
foundation, but to believe in a man whom no man sees; to have one for King who
has been hanged on the cross, and to have him sor the only and true God,
whom they had seen to have but the disfigured form of an infamous servant: to
men of judgment, and to such as the truly faithful are, this would seem
impossible, if their immortal spirits did not at^end after this life (nay
rather, this miserable death) a most happy life, as after a sharp Winter, a
most sweet Spring.

Finally, the only apprehension of the immortality of the soul, is it which
gives force in the fiercest alarmes, and sharpest temptations: which made weak
David to triumph over strong Goliath; Debora and Judith, of powerful Tyrants:
this made Sceuola a prisoner to amaze king Porsenna, and to raise his seege
from before Rome; with many other examples both ancient and modern: all which
had no other reason to move them in their brave exploicts, but the glorious
brething of their immortal Souls.

The first Objection.
From deluding opinions many times there follow strange and true effects.

Therefore the effects do not always argue their cause to be true.

THE false Prophets of Baal did cut themselves; the Anabaptists at this day do
strange acts; and many others deceived with vain fancies, which in them hold
the place of certain knowledge, act terrible things.

Answer: That false pastor, that very impostor, as counterfeit as lying, being
directly opposite to the truth, cannot be conceived but by comparing with the
truth, whereof he is the shadow and privation. Even so false religion
presupposes the true necessarily; for having held her place, she makes
terrible work, as in the false Prophets above mentioned, in the Anabaptists
and other Heretics.

As then all religions have for their first foundation the adoration of the
Divinity, although diverse and variable, which more or less follow the pattern
which has been given us by God in his holy word: so all the Heroicke deeds,
all the worthy actions, though thrust on diversely by diverse passions, yet have
they all the immortality of the soul for their first foundation, without the
which men like unto beasts, would only care for the belly, and not perform
any worthy act; much less endure so many reproaches and miseries in this world,
as has been showed, and as is daily seen.

The second Objection.
If the soul were immortal, it should be an evident Principle to every man by
his own light, as that two and 2. make 4. that the whole is bigger then the
part, that we must fly evil and do good and^, things which we know without
learning.

Answer: I grant the consequence of the Mayor; for that the soul is immortal,
it is clear by her own brightness, although she has been much darkened by
sin: This is known to all men, in all places, and at all times, which are
the very conditions of the Principle.

And all that which they allege, is but to defend this truth against the
cunning and Sophistry of the wicked spirit and of his supporters, laboring by
cauillings to dazzle the eye of the soul; that not seeing her immortality, she
might be intrapt in the snatos of Satan, and suffer shipwradke of her faith.

The third Objection.
If the soul were an essence subsisting of her self, she should be known of
all.

But no man could ever know it.

ALL men that enter into this question of the soul, cry out, O darkness, o
pity! That which leads us to the knowledge of things, is unknown unto us.
that we have a soul, says Seneca, by whose commandment we are thrust on and
called back, all men confess it; but what this soul, this Lady and Queen
is, no man can decide, neither yet where she abides. Laertius, or rather
Heraclitus for him: Let us pass over the soul (says he) for no man can
find it, yea, if he should employ his whole life; so profound is the reason
thereof. Do not urge that the eye sees every thing but it self; for the eye
sees another eye, but one soul knows not another soul: yea, the eye sees
it self, not his image, but his proper substance, in the reflection of his
visuall beams, by the means of the lookingglasse; as for the soul, al they
that have delivered their opinions, have seemed to doat. Varro has said, that
Lact. de opist. c. 17.
it was an air conceived in the mouth, purified in the lights, made lukewarm
in the heart, and diffusedly spread over the whole body: Zeno, that it was a
fire kindled in our bodies by the celestial fire: Empedocles, and Circias,
that it was nothing but the blood; Hippocrates, that it was a subtle spirit
insinuated throughout the whole body: Thales, that it was a nature moving of it
self without rest: Asclepiades, a common exercise of the senses: Hippoc. that
she goes always on until death, 6 Epistle part 5. com. 5.

Finally, if it were ever, it is in this, That so many heads, so many opinions.

Answer: The soul flowing from the divine essence, has that common with God,
that we see many nega tions of her, but few or no affirmations: but we know
with Aristotle, that it is the perfection of a natural body which may have
life; that it is the beginning of nourishment, feeling, motion, and
understanding: And yet more then that, although we cannot climb so high: the
reason is, that the knowledge which the soul has of things, is from the
senses by means of the Ideaes; but the soul cannot be perceived by the
senses: of her there are no Ideas, nor by consequence any knowledge. And as for
this air, this fire, these spirits, such as they are fashioned in the brain,
they are but organes and vessels fit for the soul; seeing that we see them
wast and consume every moment, without loss of life, the which notwithstanding
cannot subsist without the ministry of the soul.

Finally, as for the different opinions of diverse men, they show that they know
not what it is; but withal they demonstrate that they know there is a soul
which they strive to know; but who is he that would study to know that which is
not in nature, unless he were mad?

The second Objection.
If the soul were endowed with a special motion, she would express it by her
body.

But she does not express it.

IF the soul at the departure out of the body, had her flight toward heaven,
she would give some sign of it to the body, stirring it with some special
motion. Simple Creatures move themselves in all sorts of motions, differing
from plants, which without moving from their place, do but grow up and spread
abroad, for that their souls are diverse: and why should not man, who has a
special soul, have a special motion? As for that he bounds and skips,
therein a goat or a cat has more then he; neither is that the reasonable
soul that does it, but rather the vegetative, the mixture of the natural fire
which raises him: wherefore as soon as a man breathes and exhales: this fire,
he falls from his leap; but of any proper or particular motion of this flying
soul, he feels nothing.

Answer: Seruius upon the 6. of Virgil will answer, That the soul in the body
is like unto a Lion shut up in a straight cage, which notwithstanding loses
nothing of his force, although he cannot show it; but if he once escape, you
shall see him as strong as before, so as a man would think his force had been
abated in his prison. Moreover, some have been so active as they have flowne;
as at Paris in the year 1551. there was one undertook to fly from the Tower
of Nefle unto the Louure, the river being betwixt both, the King expecting him:
and although he could not get to the end of his enterprise, yet he got up
into the air after such an admirable manner, as he came to the midway. But
the flying of the Creature does not prove his essence immortal, for then birds
should be immortal. And how then can the souls mount up to heaven going out
of the bodies? If thou do believe the holy Scriptures, the Angels sent to
serve them lovingly which shall receive the inheritance Hebr. 1, 14
of salvation, will carry them as the Angel did poor Lazarus. Luke 16, 22


Hereunto that good Father Macarius had regard: There is a great Mystery, says
Hom, 22, of the estate of them that die.
he, accomplished in souls going out of the bodies; for if they be guilty of
sin; troops of devils and bad angels flocking about them, seize upon those
souls, as their slaves, and carry them away etc. But if they be in good
estate, the companies of good Angels carrying them to a better life, present
them unto the Lord; yet we will not deny but in the soul there is an
intrinsecall virtue to climb up to heaven, with a swiftness equal to her
desire: if that fire has a secret force to mount up to his proper place, being
a dead Element, what then shall the soul separated do, being so active, and so
quick, and whose proper Country is Heaven? And although that heaven,
especially that which is the mansion of happy souls, be so many leagues
distant, as Astrologers which have sought to take the height, have found
millions, and being much amazed have mounted near to two thousand millions of
leagues; yet we must not believe that the soul is long in passing this great
distance; for that her motion, not being continued, but divided like to that of
spirits, departing out of the body she is presently in heaven, even as in this
corruptible body, in a moment she sends the beams of her sight and thoughts
up to heaven. But wholly to stop the mouth of our adversary, we say that the
true knowledge of the soul in her immortality, is no human invention, but a
divine revelation, as Iustine Martyr says; and that since she is fallen Dial.
cont Triph.
from her first integrity, which fall has so amazed and dulled her, as she
knows not truly what she has been, what she is, or where she is, nor
whither she shall go, of whosesinne she is the subject, as Iron is of rust; it
has wholly spoiled her, dulled her quickness, and weakened her vigor; which
is the cause that she stumbles in the way of health, is blind in the knowledge
of the least things and is interrupted in the course of her brauest discourses
by a fly or any toye: To conclude, she is so troubled, as she dreams of a
thousand fancies, and in a manner mistakes every thing.

The fifth Objection.
To allege the desire of a morsel of fruit, for the only reason of so great
a misery, is to show himself ridiculous.

Moses for all the miseries of Adam and his descendants, produces no other
reasons.

DV Bartas has seen this Objection, and has written in these terms:

Who shall direct my pen to paint the Story
Of wretched man's forbidden bit-loft, glory?
And,

Though Adams doom in every Sermon common,
And founded on the error of a woman,
Weary the vulgar; and be judged a jest
Of the profane, zealefcoffing Atheists?
Answer: The offense of the first man is not so small as it seems to an eye
troubled with carnal sense

But i was a chain where all the greatest sins, Were one in other, linked
fast as twins.

Let us examine them and condemn them; The 1. is Ingratitude, to have received
from God these sovereign blessings, as wisdom, justice, felicity, the
government over all Creatures; and then to have more honored the Devil then
his benefactor.

Secondly, Pride; not to content himself with his honest condition, but to
seek G^. 2. 22.
to make himself equal to his Creator.

Thirdly, his Infidelity, not to give credit to the threatenings of God, Thou
shall die the death: and to believe Satan, mocking at the threats of God, and
accusing him of envy; You shall not dye, but God knows that what day you
shall eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and you shall be as Gods.

Fourthly, the contempt of God, wilfully disobeying, and touching the forbidden
Tree.

Fifthly, his revolt from God to his adversary, from whom he hopes and attends
his imaginary greatness: the which the Doctors of the Church weighing, they
have found that it was no small sin, but the greatest in certain cases that
man could commit; for three reasons set down by S. Augustine, and these are
Aug. lib. 4. de Ciu. D^. c. 12. and 15.
the contents,

1. Never man had that facillitie to keep himself from sin that Adam had;
for he had but one Commandment, and that most easy; he had no concupiscence
that induced him to evil; but he had divine authority, and that grievous
threat to divert him.

2. Man was most happy in the earthly Paradise; but we although we have great
blessings from our God, yet we have them partly in faith, as the Incarnation
of Jesus Christ; partly in hope, as eternal life: which is the cause that not
tasting them yet, we feel many doubts crossing our mind. Besides, in the
midst of Gods consolations, we are stung with many afflictions, so as it is
no wonder if many leaving the way of heaven, turn themselves to the goods of
this world. But Adam had received infinite blessings of God, with a perfect
knowledge of him, and no vexation; and yet he was an Apostata unto God.

3. That sin is greatest which brings most ruin unto mankind: but there is
none committed since, that has made a greater spoil; By it (says S. Augustine
in the former place) the universal Mass of human nature is condemned; for
that he which did first commit it, is punished with his posterity, which was
in his rheines. It follows then, that it is a most horrible sin, and they
that speak otherwise, have never duly considered thereon: or else they are
very bad disputers, concluding it a small fault in breaking an easy com
mandement of a light thing; for it is that which gives most weight unto the
sin, as has been already declared. To the King of heaven, immortal,
invisible, to God only wise, be honor and Glory, for ever and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
The Errata.
FOl. 227. l. 11. for death read life. In M. fol. 254. verses set in prose.
fol. 161. l. 7. for men read wise men. fol. 398. l. 13. for Creatures read
Creator. fol. 306. l. penul. for dainty read vanity. fol. 313. l. 7. re^
Massachres, ead. l. 16. for sand read ^and, fol. 330. l. 7. read who has
learned, fol. 344. l. 17. r. alarmes, fol. 355. l. 7. read Apology. fol. 361.
l. 6. read thousands of offenders. fol 372. l. 4. read seazure, fol. 374. l.
1^. read for there. fol. 382. l. 7. read seen. fol. 404. l. 14. for joyful
read pleasant.


