THE HAPPY DELIVERIE OF WOMEN.

Wherein is set down the Government of Women.

In the time Of their breeding Child: Of their Travail, both Natural, and
contrary to Nature: And Of their lying in.


Together with the diseases, which happen to Women in those times, and the
means to help them.

To which is added, a Treatise of the diseases of Infant and young Children:
with the Cure of them.

Written in French by JAMES GVILLIMEAV the French Kings Surgeon.

LONDON Printed by A. HATFIELD. 1612.

Ad Authorem.
TErgeminam merito laudem sibi vendicet Author
Cui Matris curae est, cui Puerique salus.
Faem^ Laudabit te iure Puerpera; grates
Vir quoque pro salua coniuge, Letus aget.
Inque tuum primos Infans formabit honorem
Risus, cum tumidi carceris exit onus.
Infans, Vir, Mulier, pro vita vota rependant:
Chara tibi coniux, pignora chara ferao.
THE AVTHORS Epistle Introductory to the Reader.
ALthough that man be the most perfect and absolute of all other cretures,
nevertheless, so weak is he by Nature, and so subject to infinite
infirmities, that Divine Hippocrates has urged him, to be even sickness it
self from his very birth: He is not fit (says he) to be employed in any
business while be sucketh: because h^e wholly depends upon the help of
another: afterward when he comes to more years, he grows stubborn, and
unruly, and wants a M^ster to give him instruction: Again, when he is grown
to the prime of his age, he becomes audacious and proud. At last in his
declining time, he falls into misery, having nothing left him, but the
remembrance of his labors ill bestowed.

Pliny notes, and experience shows it to be true that the ill sent only of a
Candle new put forth, is enough to destroy a child in the mothers womb, so
that she may be forced to fall in travail, and be delivered before her time,
unless her strength be the greater to resist the offense. And although the
child stay the full time that nature has prefixed him: yet commonly he is not
able to get forth, or come safely into the World (yea though the birth be
natural) without the help not only of the Mother, and himself: but also of
the Midwife and other women about her ready to receive and cherish him: And
which is worst of all; if he be placed awry, or else be weak and faint, or
else if the midwife be at the farthest of her skill; then if they will save the
child, and so consequently the mother from death: they must call a Surgeon
to deliver her, and bring the child into the world: which (that I may touch it
by the way without taxing any) is commonly done too late either through the
wilfulness of the kinsfolks, or obstinacy of the Midwiues.

But grant that the child comes into the world of it self, without the help
either of Surgeon or Midwife: yet (as it is commonly said) he draws his
death after him: the which may be plainly perceived by the cries and laments
which he makes as soon as he sees the light, as if hce craved for help and
succor. For if he should continue in that case that he comes from his mothers
womb, clogged with his bed or afterbirth, without doubt this bed being
putrified, would infect the child, and at length kill it. Besides, oftentimes
if there were not help to make a free passage, in the fundament, yard, or
other natural places, that are sometimes closed up, there could neither
sustenance be received, nor excrements expelled, which would cause the child to
be stifled, and choked up.

Many times also the head, and other parts of the body, (as the bones and
legs) happen to be ill shapen, yea broken and out of joint, which would never
come of themselves, into their proper and natural place. There, then is it
necessary that the Surgeon use his helpful and skillful hand: So that every
man may plainly see the necessity and Antiquity of this work: since that the
first practice in Surgery, that ever was done in the world, was the
Omphalotomia, or cutting of the Navel, which Adam and Eve practiced on their
first child.

These therefore are the Motives that have induced me to publish this
discourse, and therein to treat of such diseases as happen to women with child.

And herein I have endeavored to help them both in their natural, and
extraordinary travail: and to ease them in all such accidents, as may happen
unto them in their childbed: being the rather incited thereunto, by reading the
complaints of Women, related by Soranus. O male occupatum virorum genus!
occidimur nos non morimur: and ab illis qui inter vos peritissimi existimantur
perperam curatae. Vos de qualibet leuissima vestratum affectionum, libros ex
libris facientes, bibliothecas Voluminibus oneratis; de nostris interea diris
et difficillimis cruciatibus nulla vel exigua mentione facta.

O men, how ill do you bestow your time, and pains! Alas, we women die not,
but are tormented even to death: For those that are accounted the most expert
and skillful among you, take not that care of us which they should: you fill
whole Libraries with large volumes and writings of every light and triuiall
disease of your own making little or no mention at all, of our cruel and
insupportable torments.

I had purposed above fifteen years since, to have written somewhat concerning
this subject in my books of Surgery: but having more maturely considered
thereof, I thought it fitter to write a Treatise of it by it self: which it
deserves both for the difficulty of the subject, and for the variety of the
matter which I was desirous to observe therein: And indeed this work
excels all other, which are practiced upon the body of man: whether ye
respect the Antiquity, Necessity, or dexterity thereof.

For the Antiquity: without doubt the first work in Surgery, that ever was
in the world, was the cutting of the Navel which, (as is said before) Adam
practiced upon his first borne.

Concerning the necessity: some perhaps may object, that the bringing a bed of
women, is not so necessary a work as these following:

To stay the flux of blood, whether it be in vein or Artery; to use the
Trepan; to open the Empyema, or suppuration in the breast; to cut one that has
the Dropsy; or to let blood skilfullie: For the flux of blood it may be
further said, that unless it be stopped by leesing the blood, the life also
is endangered. But we must consider, that the blood oftentimes staying of it
self, and experience evidently shows, that nature, which is wise and provident
does commonly restrain, and stop it. I have been present in many skirmishes,
(yet far enough out of gunshot, where I have dressed many that were wounded,
who have had the great vessels in many parts of their bodies cut, and bruised,
having lost much blood upon the hurt, and yet it has stopped and stayed of it
self. Some will say, that he who has his scull cl^ft by a wound is in danger
of death, if the blood that is shed upon the Membrane, be not taken forth by
the means of the Trepan; For this blood would be wholly putrified, and
withal, corrupt the brain, the chief instrument of life, and whose use is
more then necessary. Notwithstanding we see, that in many, the filth and
ma^ter comes forth by the Nose, Ears, and mouth, without being trepanned,
yea, that it passes even through their bones. We may say the like of such
which have the Dropsy, or Empyema, the breast of the one is full of
Corruption, and the others belly full of water: they both choke and stifle,
unless the Surgeon make incision: in the one making a Paracentosis, in the
other opening the Pleura.

Yet nevertheless we see, that he which has an Empyema or suppuration does
oftentimes expel the matter, and filth, by the mouth or urine (the ways
being manifest, by which nature does unburden her self) and he that has the
Dropsy auoideth the water, either by urine, or stool, yea, and by sweat, or
by some little vent which Nature makes in some part of the body, as in the
Navel or legs: which we observe by daily experience in many men: and
therefore we may perceive, that these practices are not always, so necessary,
and requisite.

For letting blood; you will say, that he hazards his life, (and that
suddenly) who being oppressed, and troubled with a great pain of his head or
side, is not speedily let blood? because the blood that boyleth in his veins,
strives only to come forth; I will answer: that Nature very often sends it
forth by the Nose, Mouth, Eyes, and Ears: by stool also, and other parts,
disburthening her self to the sick Man's ease and profit: But It is not so in
the delivery of women; for if the entrance of the womb be closed, (as it is
seen in diverse) whether it be naturally, by reason of a strong and thick
membrane, which shuts up the passage: or other wise, because some scarre
happening there, has hardened, and shrunk up the sides of the neck of the
said womb: it would be impossible that nature should ever be able to separate,
and break through th^se impediments: for as for the one, it is hard for a
pen or quill to pass there, and for the other, you cannot put in a small
probe through the little hole which is in the midst of the membrane. And yet
I have had the experience thereof in two women, which were never the less with
child, as I will show more at large hereafter. So that either the Chirurgions
help must be used, or else both the Mother and the child would die miserably.

Some may object unto me, that the Mother might open the passage her self by
tearing the parts so bound by the scarre, and breaking through the said
membrane? But what will you answer me, for her which has her child turned
awry and lies double in her womb, and falls into a Convulsion, or flux of
blood, or both together. The Mother not being able either to turn it, or pull
it forth, especially if the head of it be entangled and fastened between the
bones of os Pubis, so that it is impossible to turn it, safe and sound, except
the Surgeon use his industry and skill.

Now for the dexterity: there is no comparison between this and other
practices; for there be no works to be done in Surgery; where it is not
necessary, to have the benefit either of daylight or candle light, and the part
which is to be handled, and dressed must be apparent and laid open to the eye.

Whereas contrariwise in this work as well by reason of the company present,
as also, least the woman should be afraid, the very entrance, whereby he
should put in his hand, they are constrained to hide: and then his hand being
there, he must search for the child) howsoever it be placed) not being able to
see it. And if there be found two, three, or four Children, yea, sometime five
(as Albertus Magnus reports, he saw in Germany, a Woman that brought forth
to the number of threescore and five children, being delivered every year of
five) then (I say) I leave you to judge what skill and dexterity the
Surgeon ought to use in seeking them one after another if they come amiss.

On the other side, as often as a woman is well delivered by the help and hand
of the Surgeon, there life is given to two, to wit: to the Mother and the
child. And therefore as this worthy man says, In partu inuocatur dei auxilium:
quaeritur enim and parturientis and nascentis salus. When a woman is in
travail, they call upon God for help: because they desire to save both the
Mother and the child. Now in all other practices, though they attain to their
wished end, yet can there be but one only saved at once. Whereby it may be
judged, that this practice is both for the Antiquity, Necessity, and
dexterity thereof, the most laudable and commendable of all others.

To make the which more easy, and the better to instruct the young Surgeon:
I have gathered together all that I could possibly, out of that which I have
observed this forty years and above, wherein I have practiced it, and seen it
practiced, in the greatest families both within, and without this Kingdom,
where, thanks be to God, good use has been made of me. And withal I have not
refused nor disdained to go unto the meanest, moved partly by Charity, and
partly to make my self more and more experienced therein.

Having then conferred together, what either the Graecians and Latins both
ancient and Modern have written, with that I have been able to observe: and
having reduced it all into one, I have put it into French in favor of those
who are not so well learned, and have not the knowledge of the Greek or Latin
tongues.

Some will say (to diminish that little honor, which I might get by this my
labor) that the Ancients have written the greatest part hereof. But they
shall learn from the mouth of this great Oracle, That there is no less wit
and understanding required, to be able to judge of Sciences formerly written,
then to be the first Authors of them.

I know Moreover, that in the Doctrine, and much more in the phrase, some will
find many things to be reprehended. But I entreat the Reader, that he would
receive it in as good part as I offer it him: and likewise exhort others, (that
are more experienced, then I am: to do better. Let them show me my faults
friendly; and I will not refuse, willingly to retract them: after the example
of that divine Hipocrates, who freely confessed his, saying openly, that he had
gotten more dishonor, then either glory, or credit, by practicing of Physic.


The Translators Preface.
THus far has the Author pleaded for him self, whom while I Translate, least
the fault be translated upon me, I will speak somewhat for my self, before I
be accused: least when I am accused, there be no body to speak for me: If
therefore it be thought prejudicial, either to the literarie commonwealth of
Physic, that I have exported and made common a commodity, which the learned
would have had private to themselves: or if I have been oftensiue to Women, in
prostituting and divulging that, which they would not have come to open light,
and which beside cannot be expressed in such modest terms, as are fit for the
virginity of pen and paper, and the white sheets of their Childbed. I must
(as well as I can) defend my self from these imputations, and show my care to
keep both learning and modesty illibate, and inviolable. First then, I have
done no more in this, then the Author has in his French Copy, which is common
to be had and read in that vulgar tongue: In defense of which, and this the
shadow thereof, I must say that it is not writ so much for the learned (who
notwithstanding, if they have not the french, may make use of this) as for the
Chirurgions, and Midwiues, who are called to this kind of employment. As for
women (whom I am most afraid to offend) they must be content to have their
infirmities detected, if they will have help for them, which I wish might not
come to any ear or eye, but to those which they themselves would have
acquainted therewith, and as well for their sakes, as mine own satisfaction: I
have endeavored to be as private and retired, in expressing all the passages in
this kind as possibly I could.

And with this I hope all good Gentlewomen will rest satisfied: to whom I wish
all happiness of increase, and all increase of happiness, that they may have
a good hour for this business, and for all other Contentments, many good
days and years.

A Summarie or Brief of all the Chapters contained in this work.
That which is handled in the first Book.
THe government and ordering of a woman, the nine Months she goes with Child;
and the means to help her, whatsoever sickness does happen in that space.
Fol. 1 1 The signs, whereby to know that a woman is with Child. 2 CHAP. 2 The
signs to know whether she will have a Boy, or a Wench. 8 3 The signs to know
that a woman has two Children. 12 4 Of false Conception. 13 5 Of the order of
Diet, which a great bellied woman ought to keep. 18 6 How a Woman must govern
her self all the time of her being with Child. 27 7 Of diverse Accidents which
trouble and molest Women while they are with Child. 32 8 Of Women's longing,
called Pica, 34 9 Of Distastfulnesse, and of the Hicket. 41 10 Of the Vomiting,
which comes upon a women with child. 43 11 Of the pains of the Stomach,
Flancks, and Belly, which happens to a Woman with Child. 47 12 Of the pain of
the Back, Hips, and Groine, and of the difficulty of making Water, which
chances to Women with child. 49 13 Of the palpitation and beating of the Heart:
As also of the Swounings which happen to women with Child. 52 14 Of the Cough.
54 15 Of Costiuenesse, or hardness of the Belly. 51 16 Of the Flux of the
Belly, or Laske. 61 17 Of the swelling of their Legs and Thigh's. 65 18 Of
Abortment, or the means to help them that bear not their Children to the full
time. 69


That which is handled in the second Book. The means to help a Woman with
Child, either in her natural Travail, or that which shall be contrary to
Nature.
1 OF Midwiues. Fol. 79 2 What manner of woman a Midwife ought to be. 84 3 What
must be observed when a woman is ready to fall in travail. 86 4 Of the duitie
and office of a Midwife, concerning the first time she must observe in the
travail. 91 5 Of the second time she must observe. 93 6 Of the third time she
must observe. 97 7 Of the care and attendance that must be had, to a woman that
is newly delivered. 101 8 Of painful, and difficult delivery, and the causes
thereof. 104 9 The means to help Women that are delivered with difficulty and
great pain. 113 10 Of diverse kinds of deliueries which are performed by the
Chirurgions help. And first, what a Surgeon ought to consider, before he go
about this work. 123 11 The means of helping a woman that is troubled with a
Flux of blood, and Convulsions, in the time of her travail. 125 12 The way to
help a woman in travail, when the Afterbirth comes for-most. 133 13 The
means to help a woman, when her Child is dead in her womb. 136 14 The way to
draw forth a Child that is puffed up and swollen. 104 15 The means to help a
woman, when her Child comes with the head forward, having his Neck and Head
turned awrie. 144 16 The means to help a woman, when the Child comes with an
Arm and the Head foremost. 147 17 The means to help a woman, when the Child
comes with both his Arms, and the Head foremost. 149 18 The means to help a
woman, when the Child comes, with one, or both the Feet foremost. 152 19 The
means to help the delivery, when the Child comes, with both his Hands, and
both his Feet together foremost. 160 20 The means to help the Woman when the
Child comes double, putting foremost either his Sides, or his Back, and
Shoulders, or his Buttockes. 163 21 The manner of helping the delivery, when
the Child comes with his Breast, and Belly foremost. 166 22 The means to
help the delivery when there is two Twins, and the one comes with his Head,
and the other with his Feet foremost. 169 23 The means to help the woman that
has two Twins, when they both come with their Feet foremost. 173 24 Of the
Afterbirth, which is retained, and stays after the delivery, and the means
to bring it away. 176 25 The way to take forth a Child, by the Caesarian
section. 185


What is contained in the third Book. The Government, and ordering of a Woman
newly delivered, and of the diseases that happen unto her, in her Month.
1 OF her Diet. 189 2 What must be done to her Breasts, Belly, and nether
parts. 194 3 Of the Accidents that follow the Delivery; And first of the
Gripings, or After-throwes. 206 4 Of the falling down of the Fundament and
Matrice. 210 5 Of the hurts and excoriations, which happen in the nether parts
after the delivery. 211 6 Of the Hemorroides. 215 7 Of the immoderate flowing
or coming down of the ordinary euacuations or purgings. 220 8 Of the
suppression or stopping of the said purgings. 227 9 Of the false Conception,
staying behind after the delivery. 232 10 Of the precipitation, or falling
down of the Matrice. 235 11 Of the sticking and growing together, of the neck
of the Matrice. 245


FINIS.
THE GOVERNMENT and ordering of a Woman the nine months that she goes with
child: And also the means to help her what sickness soever does happen in
that time.
The First Book.
Written by JAMES GVVILLEMEAV the French Kings Surgeon in Ordinary, and
sworn at PARIS.
THE PREFACE.
I Have purposed only in this Work, to handle the government of a Woman with
child, and the means to help her in her travail; together with the order
which is necessary for her in her childebed. But because this government is
particular, and proper to a Woman with child, before we give order thereunto,
we must first find out whether she be with child, or no.

The signs to know whether a woman be with child, or no. CHAP. I.
A Surgeon must be very circumspect, in determining whether a woman be
conceived, or no; because many have prejudiced their knowledge, and discretion,
by judging rashly hereof. For there is nothing more ridiculous, then to assure
a woman that she is with child; and afterward, that her natural sickness,
The Chirurgions must beware of judging rashly.
or store of water should come from her: and in stead of a child, some windy
matter should break from her, and so her belly fall, and grow flat again:
which has happened unto many men, that have been well esteemed, both for their
learning, and experience. And we have seen the experience hereof in some
women, which were (without all question) thought to be so great, that the
Midwife was even ready to receive the child: A story.
who notwithstanding have been freed and acquitted hereof either by their
natural purgings and euacuations, or by voiding of water, or else expelling of
wind. The which happened unto Mad. P. to her great grief, who was delivered of
certain gallons of water, when she thought assuredly that she had been with
child. I saw the contrary happen to the daughter of M. Marcel: who was judged
by four of the chief Physicians, and as many Chirurgions, and two Midwiues,
not to have been with child; and yet being dead, there was found in her body,
a child between six and seven months old. And of late memory, some of the
most expert Physicians, and Chirurgions of our time, Another.
undertook the cure of an honest woman; and from the third until the eighth
month of her time, administered unto her infinite many Clisters, Apozemes,
Potions, Fomentations, and Iniections, and yet could not they provoke her
natural sickness, much less cause her to be delivered. At length in the
ninth month, she thinking that she had had the Chollicke, was brought a bed of
a fair daughter, being verily persuaded even then when she was in travail
that she was not with child, as she had assured us, all the time that she went.
Directions for the Surgeon.
So that a Surgeon being called to give his opinion of the conception of a
woman, whether it be in a judicial, or private case, must be very wary and
circumspect what judgment he gives herein.

The ancient and modern writers have left some signs whereby we may foretell
it, which are collected from the Husband, from the Wife, from the Child, and
from the Midwife.

As for those signs which are taken from the Man, they are these: Signs of
co^ception taken from the man
If he find an extraordinary contentment in the company of his Wife; and if
he feel at the same time a kind of sucking or drawing at the end of his yard;
if he return from the field of nature, not ouer-moyst, these are signs that a
woman may have conceived. Experiment.
And by these observations I have known men which have assured their Wives
that they have got them with child, as soon as they have had their company.

Signs taken from the woman.
The signs which are taken from the Woman are more manifest and certain: and
although the greatest part of them be found in Women and Maids, which cannot
have their natural courses: yet nevertheless all these signs joined
together, a man may presume as far of them as art will permit, and they be
these: If she received an extraordinary delight in the company of her
Husband: if from her natural parts (whether they continue dry or moist) there
issue or flow nothing forth, because it is no necessary consequence, that
those parts should always remain dry, since the Matrice retains only that,
which is fit for the conformation of the child. Likewise, if at the same time
she has a kind of yawning, and stretching, and feels within her a shaking or
quiuering (such as we commonly find presently upon making of water) which
runs through the whole body, with a kind of chillness, and is felt chiefly
between the shoulders and the back, with some pain about the Navel, and a
rumbling or disquietnesse in the nether belly, which happens, because the
Matrice shrinks it self together, The womb shuts it self
to entertain and embrace the matter of generation which it has drawn and
sucked in, feeling thereby a kind of tickling. Again, if within few days she
falls a vomiting, and spitting, distasts her meat, grows dull, careless,
and qualmish, longs after strange things, finding her belly fallen, and
grown flat, according to the French proverb. -- Au ventre plat, enfant ya.
In a belly which is flat,
There Is a child, be sure of that.
Which makes them oftentimes to complain and say they be quite fallen away.
Then not long after her belly swells and grows bigger; her hips and raines are
enlarged; her courses appear not, which should flow at certain times, Some
women when they be with child have their courses.
(although some have them when they be with child.) Likewise if toward the
second month her eyes grow hollow and wan, her eye balls show less: the lids
be loose, limber, and soft: the veins in the corners of her eyes more swollen,
and bigger then ordinary. Hippocrates.
For as H^ppocrates says, if thou can not find by any means whether a
woman be with child, or no, her very eyes will tell thee: for their eyes be more
hollow, and sunk inward; and the white is turned bluish: the veins and
arteryes of their neck are pust up, and more apparent then usually: their
breasts grow big, and hard, with some pain and pricking, having also milk
within them: the nipple waxes firm, and hard: red, if it be a boy; and
sometime blackish, if it be a wench, which happens about the third or fourth
month, when they begin to quicken.

Signs taken from vrines.
Some judge of their being with child by the urine, as if it be white, and
clearly mingled with little moates, and that at the top there is perceived as
it were a little cloud like to the Rainebow; or of an Opall color, At the
bottom there appears a certain thick sediment, which being shaken, spreads
it self into little flocks, like to carded wool. Toward the end, their urine
is thick and reddish, by reason of the long retention of their natural
courses.

Experiment of Fernelius.
Fernelius makes this trial, which is, to take equal quantities of the woman's
urine, and of white wine and to shake them well together, if this mixture look
like the broth of Beans, it is a sign she is with child.

Hippocrates. Hydromell is made of honey and water boiled together.
Hippocrates sets down diverse experiments, as to give the woman Hydromell to
drink made with rain water at night when she goes to bed, or else Honey and
Annisseed beaten and dissolved in water. If she be with child, she will feel
great pains and griping in her belly, (unless she be used to such kind of
drink, Auicen.
as Auicen says.) Besides, if she receive below any strong or stinking oder or
smell, her clothes being well wrapped close about her, and the sent pierce not
up into her nose, she has conceived: As also, having over night put up a cloue
of Garlic, if in the morning the savor or taste come not into her mouth.

Truest signs gathered from the Child.
But these signs are not so certain, the truest and surest are those which are
collected from the child, when he begins to stir and move, which commonly
happens in the third and fourth month. This motion is very gentle, not unlike
the stirring of a fly when he flies.

Another certain sign may be perceived by the Midwife, Signs gathered by the
Midwife.
who putting up her finger into the womb to touch the inner orifice thereof,
if the woman be with child she shall find it so close shut, that the point of
a needle will scarce enter therein, yet soft, and without any hardness, which
also will be drawn upward being shrunk and as it were trussed up, because the
body of the Matrice does gather it self together to embrace the seed, which is
the reason that the Midwife can very hardly come to reach it with her finger.

Some women when they be with child hate the company of their husbands: which
quality is said also to be in brute beasts when they be great with young, who
commonly shun the company of the Male. And surely there be certain times and
seasons of the year proper for brute beasts to couple, but man (as Pliny
says) has neither time nor season limited him, neither day nor hour
appointed him, that so he might have his desire at all times: which has been
thus ordained by nature, as being more fit, and necessary for man to multiply
in his kind he being (the lively image of God, and made to behold his glory)
then for brute beasts, which were created only for the use of man.

I know well the answer that those two noble Ladies, Poppea the daughter of
Agrippina, A pleasant answer.
and Iulia the daughter of Augustus made concerning this matter. The one said,
that brute beasts cannot taste the delight which women receive that are with
child, because they are without reason: and the other said, that when her ship
was laden with wares, then she could take in passengers.

The signs whereby to know whether a woman be with child of a boy or a wench.
CHAP. II.
Having shown the means to know whether a woman be truly conceived, it will
not be from the purpose to handle this question for the satisfaction of some
curious minds, who as soon as the Surgeon has given his censure that a
woman is with child, demands presently of him whether it will be a boy, The
difference of sex is hard to foretell.
or a wench? But as it is very hard to know at the first whether the woman be
with child or no, so by great reason must it needs be far more difficult to
discern, and distinguish the difference of the sex, and to determine whether
it will be a boy or a wench.

I know there are some that boast they can certainly do it, but for the most
part it happens rather by chance, then through either art or skill. And for
proof thereof, I have showed them a child newly come from the mothers womb,
only laying my hand upon the privy parts, yet durst they not be so bold as
give their opinion thereof, saying, that it were more easy to judge of it when
it was in the womb, seeing that from thence might be gathered many evident
signs: but we must account the greatest part of them to be uncertain, as we
have formerly said. Nevertheless, to distinguish the Male from the Female, we
will presently show all the marks which we ever knew, or could observe, either
out of the ancient, or modern writers.

And first of all, young women commonly are with child rather of a boy then of a
wench, because they be hoter then the elder women, which was observed by
Aristotle, who says farther, Aristotle.
that if an aged woman which never had children before, chance to conceive, one
may be sure it will be a wench. The like happens (as some write) to women,
which conceive when the wind is in the South, who for the most part bring
forth daughters, and when the Northwind blows, sons. Observation.


Hippocrates says, Hipp. Aph.
that a woman which goes with a boy has a good color, for a woman in her
case, but if it be of a wench, she will have a worse complexion. Likewise if
the right breast be harder and firmer, the nipple hard, red, and more eminent,
the milk white and thick, which being milked or spirtled against a
sleeke-stone, or some such smooth thing, continues in a round form like a
pearl, Signs of a boy.
and being cast even into water it dissolueth not, but sinks directly to the
bottom: and if you make a cake with the said milk and flower, and in the
baking it continues firm, and close, it is a sign the woman is with child of
a boy. Again, she that goes with a boy, has the right side of her belly
bigger, and more copped, and there the child stirs oftenest. This motion
commonly at six weeks is scarce sensible, but at two months and a half more
manifest. The Male child lies high above the Navel by reason of his heat,
and the Female at the bottom of the belly, because of her coldness and weight.
They which be with child of a boy are more quick and nimble in all their
actions, and be in better health of body, without being subject to many
infirmities, which commonly happen to women with child of a wench.

^^gnes ga^hered out ^f Auicen.
Auicen observes these signs, That a woman with child of a boy has the pulse
of her right side stronger, higher, and thicker, then that of the left: she
will reach out her right hand rather then her left, and in going she will
always set forth the right foot foremost: her right breast is bigger then the
left, and the right eye greater, brighter, and more sparkling: and if a woman
about her last months have any great sickness, or any throws, without being
deliuerd, it is some likelyhod that she is with child of a boy, since the male
child is faster tied and bound then the female, because the ligaments which
hold and fasten him are stronger and dryer then they that bind and support a
wench.

Signs of a wench.
A woman which is with child of a daughter has a pale, heavy, and swarth
countenance, a melancolique eye: she is wayward, fretfull, and sad: she bears
in her face as Hippocrates says, Hippocrates lib. de stipilitate.
Maculam solarem, that is to say, her face is spotted with red, like those who
have been much in the sun: her left breast is bigger then the right; and the
top of the nipple black. The milk which comes forth of her breasts is bluish,
thin, and watrish: her belly is flat; and she feels her burden move on the
left side, and that, not before the fourth month: the veins of her thighs,
and groine, are bigger, and more knottie on the left side then on the right. An
honest Gentlewoman assured me that she had made trial of this receipt, which
is, An experiment.
to take an equal quantity of Claret wine, and of urine made in the morning,
put them together into a glass, and let them stand a whole day, if there
appear in the bottom a gross cloud, thick like to Beane-broth, it is a
sign the woman is with child of a boy, if it appear in the midst, it is
sign of a wench, if there be nothing found in the bottom but the ordinary
residence of urine, it shows she is not with child at all.

An experiment likewise may be made out of the practice of Liuia, Another
experiment of Liuia.
the Mother of the Emperor Tiberius, who being with child, and desirous to
know with what she went, took an egg from under a Hen that sat, and kept
it warm so long in her hands, till at last a Cock-Chicken was hatched out of
it, whereby she knew that she should have a son, which proved to be Tyberius
the Emperor, as Suetonius reports.

Here will it not be beside our purpose to set down what Hippocrates writes
in his book de superfaetatione, The means how to bege^ a son, or a daughter.
of the means how to get a man or woman-child. He that will (says he) beget a
son, must know his wife as soon as her courses are stayed, and then try the
utmost of his strength; but if he desire to get a daughter, then must he
company with his wife a good while after her courses, or at that time when she
has them: and beside, he must tie his right stone as hard as he can endure it;
and when he would have a son, he must tie the left. But Aristotle seems
wrongfully to blame his worthy man, when he says, that the generation of
Males or Females depends of the strength of the seed, and not of the stones,
the use whereof he says, is not for generation. But experience teaches us the
contrary, for the countrymen when they would have a Bull beget a Cow-Calfe, or
a Bull-Calfe, they tie the right stone for the one, and the left for the other.

The signs whereby to know that a woman goes with two children. CHAP. III.
To know whether a woman will bring two children.
THe signs that a woman has conceived two children, do seldom appear before
the third or fourth month, which then is known, both by the moving of the
children, and also by the greatness and swelling of the woman's belly. As for the
motion, if it be felt strong and forceable both on the right and the left side,
at the same instant, then it is apparent, that there be two children. Likewise
for the greatness of her belly, if it appear more swollen and bigger then in
her other childbearing, if the sides be higher then the middle of her belly,
and from the navel downward there appear as it were a line or separation
between both sides creasted; if the woman bear her burden with difficulty,
and her belly fall upon her thighs and hips, then may you safely say that she
goes with two children.

Of false Conception. CHAP. IIII.
WOmen are oftentimes deceived in reckoning themselves with child, for they
think themselves with child when it is nothing but the stopping of their
natural sickness, which keeps not due course. Some have a false conception,
which is as it were the beginning of Mola. Others have the Mola it self, which
we commonly call the Moone-calfe.

False conception is a lump of flesh gathered together commonly like to the
gizard of a foul, What a false conception is.
which is bigger or lesser according to the continuance of it, which nature
commonly expels in the second, third, or fourth month. But the Mola is far
bigger, and continues a year or two, yea ten or twelve, and sometime as long
as the woman lives. Of this Mola there be two kinds, the one may be called a
true, the other a false one. Mola is either true, or false.
The true Mola is fleshy, being nothing else but an unprofitable mass, without
shape or form, hard and firm, bred within the Matrice, and cleaving to the
sides thereof. The false Mola is of three sorts, the one windy, being a
collection of gross winds: the second watrish, or a heaping together of
waters: the third humorall, or a meeting of many humors. All three contained
within the capacity of the womb, which does make them differ from the
swelling, hardness, or Scyrehus of the said womb, or from any flesh, water, or
humor, which may chance to cleave to, or touch the outward part thereof. These
are often bred together with the child, Mola bred together with the child.
but then they cause death, either for that the child is deceived of his
nourishment which is carried to the Mola; or because he wanting room, cannot
grow and come to perfection.

Hippocrates.
Hippocrates says, that there be some living and some dead Moles. The dead are
like to the false burdens, so called, because women carry them not long, as
being but lightly tied and fastened to the sides of the Matrice. Sometime they
are divided into diverse several pieces, so that Nicholas Nicolus says, he saw
a woman which cast forth nine of them in one day, the least whereof waighed
four pound. The quick and living Moles are they which wholly cleave to the
womb, and continue with the woman even to her death.

Cause of the flesh Mole.
The cause of the fleshy Mole according to the ancient writers cannot wholly
proceed from the woman, but the man must add somewhat thereunto. Galen
holds, that it is bred when the man's seed is weak, barren, imperfect, or in
little quantity; and for the most part choked through the abundance of the
menstruous blood, which is gross and thick, unfit for the framing of a child,
so that in stead thereof is bread a lump of flesh that by little and little
increases, being wrapped in his own membrane, which nature effects, as
desirous to bring forth any thing rather then to be idle.

The windy Mole is engendered through want of heat in the Matrice, and other
parts adjoining, Windy Mole.
as the Liver and Spleen, whereby much wind is bred and shut up in the
emptiness of the womb. It may also come from without, as in women newly
delivered, and in such which having had their natural courses in great
abundance, do venture too soon into the cold air.

The watery Mole proceeds from the abundance of watrie showers which is sent
from the Liver, Watery Mole.
or the Spleen, or other parts thereabouts; or else through the weakness of
the Matrice, which cannot assimilate the blood that is brought to nourish it,
part whereof is turned into water, and being not voided, stays in the womb.

The humorall Mole is bred by reason of too much moisture, as of serious, or
whayish humors, Humorall
of the whites, or watrish euacuations, which come down through the vessels of
the Matrice, and are stayed in the concauitie thereof.

False conception has some common signs with the true, as suppression of the
natural courses, Common signs.
depraved appetite, distastfulnesse, vomiting, swelling of the belly and
breasts, so that it is very hard to distinguish the one from the other. But
these that follow are more proper to the false, Signs of false conception.
then the true birth: for (as Hippocrates says) In false conception, or Mola,
the face is commonly puffed up, their breasts which were swollen at the
beginning, do fall, and daily wax soft, limber, and lanke, and without milk.
In the end, the face, breasts, arms, thighs, and legs grow lean and thin:
true it is, that they swell toward night, like those that have the dropsy,
the belly rises and grows quickly, and withal very hard, for the most part
of an equal roundnesse, with diverse pricking pains in the bottom of the
belly that never cease, which makes them that they can hardly walk, being
hindered as it were with a heavy burden, and having oftentimes a windiness in
the womb, as Ahasis reports.

Signs from the motion.
The said Hippocrates observes, how that by the motion it may easily be known,
for in true conception the male child begins to stir at the end of the
third month, or sooner; and the female at the third or fourth month: and
where there is no such quickening, we must observe whether there be any milk in
the breasts, if there be none found, it is a sign that it is a Mole. The child
moves of it self, and not the Mole.
Beside, the mother feels the child move every way, both on the right side,
and on the left, as much above, as below, and in the middle, without any help.
But in false conception, though there be some motion, it is not animal, but
proceeds rather from the expulsive faculty of the Mother then of the Mole,
which having no living soul endeavors not of it self to come forth, neither
provoke the womb as the child does, who having need of air to breath in,
seeks after it. But this is a most evident sign when the woman lies down on
either side, for then she feels it fall like a boule, and is not able to
uphold, or stay it; yea, and being laid on her back, if her belly be pressed
or crushed, it will remain in the place whither it is thrust, without coming
back again. Now that which most assures us, is, True signs.
when the nine months are past, and the woman not delivered, but her belly
grows bigger, and swells more and more, and all the other parts grow lean
and less, this is a sure sign of a Mole, though there be some women that have
borne their children ten, yea, eleven months.

The signs of the windy Mole are these, Signs of the windy.
the belly is equally swollen and stretched like a bladder, softer then in the
fleshy Mole, and chiefly near the groine and nether belly, which being
struck upon sounds like a Tabour: sometime it decreaseth, and otherwhile it
swells more: it is sooner bred and increased then the fleshy or watery, and
stretches the belly as though it would tear it, which is not proper to the
fleshy.

As for the watery and humorall, Signs of the watery and humorall.
the signs are almost alike, the belly grows big, and rises by little and
little. If you touch it with your finger sometimes the print thereof will
remain behind: it is even, without any hardness. It is true, that the woman
lying on her back, her flancks are fuller and bigger then the middle and
bottom of the belly, which wax flat, the water and humor running from one
side to the other; and in shaking the belly, they feel a swimming and floting
of water.

Difference between the Watery and Humorall.
This difference may be also added, that in the the watrish the flancks, groine,
and sometime the thighs are more distended and swollen then in the humorall,
because the waterish substance steals thither soonest: besides, that which
passes forth and blows below is clear like water, without any ill smell;
but that which flows in the humorall is reddish, and like to the washing of
flesh, and of a bad sent. This also is to be observed, that in the false
conception the natural courses flow not, and that the Navel does show it
self but little, or not at all, as it commonly does when the Mother is with
child. Concerning the cure thereof, I mean (god-willing) to handle it
hereafter.

What diet and order a woman with child ought to keep. CHAP. V.
THat a woman with child may enjoy her perfect health, she must diligently
observe that which consists in the use of the six things not natural, which
are the Air, Meat and Drink, Exercise and Rest, Sleeping and Waking,
Fullness and Emptiness, and the Passions of the Mind.

Good Air fit for a woman with child
First therefore she must dwell and live in a good and well tempered Air, which
is neither too hot, nor too cold, or waterish: not subject to any foggie
mists, or winds, and especially the South Wind. For (as Hippocrates says) when
those winds do blow upon every light occasion, women miscarrie. The Northwind
also is hurtful unto them, for those winds breed thin rheumes, distillations,
and troublesome Coughs in great-bellyed women, The Cough naught for women with
child.
causing them oftentimes to abort, or be delivered before their due time.
Likewise such winds as bring with them ill smells and vapors, which being
drawn in together with the Air we breathe, into the Lungs, do many times
breed very dangerous and troublesome diseases. Aristotle says, Bad smells to
be avoided.
that the smell of a Candle put forth, may cause a woman to abort, or loose her
fruit: wherefore she must beware of all ill Air, and make her abode in houses
well and pleasantly seated, shunning as much as may be possible all bad savors.

Concerning her Diet, Her Diet.
she must use meats which be of good nourishment, and breed good juice,
moderately drying. The quantity must be sufficient both for her self, and for
her child, and therefore they are to be dispensed withal from fasting at any
time: for sometime too much abstinence makes the child weak and sickly, and
causes him often to be borne before his time, seeking after nourishment, which
he cannot find within his Mothers body. As also the too great quantity of meat
his Mother takes, may often stifle him, Too much meat stifleth.
or else make him grow so big, that he cannot keep himself in his place,
which constraines him either to come forth, or else makes him sickly, seeing
that those meats are corrupted wherewith he is nourished a fed. Hippocrates
writes in Epidem. that the Sister of Caius Duellius after she had eat her
fill, aborted.

All meats which are either too hot, cold, or too moist, are to be avoided,
and chiefly in the beginning of meals; Salt meats bad.
as also those which are too salt, or overmuch spiced; and likewise all baked
meats are utterly forbidden. Aristotle and Pliny write, that if a woman with
child eat much salt meat, her child will be borne without nails; which
shows, that he will not be long lived. Her Bread must be of good Wheat, well
kneaded, light, and also well baked. Fit meats.
For her meat she may use Hen, Chicken, Capon, young Pigeons, Turtle,
Pheasants, Larks, Partridge, Veale, and Mutton: and for Herbs, let her take
Lettuse, Herbs.
Endive, Borage, Buglosse, and Sorrel, abstaining from all raw Sallads. She
may close her stomach after meat with Pears, or Quinces baked or preserved;
as likewise with Cheries, or Damsons. She must shun all diureticall things,
Diureticall and windy meats are naught.
which provoke either urine, or the natural courses, and such as are windy,
as Pease and Beans. Notwithstanding, women with child have oftentimes such
disordinate appetite, by reason of some salt or sharp humor which is contained
within the membranes of the stomach, that they desire to eat Coals, Chalk,
Ashes, Wax, Salt-fish raw, yea and vnwatred; and to drink Veriuice, and
Vinegar, yea very dregs, so that it is impossible to hinder them from eating
and tasting them. But yet they must refrain and ouer-maister themselves
therein as much as they can, since that such food may much hurt and hinder
both their own and their child's health. Nevertheless if they cannot forbear,
suffer them a little, and let them have their longings, for fear least it
should prove worse with them. Accidents that may happen.
For I have seen many women which being hindered and forbidden from using such
trash, have presently fallen into travel: and in others, their children have
carried the marks of some of the things they so earnestly desired and longed
after. Beside, although that such meats for the most part are very bad and
contrary, Lib. 2. Aph. 38. Cibus and potus deterior, suauior tamen: melioribus
quidem sed insuauioribus est anteponendus.
yet for the desire they have to eat them they are digested commonly without
hurting the party at all. Meat and drink (says Hippocrates) is better and
fitter, though it be somewhat worse, then that which is better, and not so
agreeable and pleasing.

For her Drink she may use Claret wine, mature, Her Drink.
and not too strong, which she must allay very well. For this Wine has power
to comfort and strengthen the stomach, and all the other parts serving for
nourishment and generation: and if she cannot away with Wine, let her drink
Hydromell, or Barley-water well boiled.

Her sleep must be in the night, Her Sleep.
the better to digest the meat she has taken: for watchings do engender
crudities and diseases, which cause untimely births in stead of fair and
goodly children; and chiefly, she must avoid sleeping after dinner. But in the
morning she may take her ease, as she shall think best, yet not turning (as
some great Ladies do) the day into night, and the night into day.

Exercise.
She may use moderate exercise, but violent motion loosneth the Cotiledons or
vessels of the Matrice whereby the child receives his nourishment. They must be
forbid riding in Waggins or Coaches, especially in the three first months: for
as upon a small occasion we see the fruits and flowers of trees do fall (as by
some little wind that shakes the tree, or the like,) so many times through a
light cause women great with child, Causes of Abortment.
in stirring or moving themselves, yea, or but setting their foot awry, may be
delivered before their time.

It was not without good cause that the Romans forbad their Wives to ride in
Coaches, the which also ought to be observed in these days, especially by
those who are subject to take hurt, and therefore let them walk gently, taking
an especial heed and care to themselves the first three months.

Great noyses hurtful.
She must shun all great noise and sounds, as of Thunder, Artillery, and great
Bells. Galen in his book de Theriaca, says, that many women with child have
died with the very fright they received by a clap of thunder: and when she is
afraid of hurting her self or falling into travail, let her be carried in a
Chair or Litter between two strong men, and chiefly two hours before meals:
for as a woman may easily loose her burden the first month, because her child
(though he be but little) is not yet firmly fastened and tied to the womb, so
likewise being great or big through his weight, he may fall down, and come
forth; wherefore all violent exercise, and too much labor, Violent exercise
hurtful.
is hurtful and dangerous for her; as also to fret, chide, or laugh
immoderately. The fourth, fifth, and sixth month she may use more liberty,
the seventh and eight she must keep herself still and quiet, but when she is
in her ninth month, then may she use more stirring, and exercise. And
therefore is it that Aristotle in his Politics appoints, Sentence of
Aristotle.
that women with child should not be sedentary, nor live too nicely, but that
since God has blessed them to bear children, they should daily visit the
Temples of the Gods for their exercise.

The which Plato expressly commands in his Commonwealth, and by a kind of
devotion, Opinion of Plato.
and religious piety. But Aristotle in that place speaks like a Physician,
as he shows in his book de Generatione. In the Country (says he) where
women accustom themselves to labor, they are brought abed more easily, and
with less pain. In brief, where women exercise themselves, Women that labor
are easily delivered.
they are sooner delivered, for their exercise consumes the excrements, which
idle and slothful women gather and heap together.

In the first four months she must likewise abandon Venus for fear of
shaking the child, Venus forbidden.
and bringing down her courses, which must also be observed in the sixth and
eight month, but in the seventh and ninth she may boldly use it, especially
toward the end of the ninth month, which some are of opinion will help and
hasten the delivery.

Aristotle is of this opinion, (though herein he contradicts the authority of
Hippocrates, Aristotle's opinion.
) The woman with child (says he) ought not to have the company of her husband.
But Aristotle and Hippocrates may easily be reconciled; the Philosopher
means, that they should not embrace their wives all the time of their being
with child, but only toward the time of their lying in, thereby to shake the
child, and make him come the more readily forth; for coming into the world
after this act, he is commonly enwrapped and compassed with slime, which
helps his coming forth.

Her belly must be soluble.
It is also requisite that her belly be loose, not retaining her excrements, and
that she have (if it be possible) every day the benefit of Nature, which if it
be not done naturally, it must be helped, taking every morning some broth of
Damaske-Prunes; Also Apples stued with Sugar, and a little Butter, is very fit
and good. She may use Broth wherein Borage, Buglosse, Purslane, Lettuse,
Patience, and a little of the herb Mercury has been boiled. She may likewise
take Suppositaries so they be not too sharp. Clisters.
Clisters made of a Calues-head, or of a Sheepes-head, boiled with Annis-seed,
and Fennil-seed, wherein some course Sugar, and oil of Violets is dissolved,
are very convenient, using them nevertheless with discretion, leaving out all
manner of ingredients which might cause a flux of the belly, Lib. 5. Aph. 34.
Mulieri grauidae si aluus prosusior sit, abortionis periculum imminet. Lib. 5.
Aph. 21.
for fear of Abortment, or being delivered before their time, as Hippocrates
says.

Notwithstanding the same Hippocrates is of opinion, that women with child in
cases of necessity may be purged from the fourth to the seventh month, A
Woman with Child may be purged.
but before and after those times he admits it not, nay, he forbids it
directly; which for all that the Physicians of our time observe not in cases of
danger, because the Medicines we use in these days, as Rubarbe, Manna, Cassia,
and Tamarinds, are not so violent as those that were used by our Ancients,
which were Hellebor, Scammony, Turbith, Coloquintida, or the like: and we must
take especial care of giving them any opening things which may either provoke
urine, Opening medicines must be avoided. Lib. 5. Aph. 60.
or their natural courses; for as the same Author says, It is impossible for
the child to be healthful if the mother have her natural sickness.

Bloodletting is forbid them, unless it be very needful, especially if the
child be grown any thing big, because he has more need of food and
nourishment, then at the beginning when he was little: for take away his
sustenance, and he will wax lean and feeble, being oftentimes driven for want
thereof to seek a passage forth. Notwithstanding there are some women so
sanguine and full of blood that we are forced to take some of it away, least
the child be stifled with the ouer-great quantity thereof, or when they fall
into diseases where it is necessary to open a vein. Considerations concerning
Bloodletting.
The fittest time (if it be not in case of necessity) is from the fourth, to
the seventh month. I have seen a woman with child who for a Pleurisy was let
blood eleven several times, and yet stayed her full term, and was well
delivered.

Passions of the mind.
Now concerning the passions of the mind, a woman with child must be pleasant
and merry, shunning all melancholic and troublesome things that may vex or
molest her mind: for as Aristotle says, A woman with child must have a settled
and quiet mind, which Auicen also counsels, that those which have conceived,
ought to be preserved from all fear, sadness, and disquietnes of mind,
without speaking or doing any thing that may offend or vex them; An
observation. For great bellied women.
so that discreet women, and such as desire to have children, will not give
ear unto lamentable and fearful tales or stories, nor cast their eyes upon
pictures or persons which are ugly or deformed, least the imagination imprint
on the child the similitude of the said person or picture, which doing, women
shall be sure to be well and happily delivered, and that (With the help of God)
they shall bear their burden to the full term, which shall be sent into the
world without much pain, promising them a happy and speedy delivery. To
conclude, they must leave off their Busks as soon as they perceive themselves
with child, not lacing themselves too straight, or crushing themselves
together, She must take need of lacing her self too hard.
for fear least the child be misshapen and crooked, or have not his natural
growth: and their garments must be rather light and thin, then heavy and
cumbersome.

How a woman must govern her self the nine months she goes with child.
CHAP. VI.
NOw I have prescribed what manner of life a woman ought to lead, while she is
with child: she may observe (if it please her) this that follows, though not
so necessary, yet commodious and profitable both for the maintaining of her
health, and preservation of her beauty. To the end then that her breasts after
her delivery, be neither too big and pust up, To preserve the breasts.
nor yet hanging down like bags, and to prevent the danger that might happen
unto her, by the too great quantity of blood, that is turned into milk, (which
may be curdled, and so suppurate, and putrify.) As soon therefore as she
knows her self to be with child, (as in the second or third month) let her
wear a chain of gold about her neck. Some prefer a chain of steel, or
else a little gad of steel put between the two breasts, as likewise to put a
piece of cork there, and to wear under her arme-pits two little pieces more
of the same. This Fomentation also is very good.

Take of Periwinckle, Sage, and ground-Iuy, A Fomentation.
of each a handful, Hemlocke half a small handful, boil them in wine and
water, and when you have taken it from the fire put thereto a little
rose-vineger. And with this decoction warm, bath your breasts in the morning
with a cloth or spung dipped therein, a quarter of an hour, wiping and drying
them afterward with reasonable warm clothes. The like may be done with the
waters of the same herbs, What must be done, the 3. and 4. Month.
and about the third or fourth month, when she feels her self quick, about
which time her belly begins to swell and grow big, she must wear a Swathe
(made fit for the purpose) to support her belly, being first anointed with
this Liniment or Pomade, which she shall continue till the ninth month, to
keep her belly from being full of knottie and broken veins, furrowed and
wrinckled, making it grow deformed, unseemly, and hanging down lower then is
fit, which happens by reason of the great burden and weight of the child, that
stretches and inlargeth the skin thereof, and causes them to endure great
pain in their belly and groine.

The Pomade or Liniment approved. Take of Kids sewet, and the fat of a Sow, of
each three ounces, of Capons and Goose-grease, of each an ounce and half, cut
them small, and melt them in an earthen pot, putting thereto as much water as
will suffice, then strain them through a cloth, and wash them in water till
they wax very white, and have lost their savor. Afterward melt them again in
a double vessel, adding thereto anounce of the marrow of a Heart, or Stag, then
wash it again with Rose Water, or other sweet smelling water, mingling
therewithal (if you think fit, or that it will not be hurtful to the womb)
two or three grains of Musk or Ciuet.

Some use this ointment: Take dogs grease, Another Liniment-
and the fat about a sheep kidney, of each two ounces, Spermaceti one ounce,
oil of sweet Almonds an ounce and a half, the fats must be melted, prepared,
and washed as before, then melted again with the rest, and washed with rose or
sweet water.

Some take good store of Sheepes-feet well bruised and broken in pieces, to the
number of thirty or forty, and boil them well in water, then taking off the
fat, and marrow that swimmeth on the top, which they wash well in common water,
and take thereof two ounces, of Ducks-grease as much, Another.
Spermaceti one ounce, white Wax six drams, melt them altogether in a double
vessel, and wash them in the above named waters.

Some Ladies and Gentlewomen which love not to rub their bellies every morning
with any of these liniments, wear thereon a Dog-skin, or some other well
prepared and dressed, as follows; and change it every fifteen days, or
according as it will last and continue, not taking it off, except it shriuell
and grow wrinckled.

Take a Dog-skin, or some other skin ready dressed to make gloves of, wash it
often in common water, afterward in Rose Water, and dry it in the shade, and
being thus dressed and dried, lay it in soke in these oils and fats following:

Take of Mesues ointment of Roses an ounce and half, oil of Saint John's wort,
The manner to prepare it.
and of sweet Alamonds, of each an ounce, fresh Butter, and Spermaceti, of each
half an ounce, melt all these together in a double vessel, and let the skin
lie and soke in it, three or four days, moving and stirring them together
daily: then take it forth, and spread, it in the air, and let it lie there two
or three days till it have sok't in all the oil, and become dry: then cut it
to the form and bigness of the belly, and so apply it.

The dainty and curious may use the former liniments and skin: they that have
not the means to do either, Another easy to be provided.
let them; Take of fresh Butter well washed in common water, and then in
Rose Water, three ounces, oil of sweet Almonds, one ounce, Spermaceti, half
an ounce: and with these melted together, rub their belly.

Observation.
These Ointments must be kept in a gally pot, and covered with Rose water to
keep them from being mustie.

Government of the ninth Month.
When the Woman is come to the ninth Month, having been in good health all the
time of her going with child: she must continue the use of the aforesaid
Ointments, and must begin to use more exercise then she did before, walking
gently before meals the first twelve or fifteen days: and then afterward it
will be good to use stronger exercise.

It will be very profitable for her (especially after the ten or twelve first
days of the ninth month be past) to sit in the decoction following, after the
manner of a half Bath, some quarter, or half an hour in the morning, and then
being well dried, and laid to bed, let her be anointed behind, all along the
lower part of her back, and before, from the Nauill downward; and chiefly upon
Os Pubis, and the groine, with the ointment following.

Take of Mallows Althaea, with their roots, The Bath.
Motherwort, of each two handful, white Lilly roots, three ounces, Chamomill,
and Melilot flowers, of each a good handful, Lin-seed, Quince-seed, and
Foenigreeke, of each an ounce: Boil them all in sufficient quantity of
running water, for the Bath.

Take of Hensfat, three ounces, Duckes fat, The Ointment.
an ounce and a half, fresh Butter, two ounces, Linseed oil, an ounce and a
half: Melt them all together, then wash them very well in Parietarie, and
Mugwort water, adding thereto two ounces of the Muccilage of Althaea Roots. In
which space, let her take this drink every morning fasting. A Drink.
Take of Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn without fire, an ounce, white Wine,
half an ounce, Parietarie water, one ounce, mingle them together. Some have
found good by taking the yelke of an Egg, and drinking a draught of Hypocras
after it.

Others take a little Wine and water, wherein Lin-seed has been stieped.

Let this or the like order and government be observed, for a Woman that is of
a good habit of body, and who in her going with Child, has not been subject to
any sickness, or accident of moment: bearing her Children well, and without
much pain.

But because there be many, which are troubled with diverse accidents, which
happen in their Childbearing, I thought good here, to treat thereof briefly,
before I speak of their Delivery.

Of many infirmities, which trouble Women while they are great with Child.
CHAP. VII.
A Woman must have a care of her Beauty.
IT becomes a Woman well at all times, and chiefly in her Childbearing, and
after her Delivery, to have a care, as much as she can possibly, of the
preservation of her Beauty: since there is nothing that sooner decaies and
spoileth it, then the often bearing of Children. Health must be preferred.
But as Health is more precious, and recommendable then Beauty: and seeing
that a woman with Child may be troubled and oppressed with many accidents, and
infirmities, during the nine Months she bears her child: it will be therefore
very necessary and profitable to seek out the means to free and deliver them
thereof: For in loosing the Mother, the life of the Child is also hazarded.
Aristotle.
Aristotle in his book De generatione Animalium, is of opinion, That bruit
beasts going with young, are not subject to any diseases: and contrariwise,
that Women are very often sick. Hippocrates says, Hippocrates.
That they be pale and wan, to show that they are subject to many infirmities.
In times past when men and women were sold like slaves, if there were any found
that were with child, she was not warranted for whole and sound by him that
fold her, Vitruuius.
as Vitruuius writes in his second book; because they were troubled and subject
to so many diseases. In the first three or four Months such infirmities
chiefly happen for many causes. First, Why women with Child are sick.
because they live (as Aristotle says) for the most part in idleness, and
eat ill meats; which are turned into excrements, and breed many obstructions,
the fountain and beginning of all diseases: the second is, the great
suppression and stopping of blood, whereof they were wont to be purged every
Month, before their being with Child; which runs to the Matrice to be voided,
and find that accustomed passage; which it had wont to have: but being not
able to get forth, and much less to be spent and digested, by the Child (which
is as yet but little) it returns back into the veins, and chiefly those
which are near the stomach: and through the long continuance, is there
corrupted, and changed, to be of a bad quality, whereof proceeds this depraved
and disordinate appetite, which the Latins call Pica, or Malacia: Loathing of
meat, Hicket, Vomiting, Diverse diseases of women.
Pains of the stomach, Flanckes, and Belly, Ache of the back, Hips, and
Groine, difficulty of making water, Panting, and beating of the heart, with
Sounning, the Cough, binding and Flux of the belly, swelling of the Thighs,
and Feet, and sometimes Abortment, not being able to bear their Children the
full time: together with many other accidents; whereof we will speak
hereafter, beginning with the Pica, which troubles them oftnest, and longest.

Of the disordinate longing called Pica. CHAP. VIII.
We commonly say the appetite is depraved, when beyond measure we covet to
eat and drink too much (in respect of what hunger naturally requires:) Or
when we desire, or long after meats, which are unusual, and offend in
quality, and are not dressed and prepared as they ought.

Of this depraved Appetite there be diverse sorts. The first is called Boulimos
of the Greeks, Boulimos.
and of the Latins, Fames vaccina, and appete^tia immodica. When they eat more
then is requisite, not being able to satisfy themselves. And if hunger urge
them farther, and grow greater, then it is called of the Latins Appetitus
caninus, Canina appetentia.
or Fames insatiabilis, and the party eats, till he be full, even to the
throat, that he is constrained to vomit, his stomach being so ouercharged. But
then presently he is driven to eat again, and then to vomit: from whence the
Proverb is taken; He is returned like a Dog, to his vomit. The like happens
for drinking, as for eating, which the Latins call Sitis immodica, Sitis
immodica.
which is so great, that the tongue cleaues to the roof of the mouth, not
being able to eat or speak except the mouth be first moistened, and the tongue
wetted. This accident is very hard, yea, even unsupportable to endure, the
sick party taking no other delight but in drinking, and that often, and in
great draughts. Men are more subject to this drougth then women: Contrariwise,
Women, and chiefly those with child, and such as have not their Courses, or
Wenches that are subject to the Green sickness, are more troubled with this
depraved or immoderate appetite, called Malacia, or Pica; having this name
given it, From whence it is called Pica.
either because Pyes are troubled with this disease, or else for that their
feathers be of diverse colors, black and white, according to the variety of
things, which Women long after. This sickness happens when they desire to eat
or drink things, that are wholly contrary to Nature, as eating of raw or
burnt flesh, yea, even to long after Man's flesh, Ashes, Coals, old Shoes,
Chalk, Wax, Nutshels, Mortar, and Lime: Story of Fernelius.
as Fernelius witnesses of a man, who being a long time desirous to eat
vnslak't lime, at last devoured thereof the bigness of ones fist; which helped
him, without doing him any harm, either in the stomach, or guts.
Notwithstanding, not long since, the daughter of M. Forges died, with eating
the plastering of walls.

Sometimes custom, which is a second Nature, makes us covet to eat such
contrary things, as we desire, and the rather because we have commonly eaten
thereof in our youth: There is found the contrary hereof in some, who abhor
and loath good meats, which is imputed to the Idiosyncrasie or particular
constitution of the person. Others have observed, that there are such malignant
humors sometimes bred in us, that they are turned into poison, and make both
these depraved appetites. As it is seen by poisons taken inwardly, and applied
outwardly, which make the like effect. The biting of the serpent Dipsas does
testify the same, which breeds an intolerable and unquenchable thirst in
him that has been wounded by it.

Now therefore, leaving all these kinds of vitiated and depraved Appetites, we
will only speak of that wherewith great-bellied Women are troubled, which is
called Pica.

Diverse causes of Pica.
Some impute the cause of this sickness to certain Crudities, and ill humors,
which are contained in the whole habit of the body, and imparted to the
mouth, or orifice of the stomach. But the soundest opinion is, that the sides
and tunicles of the stomach, and orifice thereof, are infected, and stuffed
with diverse excrements, and ill humors; and according to the quality they
have, the Woman with child, Wherefore they desire diverse things.
longs after the like: As if Melancholy abound, not burned or adust; she
longs after sharp things, as Vinegar, Citrons, and Orenges: if the
Melancholy be adust, she desires Coals, Ashes, and Plastering: if the humor
be salt, she coueteth salt meats, and so of the rest. And surely it often
happens, that they long for the like things as are in their stomachs. This
malign and bad humor, is engendered (as we have said) through the retention of
the natural Courses in women with Child, which flow back into the stomach.
In some it begins the first weeks, yea, The beginning of the Pica.
the very first day; in others the thirtieth or fortieth day, and continues
even till the fourth month, and then cease: which comes so to pass,
because the Child is grown bigger, and having need of more Nourishment, draw's
to him a greater quantity of blood; the which he consumes: and so by
consequent, it returns back no more into the stomach. Besides also, this
humor has been much spent and voided, by the often vomitings which Women have
during the first months. And also because the Child's hair is bred, and grown
great, The breeding of the hair causes the Pica.
which some hold to be partly a cause of this sickness. Pliny writes, That
women with Child, feel themselves worse, when their Child's hair begins to
come, and chiefly about the new of the Moon.

Now that we may preserve them from this infirmity, or at least diminish it as
much as may be: she must chiefly use meats that breed good juice; Their diet
in Pica.
and that in little quantity, increasing it nevertheless as her bigness
augmenteth, and the child grows: which at length waxing stronger and
greater, will consume part of this great quantity of blood, and the rest may
be put into the membranes which wrap and infold the child, and to the mass
of blood which is called the after-burthen, which is as it were the liver of
the Matrice.

Now concerning their meat and drink: Considering that they that are sick of
this disease, and so infinitely distasted, that often times they do even loath
and abhor good meats: therefore we must set an edge (as it were) on their
appetite, Meats fit for those that have the Pica.
varying their meats in as many fashions as may be possible, thereby to make
them the more pleasing and desirable.

Olives and Capers, as likewise sallades a little parboiled, are very good for
them.

All meats that are either too fat, or too sweet, be naught, because they
stir up a desire of vomiting.

For their sauces: they may use Veriuice, Orringes, Citrons, Pomegranats, and
good Rose viniger, all very moderately taken.

Auicen.
Auicen commends tosted cheese, and Amylum dried: Aetius.
which Aetius and Oribasius do allow, and especially to those that desire to
eat earth, Oribasius.
and plastering of walls, Aegineta.
or the like. Paulus Aegineta allows them the use of mustard, pepper, and
cloves to make sauce thereof, for the stirring up of their appetite, and to
help to digest the crudities contained within the stomach: after meals she
may eat baked quinces, and roasted filberds. For her drink, she must use good
clarret wine, well allaied: but if she long for white, you may give her leave
to drink some, so that it have a little astriction.

Much drinking is naught in the Pica.
True it is, that the over great quantity of drink is hurtful for her, by
reason of the great washing which it might make in her stomach: she may take
every morning a draught of Wormewoodwine, or a little strong Hydromel, with a
tossed of bread. The use of these Lozenges is much commended.

Lozenges.
Amyl: puriss. sic: j Caryoph: Nucis mosch: ana s Spec: diarhod: abbat: j.
Sacchar: in aq: Rosar: and Absynth: dissolut: ij fiant tabellae ponder is j.
Capiat vnam singulis auroris and superbibat tantillum vini. The Ancients, as
Paulus and Oribasius, exceedingly commend the decoction of Polypody, and
Annis-seed, with sugar of Roses. They may use gentle fomentations to their
stomachs, made of Wormwood, Balaustia, Cumin, Cytisus, and Fennill-seed
wherewith likewise may be made Cataplasmes for the same use. For these
medicines will comfort and strengthen the concoctiue faculty of the stomach,
the better to digest the meat; the retentiue, to retain and keep that it has
received; the expulsive, to thrust that forth which troubles the stomach;
and the appetite, to covet and long for meat.

This ointment is also very fit and profitable.

Liniment. Ol. Nardin. Cyd^nior. ana s. Pull. Caryoph. Maslich. an j. Croci gr.
iij. Cerae parum. fiat litus pro stomacho, praemisso fotu.

As also this that follows.

Another.
Ol. Mastich. Cydonior. an j. ol. Nardin. s Coral. rub. Caryophyl. Menth.
Calam. aromat. nucis Mosch. an s. Cerae q. s. ad formam Cerati.

A Cataplasm.
Cortic. Citri j. fol. Meliss. Absynth. ana M. ij. Coquantur in aq. com.
pistentur and passentur, addendo olei Nard. and Mastih. an j. fiat Cataplasma.

They may use Galens Cerote for the stomach, or that of Aecius, made with
Quinces, Saffron, and a little oil of Spicknard.

Concerning general purgations, which may euacuate downward part of this
superfluity, they must not be administered when a woman is young with child,
Discretion in purging.
but with very great care, and good advice, not using any strong purgers. But
if there be need, and that the disease cease not by light medicines, then
may be given a little infusion of Rubarbe, and a gentle decoction of Seen,
taking the advice of the learned Physician. And therefore we must only have a
regard to their vomiting, which at these times does commonly molest and trouble
them: taking heed of staying it, except it be immoderate (as Auicen says) or
too violent. Auicens precept.
For otherways it helps to cure this disease, euacuating part of those ill
humors whereby it is nourished and increased. And if we perceive she has a
desire to vomit, and that the expulsive faculty be not strong enough to help
it, let her take a little Hydromell warm; and if the matter in the stomach be
tough and clammie, add thereto a little vinegar, the better to attenuate, and
cut it. I have been the longer in this Chapter, because it is an accident that
does much annoy women with child: thereby the better to instruct the young
Surgeon, when there is no Physician near at hand.

Of Distastfulnesse and Hicket. CHAP. IX.
MOst women, as soon as they are with child, be so distasted, and do so
loath and abhor meat, that they cannot endure either to eat, see, or smell
it, yea, and some are sick even with the very hearing of it named: which makes
them go often times two or three days without any desire to eat. This disease
happens upon the same reason we gave before of the depraved appetite, The Cause.
because the stomach is filled and stuffed with diverse excrements (that oloy a
great bellied woman) which by little and little are there gathered together, by
the flowing back of the courses that be stopped (which cannot be put forth,
much less consumed by the little one) and so come into the stomach, and fill
it.

But when these corrupted, The Hicket.
and ill humors abide longer in the stomach, there happens another accident,
commonly called the Hicket, or Yeaxing, which is a violent and conuulsiue
motion of the stomach, which seems to discharge it self of those bad
humors, which are contained in the capacity and membranes thereof: and offend
either in quantity, or quality, or both together. Discommoditie of the Hicket.
From hence comes it that the stomach willing to put them forth, casts up with
all the meat and food, the woman has taken: to the prejudice of her self,
which cannot keep any thing for her own sustenance) and of the Child, who
cannot find sufficient blood to nourish him: which at length makes them both
weak, and causes the Mother either to be delivered before her time; or else
to breed a faint and feeble Child, and oftentimes one that will be sickly all
his life time.

Cure.
For the remedying of this queasinesse, we must have recourse to those
medicines, written in the Chapter of depraved Appetite; Both for the diet and
remedies. And touching the Hicket, when it comes through emptiness, or want of
eating; then the woman must nourish her self, taking often good meat, and in
small quantity, as yelkes of eggs, cullis, veale, broth, hens, and chicken:
and let her belly be anointed with oil of sweet Almonds, and Violets. If the
cause proceed of any sharp or biting humor, it must be drawn and purged
downward gently, as we have said already: or else by vomit, Straining bad for
women with child.
without much straining Cow milk, and the milk of an Ass are very much
commended; as also the use of syrups of Violets, and Nenuphar are very
profitable.

The Hicket may also come of some inflammation, that is in the Spleen, Liver,
or other bowels near the stomach, and so is impart to it: this happening, it
will be very necessary to let her blood: and that she use meats which
moderately cool, as also medicines of the same nature both inwardly and
outwardly: consulting thereof with the Physicians.

Of the Vomiting which happens to Women with Child. CHAP. X.
THere be some women, who as soon as they be with child, yea, the very first
days, are subject to Vomit: Women with child Vomit often.
casting up store of water and slime by the mouth: and this vomiting continues
even till they are quick with child: and with some it remains all the time
of their going: which I saw happen unto a great Lady of this kingdom; who from
the second day after she had conceived, vomited; and affirmed constantly that
she was with child.

When this Vomiting happens, Vomiting must not be stopped on the sudden.
it must not be stayed suddenly, if so be it continue gently, and without
violence: for being stopped, there is such store of humors heaped and gathered
together in their stomachs, that they are ready to be stifled, or stuffed up;
which being by little and little cast up without violence, they are much eased:
for by this euacuation of noisome excrements, the first region of the belly
feels it self free, discharged, and vnburthen'd of many long and grievous
pains. Cause.
The cause of this accident proceeds commonly of the abundance of humors
gathered together in the stomach: or else of some sharp, and biting humor,
that does stir and provoke it, and chiefly the upper orifice thereof: as well,
by reason of the ill meats they eat, and that in great quantity, as also
because they fill themselves too much with good meat, which does putrify and
corrupt, (the natural heat being weak) and requires rather to be cast forth,
Accidents of Vomiting.
then kept in the body. But it happens oftentimes, that this Vomiting is so
violent, that even the meat and sustenance which the Mother takes, to nourish
her self and the child is cast up, and then it must be remedied.

Likewise, if this accident come from some weakness of the stomach, or by the
default of the retentiue faculty, which is not able to retain and keep the
meat, although it were of good juice, and in final quantity: or by some
malign vapor, which arises from the womb, by reason of the feed and
natural courses retained; they maybe helped by these means following.

First, if the great quantity of meats whether good or bad, which the woman
has taken, be the cause: then let her abstain from eating them: observing the
above mentioned Diet, using good meats, and in little quantity; thereby to
roll it forth. If the overmuch quantity, or ill quality of sharp and biting
excrements, be the cause, then must they be gently taken away and purged:
Notwithstanding, we must refrain from giving them any purgations with
Diagredium, or Coloquint: and also from such as do much soften and moisten, as
Cassia, Electuar. Lenitiuum, and the like: because through their moisture, they
relaxe the stomach, and so consequently, all the means, which have
correspondence and traficke with the Matrice: for the similitude of their
neruous substance.

Their purges therefore must be of Rubart infusion, and also in substance, of
the compound syrup of Cichory with Rubarbe; which besides that they euacuate,
do likewise coroborate and strengthen: as also of the Syrup of Damask Roses,
Ma^na, and other which with drawing away the water, do dry withal. But above
all pills are very fit for them, because they dry; both for their form, and
also for the drying ingredients whereof they are compounded: as those of Rubarb
and Seen, made with a little conserve of roses, A good precept.
adding thereto (if there be any suspicion of some malign or bad quality) a
little of the confection of Hyacinthvs. This rule must be observed in the
purging of women with child, and hereof must be had the counsel of the learned
Physician.

If some malign vapor be the cause; they must use cordials, as, a little
confection of Hyacinthe, the electuary of Gemmis, these cordial Lozenges, or
the like.

Cordial Lorenges.. Corali vtriusque. s. lapid. bezoard. and rasura vnic. an
s. pulu. electuar. diarrh. abbat. i. confect. de Hiacintho, s. saccar. cum.
aqua card. bened. dissol. ij. fiant tabellae ponder. i. capiat singulis dicbus
vnam mane, alteram a prandio, long a pastu.

While they shall use the aforesaid remedies, it will be very necessary to
comfort the stomach: as also if the vomiting proceed through some weakness,
the stomach not being able to retain, and hold the meat, the fore mentioned
Lozenges are very good, as also Lozenges of Diarrhodon, if they should prove
distasteful, let them use Codigniack, or some Citron pill condited. They may
likewise take some digestive powder after meals.

Let there be provided some such fomentation for their stomach, as this.

Fomentation.. Mentae, Ab sinthij, rosar. rub. an. m. s balaust. ij.
gariophilor. and santalor. an. s. carnis cidoniorum i. corticis citri. i. fiat
decoct. in vino austero profotu.

Then let them have this ointment: Liniment.. Olei mastich. and cidonior. an.
s. olei de absinthio ij. pulueris coralli rub. and gariophil. an. i. croci
parum fiat litus, admoueatur praemisso fotu.



This Emplaster is very fit: which must be applied after the ointment,
Emplaster.
and remain there a good space.

. crustae panis assati iiij. macerent. in vino rubro and succo cidonior. pull.
rosar. rub. and absinthij an i. ligni aloes and gariophilor. an. s. pull.
coralli rubri. iiij. olei de absinthio. i. fiat cataplasma. If all these
forenamed medicines help not the patient, Master Mercator does set down a
remedy very easy to be practiced, and of incredible virtue (as he says,)
which cannot bring (having often tried it) any danger: An approved medicine.
nor cause the woman to be delivered out of her time: which is to let her blood
in the Saluatella of the right hand.

CHAP. X. Of the pain of the sto acke, stancks, and belly, which happens to a
woman with child.
THere is great store of gross winds bred, not only in the stomach, and
guts, but also about the Liver, Spleen, Mesenterium, and Navel, Causes of
wind.
by means of a weak and feeble heat, which is not able wholly to consume, and
scatter them: from whence proceeds a great distention of the belly, and other
parts near and chiefly about the Navel: which in some oftentimes stands out,
and is as big, as a goose egg. The which winds being thus enclosed, and not
having free passage, cause such intolerable pain, that even the breathing is
thereby hindered, and the pulse almost lost, which at length might cause the
woman to be delivered.

Sometime also the wind is shut up within the womb for I have known some
women, Wind enclosed in the womb.
that have voided them with such a sound, and noise, as though it had been, by
the fondament, and this must be remedied after this sort.

First she must shun all manner of moist, Diet.
and windy meats, and live after the order before prescribed. If it be
needful to purge her; let it be done, as is already set down. Then let there
be applied some dry fomentations to the place affected, as this.

Quilt. flor. camo. and anethi an. m. ij. rosar. rub. p. ij. se. minis annisi
and foenicul. an. ij. baccar. lauri i. fiat omnium puluis grossus de quibus fi
aut sacculi duo irrorati cum. vino rub. and tepide admoueantur parti affectae.

The same quilts may be boiled in wine, and fomitations made of the said wine
with soft spunges. But you must observe, that the too long use of moist
fomentations, oils, and fats is forbidden women with child, for fear least by
too much moisture, and oylinesse, the ligaments and vessels of the matrice be
made too loose and soft: which at length may cause the woman to abort. Apply
unto her belly and to me parts pained, in form of a Pultesse this that
follows.

Pultesse.. Vitell. ouorum n. iiij. puluis anisi. and foeniculi dulcis an. s.
pull. absinthii. s. cum oleo anethino and camomil. q. s. fiat fricatum.

Let them chaw Fennil, or Anniseed, or a little Cinnamon: and take a tossed dipped
in Hippocras, Some have told me, that the distilled water of Citron Pills,
drunk, is very singular good. And it will not be amiss, sometimes to take a
spoonful, or two of this water.

A Claret water. Aquae vitae s. cinamo. i. macerent. spatio xiiij. hor. deinde
affunde aque rosar. iii. saccari candi s. fiat aqua clareta, capiat coclear
vnum.

If ye perceive that she is much troubled with pain you may give her a
Clister: as this.

A Glister.. Folior. maluae, matrica. an. m. i. flor. camom. meliloti, et
summitat aneti an. M. ss. seminis anisi and foenic. an. iii. bulliant in iure
capit. veruec. vel vituli. de quo accipe quart. iij. in quibus dissolve Ol.
Aneth. Chamamel. an. ij. Sachar. eub. j. s. Butyr. recent. j. Vitell. duor.
ouor. fiat Clyster.

Nevertheless, Admonishment
I am of opinion (if it may be done possibly) that they should abstain from
Clysters: because I have seen women sometimes, through as small a Clyster as
this, fall into great torments, yea, and even into throws; nature being
thereto prepared and ready: which turned to the Chirurgions disgrace. Wherefore
let her use these Lozenges following: Lozenges. sem. Anis. foenic. dulc. an. s.
nucis Mosch. j. spec. Diacumin. Diarrhod. Abbat. ana. s. sacchar. in aq.
Cinnamon. dissolut. ij. fiant tabulae, capiat vnam singulis auroris.



She may use Sugar of Roses, which to every ounce has two or three drops of
the oil of Annis seed added to it.

Of the pains of the Back, Hips, and Groine, with difficulty of making
water, that happens unto Women with child. CHAP. XII.
THere be some Women, which bear their children high, and (as they say) within
their stomach: so that they are nimbler, either in going, or stirring: without
being let or hindered thereby at all. Others carry them very low, The diverse
situation of the child.
having their belly standing very much out, which brings them much
inconvenience: as pain of the Hips, and Groine, and then they complain, as if
those parts, and their belly were rent and torn in pieces. Contrariwise, there
be others, that hide their child, within their raines, and bear it very
backward; which causes them to have exceeding great pain in their backs. In
the two latter cases, we had need to help them: for as Hippocrates says; Hipp.
When women with child are troubled with great pain in their back, and legs;
then are they in danger to be delivered before their time. The like may be also
said, of them that have much pain in their belly and groine.

Cause of these pains.
These pains commonly, do rather proceed from the heaviness of the child, then
of any quantity of humors, which abound in the body. For at that time, the
womb being great, thick, and full, by reason of the child which is big, and
large, and of the bed, or after-burthen, and oftentimes filled with great store
of water; on which side soever the womb rests, it draws the ligaments and
bonds with it, that hold and fasten it to the foresaid parts: and by the force
of this dilation, and stretching, does cause and provoke pains in the back,
hips, and groine: as well by reason they are tied thereto; as likewise for the
continuitie of those neighboring parts, The Cure.
which touch them. For the remedying whereof, the woman must keep her self
still, and quiet, without much stirring, or shaking: she must eat little, and
often, and of meats that be light, and easy of digestion: for the stomach
being full, does press the body of the Matrice, and thrusts it downward.
Therefore she must were Swathes, which may help to support, and keep up her
belly: that by such a rest and swathing, the ligaments, which are lengthned,
and stretched, may be somewhat brought back to their proper places: which must
be confirmed and strengthened by these means.

All the bottom of her back, and raines must be anointed with Vnguentum
Comitissae, or else this ointment.

Ointment. Ol. Mastich. Cidonior. an. j. ol. Mirtill. ss. Coral. rub. terrae
Sigillat. an. s. Unguent. Comitiss. s. liquefiant omnia vt artis est, and fiat
linimentum.

If the woman with child feel any coldness (as it happens to some, by reason
of their cold temperature) which makes them shiuer, and quake: let there be
added to the former ointment, Ol. Costin. and Aneth. an. ss.

But if she find any heat there, or burning, then apply some ointment, that
has virtue to comfort, and cool.

Another ointment. Ol. Mirtill. Rosar. an. j. ss. vng. Rosat. Mes. j. vng,
Refriger. Galen. s. Puluer. Coral. rub. Bol. Armen. an. j. succi Aurant. ij.
misce fiat linimentum.

Likewise it may chance, A good observation.
through the waightinesse of the womb, which rests in the bottom, that the
woman with child cannot make water; which happening, she herself, with both
hands must lift up the bottom of her belly: by means whereof, she shall
hinder the body of the womb, from pressing, and crushing the bladder, and
especially the neck thereof, which is loaded and oppressed with the said
womb. You may apply below, some bathing or fomentation, made with the leaves
of Mallows, Althaea, Cresses, and Parietarie, with a little Lin-seed, to make
the passage more loose, soft, and easy to be enlarged, or widened.

Of the panting, and beating of the Heart: As also of Swouning, which happen
unto women with child. CHAP. XIII.
AS there be diverse winds and vapors, that are shut up, and enclosed in the
nether belly of a woman with child, which procure great pains in her hips,
back, and groine: for the reasons before rehearsed. Cause of the trembling of
the Heart.
So likewise are there the like vapors, that arise from the womb, and other
parts near, which are enclosed in the Arteries, and by them are carried, and
imparted to the heart, which cause a panting, and beating: and the heart
feeling it self offended, and oppressed by the said vapors, endeavors by
his motion, to expel and drive them away, The wisdom of Nature in all her
works.
far from itself, (Nature having given to every part, some particular means,
whereby to repel, and thrust back that, which does annoy, or molest it. As
the Brain by sneesing; the Lungs by coughing; and the stomach by vomiting.
But because this accident is oftentimes the forerunner of a Syncope, or
swouning, therefore will it be needful to have care thereof, it being easy to
be known, both by the relation of the party, who finds her heart beat, as
also by feeling the breast upon the region of the heart with ones hand, with
which this motion lifts up the ribs and the hand that is laid thereon, yea
some women have such a beating, that it makes even the ribs stand out of their
place. For remedy whereof, such vapors must be kept from seasing upon the heart,
which may be done by well fensing of it, both within, and without.

If then you perceive that the woman do abound with any ill humors, from
whence these vapors may partly arise: she must be purged (as before,) and let
blood, according as the accidents do require, and the ancients do appoint,
which must be done in small quantity, and that, not all at once: but rather at
many times by little and little. For according to Galen. How a woman with child
must be let blood.
There is no remedy that more hinders, and altars the course of blood and
noisome vapors, from piercing and assailing the heart, then letting of blood
does.

Let her take every morning, one of these Lozenges, which are very proper
Lozenges.. puluer laetitiae Galeni and de gemmis. an i. pull. lapid. bezoard.
and ossis de cord cerui. an. s. confect. de hyacintho s. sacchari cum aqua
scordij dissoluti ij. fiant tabellae pond. ij. sumat vnam singulis diebus mane
and sero cubitura.



In steed thereof she may use this opiate: Opiate.. conseruae bugloss. and
borag. an. s. conseruae radicis scorzonerae. vi. corti. citriconditi iij. there.
veter. i. pull. electuar. diamarg. frigidi s. fiat opiata capiat singulis diebus
mane and sero i. vt dictum est.



The Claret water before described is very excellent good, some do use the
water of Orringe flowers.

The heart must be guarded.
The heart must be outwardly fortified with Quilts, Fomentations, Epithemes,
and Cataplasmes, applied to the region thereof; made with the aforenamed
ingredient. Take for the Epitheme or fomentation, the waters of Borage,
Buglosse, Balm, and of Oringe flowers, Cardus Benedictus, Roses and of
Scordium, adding thereto Saunders, Angelica seed: Cordial flowers and the like.

The womb desires good smells.
And because that the heart and matrice, are delighted with pleasant odors, let
those that are troubled with this disease use good smells; sweet, but neither
strong nor piercing.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Cough.
ONe of the most grievous, and almost insupportable accidents, that can happen
to a woman with child, is the Cough: the which being violent, oftentimes
causes headache, pain of the sides, flanks and belly, Inconveniences of the
cough.
vomiting, and watching, the woman not being able to sleep, or take any rest,
for the great concussion and agitation which is made through the whole body,
which oftentimes puts the woman in danger, to be delivered before her ordinary
time.

For the most part it proceeds of some sharp and biting vapors, Cause.
which arise from the nether parts, or else by the distillation of some thin
humor, that comes from the brain, and falls trickling upon the Trachea
Arteria, or wind pipe, and the lungs, which prouokes them to cough, and yet
bringing up little or nothing: the distilation may also be of some thicker
humor which falls down upon the said parts.

Therefore we must have respect to the antecedent cause, Cure.
by hindering such vapors and humors from breeding, then staying those, which
may flow or fall down: if there be any cause or matter joined with it, already
fallen and impacted in the lungs and breast, then must it be brought up by
spetting.

For the helping hereof, Diet.
they must avoid all salt and spiced meats, as also those that are sharp, and
biting especially if it be caused by some vapors or destillation of a thin
or serous humor.

Concerning general medicines: General medicines.
if it be accompanied with a fever, or some great heat, it will not be amiss
to draw a little blood. then (the better to turn the course of the
distillation): which causes the cough to apply cupping glasses upon the
shoulders, with some light scarification. And if the cough should be of so
long continuance, Cautery.
I would counsel you to lay a cautery in the hollownesse of the nape of the
neck: which I have practiced with good success, but it must not be done before
you have tried the medicines following, and when the cough is great and violent.

Frictions.
The rubbing of the arms, shoulders, and back must not be omitted, as also
when the hair is shaven away to apply Emplasterum de Betonica, upon the head,
to stay the Rhume.

If the cough be dry, proceeding from some thin and sharp humor or vapor, it
must be thickened, contrariwise if the humor be tough and thick, it must be
cut, and attenuated, by concocting both, and therefore in this case, the use of
Medicines, that do dull, the sense thereof, are very profitable to mittigate
violent Coughs: of which kind are these that follow. If the humor be thin and
sharp this Iulep taken twice or thrice is very fit.

. Syrup. rosarum sicar. and de iuiubis an. vi. syrupi de nenuph. s. aquae
cardui and vngulae cabalinae an.. ij. s. fiat. Iulap. reiteretur ter quater-ue
vt artis est. If the humor be slimy, thick, and tough she may use this Iulep.

Iulep.. Syrupi capill. veneris and de liquirit. an.. vi. oximelit. simplic. s.
aquae betonicae, and vngul. cabal. an. Another.
ij. s. fiat Iulap. reiteretur vt supra.

Let them often hold in their mouth sugar candy, especially that which gathers
about the pot side, wherein sirop of Violets or the like has been put. Let
them use Trochiscks, juice of Licorise, and sometime chawe a piece of Lichorise
in their mouth. The Lozenges of Diatragacanthum frigidum, Diairis simplex, and
sugar of Roses, are very good. The use of Lohocs is very distasteful, but in
steed thereof, let them use Syrup of Iuiubes, of dried Roses, and a little
diacodium mingled together, I have seen this medicine do much good,
especially when the cough is great, and that they feel some excoriation, and
roughnes in the throat. A medicine to take away the roughnes of the throat.


. olei amigd. dull. sine igne recent. extract.. i. s. saccari canda subtilit.
pulueris. s. mucag. seminis psilij and. cydoniorum cum aqua rosar. leuiter
extract. an ij. misce omnia diligenter. Let them take of this medicine in a
spoone, swallowing it down very gently, that so some of it may the better
slide down the sides of the windpipe.

It will be very fit to rub their breast all over with fresh butter, or oil of
sweet Almonds: and if they find any heat, let them use oil of Violets washed
with Barley water well boiled. Sleeping stops fluxes.


And because there is nothing, that stays destillations, better then sleep:
and that those who have the cough sleep little, it will be very good to make
the patient sleep, without giving any violent sleeping medicine, this Iulep
may be given very safely.

Drink to stay the Rheum.. Syrupi de Iuiubis, violati and diacodij sine
specieb. an. s. cum decocto portulacae, lactucae, boraginis. betonicae and
trium flor. cordial. fiat potus, capiat hora somni.

This remedy procures sleep, and so by consequence stays the Rheum. If you
have any good Laudanum, you may give safely three or four grains thereof; which
I have seen practiced with prosperous success.

CHAP. XV. of Costiuenes, wherewith women with child are troubled.
AMongst many other accidents wherewith women with child are troubled, there
are two, the one contrary to the other whereunto they be much subject: that is,
either they are bound, and cannot go to the stool but with much inconvenience,
and very seldom: or else they are always loose and subject to the flux.
Contrary accidents in women with child.
Both may put the woman in danger of miscarrying. For when she is bound, with
much strayning, and that violently to unburden nature, the ligaments may be
loosened, or some vein opened: and cause flux of blood: which may make her
fall into travail, and therefore it is fit to provide for it.

Cause of Costiuenesse.
The retention of the excrements, and costiuenes of the belly, may happen,
either because they have used to be so naturally, or by alteration, and change
of years, for as Hippocrates says, they who have their belly moist in their
youth, in their age will have it hard and dry, and so contrariwise. This
accident happens to others, because the guts are not provoked and stirred up by
the clister of nature (which is the gall,) that they may expel, and thrust
forth their excrements. There might be alleged many more reasons, which at
this time I will leave to speak of, and only frame my self to that which
most commonly is the cause of it in women with child, which is referred to two
points, Other causes of Costiuenes
either because the guts are pressed by the vneuennes of the womb, which is
too full, and being placed upon them (and chiefly upon the great gut) crushes
and thrusts them one against another, in such sort, that they have no means to
enlarge and dilate themselves, thereby to uoid the excrements contained within
them. The other is because the guts, and the excrements within them, are
commonly very hard, and dried in women with child, through the great heat,
that is in the intrailes, which makes them that they cannot easily flow. The
sedentary life also, that women lead, is cause that their excrements are
stayed, and gather themselves together, by little and little, and at the length
stop up the passage. This accident brings unto them, flushing in the face,
headache, beating of the Arteries; yea and oftentimes an Ague.

For the curing of this disease a good order in diet is very needful: Cure.
using meats that do moisten, and keep the guts supple, and slipperie, and
withal soften the excrements: which must be done with very great discretion:
for too much moisture may at length over much relaxe the ligaments of the the
womb, and of the child, and thereby hasten the delivery.

Notwitstanding, a woman with child being too costiue, may use tender meats, as
Veale, wherewith they may make Brothes, Brothes to loosen the belly.
with Lettuce, Purcelane, Sorrel, Spinach, Beets, Buglosse, Violet leaves, and
sometime a little of the herb called Mercury. Let them use Prunes, and baked
Apples. Some take two or three gulps of fresh water before their meals: but
let them use gentle exercise to make their excrement follow the more freely. It
is also very fit for a woman with child, in the morning when she rises, and
at night when she goes to bed, to make proffer to unburden nature, without
straining her self, but very gently. If for all this her belly will not be
correspondent; it will not be amiss to give her Clysters.

Clyster. Malu. Bismal. Parietar. Matric. an. m. ij. flor. Chamoem. Melilot.
an. p. ij. sem. Anisi, Foenicul. an. ij. coquantur in iure pulli vel capit.
veruec. aut vituli in colatur. ad quart. iij. dissolve Sacch. albi, olei
Violat. Butyr. recent. an. j. ss. vitell. ouor. numero ij. fiat Clyster. this
may be given at twice.

She may also take some broth wherein is put a spoonful or two of the water,
or wine of Seny, which is made after this manner.

Seny wine. Take half an ounce of Seny well cleansed, six cloves bruised, put
them into a dish, and pour upon them half a pint of wine, or water ready to
boil, and so let them soke all night, and in the morning take two or three
spoonful, which must be put into your broth: keeping the rest, to serve you
afterward, at your need.

Of the Flux, or looseness of the Belly, which troubles women with child.
CHAP. XVI.
THe Laske, in what manner soever it be, does put the woman in danger of coming
before her time: and that for diverse reasons. First, Flux of the belly
dangerous.
because thereby the meat they take for their nourishment, is voided too soon,
which should have stayed and been turned into blood, for the nourishing and
sustaining both of the Mother, and the child. And therefore, they both remain
weak, and feeble, which compels the child to come forth, and seek for
food else where. For as the Proverb says; Proverb.
Hunger makes the Wolf come forth of the wood. Beside, the Mother is so
troubled with rising out of her bed, as also with much straining her self,
(especially if it be the bloody Flixe) that the womb oftentimes is
ouerturned, and relaxed: and causes the child to be cast forth of his
place, by reason of the moistness which runs continually along the great
gut, upon which the womb is placed.

Women with great bellies are commonly subject thereto, because of the meats
they eat, Women with child are subject to looseness of the belly.
which are of ill juice: whereby the stomach being weakened, and not able to
concoct them, the expulsive faculty is compelled to thrust them downward, half
concocted, and indigested: otherwise they are corrupted, and turned into some
malign, sharp, and biting humors: as into fretting, choler rotten phlegm,
or melancholy, which do corrode and stir up the bowels, and so cause the
flux of the belly.

The Cure.
Concerning the cure of it, many considerations must be had. And first, it will
be very fit to know of what kind, the flux is, and what may be cause thereof.
Now, all Fluxes of the belly must needs be one of these three; either
Diarrhaea, Lienteria, or Dysenteria, which soever it be of these, if it proceed
of a malign, and putride humor, it must not be suddenly stopped by
astringent medicines, least it happen unto the woman with child, as it did unto
Smyrnia, A wotrhy story.
(as Hippocrat. says) who having a flux of the belly, suddenly stopped; was
delivered in the the fourth month.

How to proceed therein.
Now to know what kind of flux it may be, the stools will show and testify.
If it be not violent, it may be suffered to flow gently, and for a good while;
not omitting in the mean time, the use of some Clysters, that may assuage the
pain, if there be any. But if it continue, and that it be bred of some sharp
and biting humors which know the guts, and provoke the expulsive faculty; (of
which kind are fretting and biting choler, or salt phlegm) and that the Mother
seem to grow weak and faint: then must it be remedied with as much speed and
care as may be: otherwise the woman having diverse pangs, and prouocations, is
in danger to be delivered. Wherefore the humor offending must be purged with
Rubarb, compound sirup of Cichorie, and the like, which have been already
prescribed in the former Chapters: as also the like humors hindered from
breeding. Her Diet.
And therefore she must abstain from all unwholesome meats, especially if the
cause thereof proceed from thence. Besides, the said humors must be allaied and
made more gentle, that they may not any more provoke or stir up the expulssiue
virtue: the which may be easily done by a good diet, which shall breed as
little choler, or other bad humors, as may be: using broths made with
Purcelance, Sorrel, Buglosse, and the cold seeds, adding thereto a little
Rise, or French Barley. The use of new laid Eggs is much commended, which must
be poched in water: Her meat must be rather roast, then boiled: All spices are
to be eschewed. Let her drink be red Wine, or steeled water, wherein a piece
of bread has been soked.

This drink is very fit, and pleasant.

Take of French Barley, dried in a pan, a handful, A Drink.
Fennill-seed, Coriander-seed, and Licorise of each, two drams, boil them in a
quart of water, adding thereto an ounce of Berberis, or two ounces of the juice
of Pomgranats. A little before meals let her eat a slice of Marmilade.

And seeing there often happens pain and gripings together with pangs and
throws, because the guts are moved and provoked: therefore they must be
washed, and the pain mitigated with this Clyster.

Clister.. Hord. integ. m.i. cham^mel. melilot. an m.s. Plantag. Borag. Buglos.
an. m.i. Bulliant in iure cap^t. veruec. aut vituli de quo cape quart. iij. in
quibus dissolve ol. violar. iij. vitell. duor. ouor. sachar. rub. is. fiat
clyster.

But if the woman be further molested with gripings and that she have great,
and often prouocations: then this Clister will be very fit for her.

Another Clister.. Plantag. Bars. Pastor. Portulac. an. m.j. flor. Chamoemel.
melilot. hord. integ. an. p. 1. sem. anisi s. Bulliant in iure pulli
gallinacei. de quo accipe qu. iij. seui caprill. i. s. olei omphac. iij. vitell
vnius oui cum album. sacchar. rub. j. misceantur and fiat clyster.

Clisters that are made only with oil of Violets and the broth of a sheep,
or calves head be singular good.

If the disease do increase and the pains grow more violent, then we must
proceed even to stupifying or Narcoticke medicines, as Laudanum, or Pilulae de
Cynoglossa, which may be given either by the mouth or in a Clister wherein the
Physicians counsel must be asked.

I have seen given with good success one or two drams of new Triakle
dissolved in a clister.

It will be very fit to anoint the bottom of her belly, and about the
ossacrum with this ointment.

Ointment.. Ol. Rosar. Mirtil. an. i.s. olei Mastich. j. vitell. duor. ouor.
croci s. misce omnia simul, and fiat litus pro pectine, and osse sacro.

They may likewise use Vnguentum Rosatum Mesues.

The pain still continuing, with pangs and throws let there be made for her
this Suffumigation.

Suffumigatio^.. folior. matric. plantag. bursae. pastor. verbasci Arnoglossae
an. m. i. rosar. rub. flor. cham. and melilot. balaustiorum. an. m.s. coquantur
in aequis partibus vini austeri and aquae chalyb. and fiat insessio, and ibi
per dimidiam horam se contineat.

Then (she being well dried) anoint all the bottom of her belly, and about
os sacrum, with this ointment.

Liniment.. seui caprilli, and veruec. an. s. olei rosati and mastich. an. ij.
s. olei cydonior. i. liques. simul, addendo pull. rosar. rubr. verbasci and
mirtill. an. s. pull. terrae sigillatae, and coralli rub. ji. ceraeq. s. fiat
litus.

Of the swelling of the legs and thighs which happens unto women with child.
CHAP. XVII.
IN those women which were wont to have great quantity of natural
purgations, before they were with child; the blood after they have conceived,
which was used to flow, being stopped and suppressed, and not being converted
into nourishment by the Mother, Cause of the swelling of the face.
and much less by the child; most commonly though it does not breed the
former accidents, yet is it altered, and converted into waterish humors:
Moreover the liver through the abundance of blood, wherewith it does ouerflow,
breeds a serous or waterish blood: and being not able to digest it, it is
thrust downward by the expulsive virtue of the upper parts, and at length rests
itself upon the legs, feet, and thighs, the which makes them all swelled and
oedematous. This swelling oftentimes does continue both day and night, and
sometimes it is so resolved in the night that in the morning it is scarce
perceived at all but presently all the day, the tumor is renewed, and at the
evening does much appear: and then again, in the night it is resolved through
rest, and the heat of the bed. Such as are much subject to the whites, before
their being with child are commonly troubled with this infirmity, which was
observed by Hippocrates in chollericke people, and those that abound with
serous, sharp, Who are not subject to the swelling.
and biting humors. Beside the said oedematous swelling, there happens an
inflammation, which does cause the skin to go off, and sometime breeds
filthy ulcers. But this must be remedied before these ulcers happen.

These accidents continue commonly but the first four months, yet with some
they stay till their lying in, and so soon as they are delivered, the swelling
vanishes of it self.

If this disease do not much offend the woman with child, it shall not be
needful to use many medicines, but it is sufficient that she keep a good diet,
and chiefly if it resolve of it self in the night. But if she be much troubled
therewithal, Advertisement concerning the cure.
let her use these remedies.

Let the swollen parts be rubbed with this medicine.

Liniment.. Olei Rosat. Omphacin. iij. Aceti ss. salis ij. agitentur omnia
simul, and fiat litus pro part affecta. And if there be any inflammation, add
to it a little vng. Populeum.

The swollen parts must be wrapped with clothes, Binding necessary.
and swathed beginning at the bottom, and so going upward.

Some find good by laying thereon a Cabbage lease, and binding it as before.

Others use the lie of Vine ashes, Lie of Vine ashes very good.
adding thereto a little Allom, and Fullers earth, then dipping therein a
linen cloth doubled, or else a sponge, and so apply it. I have made proof of
this fomentation and cataplasme, when there has been no inflmmation.

Fomentation.. Fol. salu. Maioran. Ebul. Rorismar^ an. m. j. flor. Chamoemel.
Melilot. Lauand. Rosar. rub. an. p. j. Baccar. Laur. Iunip. Balaust. an. ss.
coquantur omnia in lixiuij Cineris sarment ^r. lb. xij. addendo Alum. crudi. j.
fiat fotus cum spongijs, deinde admoneatur sequens cataplasma.

Cataplasma.. Farin. fabar. hord. Orobi. an. iij. coquantur perfect in decocto
superiori, addendo faecis vini rub. iij. Terebinth. co^is j. s. unguent. Rosat.
Mes. ol. Rutac. Chamoemel. an. ij. pulu. Rosar. rub. Ireos florent. an. s.
admoueatur parti calide praemisso fotu.

I have likewise used in steed of the foresaid fomentation, before the applying
of the Pultesse, to take a quantity of Danewort, A tried remedy.
a little Sage, with a few Chamomile and Melilot flowers, and heat them in a
skillet, laying it round about the leg, and covering it quite with tyles which
cover the tops of houses, being a little heated, to keep the herbs gently
warm the space of an hour or two.

Some use Snayles with their shells beaten together, and apply them like a
pultesse.

Beside the former swelling of the legs, and feet, there happens to some a
puffing up, or windy swelling in the entrance of the womb, so great, and
swollen; that I have seen it in some women, bigger then half a child's head:
which does so grieve, and trouble them, that they are scarce able to bring
their legs together, but are feign to stand stradling: This swelling is very
clear, and shining; and to say the truth, there is nothing but water contained
within it, the which must be cured before her lying in. An observation.
There are not any Cataplasmes, or the like, in this case that can do much
good: (as I my self have often made trial) But only the manual practice,
making many long and deep scarifications of all sides, which will cause great
store of water to flow, and issue from the part: the which I have practiced
upon many. And it is to be noted, that oftentimes this tumor does return, and
is filled again, therefore it will be necessary to make new scarifications.
And to the end that it may not come so soon again, apply thereto, A tried
remedy.
both within and without, fine lint moistened in the oil of sweet Almonds, and
laying upon it an emplaster made with a little Cerotum infrigidans Galeni, and
Desiccatiuum rubrum, mingled together: this medicine will make the orifices
vent and flow the longer. Not long since, there were two worthy Ladies (which
for honor sake I will not name) that were troubled with this accident, about
the time of their lying in; in whom I opened, and scarified those parts, to
make the water flow and come forth. And it is to be observed, that we must
awaite a fit opportunity to do this; which will be when they are near their
lying down.

The means to help women which cannot bear their Children the full time.
CHAP. XVIII.
OFtentimes it happens to women, that they cannot bear their burden to the
time prefixed by nature, which is the ninth month. This accident is called
either a shift, or slipping away, or else Abortment, or (as our women call it)
a mischance: The shift is reckoned from the first day the seed is retained in
the womb, till such time as it receives form and shape, in which time, if it
chance to issue and flow forth, it is a Shift. The Abortment happens after the
fortieth day, yea, even to the end of the ninth month. For the Abortment is a
violent expulsion, or exclusion of the child already formed and endued with
life, before the appointed time. But the sliding away, or shift, is a flowing
or issuing of the seed, out of the womb, which is not yet, either formed, or
endued with life.

Those that have been delivered once before their time, for the most part they
miscarie with the rest of their children, about the same time.

Causes of Abortment.
This accident may happen upon diverse occasions, the which are either inward, or
outward. The outward are, either an Ague, flux of blood, or of the belly,
vomiting, or any other sickness that may happen unto a woman with child; as
also leaping, daunsing, riding in a Coach, too much stretching of her self,
and the lifting, or carrying of any heavy burden: the immoderate use of
Venus, Passions of the mind, as choler, sadness, longing after any thing; or
the use of violent and strong medicines.

The inward causes are gathered from one of these three: either from the
Mother, or things belonging to her, Causes from the child.
or from the child. Those that are taken from the child, are, when he is either
so weak and sickly, that he cannot be kept in the womb, being not able to draw
sufficient nourishment, and thereby does decay and die: or else by being too
big and large; so that the womb is not capable to lodge and support him: which
makes the vessels of the womb to be relaxed and break: then the entrance of
the womb dilates it self, and the child comes forth.

From the mother: when she is either too small, Causes from the mother.
or low of stature, which causes that the child cannot grow in so little room
neither move himself or breath (although he breath only by the arteries of
the mother) her breast being so straight that it cannot be stretched or
enlarged: or else because she is too fat, which makes the caul to press
down, and crush the Matrice, and causes the seed to flow and issue forth
before it be formed. Leannes causes Abortment.
A woman also that is too lean, and does eat but little, seldom or never
bears her child the full time. For if the mother be not well nourished, much
less can the child. Too much eating stifles the child: as likewise the use of
unwholesome meats does engender ill blood in the mother: wherewith the child
being nourisht, in the end languisheth, whence follows death. Another cause
may be the overmuch fullness, and moistnes wherewith women abound, Fullness is
cause of Abortment.
and chiefly in their womb, which oftentimes is full, and ouerflowes with
mosture, and fills the vessels of the womb full of slime, whereby the inner
orifice is enlarged, and dilated, unable to support, or keep in the child.
There may likewise be engendered some sharp, and biting humors; wherewith the
Matrice being stirred, or provoked, while it endeavors to expel them, may
thrust out the child also.

This accident may also happen to those that in their child bearing are subject
to have their natural courses, They which have their natural courses do often
miscarry.
as if they were not with child: which comes to pass, when nature striving
to put them forth, does cause the child to be untied, and so he follows the
Purgings.

Things annexed to the mother which do cause abortment.
Concerning those things which are annexed or belonging to the mother, I
understand them to be such as may be grown or contained within the womb, as
some impostume, Scyrrhus, or excresce^ce of flesh, mole or false conception,
therein contained, as also great store of water, the which I saw, not long since
happen unto an honest Gentlewoman, whose womb was so full of water in the eight
month that the Orifice thereof was constrained to open it self, and let them
forth, the which was in such quantity, that it is incredible to be reported,
and some six days after, she was delivered, the womb not being closed
again.

As this accident is very dangerous, both for the mother and the child; so will
it be needful to prevent, and remedy it with all speed possible.

Signs of abortment.
First we may know, that a woman is in danger to abort, or miscarry, when the
milk in her breasts does flow and run forth in great quantity, her breasts
remaining limber and soft: and if she be with child of two children, and one
breast grow empty, it is sign she will miscary with one of them. For this
shows that the child does loath and refuse his nourishment: chiefly if the
nipple have gotten any ill color, it is a sign that the Matrice is
distempered according to Hyppocrates. Hippoc. lib. 5. Aphoris. 37.38


They that are troubled with a great looseness of the belly, be often
delivered before their time. Loosenes of the belly causes abortment.


Likewise great pain of the back, and thighs, which coms round to the groin,
and bottom of the belly, does oftentimes presage the like. As also when there
flows out of the conduit of nature, first certain waters, then bloody and
slimy matter, and last of all blood.

To the end that it may be safely remedied, Cure of Abortment.
there must respect be had to the cause: Now concerning the outward causes, as
if the mother be troubled with any sickness she must be handled as it is
requisite and fit: she must shun all violent exercises, passions of the
mind, and the too often use of Venus. If the abortment proceed, from the
littleness or lownes of the mother, before her being with child, let her use
Bathes, fomentations, and ointments that may loosen and enlarge her belly, and
Matrice. And while she goes with child let her feed moderately, to nourish
her self, and her child, and when the ninth month is come let her use supling
and relaxing ointments like those formerly set down.

If the cause be of too much fatnes, it will be very fit and convenient to purge
her, and let her blood, before she be with child; and to prescribe her a
strict order of diet thereby to make her lean, using meats that be not too
nourishing, or full of good juice. Contrariwise she that is too lean, must use
good meats, and such as breed good juice, and that in good quantity. If too
much eating and drinking, or the use of bad meats, that breed ill juice, be
the cause: then must she abstain from them.

And when it does proceed from the fullness and abundance of humors, and
water: as it happens in full bodied young women, or which before their being
with child were subject to some euacuations (as bleeding at the nose,
Hemorrodes, or abundance of ordinary purgations, and whites) then will it also
be very needful to purge, and let them blood and before their being with
child, to make them use the diet: When the diet is necessary
and especially those, that have the ligaments of the womb loose and soft, and
the vessels full of thick and slimy matter: to whom likewise may be
administered cleansing, and strengthening iniections, drying perfumes, Baths
with sulphur, and emplasters for their backs, which shall hereafter be set
down.

Bloudletting fit for them that abort.
And when they shall be gone about four months and a half, it will be very
fit to purge them gently, and let them blood, the which may be done more
plentifully and boldly (not all at once, but at sundry times) in those who
before their being with child were used to more copious and frequent
euacuations. For experience does show, that by this means, those which were
wont to be delivered before their time, have not only born their children to
the ordinary time, but thereby also have been brought a bed more easily, and
with less pain and trouble. Store of nourishment choketh the child.
So that the child shall neither be in danger to be stifled, by drawing more
food then is needful for his nourishment; nor of growing too big, by turning
it into his own sustenance, which might be a means through his exceeding
greatness to break and tear the ligaments that support him, or else, though
he stay his full time, (being thus big) that he should not be able to come
easily into the world.

To help the abortment, Of the abor^ment that comes from the child.
whereof the child is cause, being naturally either weak or sickly, it will be
very necessary, that the mother put to her helping hand, as much as she can
possibly. Wherefore she must be merry; quiet, as well in body as in mind, not
fretting or vexing her self: and especially about the time she was wont to be
delivered, she must keep her bed, using meats of easy digestion and
distribution, and drink good claret wine: let her take every two hours, a
good space from her meat, some of this opiate.

Opiate.. Cons. Borag. Buglos. an. i. Cons. Rosar. Anthos an. vi. Cort. Citri
cond. Myrobal. condit. an. s. Margarit. splendid. Coral. rub. an. i. ossis de
cord cerui. s. Cum sir. Conser. Citri fiat Opiata capiat i. vt dictum est.

If she like not this Opiate, let her use these Lozenges.

Lozenges.. Sp. Diamarg. frig. ij. Coral. rub. Corn. cerui. vsti an. s.
priapitauri iiij. Sacchar. in aqua. Buglos. dissolut. iij. fiat electuarium per
tabellas ponderis s. vel ij. pro dosi capiat vt dictu^ est.

Let her belly be anointed with this ointment as well to comfort the Matrice,
as also to give strength unto the child.

Ointment.
. Olei Mirtill. Cydonior: Mastich. an s. Coral. rub. santal. rub. an. i.
maioran. Absynth. an. iiij vng. Rosat. Mes. s. Cerae q. s. fiat Linimentum. Let
there be laid upon her back, and os sacrum, some such emplaster. Some women
have found good by applying upon their Navel a tossed dipped in good red wine,
strowing upon it the powder of Roses; Grana tinctorum; Coral; and a little
Cinnamon.

The Emplaster.. Gallar. Nuc. Cupress. sang. Dracon. Balaust. mirtil. Ros. rub.
an. i. s. Mastic. Myrrhae an. ij. Thur. Hypocist. acaciae. gum. Arabic. Bol.
armen. an. i. ladani i. Terebinth. venet. is. picis Naualis. v j. Cerae. ol.
Mastich. an. q. s. vt fiat. secundum artem emplastrum.

The emplaster must be often taken off, for fear of the itching, and put on
again; and if there happen any heat to the part, anoint it with Mesues
ointment of Roses.

Remedies if the child be to big.
If you perceive that the child be too great, and big; to the end that he
receive not so much nourishment, whereby he may grow bigger, and larger; the
mother must abstain from all meats that are so iuicy and nourishing, and
keep herself quiet having her belly stayed up with a fit roler, that it hang
not down, and least the ligaments which hold the child might stretch, and so
by the weight be torn, and broken a sunder.

Causes of Abortment annexed to the Mother.
The like may be observed and practiced in the causes annexed and joined to the
mother, as if there be any Scyrrhus, Mole, Dropsy, Warts, Impostums,
excrescence of flesh, or other indisposition of the womb. The which must be
cured before the woman be with child, according as the disease does require,
it being very hard for a Woman to prove with child, when she is troubled with
any of the aforesaid accidents.

And in regard of outward causes, Outward cause.
wherein we did comprehend the Ague, Laske, Flux of blood, vomiting and the
like. These accidents must be prevented, according as the case does require
taking the advice of the learned Physician, as we have said before. But
concerning medicines, which must be more particularly applied to outward
causes, as falls, blows, and violent exercises, let them have recourse to the
medicines described, for the child that is weak, and sickly, to which these
following may be added as being profitable for both causes. As if there
appear any blood, or red waters that begin to flow and come forth, by then
natural passage, this medicine is excellent.

. Granor. tinct. s. Coral. rub. margarit. elect. an. Medicines f^ abortment.
gr. vi. germina duor. ouor. misce exhibeatur cum vitello vnius oui. vel.

. Mastich. subtle. pull. s. seric. subtiliter incisae s. germina duor ouor.
capiat. cum vitello oui.

She may likewise take in the morning, a Lozenge of Diarhodon of the weight of
a French Crown. This powder also is very commendable.

. Sp. Diamarg. frigid. s. Coral. rub. vst. and lot. in aq. Rosar. pryap. Tauri.
sic. an. ij. Eboris. Bol. Armen. terrae sigillat. an iiij. Sachar. rosat.
tabulat. is. Capiat mane and sero. ij. pro vnaquaque dosi. Of this powder also
may be made Lozenges.

Let there be applied to her back the former Emplaster, or this that
follows.

Emplaster to retain or keep in the child.. Mastich. Mirrh. gum. Arab. an.
ij. Menth. sicc. Absynth. rad. Bistort. Nucum and fol. Cupress. an. i s.
Cortic. granat. ij s. Styrac. calam. Colophon. picis Naual. an. iij. Cerae
Citrin. j. Terebinth. von. s. Ol. Mirtill. q. s. fiat emplast. extendat. super
alutam, ad vsum.

If the emplaster breed any inconvenience, let them use this ointment.

Ointment.. Ol. Cydonior. Mastich. Mirtill. an. i s. Bol. Armen. sang. Dracon.
Coral. rub. an s. Hypocist. Acaciae an. i. santal. citr. rosar. rub. Sem.
Berber. an. ij. Cerae q. s. f. vng. prorenibus and ventre toto.

Having (with as much breuity, as possibly I could) treated of the Accidents
which happen to women with child: and having likewise brought them even to the
time that nature has appointed for their delivery: it now remains, that we
handle the means, to help and ease them in this act and travail: the which
shall be done, after we have spoken somewhat, concerning the beginning and
office of Midwiues, as being the first that are called in this business.

THE MEANS TO help and succor a Woman with child, as well in her natural
travail, as that which is contrary to nature.
The second Book.
Of Mid-Wiues. CHAP. I.
DAily experience does show us, that many women are delivered without the help
of the Midwife, Notwithstanding Antiquity tells us, that there have been
Mid-wiues even from the beginning: yea, that diverse of that sex have practiced
Physic.

Hippocrates swears by Apollo and Aesculapius and by Hygea, and Panacaea, as
Gods, Hippocrat. Diverse wom Physicians.
and Goddesses of Physic.

Ovid does make mention of Ocyroe, Ovid.
daughter to Chyron the great Physician, who out of her curiosity did practice
Physic.

Origin in his eleventh Homely upon Exodus speaks of two Midwiues, very
skillful in Physic, which were Egyptians, and calls them Sephora and Phua.

Beside this curiosity; necessity, (the mistress of Arts) has constrained
women, to learn and practice Physic, one with another. For finding
themselves afflicted, and troubled with diverse diseases in their natural
parts, and being destitute of all remedies, Why women did study Physic.
(for want whereof many perished, and died miserably) they durst not discover,
and lay open their infirmities, to any but themselves, accounting it to be
dishonest: Higinus. Women forbid to study Physic.
As Higinus testifies, who relates, how the Athenians had forbidden women, by
their Laws, to study in Physic; and that at the same time there was a
certain maid named Agnodicea, very desirous to study therein, who the
better to attain unto her purpose, did cut off her hair, and apparel her
self like a man: and being so disguised, she became the scholar of Herophylus
the Physician: A notable History.
And when she had learned Physic, having notice of a certain woman that was
troubled in her natural parts; she went unto her, and made proffer of her
service; which the sick party refused, thinking she had been a man: But when
Agnodicea had assured her (by discovering of her self) that she was a maid,
the woman committed her self, into her hands, who dressed, and cured her
perfectly: and with the like care and industry she looked to many others, and
cured them. Which being known by the Physicians, because they were not called
any more to the cure of women, they accused the said Agnodicea, that she had
shaued off her beard, that thereby she might abuse women, faining themselves to
be sick. Then she putting aside her garments, made it evident that she was a
maid: which caused the Physicians then to accuse her of a greater fault, for
transgressing the Law, which forbad women either to study or practice
Physic. This being come to the ears of the chiefest women, they presently
went to the chief Magistrates, and Judges of the City, called the
Areopagites, and told them: that they did not account them, for their husbands,
and friends, but for enemies; that they would condemn her, which restored them
to their health: which made the Atheniaens to revoke and disanull that Law,
giving Gentle-women leave to study and practice Physic.

Now since the greatest disease that women can have is that of the nine
Months, the Crisis and cure whereof consists in their safe delivery: There
have been Midwiues from the beginning. Lib. de Carnibus.
we must not doubt, but that there have been some women addicted thereto, and
practiced therein, in all ages. Hippocrates speaking of the birth that happens
in the seventh Month, does refer the Reader unto the Midwiues, who are present
at such labors, and wishes him to learn the truth thereof, of them.

Galen says, Lib 3. de Facul. natural
that Midwiues do not bid the women that are in travail, either to raise
themselves, or to sit down in the Chair, Midwiues i^ Galens time
before that the entrance of the womb be open, for the coming forth of the
child; which they know by feeling with their hand. Lib. de Causis morborum.
The same Author likewise speaks of the errors committed by Midwiues, when
they receive the child; an evident testimony that there were some such in the
time of Hippocrat. and Galen.

Socrates mother a Midwife.
Lacrtius, and Valerius Maximus do testify, that Phanerora the mother of
Socrates was a Midwife: yea, and it is found, that the ancient Judges did
appoint a stipend for those women that practiced Physic well; and which were
good Midwiues. Witness Vlpian: Lib. 1.. 1. de Extraordinaria cognitione.
as likewise, such were punished, as had practiced, or behau'd themselves
amiss in their profession, as it appears by the Law. Item si Obstetrix.

But among those that have practiced Physic, there were some that have
applied themselves most, to the delivering of Women; and for a difference from
others, they were commonly called Cunning women: or else caused themselves to
be so called: For women are of this disposition, that they desire to excel
men, or at least to seem to go beyond them. Wherefore it may easily be
perceived, Two sorts of cunning women.
that there has been, some women that have practiced Physic: and others that
were employed in the delivery of women. And these last took upon them three
things, Gal. in 62. lib. 5. Aph. Hippocrat.
as the Lawyers, Plato in his Thetetus, and Galen do witness.

First office.
The first office was to make the match, and to join the husband with the wife,
and likewise to judge, whether they were sit, and capable, or else ^^ble, and
insufficient to have issue, and beget children: which is very difficult to be
known, and at this day there is no woman so cunning, who is able to tell it.

The second office was, The second office.
to be present at the delivery of women, and birth of children; whether it
were in giving of some medicines, Act. 3. Scen Andr. Quod iussi ei dare bibere,
and quantum imperani, da^
(as Terence does witness) whose words are these; Let her drink that, which I
appointed, and the quantity I commanded:) or else by using her handiworke:
which work was committed to none, but those that had had children; because (as
Plato saith^) one cannot be so apt and skillful in exercising a work not
known, as they which have had the perfect knowledge and experience thereof.
Beside, the said Midwife was not to begin to use this art, before she was past
childbearing: The Midw(...) must be pa^^ child bearing.
because Diana (the Patroness of women in childbed) is barren and also for
that a woman which bears children, is much troubled, and more unapt to labor
and take pains.

The third office was to know, The third office.
and tell whether a woman was with child, or no. And therefore the Law given a
DD. fratribus did ordain, that three honest Midwiues, skillful in Midwifery,
should view and make inspection, and then give their judgment, whether the
Woman were with child.

But since that time beside the three former offices, Another office of Midwiue^
they have taken upon them authority* to judge of the virginity of maids,
Nevertheless all the famous Universities of Italy have rejected, and condemned
the opinion of such Mid-wiues, who say they can judge thereof. And Master
Cuiacius has done the like (for the French) saying, that it is very difficult,
yea impossible, to know whether a maid, be a virgin or no; And that this power
was never given unto Midwiues by the Civil Law, to judge thereof.

What manner of Woman, a Midwife ought to be.
MAny things are requisite, and needful in a Midwife, but they are all
referred to her person, The quality of a Midwife for her person
to her Manners, and to her mind: First, concerning her person: she must be of
an indifferent age, neither too young, nor too old: well composed of body: not
being subject to any diseases, nor misshapen, or deformed in any part thereof,
neat in her apparel, and person: especially having little hands and not
thick: clean, and her nails pared very near, and even; neither must she
wear rings upon her fingers, nor bracelets upon her arms, when she is about
her business. She must be pleasant, merry, of good discourse, strong,
painful, and accustomed to labor, that she may be able (if need be) to
watch two or three nights by the woman. Her manners. And. Act. ^. Sc. ^. Save
pol^^lla tonul^n^aest mul^er, and teme^^ria necsatis digna cu^ c^m (...) p^mi
sarin wherem


Concerning her behavior, she must be mild, gentle, courteous, patient,
sober, chaste, not quarrelsome; nor chollericke, neither proud or covetous, nor
a blabber, or reporter of any thing she shall either hear or see in secret, in
the house or person of her she has delivered. For as Terence says,
Drunkenness^ reproved
It is not fit to commit her into the hands of a drunken, or rash woman, that
is in travail of her first child.

As for her mind, she must be wise, discreet, Her mind
and witty, able to make use sometime of fair and flattering speeches: as
Plato reports Midwiues were wont to do in times past: which was done to no
other end but only to busy and beguile the poor apprehensiue women. And it
is a commendable deceit, allowed also in a Surgeon when it is done for the
patients good. For as the same Terence says. Deceit does serve oftentimes for
a good medicine in extreme diseases.

Now above all things the said Midwife ought to know that nature, the handmaid
of this great God, has given to every thing a beginning, increase, state,
perfection, and declining, which he does manifestly, The chie^fice of a (...)
wife.
and chiefly show (says Galen) in the birth of a child, when the mother
brings him into the world. For Nature surpasses all* and in that she does, is
wiser then either Art, or the Midwife, whosoever she be, yea, then the best
or most cunning workman that may be found, Lib. 7. de (...) partium.
as Galen witnesses. For it is she, that has set down the day of the child's
conformation, and the hour of his birth. And certainly it is a thing worthy of
consideration, to see how in a little space, Admira(...) thing.
yea even in the twinkling of an eye, the neck of the womb, which all the
time of the nine months was so perfectly and exactly closed and shut, that the
point of a needle could not enter therein: how (I say) in an instant it is
dilated and enlarged, to give passage, and way for the child; the which cannot
be comprehended (as the same Galen says) but only wondered at, and admired.
The same Author in his fifteenth book de vsu partium, desirous to show the
providence of Nature says, that the faults of Nature are very rare, and that
she works always, and in such order, and measure, that of a thousand births,
there is scarce one found that is amiss.

Wherefore neither the Midwife nor any of the Woman's kinsfolks, or assistants,
ought to do any thing rashly, but suffer nature to work; helping her
notwithstanding in that which shall be needful, as hereafter shall be
declared: dividing the work of their delivery into three several times and
seasons.

What must be observed, when the woman feels her self, near her time. CHAP.
III.
THe time of delivery being at hand, the woman is to prepare her self in this
manner. She must presently send for the Midwife, and her keeper, it being
better to have them about her too soon, then too late; for there be some women
that are delivered suddenly without the help of any one, although they have
been long in their first labor.

The bed
In the mean time, she must have a little bed provided her, like a pallet,
which must be of a reasonable bigness, strong and firm, and also of an
indifferent height (as well for her own commodity, as the Midwiues, and others
that shall be present about her, to help her, in her labor) and it must be so
set and placed, that they may conveniently come and go round about her, it must
be placed far from any door, and somewhat near the fire. Let it also be
conveniently furnished with beds and good store of linen that they may be
often changed, as need shall require. And likewise there must be laid cross
the beds feet, a piece of wood, for the woman to rest her feet upon, that so
she may have the more strength when she bends her legs, as we will show
hereafter.

As soon as she feels her self stirred and provoked with throws and pains,
Women in travail mu^^ walk.
which are usual in this case, it were good for her to walk up and down the
chamber, and then lay her self down warm in her bed: and then again afterward
to rise and walk, up and down the chamber, and then lay her down warm in her
bed: and then again afterward to rise up and walk, expecting till the water
be gathered, and the Matrice be opened: for to keep her self so long in her
bed, would be very tedious and painful. Yet it may chance, Rest is often
profitable
that being in bed she may take some rest and have a little slumber, and so by
this means the mother may gather more strength, and the child be the better
enabled to come at the time, which God has appointed it, and also the waters
will be the better prepared and gathered.

They may give her, if the labor be long, a little broth, or the yelke of an
egg with some butter, and bread, and also a little wine and water.

Diverse sorts of bringing women to bed.
It is very certain, that all women are not delivered after one fashion: for
some are delivered in their bed; others sitting in a chair, some standing
being supported and held up by the standers by: or else leaning upon the side
of a bed, table or chair; others kneeling being held up by the arms. But the
best and safest way, The best way to be delivered.
is; to be delivered in their bed, (the which I advise them to) the midwife,
and assistants, as her kinsfolks, friends, and keepers, observing this that
follows.

First the woman must be laid flat upon her back, having her head raised
somewhat high, The placing of a woman in travail.
with a pillow under her back that it bow not: and under her buttocks and os
sacrum, let her have another pretty big pillow, that thereby those parts may
be somewhat lifted up: for a woman that sinketh down into the bed can never be
well delivered; and therefore the well placing of them is of great consequence.
Let her thighs and knees be stretched forth and laid abroad one from another:
and her legs bowed and drawn upward, having her heels and the soles of her
feet, leaning hard against the piece of wood, which is laid cross the bed
for this purpose.

About some they put a swath four times doubled under their back, and hinder
parts, which comes round about them: this swath must be a foot broad, and
better, and so long, that it may be held by two women, standing on each side of
the bed, there with to lift up the woman in travail a little, pulling it gently
toward them, and chiefly when her throws come upon her. For this raising or
lifting up does much refresh her, and makes her endure her throws with more
ease.

Beside the two women that hold the swath, there must be two more of her
friends or kinsfolks, Another help for a woman in labor.
to take her by the hands, thereby to clinsh or crush them when her throws
come, and the other hand they must hold on the top of her shoulders, that she
rise not upward too much, and that she may the better strain her self, for
oftentimes as she thrusts her feet hard against the piece of wood, which is
put cross the bed, she raises her self upward. Sometime I have bid one of
the women that stand by to press gently with the palm of her hand the upper
parts of the belly, stroking the child downward by little and little, the which
pressing did hasten the delivery, and made them endure the throws better, and
with more ease.

The woman in travail being thus placed, must take a good heart, and strain
her self as much as she can, when her throws come upon her, making them double
and increase, by holding in her breath and stopping her mouth, and forming her
self, as though she would go to the stool, which is much fitter for her to
do then to lie crying and lamenting.

Aristotle has well observed, that those women, De generat(...) Animal.
which draw their breath upward, are delivered with much pain, because they
make the Midrife rise up, which in this business, should rather be depressed,
and kept down. It is very fit indeed, that she take some ease and respite,
not forcing her self much for every little pang that happens, which she may
gather all into one, thereby to make them available; when time shall serve.

Actites.
If she wear about her neck an Eagles stone, loadstone, the skin of an Vrus
or wild Ox or the like, which might keep back the child, let them be taken
away, and tied to her thighs.

But above all things she must be obedient to all that is commanded her, either
by her kinsfolks, and friends, or by the Midwife. Likewise she must be patient
in her sickness, calling upon God for help, since it concerns both her own
life, and the child's, and she must call to mind, that he has said with his
own mouth, Genes.
That the woman should bring forth with labor and pain. For it would be a
rare thing to see a woman delivered without any pain. Medea in Euripides
says, Euripides.
That she had rather dye twice in the wars, then to be once delivered of a
child.

Nevertheless we read in histories, of a certain Country wherein women are
delivered without any pain. And Aristotle in his wonderful Narrations
reports, Women delivered without pain.
that the women of Ligustria do bring forth without pain, and that they
return to their business as soon as they are delivered.

They that write the History of America do tell the like, of the women in that
country, which is; That as soon as they be delivered, (they are so kind to
their husbands, which took the pains to beget the child) that they presently
rise up and lay their husbands in their room; Men that lie in.
who are used and attended, like women in childbed. And in this manner they be
visited of all their friends, and kinsfolk, who bring them gifts and presents.

The office and duty of a Midwife, for the first time, she must observe in the
travail. Chap. IIII.
THe Woman that is ready to be delivered being thus placed and laid in her
bed, must have the Midwife near unto her: who ought first to ask of her
woman, whether she has gone her full time, and be ready to be delivered;
and at what time she conceived; then must she handle her belly, and marking
it well, consider diligently whether the upper parts seem as if they were
empty, and fallen, and the nether parts very big and full: which shows that
the child is sunk down. Beside, she must ask her, whether she have any
pains, and in what manner they be, Signs o^ ^ing in tr(...)
where they begin, and where they end: and whether they be little or great,
and frequent: whether they begin at the back, running down all along the
belly, without staying at the Navel: and chiefly if they run along the groine,
and end in the bottom of the belly inwardly (that is in the inner neck of the
womb) then it is a sign that she begins to fall in travail. And for the more
assurance, let the Midwife thrust up her hand, being first anointed, either
with fresh butter, hogs grease, or some other ointment, which here after shall
be set down. And if she perceive that both the inner, and outward orifice of
the womb, be dilated and opened, it is a sign she begins to be in trauail,
especially if there flow or come forth by the said passage, any slime, or
water: the which do foreshew, that the birth is at hand, as Hippocrat. says,
which if they be pale, it signifies for the most part, it will be a wench: and
if it be reddish that it is a son. Now this slime comes by the dilatation
of the inner orifice, and from the membrane, that does wrap and infold the
child, which begins to break. And also by reason of the vessels, and ties
which are loosened from the sides of the womb the which may be perceived by
the waters which will swell, showing like a bubble, or rather like a bladder
full of water. And when the water begins to be thus gathered, there is no doubt
to be made, but that the woman is in trauail: Hippocrates does observe three
sorts of humors, that flow in the time of their travail: the first, is slimy:
the second reddish: the third is the water wherein the child swimmeth, and
here ends the first time, which the midwife must oberue.

Of the Second time that the Midwife must observe. CHAP. V.
WHen the waters are in this sort gathered together, by means of the throws,
which come by little and little: The placing of the Midwife.
then the Midwife must place her self conveniently near unto the woman,
sitting in a chair somewhat lower then the bed: and she must sit in such
manner, that she may easily put up her hand (being first anointed) into those
parts, when need requires. And by this means, she may know, The mean^ to know
h^^ the child comes.
whether the child come naturally, or no, for in feeling gently cross the
membrane, that contains the waters, she shall find, either the roundnesse of
the child's head, or else some unevenness. If in feeling, she perceive that
there is any hard and equal roundnesse; it is most likely to be the child's
head* and that he comes naturally: but if she feel any unevenness, the
contrary may be imagined.

When she perceives, that all comes well, and according to nature, the throws
increasing upon the woman, and that the child does strive and endeavor to come
forth, and the womb does strain it self to be freed of this burden; Then
the Midwife must encourage the woman, entreating her to hold in her breath, by
stopping her mouth, and to strain downward, as though she would go to the
stool: Assuring her, that she shall be quickly eased of her pain: and that
her child is even ready to come into the world, exhorting her to be patient,
and promising, that she shall have, either a goodly son, or a fair daughter,
according as she knows her affection inclined.

And the Midwiues greatest charge must be, that she do nothing hastily, or
rashly, or by force, to enlarge the passage of the child: and much less, to
let forth the water, or to break, and tear the membranes, that contain it:
but she must expect till it break of it self.

The water must not be let forth.
Some Midwiues either through ignorance, or impatience, or else by being hastened
to go to some other woman's labor, do tear the membranes with their nails,
and let forth the water, to the great hurt and danger, both of the poor
woman, and her child: who remains dry, the water being issued, and voided
before the appointed time; yea, oftentimes before the child be well turned,
which has been the death of many women, and children. But when the water, both
by the endeavor of the Mother, and likewise of the child, shall be newly
broken; then as well the Midwife, as the rest of the women present, must more
and more encourage the woman, especially when her throws increase; beseeching
her in the name of God, that she would farther them, as much as she can
possibly. In the mean time, the Midwife must continually anoint the nether
parts with butter, or some other fats. And when the head does offer it self to
come forth, she must receive it gently with both her hands: which being come
soorth, and the woman's throws increasing, she must draw out the shoulders
handsomely, sliding down her finger under the child's arme-pits; taking the
opportunity and time when her throws come fastest. And it is to be noted, that
the throws cease very little, or not at all, after the head and shoulders be
once come forth: Nevertheless, it will be very fit, to give the poor woman a
little breathing, entreating her, that she would be of as good cheer as she
can. After this, the Midwife having drawn out the shoulders, may easily draw
forth the rest of the body: which must not be done either hastily or rashly.

But because the child naturally does come into the world, with the face
downward: therefore when he is quite taken forth, he must be turned upon his
back: for fear lest he be stifled, or chok't. The Navel string must be
undone.
And if his nauell-string be woond about his neck, (as many times it happens)
then must it be vnwoond. Oftentimes likewise, the child is so feeble, and
faint, that there can scarsely be perceived any breath, or life in him: and
therefore he must have a little wine spirted into his mouth, nose, and ears,
in that quantity as shall be needful. When he is come to himself, and begins
to cry, then the Midwife must follow the string, wagging and shaking it,
thereby to draw, and bring forth gently the afterbirth, to which it is tied:
Means to draw forth the after-burthen.
bidding the woman to cough, and likewise to hold some salt in her hands, fast
shut together, and then blow in them.

In the mean time the Midwife, or some other woman, must press gently with
her hand, the top of the woman's belly, stroking it lightly downward: the
after-burthen being come, it must be laid upon the child's belly: What must be
done to the child.
and the child, together with the afterbirth, must be wrapped up handsomely in
a bed, and a blanket, to be carried nearer the fire, covering the head with a
linen cloth five or six times double: and yet not exposing him suddenly
either to the fire-light, daylight, or candlelight, lest by this sudden
change his sight might be hurt: but his eyes must be covered, that by little
and little he may open them, and acquaint them with the light.

But as I said before, the woman must be encouraged when the water does issue
forth, and caused to strain her self to be delivered, that the child may
follow the foresaid water.

And they must likewise observe diligently, whether the pains, be the pains
of travail, or no: and whether the water be that, wherein the child swimmeth.
For there be some women that have these waters issue out, and come away, long
before they are ready to lie down. Which I have seen happen unto diverse women,
and of late memory to Mad. Arnault, A notable story.
who having gone six or seven months, and troubled with a great Colique, that
had held her almost two months, and took her every day at certain hours:
She being at her house in the Country, entreated me that I would come and see
her, and to have my advise and counsel, whether it were fit for her to come
into the City; which I adiused her to do: both because of the great pains she
had, as also for her exceeding greatness: being of opinion, that she might
have two children, as she had had, not above a year before. Being come to
Paris, her Colique was somewhat mitigated, and a little while after she voided
two or three gallons of water, without any pain, thinking verily then, that
she was not with child: yet five days after she was delivered very happily,
and with little pain, of a fair daughter, there following very little water,
or none at all.

I saw another Lady in whom these waters came away, above ten days before her
delivery, yet she kept not her bed, but followed her ordinary business. And
this is worth marking, that they may be careful not to hasten the delivery;
except the pains be proper for travail, and such as I have already described.

The Third time that must be observed by the Midwife. CHAP. VI.
AS soon as the child is borne, and that the Mother is delivered of her
afterbirth, the Midwife shall cause her legs to be gently laid down, taking
away the piece of wood, that lay at her feet: and put a fine linen cloth, or
rather a clean sponge, washed in warm water, and wrung out, between her
thigh's, near unto her natural parts, that the cold air may not get therein:
and then must she take the child, together with the after-burthen, and carry
them to the fire, as has been said already.

And if it happen, that the after-burthen be long ere it come, or be drawn
forth; and that the child may not stay so long there, for danger to be
stifled, and die, it being oftentimes very weak. The midwife shall first tie,
and then cut the child's Nauel-string, to seperat him from the after-burthen:
Which must be done in this manner.

How the Navel must be tied.
She must have in readynesse, a good double thread, and a pair of sharp
Scissors: with the thread she must tie the Navel a good inch from the child's
belly with a double knot, or oftener: this knot must be neither too hard and
strait, neither too loose: for too strait tying, beside the extreme pain it
causes, makes that which is tied fall off too soon, and that, before the scar
be grown between the live and the dead part: And if it be tied too loose,
thereof proceeds a flux of blood from the vmbilicall vessels, which are not
exactly closed and stopp't by the said ligature: and therefore, a mean must be
observed in doing it. Then being thus tied, Where the Navel must be cut.
the Nauel-string must be cut off an inch beneath the knot; And that the knot
may not slip, nor the thread slide away, she must take a little fine linen
rowler dip't in oil of Roses, wherewith she must wrap the rest of the Navel,
and with a little fine bumbast moistened in the same oil, she must lay it upon
the belly, that it be not crushed, when they dress and swath the child. By this
ligature, The Navel must fall of it self.
that which is tied will come to wither, and dry of it self, and some four
or five days after, more, or less, the dead part will fall from the quick,
which must not be forced or plucked off in any case.

Some do observe, that the Navel must be tied longer, or shorter, according to
the difference of the sex, allowing more measure to the males: The measure in
tying the Navel.
because this length does make their tongue, and privy members the longer:
whereby they may both speak the plainer, and be more serviceable to Ladies.
And that by tying it short, and almost close to the belly in females, their
tongue is less free, and their natural part more strait: And to speak the
truth, A common saying of Women.
the Gossips commonly say merrily to the Midwife; if it be a boy, Make him good
measure; but if it be a wench, Tie it short.

Hippocrates would have them, in tying the Navel, observe this that follows.
Precept of Hippocrates.
If a woman (says he) be delivered with pain, and the child stay long in the
womb, and comes not forth easily, but with trouble: and chiefly if it be by
the Chirurgians help, and instruments: such children are not long lived, and
therefore there Nauell-string must not be cut, before they have either sneez'd,
pissed, or cried.

Anon after the Midwife has cut the Navel, she must wipe and make clean the
child, not only his face, but his whole body, and the wrinkles and folds of
the arme-pits, buttocks, and ioints, either with fresh Butter, or oil of sweet
Almonds. Some do it with oil of Roses, others with oil of Nuts, thereby to
make the skin more firm, and to stop the pores, that the outward air may not
hurt him, and likewise to strengthen all his parts.

Auicens Method.
Auicen boyleth Roses and Sage in wine, and washes the child with a fine soft
Spung dipped therein: and so continues it three or four mornings when he is
shifted.

The child being thus shifted and anointed, and then well dried, and wrapped up
by the Midwife, or others: What must be given the child after he is borne.
they must presently give him a little wine and Sugar in a spoone, or else the
bigness of a pease, of Mithridate, or Triacle, dissolved in a little wine, if
it be Winter, and in Summer (by reason of the heat) with a little Carduus
Benedictus, or some other Cordial water.

Auicen does think it sufficient to give them a little Honey: and to rub the
top and bottom of the tongue with ones finger dip't in honey. And by this
means, to see whether they be tongue tied, and so to cut the string, if it be
needful.

of the Care that must be had of a Woman in Child bed. CHAP. VII.
WHile the Midwife does cut the child's Navel, and make him clean, the Nurse,
or some other that is present, must have an especial Care of two things: The
first is, To give the woman in childbed this drink. A Drink for a woman in
childbed. Take oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, two ounces, Syrup of
Maidenhayre, one ounce, white Wine, water of Parietarie of the wall, and
Carduus Benedictus, of each half an ounce,

Mingle them very well together with much shaking, and so let her drink it.
This medicine will mitigate and lenifie the passage of the throat, and Trachaea
Arteria, which have been heated, and stretched with crying, and groaning: And
likewise it will help to provoke the purgings, and hinder the pangs and
gripings from being so violent.

2. The second is, to cause a sheep to be fleaed, and to wrap the woman's back
and belly in the skin yet warm, thereby to strengthen and comfort, all those
parts, which have been as it were disiointed, and pulled one from another, with
much striving in her travail. Auicen thinks it enough to lay upon the woman's
belly, a Hares skin newly stripped from the Hare being alive.

Then the Midwife (if she be not busied about the Child) or some other that
looks to the woman, shall apply beneath to the entrance of the natural
part, and about the bottom of her belly this medicine.

A strengthening Medicine. Take oil of Hypericum, Saint John's Wart, two
ounces, Oil of Roses, an ounce: Two whole eggs, Mingle them well together and
let them be applied as I showed before with finelinnen clothes, or flax,
likewise there must be laid under her hams, a little pillow doubled, to make
her keep her knees up a little, and that her thighs and legs lie not straight
down. Let her neither lie along, nor sit upright but keep her self between
both, having her head and body rather a little raised, then laidlow, that her
purgings may the easier come away.

After the skin has layen there two or three days, the Midwife, or her
nurse shall take it away, and swath her belly, rubbing and anointing it first,
with oil of Saint John's wort, sweet Almonds, and Roses, mingled together. For
this swathing serves to keep the Matrice in his place, and to drive down
gently her after-purgings, and also is a means to keep out the air, which
otherwise might cause the woman to have great pains and gripings.

The fashion of the swath. The swath must be made of linen cloth four times
doubled, of the breadth of all ber belly; which must be put round about her
back and belly smooth without any pleat and wrinkle. And while they be about
this, they must take an especial care, that the woman catch not cold, nor that
the air get not into her womb, which being emptied of such a burden, will
easily receive it, They must beware of taking cold.
and this might be a means to make it swell, and puff up, and to shut the
orifices of the veins, by which her purgings should flow: the suppression
whereof does cause pains, gripings, suffocation, an ague, and many other
accidents.

Now when the woman shall be thus accommodated, she must be kept from sleeping,
though she be very desirous thereof, and let her in the mean time be
entertained with some discourse, and let her nurse look to her breasts,
applying such things thereunto, as shall be set down in the third book in
their proper place.

After the woman has been kept three or four hours from sleeping, you may
give her some broth made with a knuckle of Veale, or a Chicken, The woman in
child bed must be in quiet.
or in stead thereof, a couple of yelkes of eggs, and so let her take her
rest: and if she have any desire to sleep, she may, which must be some three
or four hours after her delivery, the doors and windows of her chamber,
being close shut, not making any noise.

And so let this suffice, for the natural travail or delivery; wherein there
has been no difficulty: the woman being neither much troubled, Genesis 3.15.
nor having had any great pains, but those that are ordinary, and such as God
has, which is, that In sorrow a woman should bring forth.

Of a painful, and difficult delivery with the causes thereof. CHAP. VIII.
WOmen are brough a bed very hardly, and with much pain, upon diverse reasons,
which is an occasion that many repair unto Physicians, and Chirurgions, to
have their help, since there be few Midwiues found skilful, that can give them
much aid or succor in these cases.

Causes of difficult delivery
A Surgeon being called thither, ought diligently to inquire, what may be
the cause, and consider carefully thereof: now the cause may be referred to
four things, either to the mother: or to the child: or to things that are
annexed unto the child: or else to outward things, and so accordingly must they
frame the remedy.

Cause from outward things.
In the number of outward things I comprehend those persons, that are about the
woman in trauail, who if they be displeasing unto her, are to be intreted
gently to withdraw and absent themselves. Whether it be by reason that the
woman has any fear, apprehension, or any mislike and loathing vnwillling to
have them so near her, when she is in her travail, and anguish; or else
being ashamed to see her self in that case.

Lib. 28. cap. 6.
2 Pliny writes that the ancients held an opinion that the delivery might be
hindered and prove difficult: Opinion of Plyny. Story of Alcmena.
if there were any in the woman's chamber, which held her fingers locked, or shut
one within another: and produces for an example Alcmena; who could not be
delivered of Hercules, but with much difficulty.

3 Likewise the outward air being too cold, may hinder the delivery because it
cools the woman, Coldness or heat does hinder the delivery.
shutting up her body, and especially those parts, which ought to be enlarged,
and dilated. As also the air being too hot, spends the spirits, and makes
the woman lose her strength, remaining weak and feeble, and as it were
fainting, without any power, or courage. And therefore the air must be
temperate, yet rather hot, then cold.

4 Pleasing smells, (as of Musk, Ciuet, Effect of sweet smells.
Amber Grise, or the like, if she have such about her, the vapor whereof, may
strike up into her nose,) do hinder the delivery: because they draw the womb
upward.

If the cause of difficult delivery be in the mother her self, it comes,
either by reason of her person, Causes from the Mother
or her age, or her natural disposition, or of some other accident she has
had or may have: or by being delivered before, or after her time.

1 Her person or body may be the cause thereof: as if she be too fat and full:
for in such women I have seen great store of fat come down into their natural
parts, which stopped the passage. Fatnes^*
And in others I have seen the caul come down, which did so press, and
crush together both the inward and outward neck of the womb, that it could
very hardly open it self, yea, and being dilated, and enlarged, did even close
and press it together again.

In some I have seen and felt part of the bladder present it self at the
entrance of the womb. The Bladder.


A woman that is too lean and bare: as also one that is too little, Leanenesse.
may likewise be delivered with much difficulty. And when this happens, it
cannot be remedied, as one would desire.

2 Now concerning their age: both they that are too young as being too
straight: and also they that are old, having also their natural parts too much
shrunk together and dried, and the bones too closely joined together, and the
cartilages very hard which cannot so well yield, and be dilated, as in youth;
I say both of these be delivered with very much difficulty.

From her disposition.
3 Their natural disposition likewise may be a cause that they are delivered
with much pain.

1 As if they be weak of constitution, nice, tender, timorous, and afraid of
pain: which makes them, that they will not force themselves, nor make their
pains and throws effectual: and when the child is even ready to come forth,
they shrink in themselves, with the very fear they have to feel such pain.

2 Hippocrates says that women, which have an Ague when they are with child,
Hippocrates.
and become very lean without a manifest cause, do bring forth their
children with great difficulty, pain, and danger: And if they do miscarry or
abort, then they are in danger of their lives. The same Author says, that
those women which give but little nourishment to their children, are sooner
delivered, Lib. de natura pueri.
and contrariwise they that feed too much, are longer ere they be brought a
bed.

3 They that have been troubled with any sicknesses; as the bloody flux or
other flux of the belly, Convulsions, flux of blood: or that have any tumor,
ulcer, or scarre which has happened by being heretofore badly delivered; or
any other accident that has made the neck of the womb hard, close and
straight, which is a means that it cannot be dilated, and enlarged, or else
which have the entrance, or passage stopped with some flesh or membrane, that is
natural unto them: that is to say which they have had from their birth: All
these (I say) are delivered with great pain, and difficulty, yea and
oftentimes do lose their lives thereby.

Now some will think it very strange, and almost incredible, to find a woman
that should be with child, and yet a maid, A thing worthy to be observed.
there being even from her birth a membrane that stops the passage, and
hinders the man from entering. Where as it is necessary for conception, that a
woman should have the entire fruition or company of the man, and that he should
not only enter within the outward passage of the womb, but even to the inner
neck thereof, to carry thither the seed, and there to mingle it with the
woman's. But stories in this kind make us believe the contrary; seeing there is
no such necessity that the man's seed should be carried, and cast so deep. For
in some Women the womb is so greedy, and lickerish that it does even come down
to meet nature, sucking, and (as it were) snatching the same, though it remain
only about the mouth and entrance of the outward orifice thereof.

A story of Auerrhoes.
Auerrhoes tells a story of a woman that became with child, only by drawing in
(as she bathed her self) the seed of a man that was bathed in the said Bath.

A true story.
The year 1607. in May, Master de la Noue the Kings Surgeon in Ordinary, and
sworn in the Chastelet of Paris, was called to search a young Woman the wife of
a Goldsmiths, who had been cited by her Husband to appear before the
Official of Paris: alleging, that she was not capable nor fit by nature, to
be married: which was an occasion that Germane Hassart a Midwife, and my self
were sent for to search her. Where we found, that in the very entrance of the
womb, there was a membrane so strong, hard, and thick, that a man's finger,
(and much less the other part) was not able to break it open; he having
oftentimes made trial to do it, whereby he had incurred a Paraphimosis: And
therefore it was concluded, that her husband had a just cause to cite her, but
yet for all this, that it was curable.

Whereupon her Husband thought good to call Master de Levrye, and Pietre,
sworn Chirurgians at Paris: then we all there concluded with a general
consent, to make an incision, of the said Membrane, which was done; and dressed
and healed, to her Husbands content: only he was somewhat doubtful of that,
which the said de La Noue had observed, and told him, that his wives belly was
big, and that she was qualmish and distasted, vomiting every morning, which
made him suspect that she was with child: whereupon a Midwife told him that
there was no likelihood, nay it was impossible to think that a young woman of
eighteen years of age should be with child, her husband having never entered
within her maiden cloister: and that with threshing only at the barn door,
she could not be full. Whereupon Master Pietre, was sent for, who though at
first he could not be induced to believe it, yet at length, having well
considered thereof, gave his judgment, that she was with child, which proved
true, for about some four Months after the incision was made, she was
happily delivered at her full time of a fair daughter.

Mad. Scaron sent for me, to help a Farmers wife, Another story.
that was great with child, and ready to lie down, who had had the outward
orifice of her womb, for the space of four or five years, so perfectly
closed, glued and joined together, that it was impossible to put a little probe
therein: the which had happened unto her, by being ill delivered, by means
whereof, the entrance of the outward neck of the womb, had been exulcerated,
and the ulcers cicatriz'd, and the sides of the said neck joined together: and
yet for all this she proved with child. At the time of her delivery, by the advice and council of Master Riolan, and Charles the Kings professors in
Physic, and Regent Doctor in the faculty of Physic at Paris, Brunet,
Paradis, Riollan, Fremin, Rabigois: and Serre (Queen Marguerites Surgeon)
Mitton, and Choffinet, Master Barber Chirurgions at Paris, Honor the Kings
Surgeon, and my self, I say by the advice of all these, there was an
incision made, then presently the Speculum dilatatorium was so well applied,
that all the Cicatrizes were enlarged, which succeeded so prosperously, that
within three hours after, she was delivered with much ease.

The delivery that is too soon or too late, does prove difficult.
4 The travail may likewise prove difficult, and painful, when the woman is
delivered before or after her time; before her time, as when it comes in the
sixth, seventh, or eighth Month: which happens when the womb is too moist and
weak, or else full, and as it were stuffed with much slime, which does so
moisten the neck thereof, that it is enlarged and dilated before the limited
time. As also the vessels, to the orifices whereof, the after burden is
fastened, do begin to be relaxed, which causes that the child cannot be
supported nor remain in his natural situation. By which change, finding the
inner orifice loosened, and enlarged: and the membrane wherein the waters are
contained, and in which the child swimmeth, to be very small, and thin: it
begins to break, which makes the child out of order, and so causes difficult
delivery. As also too much dryness, Effect of too much drines.
as it were, want of nourishment, when the mother is not well nourished, having
not wherewith to sustain the child, which makes the said child, not having
sufficient nourishment, to turn and wind himself seeking about for it, and
casts it self down, and vnloosneth his bed (which is the after-burthen) from
the sides of the womb: and in the end breaks the membrane wherein the waters
are contained, and strives to come forth, for the most part out of order. The
like happens to them, that go till the tenth, or eleventh month: because the
child through the length of time, that it stays in the mothers womb, does
grow, and wax bigger, though the parts of the mother, whereby the child (being
thus big) is to come forth, and pass through, are not increased or enlarged at
all; which causes (the passages being not able to be sufficiently dilated and
widened) great anguish, and pain, to the mother especially, she being
weakened in all her parts, that serve for the expulsion, and bringing forth of
the child: which among the rest, are the Matrice, and the Muscles of the upper
belly; which being stretched beyond measure, through the greatness and
bigness of the child, do enlarge the fibers, which cannot afterward be so
easily drawn together, having lost their proper force, and strength.

And this may be manifestly perceived, A good observation.
in those that cannot make water; the bladder being too full, that although the
passage be opened by a probe, yet the Surgeon is constrained to press the
belly, so to help the fibers of the bladder, to close, and fould themselves
together. Besides, the child filling up all the space that is in the womb,
cannot help it self so well in thrusting forward, being, as it were, fettred,
and locked fast therein.

Causes from the child.
3. The like hindrance of delivery may proceed from the child, who having
attained unto the ninth month, is not able to come into the world, either
through weakness, and feebleness; or because he is not perfected, and ripened
as he should, and so has not sufficient strength to dissolve the ligaments,
and vessels: and to break asunder the membranes, wherein he is enclosed: which
causes, that after he has striued in the ninth month, and attempting it
again in the tenth, A double conflict of the child.
he is not able to strive so lustily for his coming forth, having been
weakened with forcing himself the month before. And it is most certain, that
the child's staying, in the womb after the ninth month, does proceed only
from want of vital heat, which is in the heart; Why the child is staid from
coming forth.
or that he has it not in sufficient quantity to desire the Air, which we
draw in to cool us: or that all the parts of his body, are not strong, and
able enough, to draw unto them sufficient nourishment.

Another cause of difficult delivery.
This difficulty of delivery happens also, when the child is either sick, or
dead; and is not able to help it self: as likewise, when he is too big in all
his body, and chiefly in the head: or if he be a Monster, having two heads,
two bodies, four arms, or legs: or if they be Twins; the one hindering the
others coming forth: Diverse situations of the child.
which will be evident by the bigness of the Mother: or if he be ill placed to
come forth, putting foremost an arm, or a leg, or both; the shoulder,
buttockes, side, or belly coming foremost.

4 Now concerning that which is annexed to the child, the delivery proves
difficult, Cause from things annexed to the child.
if the membranes, that contains the water, whereon the child does floate, and
swim, be firm, solid, and hard, that it cannot, but very hardly be broken:
or that the said membrane be so thin, that it breaks too soon, and before the
child be well turned, and ready to follow the said water, which serves to
carry him, and make him come forth the easier: For the child that remains
dry, comes into the world with much pain.

Likewise, if the after-burthen offer it self first, and that it stop the
passage: or if there be a Mole, or false Conception; As also if the woman have
not been lately at stool, or made water: The retention of excrements hinders
the delivery.
the which is cause, that the great gut being full, may close the neck of the
womb: as likewise the bladder being full may press it down, because it is
placed between them both. Whence it is commonly said in the proverb; Que
l'enfant est situe enter le boire, and le manger, which is; That the child is
seated, between the meat, and the drink. And therefore, all the aforesaid
accidents must be remedied accordingly.

The means to help Women that are delivered with difficulty. CHAP. IX.
THat a Woman, Direction for the Chirurgian.
which is delivered with difficulty, and much pain, may be helped: the
Chirurgian ought to know, what is the cause thereof, and from whence this
difficulty does proceed: that he may the better cure it.

If it be, because the Mother is to gross, or fat, and chiefly in her natural
parts, as also if there be any store of fat offer it self; (as I have seen it
oftentimes happen in great striving, and throws,) yea, and that in such sort,
that it did even stop the passage of the child; Then the Surgeon, (as gently
as he can possibly) must thrust back, and put aside with one hand, the said
fat, not tearing or hurting it, Means to help them that are too fat.
least it be spoiled and corrupted afterward; holding it still down on the
one side, till the child be come forth of the womb, keeping it always from
falling down into the passage, and among the bones, when the child is readdy
to come forth.

Considerations for the Bladder.
But when part of the bladder, is sunk down and relaxed, and is manifestly
perceived in the entrance of the womb: then must he do the like, as he did to
the fat, holding it aside upward, with the flat of two or three of his fingers,
until the child's head be past the Os Pubis. If he find then (as it may so come
to pass) that the said bladder be full of urine: the woman in travail not
having made water, The woman must be provoked to make water.
a good while before; then must he cause her to make water, by putting a fit
instrument gently into the bladder. For it is seen in some, that the fibers, An
Observation.
which do contract the bladder, and make it drive out the urine, are so
weakened, and also the whole body thereof, that the urine cannot come forth.

Some women have been deceived, A thing worthy to be noted.
by taking the said bladder, thus full with urine, for the waters which come
before the child, causing the said bladder to be broken: the which is worthy of
great consideration. Also the said neck of the bladder may be stopped, by
reason of some Carnositie, Inflammation, or stone, A notable story.
which I have seen an honest woman, there being a stone fallen down into the
neck in her bladder, that stopped her urine, which being put aside by the probe,
she made water: Nevertheless, when the child was ready to come forth, the
stone returning in to the said neck of the bladder again, did so fret and
hurt it, through the long stay, that the child's head made in the passage, that
it grew to an Impostume and suppuration, which made a little hole, through the
which she has long time made her water, not being able to hold or retain it;
which is a story worthy to be marked. But as the urine may be sometimes
stopped, so likewise the excrements of the great gut may be retained: which
happening, it will be more then necessary for the cure thereof, to give the
woman a Clyster, that may both unload her, of her excrements, The excrements
must be voided.
and likewise help and make her delivery the more easy.

I my self was present at the travail of a poor sick woman, Another story.
that had not been at stool in ten days before, whose great gut was so filled
and stuffed with excrements, as hard as a stone, that it was impossible for her
to receive a Clyster; and we were constrained, before she could be delivered,
to get out all the said excrements, otherwise it had been impossible, to have
taken forth the child.

To help and succor one that is lean and barren, or else of little stature, as
also such as are either too old, or too young: they must have recourse long
before hand, unto medicines that shall mollify, moisten, and relaxe; not only
the membranes, which ought to be dilated and stretched, that they may be made
more souple and gentle; But likewise you must anoint the Cartilages, and
Ligaments that join the Os pubis, Sacrum, Os Coccygis, and Ilium, which must
be done with ointments already set down, and even in the very hour of the
delivery, annoint all the said parts therewith.

Some mislike not, about the end of the ninth month, to bathe the woman,
either with a general or particular bath, as we have heretofore appointed; as
likewise to give her, every morning, eight or ten days before her lying in,
this Drink. A Drink to make easy the delivery. Take Oil of sweet Almonds,
drawn without fire, an ounce, water of Parietary, two ounces, mingle them
together, and let her drink it.

The which I have oftentimes tried in many women, and among the rest, in Madame
Capp, who before had been many times delivered with much pain and sorrow, of
her children, dead. But since I counseled her to use this medicine, she has
been delivered (thanks be to God) very fortunately of many children living.
The same remedies do likewise serve for them, that have any Callositie, or
hardness, in the passage of Nature.

The weak and dainty women must be fed with yelkes of eggs, cullis, a tossed
with wine and sugar, Remedy for the dainty.
or Hyppocras: and that a little at a time, and often, you may also give them a
little confection of Alhermes dissolved, either in wine or Hippocras: Cinnamon
water also that is well made, and not too strong, is very fit and good.

And if the fear of the pain does hinder the delivery, then the woman must be
encouraged, Fear of pain.
telling her that she shall be quickly freed from this sickness, and that it
is common unto all women, to have such pains, cherishing her with good hopes,
assuring her that her travail will be very easy, and promising her, A good
deceit.
that she shall have either a son or a daughter, according as you know she
desires, as we have said before, flattering and soothing her as much as you
can, without chiding or giving her any cross speeches at all.

The most grievous and troublesome accident, Cause of the most troublesome
delivery
which a Woman can have, that is in travail, is when there happens unto her,
any flux, of blood, or Convulsions; for either of them kill both the Mother
and the child instantly, especially, if the flux of blood continue long:
because through the great loss of blood (which is the lives treasure) the
spirits and heat are dissolved.

And concerning Convulsions, Why Conuulsions are dangerous.
they are very dangerous; because the brain being hurt, it cannot afford
such store of spirits as are needful, for the respiration of the Mother, and
the child, who breath's only by means of the spirits, that are imparted unto
him by the Arteryes of his mother, which causes him to be choked and stifled.
Besides, the great convulsion, makes the Midrife, and the muscles of the upper
belly, move so violently, that the child is much shaken, and puts both him and
his mother in danger to be stifled, and die.

What must be done in fluxes and convulsions.
Either of these accidents happening, or else both together, the mother and the
child must be succored without any delay, which shall be done (to speak in
a word) by delivering her. And this ought to be done, either by the help of a
Chirurgian, or else of a very skillful Midwife.

Lib. de super faetatione. A good sentence of Hypocrates.
Hippocrates well observed it, when he says. If in a difficult travail there
happen a great flux of blood, without any pain before the travail, then is
there danger lest the child come forth dead, or that he will not live, and
therefore she must be suddenly delivered, the which we have oftentimes seen
(to our great grief) happen unto diverse women, that have died, through the
obstinasy of their friends and kinsfolks; yea and some also through their
Physicians and Chirurgians fear, who delayed the time, thinking, and hoping
that the flux would stay: telling them that the child came naturally, being
well placed, with his head forward and that the mother should be delivered
even of her self.

I know there be many, both Physicians and Chirurgians, that will appoint
diverse inward, and outward medicines, yea to make reuulsion and altar the
course of blood, will cause a vain to be opened in the arm once or twice:
rather then consent to this practice. But yet of all their medicines, I could
never see any that did good, but that in the end they were constrained to use
the hand: the which I counsel to be done speedily, and chiefly if the mother
be at her full time, and ready to lie down; which may be both known of the
woman, and also perceived by the throws she has, or which went before: as
also by the dilatation of of the inner orifice of the womb, which will be
open: and likewise feeling with the finger, that the waters are gathered and
ready to come and issue forth. A good observation.
And when the water shall be broken and come away, then so much the rather
must the child be taken out; though the woman have not gone above four, five,
six, seven, or eight months. Sometimes the waters must be let forth.
And ye must note that if the said water be not broken, and that the flux of
blood be very great; then you shall let forth the water, by dilating, and
stretching gently the inner orifice of the womb: thereby to draw forth the
child, as we will show hereafter.

But because many women are subject to a flux of blood, in their fourth,
fifth, sixth, seventh, Caution concerning the flux of blood
or eighth month of childbearing: being not as yet ready to be delivered:
therefore the Surgeon must observe from what place this blood is sent, the
which may be from the entrance or Vagina of the womb, and not from within the
body thereof, where the child is contained, and enclosed, which may be easily
perceived, if the woman have no throws, or if the inner orifice of her womb
be not open, but close shut: then there is no likelihood of any delivery
toward, for blood may issue and come from the said outward neck, When they
must not be delivered in a flux of blood
or Vagina, both in maid and woman with child: If it be so, then it will not
be needful, to meddle with such women, or to force them at all, but only you
must proceed to medicines, that shall stay the said flux of blood. As we will
show in the chapter of the after purgings that flow immoderately in women newly
delivered.

A worthy sentence of Hippocrates. Lib. 1. de Morb. Mulier.
It may also happen because the woman is plethoricall, and full of blood: In
this case we must follow the opinion of Hippocrates, who says, that if a woman
that is in travail, cannot be delivered, and that her pains continue many
days: if she be young, lusty, and full of blood you may let her bleed in the
foot, if her strength will bear it.

Other accidents that may hinder the delivery.
But if she be troubled with any ulcer, tumor, excrescence of flesh,
Hemorrhoides, inflammation, chapps, or the like, which may chance in the neck
of the womb; then shall she be handled, as we will show in their proper
places. All the which indispositions may make the delivery difficult, and
cause, that the parts cannot be dilated, according as it is sit and necessary,
for the child's coming forth.

For remedying the delivery, that is too soon, or too late: we must have
regard unto the cause, and according thereto it must be cured, and chiefly
that, which shall concern the mother; whereof we will treat, when we come to
speak of the Abortment: it being my purpose in this place, to speak only of
those things which are fit, and ought to be done in the time, and at the hour
of the delivery.

Now for the comforting of a woman, Cure when the fault is from the child.
and easing of her travail, when the difficulty does proceed from the child;
as when he is weak, tender, sickly, or dead: as likewise if he be too big, or
a monster having two heads, or if he be ill turned, and that he offer himself
amiss: then the Surgeon in this case shall help, and set to his hand in
this manner.

First, if it be through the weakness, or tenderness of the child being
sick: the Surgeon must not delay one minute of time, When the delivery must
be hastened.
to hasten the delivery, and he must encourage the woman to do the like. If
the head come first, then shall he proceed therein gently, as in the natural
delivery: applying beneath, and chiefly about the fundament, and os Pubis,
which are the two utmost parts of the natural passage, some ointments with the
fingers ends, Ointments made for the purpose.
having his nails pared very close. For this anointing will provoke and stir
up the Matrice, to thrust out the child. The ointment is this.

Ointment..Axung. Anser. Gallin. saepius in aq. Arthem. lot. an. is. Axung.
porcirecent. i. Butiri recent. ij. Mucilag. sem. Lini, Cydonior. in aq.
Sabinae, vel Artemis: extract. an. vi. Ol. de Castor. i. Galliae. moschat. i.
Ladani is. Libethi s. misce omnia simul pro litu.

He for his part must encourage the mother, giving her a little Confectio
Alkermes, and likewise let her take this Clyster.

. Bismal. cum. Radic. Matricar. Mercur. an. m. i. aristoloch. A Clyster.
nostrat. Dictamni. Arthemis. an. m. s. Flo. Lauandul. p. s. sem. Lini.
foenugraec. an. s. fol. senae mundat. vi. fiat omnium decoctio, de qua cape
quart. iij. in quibus dissolve, Diophoenic. Hierae simplic: an iij. Ol. Rutac.
Cheyrin. an. ij. fiat Clyster. She may also take this drink, which I have
known to do good to many.

A Drink.. Corr. Cass. fistul. contus. s. Cicer. rub. m. s. Dictum.
Aristoloch. rotund. an j. fol. senae mundat. Hermodactyl. an ij. fl. Lauandulae
s. fi. Decoctio in aqua Arthemis. and Petroselini. ad iij. in quibus dissolve
Cinamomi. i. Croci. gr. vi. fiat Potio: this potion is to be given in
extremity.

Amatus Lusitanus does much commend this medicine. Amatus Lusitanus.


. Cinamoni. Troch. e Myrrha an s. Croci s. excipiatur cum vino generoso.

Rondeles.
Roddeletius does praise this.

. Sem. Lauandul. ij. Sem. Endiu. Plantag. an. ij. Piperis i. fiat puluis Aq.
Caprifol. Endiuiae an ij. fiat Potus.

Another.

L'obolius approves this drink, and says that it will even expel, and bring
forth the dead child.

Lobel.. Confect. Alkerm. sem. Lauandul. Endiu. Plantag. an. ij. Troch. de
Myrrha. Borac. an s. Castor. i. Aq. Arthemis. Buglos. vini albi an. ij. fiat
potus.

Another.

. Borac. i.s. Cinamoni. ij. Crocig r. iij. fiat puluis and cum aq. Arthemis.
vi. fiat potus. Of diverse deliueries wherein the operation of the hand is used.
And first what the Surgeon ought to consider before he sets to his hand.
CHAP. X.
WHen the Surgeon shall be called to deliver a woman that is in travail
and cannot be delivered naturally: before he venture to do any thing, he must
consider two things: Two things must be considered in these deliueries.
the first is to know whether the mother have strength enough to endure the
violence of Manual operation: and having found that she is able, he must then
search, whether the child be dead, or alive, for sometimes the child is taken
dead, and sometimes alive out of the mothers womb.

Now as concerning the Mother: Considerations concerning the mother.
First the Surgeon must behold her face, hear her speak, observe her
doings, countenance, andbehauiour, then presently must he feel her pulse,
which if he find to be equal, strong, not intermitting, and that she be not
much changed from her wonted disposition? and likewise if the poor woman, her
friends and kinsfolks do entreat him to help her, assuring him, that she
will courageously endure; all that he shall do unto her: then following the advice of her kinsfolks and friends, The mother does hazard her life in the
delivery.
he must go about it: foretelling them nevertheless; that this kind of
practice is very dangerous, and that the mother venters her life, seeing that
the child is either dead; or else likely to die, if he be not already.

But if the Surgeon find, that her face and speech is decayed, and weakened,
her countenance changed, her pulse small frequent, sometime intermitting and
formicant: and that she has often swounings, Remedies must not be dis^amed.
Convulsions, and cold sweats: then he must forbear for fear least he be
blamed, and thereby discredit those means which should have profited, and may
also do good unto others.

Signs of the child's being alive.
Now you may know by these signs whether the child be alive, or dead. If the
child stir it is a sign he is alive; which the Mother may conjecture, and
also the Surgeon, by laying his hand upon her belly. And for the better
assurance hereof, he must slide up his hand into the Woman's Matrice, and
search for the child's Navel. If, in holding it between his fingers, he feel
a beating of the Arteries, as also, if by laying his hand upon the child's
temples, or else handling the wrist or sole of his foot he find, that the
Arteries do beat, and likewise, if in putting his finger into the child's
mouth he perceive that he either suck, or wag his tongue, it is a sign that
he is alive.

Signs that the child is dead.
Contrariwise, if the foresaid things do not concur, and that the mother
feel a heaviness, and that in turning of her self, (whether it be on the
right side, or the left) the child does fall like a boule, if her belly be
cold, and that there comes an ill sent from her, if her breath smell strong,
and her countenance look wanne, and of the color of lead: and that the child's
Navel, or after birth offer it self foremost, besides, if the surgeon,
putting his hand up, finds the child to be cold, without pulse, neither
sucking, nor moving his tongue: then I say it may be judged, that the child is
dead.

But as the child may offer himself, being dead, The child comes after
diverse fashions.
in diverse positions, or fashion; So likewise must we use diverse considerations
and means to draw him forth: as we will more particularly show hereafter.

The means to help a woman in travail, having withal a flux of blood, or
Convulsions. CHAP. XI.
WE have showed you before, that a woman being in travail, and having either a
flux of blood, or Convulsions, she must be speedily helped, because the
deferring or delay thereof, will endanger her life.

Wherefore you must proceed herein after this manner. And since that in every
delivery, the situation is a matter of great consequence, Situation fit in all
deliueries.
to make it the more facile and easy: therefore you must begin in this sort.

The right placing of them.
First the woman must be laid overthwart a bed, both for the better conueniencie
of the Surgeon, or Midwife, that shall deliver her, and also that she may be
held, and stayed behind the faster, by some strong body, The commodity
thereof.
so that she neither slip forward, nor backward, in the operation or drawing
forth of the child. Likewise, there must be one on each side of her to hold her
knees and thighs firm, and to keep them asunder one from another: her knees
must be bowed, and her heels drawn upward, (as we have said before in the
Natural delivery,) her head must be laid upon a boulster lying cross the
bed; her back being a little raised, and her hips lifted somewhat higher, with
pillowes laid under them, and her hinder parts must lie within half a foot of
the beds side. She must have a linen cloth three or four times double laid
upon her stomach and belly, that may reach down over her knees, even to the
midst of the leg: So that neither wind, nor cold may offend her, nor any of
the assistants see what the Surgeon touches, or does: and likewise, that
the woman be not afraid of him, when he shall be about his business. And
therefore Hippocrates for this reason, would have the woman's eyes shut or
covered.

When the woman is thus placed, the Surgeon must put up his hand (being
first anointed) into the first entrance of the natural parts, The clots of
blood must be taken away.
that he may take forth all the clots of blood, which he shall find there.

Then he must consider, whether the inner neck be wide enough for him to
thrust in his hand, and to turn the child, if it be needful: Now if the
inner neck be not sufficiently dilated, The inner neck may be dilated.
then shall he, as gently as possibly he can, and without any violence (having
first annionted all the parts thereof with fresh Butter, or some ointment)
stretch it by little and little, till he get in his hand: if the water be not
broken, he need not be afraid to let it out: then presently if the child come
with his head foremost, he shall turn him gently to find his feet, which he may
do more easily, then if the waters had been let forth before: because, that
much moisture does make the child slide, and turn better, then when he is
dry. And when he has found one of his feet, he must draw it gently without
violence, and tie about it a piece of riband, with a sliding knot, How the feet
may be found
that he may put the foot in again (leaving the riband hanging out) to make
the more room for his hand to go in and search for the other foot, which may
be done by sliding his hand al along the childs thigh. And having found them
both, he shall draw them out gently in a direct line, giving the woman a little
breathing, and bidding her to strain her self when she feels any throws, or
pains, then the Surgeon (having in a readiness a fine linen cloth warm,
he must wrap it about the childs thighs, for fear least he slip out of his
hand, if he took him naked) and so pluck gently, until his buttockes appear,
and the body with the head does follow; observing nevertheless, that his belly
and breast be turned downward, as we will show hereafter more particularly.

Experience will make it manifest unto us, by the stories following, how
necessary it is to deliver a woman with child, when a flux of blood, or
conuulsions do continue: and that she cannot be saved by ordinary medicines.

A story.
The year 1599. Madam Simon yet alive daughter to Mr. Pareus, Counselor, and
chief Surgeon to the King; being ready to lie down was surprised with a
great flux of blood, having about her Mad. la Charomie for her Midwife, and
likewise Mr. Hautin the Kings Physician in ordinary, and Mr. Rigault Doctors
of Physic in Paris, and because of great swounings that took her every
quarter of an hour through the loss of blood she had: Master Merchant my son
in law and my self were sent for; But I finding her almost without pulse,
having her voice weak, The Surgeon must foretell the danger.
and her lips pale: I told her mother and her husband that she was in great
danger of her life, and that there was but one way to save her, which was, to
deliver her speedily: the which I had seen practiced by the late Mr. Pareus
her Father, who had caused me to do the like, unto a Gentlewoman of Mad. de
Seneterre. Then her mother, and her husband earnestly entreated us to help
her, and that they would put her into our hands to dispose of her. And so
suddenly, following the advice of the Physicians, she was very happily
delivered of a lively child.

Another story.
The year 1600. I was commanded to go and visit a great Lady, that was taken
with a great and violent flux of blood, through a fright she had of a great
thunder clap: being come unto her, They must rest in a flux of blood.
I found that her flux was much mitigated: but she being constrained to go
twelve, or fifteen leagues from Paris, and fearing least that the said flux
should continue, she was brought thither by my son in law Mr. Merchant by
water: where she was no sooner arrived, but her flux of blood took her again,
which made him dislike it, and judge that it would prove ill, contrary to the
opinion of Master de la Riuiere, the Kings chief Physician, who was there at
the same time: Whereupon, I was presently sent for in post together with Master
Renard the Kings Physician. We being come thither, found things in better
estate; and the said Master de la Riuiere, took leave to go toward the King.
But on a sudden the said flux began a fresh, which made them send for Mr.
Marescot, and Mr Martin, the kings Physicians, who notwithstanding were not
come before her delivery: which the kinsfolks and friends of the said Lady,
and likewise Mr Renard, Mr Merchant, and my self, were of opinion to hasten,
because of the great loss of blood she had, and the often swounning that took
her: but as soon as she was delivered, the flux of blood ceased.

The year 1603, Madame Danze, or Chece, The third story.
being in travail, was taken with the like flux of blood, which held her from
morning till eight or nine of the clock at night; having with her the Queens
Midwife, Mad. Boursiere, Master le Fieure, Riolan, Le Moine, regent Doctors in
the faculty of Physic at Paris, and Mr de Saint Germain master Apothecarie,
were called to look unto her; and because she lost much blood, they called Mr
Honor the kings Surgeon, who being unwilling to attempt any thing without
my advise, I was likewise sent for. And as soon as I was come, my opinion with
the rest of the company was, to deliver her: which was done by the said
Honor, the child living.

The fourth history.
Of late memory, Mad. Coulon (being assisted in her travail by Mad. la
Charonne, a very skillful Midwife,) having a great flux of blood; after that
Mr Martin, Hautin, Cornuty, Pietre, the kings Physicians, and Doctors of Paris,
had given her many things for the staying of the said flux, in the end for
fear least by loosing her blood, she might also loose her life, falling into a
syncope: with their advise she was delivered, by the said Honor, and presently
her flux was stayed.

An Admonition for young Chirurgions.
But as these women and children aforesaid have been saved, by being delivered
in time: So likewise these following, lost their lives, because they were not
succored, as Art and experience did require, their kinsfolks and friends being
unwilling to have any go about it in due time: whereof these two histories may
bear witness.

Another story.
Mad. Vion being ready to be delivered, fell into a great flux of blood, and
though some were of opinion, to deliver her without further delay; yet this
being deferred upon the counsel of others, who hoped to stay the flux with
ordinary medicines, they suffered her to loose her blood, by little and
little, and at last to loose her life. The same chance happened to Madame
Gasselin, who not having help in time, dyed even as it was foretold, it would
come to pass; having lost all her blood, before she would give her consent to
be delivered: which will be a good occasion, to admonish a young Surgeon,
never to defer this work when he is called, and sees a great euacuation of
blood. It is now five and twenty years, since I saw this practiced, by the
late Mr Pareus, and Mr Hubert, of whom, we are bound to acknowledge, and
willingly confess, that we have learned both this and many other experiments.

Mad. de Mommor, Another story agreeing with this purpose.
being about five and twenty years of age, and near her time of delivery,
one day found her self ill, about four or five a clock in the morning,
nevertheless she rose and went to Church, which was near her house, her pain
by fits began again, and she fell into a continual flux of blood: At three
days end she was delivered with great ease, without any help of the Midwife:
and presently after, followed the after burden: Nevertheless she died the
same day, at night: and was kept a pretty while by her friends, who could not
persuade themselves, that she was dead: At last being opened by Mr Pineau, the
kings sworn Surgeon at Paris, in the presence of Mr Faber, and Mr Baillou,
regent Doctors of the faculty of Physic, at Paris; her womb was found
broken, and rent, right in that place, where the vein and artery
hypogastricke, ascend toward the midst thereof; which likewise were dissolved,
and gave way to all that issue of blood.

As for the convulsions which commonly happen through the child's great
striving, when he desires to come forth; and (not being turned aright) does so
extend the womb that the said convulsions, follow thereupon: here it is to be
feared, least all within, will be torn and broken, Stories concerning
convulsions.
and therefore it is convenient to deliver the woman, with all possible speed,
which has been practiced both by my self, and of late by Master Binet a
sworn Surgeon of Paris, a man of great experience, who being sent for by
Doctor Bouuart, to deliver Opportune Guerreau, the wife of Siluester the
Printer: which had been in labor from eight a clock in the morning, till nine
at night: and finding her pulse very weak and small, as also the woman
deprived of all sense and motion, The Chirurgions wisdom
at the first he was somewhat fearful. But being entreated by her Husband, and
fearing least she might either die suddenly, or else fall into convulsions: he
putting his hand into her womb, found the child's head, (the water not being
broke) which he let out, and presently delivered her with much ease, and she
is yet living. Therefore we need not expect, till the said convulsions grow
stronger, for fear least the womb be broken, and torn through the great
striving of the child, when he is not able to come forth, as we may plainly
see by the stories following.

The year 1607. the said Master Binet was sent for, together with de le Moine,
A wonderful story.
and Alton Master Barber Surgeon at Paris, to cut up the dead body of Ione
du Boys, and having opened her nether belly, found the child upon the guts, who
had bruised and broken the womb, and passed quite through it, there being store
of blood shed in the capacity of the said belly.

Master Pineau, Guerin, Another story.
and Launay sworn Chirurgians of Paris, can bear me witness, that in opening
a poor woman, that died in the Hospital of the City: we found her child
swimming among the guts in her belly, the bottom of her Matrice being rent and
torn.

The means to help a woman when her after-burthen comes for most. CHAP. XII.
IF the after-burthen offer it self foremost, When the after burden comes
foremost, there is a flux of blood.
the most sure and ready way to help the Woman is to deliver her speedily,
because most commonly there follows, a continual flux of blood. For that the
orifices of the veins are opened, which are spread in the sides of the womb,
and there meet with the vessels of the afterburthen: and when the Matrice does
strain and force it self, to put forth the child, then does it thrust out both
the blood that is contained therein, and that which is drawn thither, either by
any heat or pain. Besides, when the child is enclosed in the womb, and the
orifice thereof, stopped with the afterbirth: then he cannot breath any longer
by his Mothers Arteryes, How the child is stifled.
and so for want of help, he will be quickly choked, and even swallowed up in
the blood, which is contained in the womb, and which issues from the veins
that are open therein.

But before you attempt any thing, these two points must be observed: First,
whether the afterburthen be come forth but a little, or else very much: if it
be but little (when the mother is well placed) it must be thrust, Obseruatio^s
to draw forth the after burden.
and put back again with as much care, as may possibly be. And if the head of
the child come first, let it be placed right in the passage, thereby to help
the natural delivery, but if you find any difficulty, or if you perceive that
the child's head cannot easily be brought forward, or that the child, or his
mother, or both together be weak, foreseeing that the travail will be long,
then without doubt the best and surest way is, to search for the feet (as we
have said) and to pluck him forth gently by them.

Another observation.
The other point to be observed is, that if the said afterbirth be much come
forth, and that it cannot be put back again: as well by reason of the
bigness of it, as also of the flux of blood, that commonly companies it: and
likewise if the child follow it close, When the afterbirth must be drawn forth.
staying only to come into the world: then must the after-burthen be pulled away
quite, and when it is come forth, it must be laid aside, without cutting of
the string that cleaues unto it. For by the guiding of the said string, you may
easily find the child, who whether he be alive or dead, must be drawn out by
the legs, with as much dexterity as may be. And this must be done only in
great necessity, that the child may be quickly drawn forth: as it may be
easily judged by the sentence of Hippocrates, who says, Lib. 1. de morbis
Mulier. The afterbirth must come last.
that the after-burthen should come forth after the child, for if it come
first, the child cannot live, because he takes his life from it, as a plant
does from the earth.

Sometime it chances, that a part of the afterbirth, as also the membrane
which contains the waters do offer it self like a skin, and comes forth
sometimes the length of half a foot, which happens to such women as have the
skin wherein the waters are contained swelling out to the bigness of ones fist
and more, which breaking forth of themselves, leave the skinnne hanging forth,
and yet the child not following it, which happening, It must be pulled gently.
it must not be violently pulled away: because the afterburthen oftentimes, is
not wholly loosened from the sides of the womb. So that in drawing that, you
shall likewise draw the said after burden, and so consequently, the womb, or
else part thereof, which commonly brings the woman into extreme pains, and
fainting, yea, and oftentimes to death: Which happened (to my great grief) unto
a Gentlewoman, A story.
that died as soon as she was delivered, who putting her self into her
nurses hands, who took upon her to be a Midwife: and was so ventrous, as to
pluck and draw forth the said Membrane, and part of the after-burthen, which
came to light by means of her Chambermaid, who had kept it, and showed it us
after her decease: we being very inquisitiue to know the cause of her death.

The remedy.
But when this happens, it must not be pulled away but rather gently be thrust in
again, or else you may put in your hand, between that, and the neck of the
womb, to find the child's feet, and so draw him forth, as we have showed
before.

I have set down this story more at large, by reason of the great sorrow I
took; for this Gentlewomans death, whom I had delivered twice before, with
mine own hands, coming not soon enough to help her the third time.

The means to deliver a woman when her child is dead, in her womb. CHAP. XIII.
WHen it is certainly known, that the child is dead, the woman must be placed
in the same manner, as it has been shown, where we spoke of the taking
forth of the child, when there is a flux of blood.

What must be done when the child coms ill.
If he put forth an arm, shoulder, back, belly, or other part of his body
first, he must be turned with all diligence, and drawn forth by the feet, as
we will more particularly declare, in every several delivery, according to the
sundry fashions, wherein he may come, either alive or dead.

If he come dead, with his head forwards, The woman must be speedily helped.
and that there is no hope at all of the woman's delivery without help, and
that her strength begins manifestly to decay: the surest way is to apply the
hand. And then the Surgeon shall thrust gently his left hand being wide
opened, between the child's head, and the neck of the womb: and with his
right hand he must put between the said head, and flat of the hand, an Iron
Crochet, such a one as you see here figured unto you.

The figure or portaict of the Crochet, wherewith the dead child may be drawn
forth of his mothers belly, when he comes with his head forward: the which is
so locked within the os pubis, that it cannot be displaced or pusht upward, to
turn and draw forth the child by the feet, without much hurting the Mother,
and often endaungering her life. It will likewise serve to take forth a head,
that remains alone in the womb: It must be ten or twelve inches long, strong,
and thick, and large enough to take hold.



Which must be fastened to the side of the child's head, as about his ear, or
bone of the Temples, or in some other place if it may be done conveniently, as
within the hollow of the eye, or the hinder bone of his head, the Surgeon
keeping his left hand in the same place where he put it first, and therewith he
shall wagge and stir gently the child's head: Skill in drawing forth the child.
and at that very instant, with his right hand wherein he holds the crochet, so
fastened, in any part of the head, must he draw and bring out the child: bidding
the woman strive and force her self, as though she would be delivered alone.
And it is to be noted, that the Surgeon must take his time, to draw him
forth, when the woman falls into throws, for while the throws continue, the
child slides forth the easier.

Oftentimes it chances, that the Crochet cannot be put high enough at the
first, to draw forth the head all at once, Observation in using the Crochet.
so that after it is come forward and drawn out in part, they are feign to
take away the Crochet, from the place where it was first fastened, and put it in
again to take new hold higher in another place, which the Surgeon may do
very fitly, as it has been showed already. Likewise, if the Crochet be not
well, and surely fastened at first but that it slip, and lose the first hold,
then it will be needful, to fasten, and put it in a surer place.

The child may be surely drawn out by the shoulders.
Having drawn forth the head, and the Crochet being taken out, the Surgeon
shall slide in his fingers, very cunningly under the child's armepits, that he
may draw forth the shoulders, and the rest of his body, for by this means he
shall be easier drawn out then by the head: which must be done very
leasurely, without any violence, giving the woman leave to gather her strength,
and expecting till her throws come upon her.

While the Surgeon is about this work, they must give the poor Woman, a
little wine, or else let her suck a tossed sop't in wine, or Hippocras:
persuading and encouraging her, that she shall quickly be delivered.

This manner of drawing the dead child out of the mothers womb, is safer, and
speedier, Safe way to draw the child by the feet.
then that which is used by turning and putting back the child's head, to find
his feet, and so pull him out thereby. For whenever the child's head is much
entered within the os Pubis it is impossible to thrust him upward,
Inconveniences to turn the child.
and turn him without much indaungering the Mother: and causing great
contusion in the womb, from whence proceeds diverse accidents, and sometime
death, as I have seen it often happen.

I know some will allege, that they have taken forth children alive, which
were thought to have been dead, in the Mothers womb, with the said Crochet:
and that they have presently died, only with the hurt they received by the
Crochet, and certainly this is a cruel kind of practice. Whereto I answer,
that we must diligently look, and consider, whether the child be alive or
dead, before we put in the Crochet, Considerations in using the Crochet.
and if there be any appearance of life, we must defer the taking of him
forth therewith, as long as we may: But being dead, I see no reason but we
should take the child forth; with the said Crochet for the causes heretofore
mentioned. Question whether the Crochet may be used.
But if the child be alive, it is a great question whether he ought to be pulled
forth by the Crochet, presupposing that the Mother, having lost her strength,
is ready to dye, except this means be used: it being more expedient to loose
the Mother then the child, who would both dye, if that were deferred any
longer: and whether to save the Mother, (who is more dear, then the said
child) this practice may be ventured. But as I think, there are none, that go
about this business, but with some touch of Conscience, which being a point of
Divinity, I leave to be decided by them, that are more conversant therein, then
my self.

The means to draw forth a child, that is swollen, and puffed up: in his mothers
womb, together with the manner of drawing the head, when it stays behind.
CHAP. XIIII.
IF the dead child continue long in the mothers womb, The dead child swells and
is puffed up.
he may easily be putrified, and not only his head, breast and nether belly,
swollen and filled with wind, and water, but likewise his legs and feet will be
puffed up.

This swelling, and puffing up, may also happen through all the child's body,
The child that is alive may likewise be swollen.
though he be alive, having either the Hydro cephale, or swelling of the head,
or the dropsy, either of the lungs, or belly: or else being
Leucophilegmaticall. This accident happening when the child is alive, he must
be helped as being alive, not delivering the Woman to the child's loss. But if
he be dead, and ye perceive that his head, breast, or nether belly is swollen, or
filled with wind, or waterish matter, then the Surgeon must put up his hand
carrying in the hollownesse of it a little crooked knife, very sharp, made
after this fashion, and with the said knife he shall divide, and cut the part
wherein the wind and water shall be enclosed, (whether it be the head,
breast, or belly) which being let forth, the child will grow less, and
afterward, he may the more easily be taken out.

The form of the Knife to divide the swollen part, which must be of this
bigness here described, that it may the better be carried, within ones hand
to the place that must be cut or opened, whether it be the head, breast, or
belly.



It may so happen, that the child's arm coming foremost through the long stay
it makes without, as also because it has been pulled by violence, will be
swollen, yea, and even gangrened, that it cannot possibly be thrust back
again, that the child may be drawn forth by the feet: If it fall out to be
so, then the arm must be pulled out, as far as it can, and if it may be done
conveniently, let it be cut off at the joint of the shoulder, or else as near
unto it, as may be; the bone shall be cut off with sharp cutting pincers, or
else sawed off very even, the skin and muscles being put aside, that so the
bone may be covered, with the said flesh, muscle, and skin, which will fall
over it; and also, that the bone, through his roughness, and hardness, may
not hurt the sides of the womb, the stumpe that was cut, or sawed being put
back again.

Sometime the child's head will not follow the body, either because of the
bigness thereof, or else, because the child is ill turned, that in drawing him
forth, he chances to have his belly, stomach, and face lying upward: which
causes, that the body being wholly come forth, while they would also draw
forth the head, the chin takes hold of the Os pubis, and being pulled
violently, the body only is drawn, and the head not moved, sticks fast.

For the remedying whereof, that the head stay not behind: the body must be
gently turned, placing the face downward: (as we said before,) for by this
situation, the head being moved up and down, will be easily drawn forth with
the rest of the body; by holding the body with one hand, and putting a finger
of the other hand into the child's mouth.

And when the head sticks, the Surgeon must thrust his left hand into the
womb, and put his fore finger into the child's mouth, to stay the head, which
by reason of the roundnesse of it, and moisture of the womb, roules and
slideth up and down, not being easily stayed; then with his right hand, let
him put in the Crochet, which must be hook't or fastened, either in the temples,
hole of the ear, hollow of the eye, or else in the mouth; and then let him
draw the head gently, both with the Crochet, and also with the left hand,
having his forefinger in the child's mouth, and so bring him forth as
cunningly as he can: taking his time always when the Mother is in some pain,
that so the child may be the easier drawn forth.

The means to help a Woman in her travail, when the child comes with his head
foremost, but having his neck awrie, and his head aside. CHAP. XV.
depiction of child in womb: asynclitic birth

BEing now to speak of Births that are contrary to nature, we will begin
first with the Head, as being the worthiest, and most notable part of all the
body. Sometimes the child comes (as he does naturally) with the head foremost,
but it is placed amiss, which may be after four several fashions; In how
many fashions the head may be placed.
either the head lying upon the back: or upon the stomach: or else upon the
edge of the shoulders, inclining toward one of the Mothers flanckes, which
makes that the child cannot come forth straight, and in a direct line: because
his neck is bowed, and stands awrie. He being thus turned, it is very hard,
yea, even impossible, that the Mother should be delivered, either through any
endeavor of the child's thrusting his feet against the bottom of the Matrice:
nor by any labor of the woman, forcing likewise and straining her self, as
much as she can possibly, by holding in her breath. But contrariwise, the more
the child strives to come forth, When the Mother and the child strive in vain.
and enjoy the outward air, the more he intangles and wreath's his neck, so
that at last, both his strength, and the Mothers, are together much weakened,
through the pain they both suffer; the child being in danger, by reason of the
great compression that must needs follow the wreathing of his neck, and also
by the hindrance of respiration, How the child breaths.
though he breaths only as yet by the Arteries of his Mother, until the
after-burthen be loosened, for then he takes breath at his own mouth. The
Marrow also of the back, and the sinews (being the instruments of motion) may
thereby be so pressed together, that the animal spirits may be intercepted,
which depriueth the child of all motion, and consequently of life: wherefore,
it will be very necessary to help him speedily, which ought to be done in
this sort. First, let the Mother be placed, and held after the same order we
prescribed for the helping of them, that are troubled with a great Flux of
blood. Then the Surgeon, having his hands anointed (as we said before)
shall put up his right hand, being open, as gently as he can possibly, How to
find which way the child's head leans.
to find on which side the head does lean, and is turned: if the child's head
lean upon his breast, his hand will meet first with the back; if it be turned
toward the back, then he shall light upon the breast: or if the head lean
upon one of the shoulders, then he shall find the other first, which will also
be inclining somewhat toward the woman's flancks; which when he has found,
before he go about to remove the head, and bring it into his natural
situation, which is to place it directly over against the neck of the Matrice,
he must first with the ends of his fingers, thrust upward the body of the
child, either by the shoulders, or back, or by the breast: for by this means
the head of the child, will not lean so hard against the sides of the womb:
Way to bring the head straight.
so that his neck will even come of it self to the right place. And for the
better help, the Surgeon at the same instant shall slide in his other hand,
(yet not taking out the former) wherewith finding the place where the head does
rest, and lean: he may easily draw his hand toward the side of the child's
head, and so shall he bring it gently to the natural place: and by this
means, the child's head will rest between his hands, to be set right. The like
also may he do, by putting his hand gently, toward the hinder part of the head,
and so set it right, having first thrust the child upward, either by the back,
or breast: the which is seldom done, Another way.
because it is a surer and readier way, to thrust him up by the shoulders: and
to say the truth, the child's head is oftener turned, toward the Mothers flancks,
then either toward her belly, or her back.

The means to help a Woman in travail, when the child comes with the hand and
arm together, with the head foremost. CHAP. XVI.
THe child should come into the world, with his head forward, and if there be
any thing that comes with it, it is contrary to nature. If the hand, and arm,
offer themselves, and come forth of the womb, this travail is contrary to
nature, and therefore dangerous: because the arm takes up the room, The hand
coming forth, hinders the delivery.
the head should have, and hinders it from coming right; according as it is
turned, either to the right side, or to the left; or else upward; the head
leaning upon the back: or downward, being placed upon the breast: (as we
showed in the last Chapter, when the neck stands awrie,) which unless it be
helped in time, it will be very hard for him to come safe into the world. For
the hand, and arm, coming forth, by reason of their tenderness, and
softness, being never so little crushed, or held in the air: they are quickly
altered, and spoiled, and will be swollen, and puffed up exceedingly: yea, and
sometime fall into a Gangrene, The arm coming forth, falls into a Gangrene.
which I have often seen come to pass: and therefore it will be very
necessary to redress it speedily.

But especially, the Surgeon must take heed of pulling the said hand, or
arm; because it is impossible, Inconvenience of drawing the child by the arm.
he should draw him out thereby: For how much the more the arm is thrust,
whether it be by the Mothers, or the child's striving, or else by the
Surgeon, who labors to pull it out: so much the more will it make the head
and neck to bow, and bend; either toward the stomach, back, or sides: it
being impossible that the head and arm should come forth both together,
because the said head is so infolded, and engaged, in one of the said places:
and therefore this order must be observed herein.

The practice.
First, the Mother must be laid upon her back, her head and neck lying
somewhat low, and her hips somewhat raised: then the Surgeon, having his
hands oil'd (as before) shall anoint, all the woman's parts with that hand,
which is most fit, according to the diners situation of the child. If the hand
only come forth, he shall take it, at the top of the wrist, and so thrust it
back, as high as he can, guiding it all along the sides and flancks of the
child: and having placed it there, he must pull back his hand to give place to
the child's head, which at the same instant, with his other hand, must be
brought and put, right against the neck of the womb: And the better to set it
aright, he must with both his hands being spread abroad, and placed on each side
the head, thrust the shouldert upward, with the ends of his fingers, (as we
showed in the former Chapter) that the child's head may be set in the midst:
which will be easy for him to do, in taking the child's temples of his head,
between both his hands, and by that means set it straight. And when this is
done, The woman must be hartned.
let him suffer the woman to rest her self a little, assuring her, that her
child is well placed, and that by and by, he will come naturally into the
world: The rest shall be performed, as we have showed in the natural
Delivery; placing the woman after the same order, as has been said. But if it
chance, that the child be dead, and that the arm be gangrened, and so swollen,
that it cannot be put back, then must it be helped in the same manner as we
have showed before, which ought to be done with all speed: for fear of the
putrefaction, that may happen unto it.

The means to help the travail, wherein the Child comes with both his hands,
arms, and head foremost. CHAP. XVII.
MAny men are of opinion, Comparing of the two sorts of deliueries.
that the travail wherein the child puts foremost both his hands, and arms, is
not so dangerous, and difficult, as the former, when there is but one: Because
cause when both the arms come, thus stretched out, the head is found just in
the midst of the passage. depiction of child in womb But since that both arms
must be put back again, as in the former, before the child can come into the
world, (it being very hard, and dangerous to draw him forth by the arms) it
has made me always think, that this kind of delivery is more troublesome
and dangerous, then the former.

The delivery where both arms come foremost is not so dangerous.
Notwithstanding this may be said to be less dangerous for the child, because
howsoever he strive to come forth, and for all the throws that the Woman can
have, yet the child cannot wreath or turn his neck aside. But yet to say the
truth, it is more troublesome, both for the Mother, and the Surgeon, yea;
and sometimes for the child also.

But the best way to proceed herein is, The practice.
that the Surgeon, after he has placed the woman (as is aforesaid) having
his hands anointed, as also the parts of the Woman, he shall gently put in his
right hand, and bring one of the child's arms to his due place, by stretching
it out at length, along by the flanks and thighs; and presently with drawing
that hand, he shall thrust in his left, to bring the other arm into his place,
as he did the former. This being done, he shall mark, whether the head of the
child be placed right, in the mean time suffering the woman to take some ease,
not holding her so much back, as when he placed the arms of the child. Then
shall he place her, as in a natural birth, but if he find that the head of
the child be turned aside, and be not set direct against the passage, as it
uses to be in a natural birth, then shall he gently put in both his hands
joined together, and presently opening them, he shall touch only with the ends
of his fingers, both the shoulders of the child, and put him back easily
toward the bottom of the Matrice: and being so put back, the head of the
child will come between his hands, which he shall easily place aright against
the passage (as is aforesaid) by taking both sides of his head, or temples
between his hands, and so the delivery shall be performed naturally.

The means to help the mother when the child comes with one, or both feet
foremost. CHAP. XVIII.
Whenever the child, coming into the World, does put one or both his feet
foremost, the Surgeon shall place the Woman (as it has been oftentimes
told,) and having his hands anointed, let him choose whether he will draw the
child forth by the feet: or else if he think it better, to put back either
one or both the feet, and so turn him, and bring his head straight to his
passage. For my part, I think it the better and safer way to draw him forth
by the feet, then to turn him vpside down, and lift his feet upward,
thereby to bring his head downward to the passage. And therefore, What must be
observed concerning the child.
whether he come with one, or both his feet forward, the greatest care must be
to know how his whole body is placed, and lies in his Mothers womb: as whether
his face and belly be turned toward the mothers back, and his shoulders,
back, and buttocks toward her Navel: likewise whether his arms be
separated from his thighs, flanks, and sides, which ought also to be
diligently observed in all births that are contrary to Nature, especially, in
those, when the child is drawn forth by the feet: For when you draw him out
of the womb, with his buttockes, back, and hinder parts of the head, turned
toward the back of the Mother, and his face toward her Navel, and belly, then
without doubt the feet, buttocks, body and shoulders, of the child being drawn
forth, when the head comes to the os pubis, it will hang therein: which
being so catched it will be very hard, nay impossible, to draw forth the
child: and if you draw him too violently, it is to be feared least you break
his neck, especially if the child be too big, or his head great. Therefore
when you have drawn him by the feet till he is come forth, as far as the
buttocks, and wast, before you draw him any further, you must mark diligently
the position of the body, whether the belly breast, and face, be upward, or no.
For if he be so placed, before you draw him any further, you must turn him
vpside down, which you shall perform, if you hold him fast by the buttockes,
and hips, with both your hands, and turn the whole body (withal drawing it
gently) and so bring the belly, breast, and face downward, which being done,
you shall draw him forth with ease, without danger of staying, or carrying the
head upon os pubis: which must needs happen, if the child were drawn with the
face upwards. And this have I well observed, being called to the delivery of
some women, where this chance, (for want of good heed taking) has happened,
the head sticking within, and putting us to great trouble, to draw it forth.
Beside, An observation when the two arms are stretched out.
when the body is thus situated, if both the arms be stretched out above the
head, you shall bring down one of them close to the side, and let the other
stay stretched out, that when the shoulders, are come forth, the said arm may
be as it were a stay, or splint to the neck, for the passage of the head, to
hinder the passage from shutting or closing up, and fastening about the neck of
the child, and so hinder che child from coming forth, notwithstanding
oftentimes, the child is so slender and little, that so soon as the shoulders
are come out presently the head follows after, and needs not, the help of an
arm, to be a rest for the neck.

Now the Surgeon when he has thus observed, and marked the situation of
the child, or else having after that manner put him back if he find the child
may be easily turned by lifting his feet upwards, and bringing his head
downward, he may gently make trial of it. The safest way is to draw the child
forth by the feet.
But if he find that there is any difficulty therein, then the best and surest
way is to draw him forth by the feet. Therefore, if but one of his feet come
forth, he shall tie a ribband about it, that if it be needful, to put it back
again, to search for the other, he may the sooner find it, and draw it forth.
For it were enough to tear the child asunder, and so kill both him and his
mother, to draw him forth by one foot. Therefore, whether the first foot hang
out, or whether it be somewhat put back again, let it serve for a guide to
find the other, the Surgeon putting his hand all along depiction of child in
womb: breech birth the said leg and thigh even to the Perinaeum, How to find
the child's feet
near the which he shall be sure to find the other thigh, and afterward the
leg and foot, (unless you meet with them first, as commonly it falls out). But
the surest way is to do it the first way (that is to find the thigh first)
because oftentimes there are two children, which if it should so happen then
might you depiction of child in womb: breech birth take one foot of the one,
and another foot of the other: and thinking, that they were the feet of one
child only, without doubt in drawing them forth after that manner, you would
kill them both, and put the mother likewise in great danger of death, because
it would be impossible to draw them forth both together. And you must observe,
that to draw a child well out of his Mothers womb, you must have a Napkin, or
some other linen cloth, that you may not hold the child naked, You must not
hold the child naked.
either by the feet, thighs, or other part of the body: but let it be with a
warm cloth, for your hands being anointed, and greasy, and the child being
also moist, he will easily slip from between your hands, and you shall not
take so strong hold as is fit, for to bring him forth. And yet it may happen,
An Observation.
that the inner neck of the Matrice, may not be so wide, as to give way to the
Chirurgions, or Midwiues hand, without great difficulty and pain: the passage
being not bigger then to admit two or three fingers, by which nevertheless,
it is found in what manner the child comes. If you observe that one foot or
both come foremost, you must proceed according to this example.

Being at Moret with Count Charles, I was called, A story.
together with the late Mons: de la Cord, one of the Kings Physicians, to
deliver a poor woman, which had been in travail two days and two nights:
the waters being broken, and the child left dry, the neck of her Matrice was
closed, she being no more urged with pains or throws, which I observed by
slipping up my hand, unto the said neck, and getting two of my fingers
therein, where feeling one of the child's feet, I persuaded my self that I
should deliver her well, which I did in this sort.

First, when I had placed her well, I anointed my hands with butter and hogs
grease melted together, and with store thereof, I anointed the inward neck of
the Matrice, as well as possibly I could: and when I had somewhat dilated the
said neck, with three of my fingers I cast a ryband with a sliding knot,
upon the child's foot, fastening it gently: and then dilating again the said
neck, I found out the other foot, upon which I slipped another riband, as I
had done upon the former: Then did I draw both the ribands, and brought the two
feet together, which when I had drawn out, unto the buttocks, I began again
to anoint, as before, then taking a napkin, lest it should slip, I bad the
woman force her self, as much as she could possibly, especially when she
felt her pains and throws coming: and then drawing sometimes directly, and
sometimes to the one side, so to enlarge the passage, I drew on the child
gently turning the belly thereof downward; that the chin might not catch in the
ospubis, as I have noted before.

Sometimes the child comes not with his feet but depiction of child in womb:
breech birth with his knees forward, and in this case, the Surgeon shall use
the same art, as before, considering first, whether it be fitter to bring the
child's head foremost, or to draw him out by the feet. If he will draw him out by
the feet, he shall bring him into the foresaid situation, that is, to let the
face of the child be turned toward the Mothers back, and his back, toward her
Navel: then shall he unfold, or unloose the legs, that were bowed and bent;
and shall draw them forth first, and then the rest of the body, in this sort.
How to draw him forth.
He shall slide his hand from the knee of the child, along the shine, till he
come to the foot, which he shall draw forth, and tie a small ryband about it,
and put that foot in again, letting the ryband hang out: The like shall he do
to the other foot, and so shall he easily draw out the two feet. Then let him
draw forth the thighs, and buttockes, and if the child lie with his belly,
breast, and face downward, and his buttockes, back, and shoulders upward; let
him instantly, draw gently out the rest of the child, (as we have said before.)
But if he be placed contrariwise, The child must be turned.
he must turn him gently, the face downward, least otherwise the head take
hold upon the Ospubis, by the chin, as we have said before.

I have often repeated, this fashion of drawing out the child, for fear least
the young Surgeon err, in performing it otherwise; which if he should do,
he will be much troubled in drawing out the head, which may stick by the way,
as I have seen it happen.

The means how to help a Woman, when her child comes, with both the feet,
and both the hands together. CHAP. XIX.
depiction of child in womb: transverse presentation

THe child coming into the world, may offer himself to the neck of the
Matrice, in diverse fashions: as (beside those that have been spoken of,) with
both the feet and hands foremost; the buttocks, back, and head of the child,
being so bent, and bowed against the bottom of the Matrice, which does press,
and thrust him downward, that the said hands and feet, A terrible kind of
delivery.
come forth with such violence, that it is a fearful thing to see, and full
of danger, because of the difficulty to remedy it; the Matrice bearing down
it self in such sort, and to no use; it being impossible, that the child
should be borne, whilst he is thus situated. And therefore it will be
necessary in this case, to give help with as much speed, as may be: The
practice whereof is in this manner.

First, you shall place the woman as we have said before, Means to help the
travail.
then the Surgeon having his hands anointed, as is required: if the child
be alive, he shall try first with his right hand to put the feet into the
Matrice, making them slip up, as easily as he can to the bottom of the said
Matrice, and with his left hand, shall he stay the hands that they come not
forth further: the feet being thus thrust back, presently, he shall either
put one of his fingers, into the child's mouth, or else take him by the hinder
part of the head, to bring it direct against the passage: in the mean time
putting back with his left hand, the child's hands and arms, that they may
fall close to his sides: then taking the head between the palms of his hands,
he shall place it just against the passage. Which being done, the birth will
succeed naturally, both by the help and striving of the child, and also by the
endeavor of the Mother, when she feels her throws come upon her.

A surer way to draw forth the child.
But when the Surgeon shall find, that the feet, legs, and hands, cannot be
put back, and that the Matrice does bear downward, and shut it self not
suffering the feet to slip up, then must he, with all the Art he can, put back
with his left hand, the child's hands, and with his right hand draw the feet
gently, taking heed that the child's face and belly may be downward, and so
draw out the child, as has been showed before.

Likewise if the Surgeon find that the child be dead, he must draw him forth
by the feet, without troubling himself to bring the head of the child, to the
passage. For every dead child, because he is not able to give any help to the
birth, but that all the labor is to come from the Mother, is oftentimes the
cause of her death. And therefore the surest way is to turn him so, that he may
be drawn but by the feet, or else with the Crochet.

The Authors opinion.
As for my self, I am of this opinion, that it is better, whether the child be
dead or alive, (if he come with his feet, and hands foremost) that the
Surgeon bring him forth by the feet, then to turn him, and bring his head
foremost, and so expect a natural birth: for in this striving, the Mother
having been much wearied, and the chid much weakened, the delivery (though it
be natural) will prove very long, and difficult, in regard that neither the
Mother, nor the child, can have much strength left them: Whereas if you draw
him forth by the feet, neither the Mother, nor the child being much weakened,
the birth will be more easy, and fortunate; As I have always had experience.

The means how to help a Woman, when her child comes double, putting foremost,
either the Sides, or the Back, and Shoulders, or else the Buttockes. CHAP. XX.
depiction of child in womb: transverse presentation

BEside the former delivery, which is, when the child comes double, putting
his hands and feet foremost: there likewise happen diverse other births that are
no less difficult, and dangerous: For when he comes side-long, with his Sides,
Back, or Shoulders next the passage, his feet must needs be on the one side of
the Matrice, and his head on the other, lying quite cross; so that the child,
beating on both sides, with his head and feet against the womb, does extend,
and stretch it to no purpose, whereby the Mother grows weak and faint: which
neither she, nor the child can long endure without danger of death; because his
striving helps not at all for his coming forth.

depiction of child in womb: transverse presentation

A dangerous situation.
The like may happen, when the child puts out his thighs, and buttocks foremost:
which kind of birth is very painful and difficult, because the child fills
all the Matrice: Which the Surgeon perceiving, he shall consider, whether it
be better, to turn the child, and bring foremost his head, or else his feet: if
he can easily bring the child's head unto the passage, he shall proceed in this
sort.

First, he shall put in his right hand (being anointed as before) to turn the
child, and having found the shoulder, with the palm of his said hand, he shall
lift the child upward, that his feet or knees may be toward the bottom of the
Matrice, whilst the head falls and slides downward: and shall hold it fast at
the orifice of the womb, with his left hand, being put in at the same instant;
and by this means shall bring the Arms close to the thighs, and sides of the
child that the Woman may be naturally delivered. But if the Surgeon find
any difficulty, to lift the body upward, for the bringing of the head downward:
then shall he slide his right hand under the child's armepit, and so draw him
gently, yet not making the arm come forth, to place the head right against
the passage.

But if the Surgeon find any hindrance in bringing the head downward, and
that he thinks he can more easily guide and bring the feet to the orifice of
the womb, then the best and surest way is to draw him forth in that sort, by
the feet: and certainly when the child comes with his buttocks foremost, his
head being upward, then may you sooner meet with his feet, and bring them
easier to the orifice of the Matrice, to be drawn forth as we have showed
before. But when he puts his shoulder or back foremost, then may you the more
easily lift him up to make his head slip downward, or else take him by the
Armepit, and so bring gently his head to the neck of the womb, to deliver him
naturally.

The manner of helping the delivery, wherein the child comes with his belly and
breast foremost. CHAP. XXI.
THe most troublesome, and painful situation of a child in his mothers womb,
is when he comes with his belly foremost, putting out his navel, his legs and
arms being turned backwards. For when he is placed in this manner, and
strives to come forth, he thrusts against the sides of the Womb with his
hands and feet, and so boweth backward, and bends the back bone that he
brings himself as it were into a circle, whereby he endur's and suffers much
pain, and likewise is weakened exceeding much, unless he be speedily helped:
and besides, by his compression and striving, he causes the Mother to endure
much pain, and anguish without any profit at all both which does require to
be speedily redressed, which maybe performed in this sort. First the Chirurgio^
depiction of child in womb: transverse presentation shall place the woman in
good order (as has been said) Means to help the child.
and then shall he slide up his right hand (being first anointed) to observe
and feel what part of the child's body is nearest, which he shall perceive
both by his feeling, and by wagging and stirring the child up and down: If the
breast be next, he shall take with the said hand) the child by he shoulders and
top of the Arm, bringing him thereby gently downward, afterward lifting up
his hand, that the child's head may fall right toward the passage, putting in
presently his left hand to receive and set straight the child's head, which may
be turned on the one side, and that being done, the delivery shall be
afterward performed Naturally.

Another consideration.
But if the head cannot be easily brought downward, or that the belly and top of
the thigh be nearer unto the passage, then the Surgeon shall put his right
hand along the child's thigh to find one of his feet, which being found, he
shall cast about it a riband, with a sliding knot, and then shall he seek for
the other, and bring them both gently to the passage, and so draw him forth by
the feet, taking hold of him with a warm napkin, between both his hands:
observing always that his face and belly be downwards; for fear least when
the shoulders are come forth, the chinne catch upon the os pubis, as we have
shown more at large, in the chapter of delivering the child with the feet
foremost, to which place I refer you, shunning often repetition.

The means to help the birth, when there be twins the one coming with his
feet, the other with his head foremost. CHAP. XXII.
depiction of twins in womb

IT cannot well be perceived always, whether a woman bears two children,
though she be in travail: for I my self was present not long since, at the
delivery of an honest woman, One may be safely delivered of two children.
who brought two children: and when she was delivered of the first, the Midwife
(not expecting that there was a second) was ready to draw out the after
burden, but that I perceived another offer it self at the passage, which as
it came naturally, so was she delivered thereof very fortunately. But if it so
fall out that the twins do come, the one with his head, the other with his
heels foremost, then the Surgeon shall behave himself in this sort.

How he must deliver the woman when the twins come ill.
First he shall consider, which of the two children the woman may be easiest
delivered of. If the head of the one come not so forward, as the feet of the
other: it will be easy to draw forth that child by the feet, putting the
others head a little aside, and when he has brought that forth, he must
presently set the head of the other right against the passage, and encourage
the woman to be delivered, which will the easier be done, because the other
has prepared the way.

And if it happen, that in delivering the first by the feet, the second should
change his situation; then the Surgeon shall look after the feet, and draw
him forth, as he did, the former. And when the head of the first, is very
forward: then shall he thrust back the feet of the second, to give way to
the others head, that he may come naturally.

The way to deliver a woman of two twins.
If the heads of both the children come together to the passage, the Surgeon
must take great care for it is impossible for him to make them come forth both
at once, (except they be very little.) And therefore he shall put up his hand
to try, whether both the heads are placed in one, and the same line, and point
of distance (as commonly it happens) or else whether the one is further forward
then the other: And especially he must observe whether the two children be
monsters, and unnatural, or no. As whether there be two heads upon one body:
or if they be joined together, either by the back or by the belly, as it is
often seen; which he may easily perceive, by sliding his right hand open,
between the two heads, putting it as high as he can, to feel the division;
and then drawing his hand down again gently between the two heads, he shall
thrust aside the one to give place to the other, which he must bring right to
the passage, leaving the second nevertheless in his natural situation. And
when the woman feels her throws come upon her, then shall he by all means
bring forward, the former that he would receive, holding down the other, with
two or three fingers of his left hand (least he should offer to come forth)
and shall endeavor only to bring the first into the world. Which being done;
if the second be not well situated, he shall bring the head forward right to
the neck of the Matrice, and being brought thither, he may easily come forth,
because the way has been prepared, and made ready by the former. But you must
observe, that the first being come forth, he must be taken from between his
mothers legs, for fear least he endanger his life; but you must first tie
the navel, His Navel must be tied.
as we have showed. And besides it will be very necessary and fit before it
be cut, to tie the rest of the navel string, that is fastened to the
after-burthen with a large and strong thread, that it may thereby be the easier
found and drawn forth afterward. For the thread that binds the Navel, being
left too short it may slip into the womb, and thereby much trouble the
mother: When the second child is come forth, the Surgeon must search
whether there be two after-burthens, or no. And if it happen that after the
second delivery, the two after-burthens should not come away so soon as they
ought: The afterburthen must be taken away speedily.
then must they be provoked for fear least the Matrice being emptied of two
children, might chance to sink down, and shut it self close together,
thereby as it were to retain the said after-burthens, and by this means hinder
the delivery of them, which must be remedied, as we have showed before. If the
two children should have but one body, I am of opinion that for the performing
of this delivery, it would be a more easy and safe way, to turn the head
upward, and draw him forth by the feet, than to make him come forth with the
head foremost having an especial care, when he comes forth as far as the
buttocks, that you guide and draw them forth with all the Art you can
possibly: at which kind of delivery, I my self was never present.

The means to help a Woman in travail of Twins, their feet coming foremost.
CHAP. XXIII.
depiction of twins in womb

AS two twins may chance to offer themselves with their heads, so likewise
sometimes they may happpen to come with their feet foremost.

When this chances, the Surgeon ought to observe, whether the twins be
separated, (as we said before) or whether they be unnatural, as having four
legs, one or two bodies, and likewise one or two heads. Now the best way to
find it is, that the Surgeon having his hand anointed (as before) slip it
up gently wide open, Means to know whether the child be a monster or no.
as high as he can, and finding that the twins are not joined together, but
divided and distinguished, he shall bring down his hand between one of their
thighs, and pulling it a little lower, shall take hold of one of the twins
feet, (that which he thinks may be easiest drawn forth) and tie about it a
riband, with a sliding knot, toward the Ankle: then shall he put his hand
along the said leg, and so even to the buttockes that thereby he may find
the other leg of the same child, and join them together, and not be
mistaken (taking one leg of the one twinne, and another of the other: For if
he should do so, then without doubt in drawing of them forth, he would tear
them both asunder:) but being certain by this means, that both the legs
and feet, be of the same child, you may draw them forth gently, (as we have
showed before) taking care that the child come with his face downward. When
the first is come he must be taken away.
When you have thus drawn forth the first, you shall in the same manner,
proceed to the second: having first taken away (as is said before) the other,
from between the mothers legs. And if it happen that one of the twins come
naturally, with his head foremost, and the other with his feet: and that his
feet are more forward then the others head: then the safest way will be to draw
him forth first, that has his feet foremost: having first of all put the
other aside that offered himself at the passage. But if the head of the one be
right against the passage and the feet of the other on the one side, then shall
he put back the feet gently, and deliver the woman first of him that had his
head foremost, and afterward draw the other forth by the feet.

It may also happen in each of the former births, It must be known which is
alive.
that one of the twins may be dead, and the other living. Howsoever they are
placed, the Surgeon must be very certain which of them is dead, or alive.
The means to know it.
Which he shall know by feeling them about the Navel, Temples, or region of
the Heart, Handwrists, or Ankles, where if he find no pulse, or beating of the
Arteries, then he may be sure that the child is dead, as also if he be less
hot then the other: and when you put your finger into his mouth, he neither
suck it, nor wag his tongue. But if you find all these signs concur, How
you must draw him out.
then there is some likelihood that he is alive: and therefore it will be best
to bring his head right against the passage, that so the woman may be the
sooner delivered, which will be done the more easily, because the live child
can better help himself, then he that is dead. But if the Surgeon think,
that he shall hardly bring the head to the said passage, and that he find the
feet are nearer, and readier; then I would advise him to bring the child forth
by the feet, and when the woman shall be delivered of the one, let him draw
forth the other in the same fashion.

Of the staying of the after-burthen, after the delivery. CHAP. XXIIII.
OFtentimes it happens, after the woman has been delivered, whether it be
naturally, or by the Chirurgions help: that the bed whereupon the child lay,
(commonly called the After-burthen) as being a second burden, The
After-burthen may be stopped.
or delivery of the woman; because, when that is come away, the Mother is
wholly delivered, does remain fastened to the sides of the womb, and cannot
very easily be separated from it, and though it be loosened, yet oftentimes it
cannot be put forth: The which may proceed, either from the dryness of the
Matrice, and after-burthen, Causes of the retention of the after-burthen.
being destitute of their moisture, or because, that it is swollen, and
stretched, or else because the expulsive faculty of the womb, has been much
weakened by a long and painful travail: Whereunto may be added, that
oftentimes the Mother has been so wearied, and brought so low, and become so
faint, weak, and feeble, that she is not able to strain, or force her self
at all.

Now it is most certain, that after the child has left his Mothers womb, the
said afterbirth is a thing contrary to nature, which must needs be taken away
and sent forth: And therefore one of these two accidents must needs follow,
either that the quick (which is the womb) thrust forth the dead, (which is
the afterbirth:) or that the dead kill the quick: And surely, that being
retained, it does breed in the Mother, most pernicious, and dangerous
Symptoms, as swounnings, oppression, and suffocation: yea, and sometimes being
corrupted and putrified, it is an occasion of death.

For the preventing whereof, there must be great care and diligence used in the
bringing and drawing of it forth: which must not be done rashly, but
leasurely, by often shaking and moving it. In the mean time, taking heed that
neither the Mother, nor the womb, take any cold, for fear lest it be suddenly
closed and shut up: and therefore, first of all, if the woman be weak, you
shall give her, either some Broth, Gelly, yelke of an egg, or else a tossed and
sugar. And you must likewise put in practice, that which we have formerly
spoken of: as to make her Cough, sneeze, and blow, in her hands holding salt
therein: and beside you must give her medicines, that are proper to expel and
drive forth the said after-bith; which are, such as we formerly prescribed, in
Difficult travail: as A Drink to expel the afterbirth.. Succin. stercor.
Accipitr. pull. an. ss. dissolve in vino Hyppocratico, and fiat potus.

. Troch. de Myrrha, Gall. Mosch. an. j. Cinnamon. ss. Dictam. cretens. Succin.
rasur. ossium dactylor. an. ij. Piper. Croci an. j. fiat puluis, capiat pro
dosi j. cum vino Saluiatico, vel cum aqua Arthemissiae.

Gesner in an Epistle he writes to Gasserus says, That the stone of a horse,
dried in an Oven, being made into powder, and taken the quantity of a dragme,
or four scruples, is an excellent medicine.

Other experiments.
Horatius Augenius reports in his Epistles, that he has made often trial of
it, and says, that he had it, of his father, for a secret.

If the afterbirth comes not away for all the foresaid medicines, then must you
come to handyworke: and for that purpose the Surgeon shall place the woman
in the same fashion he did, in the drawing out of the child: then shall he put
up his hand, (anointed as before) holding the Nauellstring, which will serve
him for a guide to find the afterbirth; and when he has found it, he shall
observe and try diligently, whether it sticks to the sides of the womb, or
no: If the said after-burthen cannot come forth, because the passage of the
Matrice is to strait, it being shrunk together, and swollen with pain: Then
shall he use medicines that relaxe and mollify, as the liniments appointed in
the natural delivery, and also such as shall be set down hereafter, together
with fomentations and iniections: And when he perceiues that the passage is
open and free, and that the afterbirth stays only through the woman's
feebleness and weakness, in these two cases he shall draw it forth gently.

But if he perceive that it does stick to the womb, and likewise finds it
soft and moist, then shall he separate as gently as may be, with his fingers,
(his nails, being first pared very close and even) from the sides of the womb,
beginning at that end which he thinks, does best cleave or stice thereto; and so
draw it by little and little, shaking it sometimes, on the one side, and
sometimes on the other, not drawing it violently directly forward; for fear
(as Hippocrates says) least the Matrice should fall down and follow the
afterbirth, whereto as yet it is fastened: putting still between the sides of
the Matrice, and the said part of the after-burthen, either fresh butter, or
some of the liniment wherewith he annoints his hands, that it may help by
mollifying and relaxing, to separate it the more easily.

And you must take an especial care that you draw it not forth suddenly all
at once, least it should stick to many places of the womb, and so you
thinking to pull it along, might shake and bring down with it the body of the
womb, which would cause a Praecipitation or falling down thereof: Or else, if
you should separate it by violence, some vessel or part of the womb is in
danger to be broken, which may procure a flux of blood, or some ulcers, whereof
may follow a Gangrene, yea and oftentimes death.

If the Surgeon perceive that there is any difficulty, or danger to sever
and bring forth the said afterbirth, it sticking very fast by reason of
drynes, or that the Matrice is very painful and swollen, then shall he use
these medicines following.

First he shall give these Pills.

Pills.
. Myrrh. i. Rad. Aristol. rotund. Dictam. an ij. Castor. assae foetid. Croci
an. i. Gentian. s. cum succo sabinae and Mercurial. fiat Massa addendo Confect.
Al K^rmes iiij. capiat pro dosi s. vel ij. You may mingle with the said Dose,
half a Dragme of Pilulae Cochiae, to provoke and stir up the expulsive
faculty of the belly and so consequently, that also of the womb.

You must likewise provoke her to sneese, which may be done, Sneesing expels
the after-burthen.
according as Aecius appoints, with Castoreum and Pepper made into powder,
you may also use which is stronger.

. Hellebor. alb. s. piper. albi, nigri, an i. Casto. ij. Cinnamon. i. fiat
omnium puluis subtilanijciantur aliquot grana in nares. But ye must note, that
when her sneesing is ready to come, The manner of doing it.
she must stop her nose, and mouth, with her hand; that the breath in sneesing
may not go forth all at once, and that it may thrust the more violently
downward.

There must be used also this fomentation and iniection to the Matrice

An Iniection, and fomentation for the womb.. Quatuor Emoll. Matricar. an. m.
iiij. flor. Chamaemel. Melilot an. p.i. Sem. Lini, foenugraec. an. s. Bulliant
iniure vituli. vel Capi, Colaturae add Ol. Amygdal. dull. and cheirini tertiam
partem, and fiat iniectio: Ex magnate fiat fotus cum spongia.

This fomentation and iniection has power to heat and comfort the Matrice,
and also to make it more moist and fit to loosen the after-burthen. At the same
time you shall give her this Clister.

A Clyster.. Rad. Lilior. albor. Bryon. recent. an ij. Maluae; Bismal. totius,
Caulium, Matricar. Mercur. an. m. sem. Lini. foenugr. an. s. flor. Chamaem.
Melilot. an. m.i. fol. Senae Mund. s. fiat decoct. de qua cape quartar. iij. in
quibus dissolui Diaphoenic. Hierae. an. iij. Mell. Mercur. Ol. Lilior. Aneth.
an ij. fiat Clyster.

You must also cause the Woman to smell unto bad, and stinking odors, as old
shoes, Ill smells.
and Partridge feathers burnt, Assa faetida, Rue.

Some after the child is borne, Blood lettin^ brings dow^ the afterbirth
have the veins of the Matrice so swollen, that the afterbirth cannot come
forth, by reason of the bigness thereof, and the narrowness of the passage:
then it will be good to let them blood in the foot, which is a medicine very
often tried by Massaria a great practitioner and a professor at Padua, as he
writes in his book of women's diseases.

If the after-burthen come not away withal the foresaid medicines, then will
it be necessary to suppurate and putrifye it, which I have seen sometimes come
to pass: But in the suppurating of it, What must be done in the suppurating of
the afterbirth.
you must have a care of two things: the first is to strengthen the Woman, and
to preserve her from malignant vapors, that may ascend and take hold of the
principal parts, as the Heart, Brain, and chiefly, the stomach, using other
medicines, beside those that have been formerly set down. And therefore she
must be comforted with these medicines.

A Cordial Electuary.
. Cons. Borag. Buglos. Rosar. an i. Cons. Anthos. s. Confect. Alkerm. de
Hyacinth. an. is. spec. laetificant. Galen. s. cum syrup. Conser. Citri q. s.
fiat opiata. Let her take Lozenges of Diamargarit: frigidum: and likewise of
Piachodon Abbatis.

She must also have all kind of pleasant and sweet savors to smell to, which
may recreate the spirits.

The second thing that the Surgeon shall observe is, that in helping it to
come to suppuration, he have a care that there be not bred too much
corruption: and therefore it will be fit, to use mundifying and cleansing
iniections, adding thereby also, medicines that will comfort the womb, as those
that are of a good smell.

A comforting and cleansing Iniection.. Maluae Parietar. senecion. Matricar.
Apij. an. m. i. Radic. Lilior. Bryon. Cucumer: agrest. an. i. flor. Chamaemel.
Melilot. Hyperic. Centaur. Vtriusque. an. P. i. Aristol. nostr. Agrimon.
Veronic. Herbae Robert. Mercurial. an. m. i. s. sem. foenugraec. Cydon. an. s.
fiat decoctio ad lb'. i. s. in quibus dissolve Myrrh. Aloes, Ireos. florent. an
s. mellis Mercurial. iij. addendo Aq* Rosar. vini albi an. ij. fiat Iniectio.

Hip. lib. 2. Epidem.
Hippocrates to this purpose, writes a memorable story of a Carriers wife, who
had a piece of her afterbirth left behind in the womb, (that caused her to
have the Strangury) which continued there even till she was delivered of an
other child. For at the end of four months, she conceived again and bore her
fruit to the full time: which History has imboldened me to relate this that
follows.

A true story.
Mary Beaurin, yet living, Wife unto William Prat a Glasier, dwelling in Saint
Andrews street, sent for me, (it is some six and twenty year since) to show
me a tumor that came forth of her Womb, which was as big as ones fist, and
more; and was like unto a bladder: as firm and hard, as strong parchment: full
of clear water, wherein one might perceive a pretty hardness: the said tumor
or bladder would slip up easily, when she lay upon her back, and lifted her
thighs a little upward, crushing it a little with her hand, (as they commonly
do when they put back a rupture) which she did in my presence, and I
demanding of her how long this accident had troubled her; she told me it had
been so above two years, and begun at the birth of her second child: and yet
notwithstanding she said she had had a little young daughter, about six
Months since, to which she then gave suck, and that all the time that she
went with child, she said this bladder fell not down at all, as it was wont
before her last being with child. I counseled her to call Mon. Paraeus the
Kings chief Surgeon, and other Chirurgions, to give their judgment, what
this bladder might be: And perceiving, when they had handled it, that it was
without pain, they were all of opinion after it was drawn forth, as far as
it could possibly, to have it tied at the top, and then to pierce it; the which
I did; leaving the thread wherewith I tied it, somewhat long, that thereby I
might draw it forth, when I thought fit. The incision being made, there
followed great store offaire and clear water, and presently we perceived a
little, foeuus or Pantye child of a fingers bigness, somewhat firm, and hard;
without any bad smell, fastened by the Navel, which was as firm and big, as a
pretty string. About six days after, with shaking the said thread, (which had
been likewise gently stirred, every day from one side to the other) he rest
came forth: having applied, in the mean time, many mollifying iniections to
the womb, for the loosning of it, from the parts whereto it was fastened.

Lib. 4. Obseruat. 185. Another story. Marcell. Donat. Histor. medic. mirabil.
lib. 4. cap. 22.
John Schenekius, in his observations, among diverse other stories, tells a very
strange one, of a Woman, named Ludouica who for her bigness, was called the
great Mare, she going with a dead child voided only the soft parts of the
said child, being putrified, the bones staying behind: yet for all this; a
while after: she being in reasonable good health, became great with child
again. And falling sick, there passed by chance, through the rowne where she
dwelt, a certain Mountibancke or Quacksaluer, who made an incision in her
belly, and thereby took forth the bones of the said child, and cured her: And
when the time of her travail came, she was delivered of a lusty and
healthful child.

The means how to take forth a Child, by the Caesarian section. CHAP. XXV.
IT now remains only, that I speak of the last kind of delivery, which must
be practiced, after the Mothers decease, that thereby the child may be saved,
and receive Baptism. This birth is called Caesarian, a caeso Matris vtero, in
imitation of Caesar, who was rip't out of his Mothers womb, at the very
instant she died. The which ought to be observed in every well governed
Commonwealth: For, Iurisconsulti eum necis damnant, Lib. 2.. D^ mortuo
efferendo, and sepulchro aedificando.
qui grauidam sepelierit, non prius extracto foetu, quod spem animantis cum
grauida peremisse videatur. The Lawiers judge them worthy of death, who shall
bury a great bellyed-woman that is dead, before the child be taken forth,
because together with the Mother, they seem to destroy the hope of a living
creature.

In some women, I have made this practice very fortunately, and among the
rest, in Mad. le Maire, Mr Phillippes my uncle being joined with me: And
likewise in Mad. Pasquier, presently after she was dead, Monsieur Paraeus, and
the Curate of Sct Andrew, being present.

But before the Surgeon come to this work, What the Surgeon must observe.
he must observe diligently, and be certainly assured, that the woman is dead,
and that her kinsfolks, friends, and others that are present, do all affirm
and confess, that her Soul is departed: And then he must come presently to
the handyworke, because the deferring of it, might cause the child's death, and
so make the work unprofitable.

All the while that the woman lies in her pain, and Agony, the Midwife, or
else some other woman, shall hold their hand within the neck of the Matrice,
to keep it as open, as may be possible: for though we know, that while the
child is in the Mothers womb, he breaths only by her Arteries; yet
notwithstanding, the Air that may enter therein, does not only not hurt, but
does very much good.

Now, to know certainly, and to be assured that the woman has yielded up her
last breath, you shall lay upon her lips, An experiment.
and about her nose, some light feathers; for if she breath never so little,
they will fly away.

And being thus assured that she is dead, the Surgeon, presently without any
delay, after he has laid open her belly naked, shall there make an incision,
The Method of making the incision.
of the length of four fingers, near unto the right Muscles, cutting both the
skin, and the three Muscles of the Epigastrium, and the Peretonaeum, piercing
even to the very capacity of the belly. Then shall he thrust in two of his
fingers, and with them shall he lift and hold up, the said skin, muscles, and
Peretonaeum; and between them, he must make a sufficient incision, to discover
the Matrice, and the child therein contained, which will easily show it self:
Then shall he instantly make an incision, just in the midst of the womb, which
he shall find a finger thick, and more, The wom^^ is thick.
and therefore he need not be afraid of hurting the child, because I have
always observed, that the afterbirth is situated next to that place, and then
the child. But if there should be any likelihood, The way t^ open the womb.
that the said afterbirth were loosened, and had changed his place, then must
he be more circumspect, and wary: And therefore, he shall rather tear and
enlarge th'incision with two fingers of each hand, being put therein, then cut
it, and so make the orifice large enough, according as he thinks fit, for the
drawing out of the child, which he shall take forth of the womb. This being
done, he shall take the afterbirth, and lay it upon the child's belly, causing
some body, to take a little wine in their mouth, and spirt it into the child's
nose, ears, and mouth, which must be done often, as we have showed before.

Some hold, that this Caesarian Section, The Auth^^^ opinion o^ this practi^^
may and ought to be practiced (the woman being alive) in a painful and
troublesome birth: Which for mine own part, I will not counsel any one to do,
having twice made trial of it my self, in the presence of Mons. Paraeus, and
likewise seen it done by Mons. Viart, Brunet, and Charbonnet, all excellent
Chirurgions, and men of great experience and practice; who omitted nothing, to
do it artificially, and methodically: Nevertheless, of five women, in whom
this has been practiced, not one has escaped. I know that it may be alleged,
that there be some have been saved thereby: But though it should happen so, yet
ought we rather to admire it, then either practice or imitate it: For, One
Swallow makes not a Spring, neither upon one experiment only, can one build a
science.

The Caesarian Section reproved.
After Mons. Paraeus had caused us to make trial of it, and seen that the
success was very lamentable, and unfortunate: he left of, and disallowed this
kind of practice, together with the whole College of Chirurgions of Paris: as
likewise the discreeter sort, of the Regent Doctors in the faculty of
Physic, at Paris: at such time as this question was sufficiently discussed by
the late Mons. Merchant, in the two declamations he made, when he had the
honor to be admitted sworn Surgeon, of Paris.

The end of the Second Book.
THE ORDERING OF a woman newly brought a bed, and of the Accidents, that may
happen unto her in her Month. The third Book.
What diet a Woman must keep that is newly delivered. CHAP. I.
Heretofore we have spoken of the care that must be taken of a Woman, so
soon as she is brought a bed, and delivered of her afterbirth: Now we will
treat of the diet she is to keep, while she lies in, and of the accidents,
that may befall her in that time.

First she must be kept reasonable hot: for too much heat does weaken, and
dissolve the strength: Cold hurts the spermaticall parts.
but above all, she must be kept from the cold air: because it is an enemy to
the spermaticall parts, and being very piercing it may get into the Matrice
which is now empty, and there procure, great pains and torments, as also puff
it up, and the whole belly: and therefore the doors, and windows of her
chamber in any wise are to be kept close shut.

Diet.
Her diet must be thus: First she must live temperately, and not fill her self
with too much meat: and that must be of the same kind, that is prescribed for
them that are wounded; and indeed in some women, there happens a great Solutio
continui, and not that only which they call simple, but also that which has a
contusion joined with it. For in that great striving, and passing of the child,
many membranes are not only bruised, and hurt: but also broken, and torn: as
it happens in young women and in others that are far in years, and never had
any child before. Nay sometimes in these, the passage of the Matrice, and that
of Anus, are brought into one: yea, and some suffer great excoriations, and
hurts, in those parts; which being neglected, in some, have come to
putrefaction, and Gangrenes: And here I must admonish women in childbed, not
to regard the words of their nurses, The nurses must not be always harkned to.
or keepers, which continually preach to them, to make much of themselves,
saying, that they had need to fill their bellies, which have been so much
emptyed, telling them how much blood they have lost, and do daily loose, and
that at last they will grow so weak, that they will not be able to help
themselves.

But these are frivolous reasons, for the greatest part of the blood, which a
woman voideth then, and all her month, is but superfluous blood, and is good
for nothing: which has been kept in the body a long time, even the nine
months, that she has gone with child: it being now necessary for her health
to have it voided out of her Matrice: that so her belly, which is swollen, and
puffed up with the abundance of blood (like a sponge that is full of water) may
be quitted and discharged, and return to the natural proportion and bigness.
And therefore for their healths sake, She must see sparingly.
they must not feed so plentifully, the first days, as the vulgar think:
that by this abstinence may hinder the Ague which may happen unto them, and
likewise keep down the abundance of blood, which would flow to their
breasts, and be converted into milk and by reason of the store there of grow
clotty and curdle, and in the end apostumate.

Wherefore the five first days, let her use Broths, Her meats.
panades, new eggs, and gelly; not glutting her self (as commonly they do)
either with flesh or Almonds: In the morning let her take a supping or broth:
and so likewise at dinner, with a couple of new laid eggs, and some panade,
and again at supper, let her have the like, closing her stomach with a little
gelly: but yet, if she mean to nurse her child herself, she must feed more
plentifully. Let her drink barley water, wherein a little Cinnamon, A drink.
and a few coriander seeds have been boiled. The great Ladies of Italy do use
a water, made of Capons which is this.

Capon water for Ladies.
Take two Capons ready pulled, and dressed: boil them in an earthen pot, with a
sufficient quantity of fair water, till they be half sodden, then take them
forth, and cut them into small pieces, to be used as follows.

Take of Buglosse, Borage, and Balm, of each two good handfuls: whereof you
must make a lay in a glass, Limbicke, and upon that, another of the said
Capons flesh, and so upon that a lay of leaf gold, with a dram of the
powder of pearl, then pour in some of the broth, on the top: which you shall
do, until all be bestowed in the same manner. This being done, you must
distill it, in a double vessel or Balneo Mariae, and draw a quart of water or
thereabouts, which must be reitterated so often, till you think that you have
enough to serve the woman in child bed, for ten or twelve days: But this
Curiosity, is for Princesses and great Ladies. The said water must be drawn
six weeks or two months before it be used, and set in the sun in summer,
and over an oven in winter, to take away the rawnesse that remains in it.

If the woman have not an ague, in my opinion, she may drink a little white or
claret wine, with twice as much boiled water. But there be some women that
cannot endrue wine, and therefore let them drink water and honey boiled
together, or else boiled water: Another drink.
if they desire to drink in the day time between their meals, or else in the
night, give them a little syrop of Maiden hair, with boiled water, or any
other syrop, so it be not astringent, because of their purgings. When her
pains; the fear of the ague, and the burning of her breasts be past, then
may she feed more liberally, and then she may eat at dinner a little meat, with
her broth: as Capon, Pullet, Pigeon, or a bit of Veale: and at supper beside
her broth, a slise of Veale, Mutton, Chicken or any other good meat.

The eight day being past, about which time commonly the womb is well purged,
and cleansed, it will not be amiss to nourish her better, giving her more
solid meat, and in greater quantity, that she may grow strong again, the
sooner. All the which time she must keep her self very quiet, not much
moving, or stirring herself, nor so much as once looking into the Air. Let
her speak as little as may be, and have no noise made about her, Noise is
hurt^full.
nor suffer her to be much visited, but by her friends and kinsfolks, excluding
all such tatling Gossips, as may tell her any thing to trouble her or make her
sad. Let her sleep rather in the night, Sleep.
then in the day time: yet, if she have not rested in the night by reason of
some pains, then let her sleep, when soever it comes upon her. And because
most women in that case, are Costiue, and cannot void their excrements:
therefore it will be very fit to give her some such gentle Glister.

A Clyster.. Fol. Malu. Parietar. Bismal. totius an. m. i. flor. Chamemel.
Melilot. an. p. i. sem. Anis. foenicul. an. ij. Coquant. in decoct. Capitis
veruec. de quo accipe quart. iij. in quibus dissol. sacchar. rub. Mel.
Mercurial. an. ij. Butyr. recent. iij. fiat Clister.

You may also add thereto sometimes an ounce of Diacatholicon. If she dislike
Clisters, let her take a little broth or decoction of Seen.

I am of opinion that the Athenian women, while they were in Childbed, did
take the broth of Cabbage, The use of Coleworts.
or Coleworts, rather to be loose bellied, then to drive away witchcraft, as
Athenaeus would have it: For heretofore the Cabbage was Catoes Physic, and all
his household. And therefore when the Romans banished the Physicians, Cato
said, that the Cabbage alone, was Physic enough to cure all their diseases;
and besides he made a little Commentary upon that subject.

Sadness to be avoided.
Let her banish all grief and heaviness, having regard only of her health, and
to be merry, praising God for her delivery.

What must be done to the Woman's Breasts, Belly, and nether parts that is newly
delivered. CHAP. II.
NOW I have set down the manner of diet, a Woman in Child bed should
observe, it will not be amiss to show, what is fit to be done unto her,
before she sit up, or rise, endeavoring herein, to bring all the parts of her
body, which have been strayned, and as it were quite changed, through a long,
and painful travail, to their former state, that they may be recovered, and
grow strong with as much speed as may be possibly.

If our French Ladies, were (in this point) like unto those, which Vesputius
Florentinus does write of: Women t^ are Virgins after child bearing.
it would then be needles to prescribe so many medicines, for the restoring
them to the same state they were in before their being with child. There are
women (says he) that dwell beyond the Antartique Pole, whose bodies are entire
and Virgin like, even after often childbearing, and in whom there is perceived
no difference from them that are Virgins, as they that have opened them, having
made diligent search, do testify: But since there be no such women found in
our quarters, (though I dare boldly say, there be some, not much different)
therefore will it be very necessary to have a care what is to be done, to their
belly, breasts, and nether parts. Wherefore, after the sheep skin, or hares
skin, has staid on four or five hours, let it be taken away, and the woman's
belly and groine, anointed with the liniment following. And then applying the
Cearcloth of a just bigness, which must be continued the first seven days,
dressing it every morning, and turning the said Cearecloth, sometimes on the
one side, and sometimes on the other, the liniment is this,

An ointmen^. Ol. Chamaem. Amygd. dull. Hyper. an. is. Spermac. caeti ij. sepi
Hirci. i. Ol. Myrtill. s. Liquefiant omnia simul, and fiat linimentum, quo
vngantur parts ventris calide quotidie, superposia tela sequenti.

But before you lay on the Cearecloth, you shall apply to her navel, an
emplaster of Galbanum, of the bigness of two or three fingers, in the midst
whereof you must put two or three grains of Ciuet, and it must be so applied
that the smell thereof strike not up to the Woman's nose: the Cearecloth is this.

A Cearecloth.. Cerae alb. iiij. Pomat. sine Moscho, Pingued. vitul. an. i.
spermat. caeti. i s. Ol. Hyperic. Amygdal. dulc. an. i. Therebinth. Venet.
lotae in aq. Parietar. s. liquefiant omnia in Balneo Mariae. and liquefactis
impone telam ad magnitudinemventris, quae refrigerata poliatur vitro plano and
applicetur ventri post vnctionem.

Then must she be swathed as we have showed before.

This being done, you must have a care to her breasts; Some apply to their
breasts only, round plasters, made of some such Cearecloth as this.

Another Cearecloth.. Cerae nouae vi. Ol. Rosar. Mirtill. Mellis Narbonens. an.
iij. liquefiant simul and fiat sparadrapum.

The said round plasters must have a hole in the midst for the Nipple to come
through. Others use this liniment and Cearecloth.

An ointment for the breasts. Ol. Rosar. Mirtill. an. is. Aceti parum, misce,
vnge mammas calide bis in die, secundo die insperge mammas puluere myrtillorum,
and appone hoc sparadrapum.

A Cearecloth. Ol. Mirtillor. iij. Ol. Amygd. dulc. i. Terebinth. venet. vi.
Mastich. ij. Nucis Cupres. i. Bol. Arm. terrae sigillat. an. iij. sang. Dracon.
iiij. Myrtyll: Balaust. an ij. Ireos Florent: saluiae an s. Cerae q. s. fiat
sparadrapum.

Whereof you may make rounds, as I said before.

Some Women take water parsley, or smallage, and boil it a pretty while with
Urine, and apply it to the breasts. An ointm^^^ to keep (...) milk from
curdling.
I have often tried this ointment following, which hinders the milk from
Curdling, and congealing, the breasts being rubbed therewith.

. Vng. Popul. i s. Refriger. Gal. s. Ol. Rosar. vi. Aceti parum, liquefiant
simul, and fiat Linimentum. Some put sage between their breasts, and under
their Armepits.

Now concerning the nether parts: Fomentations for the parts.
let them be bathed gently, the first three or four days, with warm milk,
wherein has been boled a little Cheruill, plantaine, and a few Rose leaves.

The days following, until the eight day, let her use this bath or
fomentation.

. Vini alb. and aquae. an. lb'.s. flor. Hyperic. rosar. rub. an P. ij.
Agrimoniae Mi. fiat decoctio. After both these bathings, let there be applied,
to the sides of her natural parts, this Ointment, with a very fine linen
cloth: An Ointment.. Ol. Hyper. ij. Spermat. Caeti j ss. Cerae alb. parum,
liquefiant simul, and fiat ad formam linimenti, ad vsum.



When the first eight days are past, she shall wear upon her belly the
Ceare-cloth following, her belly being first rubbed with this Ointment.

Another Ointment.. Ol. Hyper. Chamaem. Aneth. an. j. ol. Mastich. j. ss. ol.
Mirtil. vj. Spermat. Caeti. ij. Sepi renum Hirci j ss. Adipis Cerui j. Cerae
nouae modicum, fiat vnguentum: quo vnguatur venture puerperae, superponendo
telam sequentem.

A Ceare-cloth for the belly.. Ol. Mirtil. Hyperic. an. j ss. ol. Aneth. j.
Terebinth. venet. in aqua Artemis lot. iiij. liquefac simul, and auferendo ab
igne, impone telam ex canabe, quae contineat totum ventrem, and inguina,
deferat spatio octo dieru^, praemisso fotu.

The fifteen days being past, she shall wear eight days more (by which time
three weeks of her lying in will be finished) this Ceare-cloth following, over
all her belly, and groine.

A Ceare-cloth for the belly.. Ol. Mastich. Mirtil. Iasmin. Cydon. an. j ss.
ol. Glandium ij. Spermat. Caeti j. Terebinth. Venet. sepius lotae in aq.
Plantag. ss. Cerae vj. liquefiant omnia simul, addendo puluer. Mastich. Terrae
sigillatae, an. ss. Irid. Florent. j. remouendo ab igne, imponatur tela ex
canabe, quae contineat totum ventrem, deferat quindecim dies integros:

which must be renewed afresh, after ter the first eight days. In which space
her nether parts must be bathed with this fomentation.

A strengthening Fomentation for the lower parts.. fol. Plantag. Tapsi Barbat.
Centinod. Caud. equin. an. m. j. fol. Cupress. m. j ss. Cortic. granat. Nuc.
Cupress. Balaust. an. ss. Rosar. rub. flor. Chamaem. Melilot. an. p. j. Alumin.
Roch. ij. Calam. Aromot. Irid. Florent. an. iij. Caryophil. j. fiant sacculi
duo, coquantur in aequis partibus vini austeri, and aquae fabror. pro ore
exterior. colli vteri.

And when three weeks of her time are expired, she having been, neither
troubled with Ague, pains, or gripings, nor any other accident extraordinary,
and being likewise well cleansed from all her after-purgings, before she go
abroad, it will be very good for her to bath, cleanse, and wash her self,
being first gently purged, with some easy medicine, according to the
Physicians direction.

Baths to be made in Summer, and while the weather is hot.
But because the seasons of the year are diverse, therefore will it be the the
best course to use Baths of sundry compositions: As if the woman be brought a
bed in Summer, and hot weather; then she must have provided for her such a bath
as follows.

Take a great tub, or hogshed, and fill it full of river water, made somewhat
hot, adding thereto as much white Wine as you think fit: wherein you shall
stiepe the space of a day and a night, First Bath (...) Summer.
of Fennill, Marierom, Mugwort, Motherwort, Penny-royall, Agrimonie, Chamamill,
and Meliot flowers, of Rose leaves, of each two handfuls, put them into a
strong linen bag, that is large enough, The man^^^ of making
quenching oftentimes in the said liquor, a bar of Iron red hot: Then
ouer-night, you shall take out three or four kettels full of the said water,
and set them over the fire to sees, and then pour it into the tub again, and
cover it close, that it may keep in the heat all night, and warm the tub: then
in the morning you must put in more hot water, until you have made the bath
temperate, which must be neither too hot, nor too cold. In the morning, when
the bath is thus prepared, the woman shall go into it, sitting upon the bag of
herbs aforesaid, and stay there an hour, How long she must stay in the Bath.
or two, without forcing her self, and a little before her coming forth, let
her take this Electuarie.

An Electuary.. Cons. Bugloss. Rosar. an. ss. cortic. Citri. condit. ij. fiat
Condium, capiat vt dictum est.

Some women cannot away with this Electuarie, but content themselves, with a
little Citron pill canded.

She may also sweat a little in her bed, and then cause her self to be gently
rubbed with linen cloths, to take away any spots or stains that have happened
upon her skin, in the time of her childbed. Her sweat being past, and she
somewhat cooled her self in her bed: then she must not eat any meat, but such
as is easy of digestion, and that breeds good blood.

Now, this first Bath does but only serve to prepare her for a Second, which
shall be made as follows.

Take river water, and quench in it hot Iron, as you did in the former baths:
wherein you shall boil two great Bags, which shall contain these Ingredients.

Second Bath for Summer.. Farin. Orob. Fabar. Lupinor. an. lb. ij. Farin.
glandium lb. ss. Rosar. rub. flor. Chamaemil. Melilot. an. pug. iiij. Alumin.
glacial. Roch. crud. an. iij. cortic. Querc. Nucum Cupress. an. ij. Balaust. j.
Caryophyl. Nucis Mosch. an. vj. Granor. Tinctor. ij s. conquassantur omnia
simul, and fiant sacculi cum panno lineo: bulliant in aqua Balnei primi vt
dictum est, and sit Balneum secundum.

This second Bath must be made as the first, without being either too hot, or
too cold: Wherein she shall stay an hour, or two, sitting upon the bags; and
before her going forth, let her take the former Electuarie, or a piece of
Citron pill condited: This Bath will serve for twice, it being only new heated
again.

In Winter time you shall make these Bath's.
Bath for w^^ter.. Maioran. Artemis. Menth. Rorismar. Heder. terrest. an. M.
iij. farin. Hord. fabar. Auenac. Orobi, Lupinor. an. lb. ij. flor. Rorismar.
Chamaemel. Melilot. Lauandul. an. M.i.s. Rosar. rub. m. ij. Caryophil. Nucis
Mosch. Cinnamon Benzoin. styrac. calam. an. i. Alumni. lb. s. granor tinctor.
Balaust. an. iij. omnia conquassentur, and fiant sacculi duo. Coquantur in aqua
Chalybeata, in qua sape extinctum sit ferrum candens, and fiat Balneum vt
praecedens.

In winter, the woman in Childbed shall use this, in stead of the former,
having washed her self in the first bath, that was prescribed for summer, and
taking it her coming forth, the electuary formerly set down.

And besides, while she is in the bath, whether it be in summer, or winter, it
will be very fit and convenient to rub all her body over with little bags
filled with Almonds, To make the skin smooth.
beaten very small, thereby to make her skin, smooth and slicke.

After she has been thus bathed, she shall use below, such Fomentations as
may close and strengthen those parts, and bring them to their former state.

A fomentatio^ for the lower parts.. Fol. Plantag. Tapsi Barbat. Ce^tinod.
Caudae equin an. M.i. Fol. Cupres. m.i.s. Rosar. ^ub. flor. Chamaem. Melilot.
an. P.i. Balaust. Sumach. Nuc. Cupressi. Gallar. an. i. Maioran. Thym. Puleg.
Origan. an. m.s. Alumin: vi. fiat decoctio in aequis partibus vini austeri and
aquae Calibeatae profotu partium inferior.

When she has done with the fomentation, she must receive beneath this perfume.

A perfume.. Benzoini. styrac. calam. ligni Aloes an. s. Cortic citri. Nuc.
Cupressi. Balaust. an. iij. Nucis mosach. Caryophil. an. ij. Carab. Mastich. an
i s. Rosa. rub. P.i. fiat omnium puluis excipiatur cum muccagine gummi
tragacanthi and fiant trochisci.

The manner of using the perfume.
The Woman must sit in a hollow chair, that has a hole in the bottom, and
underneath it a chasing dish of coals: whereupon there shall be put one or two
of the said Trochiscks, and so she must receive the fume thereof.

And because not only the said parts, do continue limber, and wrinkled; but
likewise the belly, and breasts, do also remain, almost as big, as they were
before she was delivered; It will therefore, Means to h^^den the bre^^^
not be amiss to take some order, that this exceeding greatness of her belly
and breasts may be diminished, and they hardened withal: endeavoring by all
means to bring them again, to their natural constitution.

And since that this swelling and puffing up, proceeds commonly from some
humors, or wind, that is got in, and gathered together in those parts, having
been too much relaxed: therefore it will be very necessary before you apply
any outward thing thereto, that she be purged, keeping a good diet, and
avoiding all meats that shall breed any ill humors, or windines.

Which being done you may apply this that follows.

. Farin. fabar. Hord. lupinor. an ij. farin. Oryz. Glandium an. ij s. Coquantur
perfect in aequis partibus. Aq. Mirtillor. Caudae equin. Centinod. Plantag.
and Rosar. addendo.

A Pultesse for the Belly and Breasts.
Pull. Nuc. Cupres. Balaust. Mirtil. an. i. Pull. flor. Camaemel. melilot. sem.
foenicul. an s. Sang. dracon. Alumin. an. ij. Ol. Mirtillor. vng. Rosat. Mes.
an. iij. Mellis i s. fiat Cataplasma ad formam pultis satis liquidae, post
coctionem poteris addere Albumina ouor. Ventri applicentur and mammis.

This Cataplasme must lie on xxiiij hours, and then be renewed. In steed of a
second Cataplasme, you may use this water.

A water for the breasts etc. Prunor. syluest. Mespilor. Cor. nor. Nuc. Cupress.
Balaust. Glandium cum suis cupulis, and si desint fructus sum cortices
arborum. an lb. s. flor. Rosar. syluest. rubrar. an. iiij. Albumin. duor. ouor.
Aluminis Crud. ij. Caryophil. Nucis mosch. an s. Be^zoini. styrac. Calamit* an.
i. Calam. Arom. Frid. flor. an vi. Macerentur omnia in lb. xij. aquae fabrorum:
post infusionem 4. dierum, ponantur omnia in Alembicum plumbeum and fiat
distillatio: seruetur ad vsum.

In this water you shall dip, and soak linen cloths or sponges, and apply them
warm, either upon the belly, breasts, or any other part, which you would have
confirmed, knit, and drawn together: And to make it the more astringent, you
must steep therein for every quart of liquor, of Masticke, sanguis Draconis,
and Bole Armoniacke poudered, of each half an ounce: setting it in the sun
in summer, and over an oven in the winter.

But it is not enough only, (especially in great Ladies) to make the foresaid
parts firm and hard, and keep them from hanging and flagging down: But it is
also very fitting, and likewise much required by them, to have their skin made
fair, smooth, and delicate: for which purpose this water is singular good.

A water to beautify and adorn the skin etc.. Aq. Florum, Bismal. Maluae. an.
lb. ij. Aq. Rosar. alb. lb. iiij. Limones duos, (remota cute exteriore) minutim
incisos; Prunor. syluest. immatur. lib. i. pistentur. Carnem vnius Caponis
iuuenis, abiectis ossibus and intestinis minutim incisam. Lact. Caprin. lb. s.
Amygdal. dulc. mund. ij. farinae. Orob. Lupinor. an. s. Limaces rubros no. vj.
Infunde omnia simul per duos dies, deinde destillentur in Balneo Mariae.

With this water the foresaid parts must be washed, having first cleansed them
with common water, wherein there has been some crumbs of bread steeped all
night.

Another approved water.
Another w^ter.. Aq. Lilior. alb. Nympb. an. lb. iij. Lactis Caprin. lb. s.
Casei recenter facti sine sale lb. i. Limones exteriori cute remota, incisos.
numero iiij. Albumina ouor. numero viii. Boracis iij. Caphurae j. Talci
subtiliter pull.. i. Cerus. s. Columbor. iuuen. number. ij. Ol. Tartari i s.
misceantur, and omnia destillentur in Balneo Mariae.

Myrrhae (as Master Le Bon writes, The virtue (...) Myrrh.
who tells it for a great secret) does lessen and straighten, the natural
parts, when they have been over stretched, without hurting the Matrice, as
also takes away the wrinkles which happen either in the breasts, or belly, and
does confirm and knit those parts, offending neither the pectorall, nor
natural parts.

Sometimes there comes little spots and freckles, in the said parts, but
oftener in the face, for the taking away whereof, this is an excellent medicine.

An ointmen^ for spots.. Tartar. vini albi calocinat. s. Mastich. i s. Caphurae
i. incorporentur omnia simul cum oui albumine: tange maculam, and tege panno
lineo, in eodem imbuto.

Of the accidents which happen to women newly delivered. And first of their
after-throwes. CHAP. III.
WE have hitherto treated of the ordering of a Woman in Childbed, as also of
the time when she shall be ready to walk abroad and be churched. But
because there do befall them, many accidents, in the time of their lying in, I
thought good to write thereof briefe-lie, and to show the means whereby they
may be helped and cured.

And since that the chiefest, symptom that happens unto them, and which comes
soonest, is the after-throws: therefore I am determined to speak of them first.

As soon as a Woman is delivered of her child and afterbirth, for the most
part, she is taken with pains of her belly, which oftentimes are so great and
violent, that she thinks her very belly, would be rent, and cut asunder in
diverse places, from whence the french word that signifies these pains and
torments, Tranchees.
was derived.

The first cause.
The cause of these gripings or pains, may be threefold. First, either because
the Matrice and those parts thereabouts have been sore troubled through the
delivery, by striving to be unburdened and freed of the child: or else, The
second
because the blood that runs, and gathers it self to the Womb, (being
retained) grows thick and slimy, that it cannot easily flow, and so makes a
distention of the Matrice, it being not able to come away, but in great clots,
and hard matter, like unto a false Conception: and likewise when it is
altogether retained and stopped, it causes a great extension of the womb.

Again, it is oftentimes so clear, thin, and sharp, that it flows above
measure, and through the acrimonie and biting thereof, does gripe and torment,
as it passes along: The third.
The third cause may proceed from the outward air, which is entered, and got
into the womb, at the coming forth of the child and the afterbirth.

Hippocrates has observed, Sentence of Hippocrates.
that women in this euacuation, are troubled with gripings and pains of their
first childmore then of any after: the reason is, because their veins are not
accustomed to disburthen themselves in this fort. Experience nevertheless
teaches us the contrary; for a woman commonly of her first child, has very
few of these pains, and gripings, and the more children she has, the more she
is troubled with them. The reason whereof seems to be this: because the
blood, which in youth, is sweet and mild, in process of time gets a bitter,
salt, and adust quality, which passing through the veins, procures this
pain: For we find by experience, that the flesh of beasts, or foul, when they
are old, grow's unpleasant, as being hard, and harsh to the taste.

But what ever the cause of these pains be, we must seek to assuage them, and
to free the woman from them, as well as we can. If then these pains be small,
and that the after-purgings come moderately, we may leave the work, wholly to
nature: only giving the woman in childbed the drink we prescribed before: of
Oil of sweet Almonds, or of Walnuts, which of late has been found by
experience, to be better, then the Oil of Almonds, so that the Nuts be sound,
and white, not rancide, and the oil drawn without fire.

This Oil is much commended, for the gripings which comes by the acrimonie and
sharpness of the blood: and in this case also, some easy fomentations of
warm Milk, or fit upon the belly and lower parts: Fomentation.
Fomentations also with Mallows, March Mallows, Parietarie, Mugwort,
Camomile, Melilot, and Linseed, boiled in Milk, are very profitable.

When these pains and pangs proceed of thick slimy blood, which cannot easily
flow: or of windy matter, which being shut up, cannot be discussed, if the
pain continue, beside those aforesaid, you may use these remedies following.

A Drink.
A Drink easy to be taken.

. Rad. Petrosel. ss. radic. consolid. Mayor. iij. sem. Anis. and Paenicul. an.
ss. Bull. omnia simul in decocto vituli, vel caponis, q.s. in quo dissolve,
croci, gr. iij. capiat mane tepide. Or else she may use this powder, of which
good proof has been made:

A powder Gripings.
. Nucleor. Dactyl. Amygdal. nucleor. Persicar. an. ss. Cinamom. elect. i. sem.
Anis. ss. nuc. Mosch. ij. spec. Diamarg. calid. j. fiat omniu^ puluis, capiat
j. cum vino, vel cum aq. Cardui Benedict. vel brodio pulli and vituli, si sit
suspicio febris. Another.. Rad. Symph. mayor. Amygdal. dulc. Nucleor. Persicor.
an. j. Mandibul. Lucij pissis, Carab. an. ss. Cinnamon. Nuc. Mosch. an. ij.
Ambrae chrysostom. gr. iiij. folia auri, nu. vj. fiat omnium puluis, capiat j. cum
ouo sorbili, vel vino Hippocratico vel iusculo pulli.

Some in this case take half a spoonful of Cinnamon water with the yelke of an
egg: others with the said yelke of an egg, take two grains of Amber greese.

If the pains continue, use the Cataplasme following.

A Pultesse.. Vitellos ouor. nu. xij. Pull. sem. Anis. Fenicul. an. ij. Farin.
sem. Lini ij. Pull flor. Chamaemel. Meliot. an. j. ss. Calamint. j. ol. Aneth.
q. sa. fiat Cataplasma, Applicetur ventricalide, auferatur antequam
refrigeretur, and iteretur saepius.

Of the falling down of the Fundament, and Matrice. CHAP. IIII.
THere are some Women, which are delivered with so much difficulty, and are so
long in travail, that to free themues from this misery and anguish, they are
constrained to strain, and force themselves in such sort, that the Fundament,
or the end of the great gut comes forth: for a woman, in her delivery must
strain and force her self, even as one does at the stool: It may happen also
that the Matrice, may follow the child, and afterbirth; which is the
precipitation, or coming down of the womb: the ligaments being loosened, and
sometimes broken, either through much striving, or because that the Midwife, or
Surgeon, in drawing forth the child, or afterbirth, draw the Matrice
together with it: which may be done, and yet not they in fault.

When the Fundament comes forth, it is to be put up after this manner:
First, the Surgeon must put up the gut with a fine linen cloth warm, as
gently as possibly he can: The Cure of the Fundament fallen.
But if he find any difficulty herein, because of some humor, with is come to
it, by abiding in the Air, all the time of the travail: or by any flux of
humors, which the pain has caused: then must he bath and foment it, with a
little Milk, wherein Red Roses, white Mullen, Camomile, and Meliot have been
boiled: and when he shall see that the swelling is gone, and it is come to it
self, then by little and little, he shall put it up, not using any force, or
violence at all. Foment.
He may also (if the pain be assuaged) foment it with red Wine, in which
Plantaine, white Mullen, Red Roses, and Balausts, have been boiled, and then
presently, he shall gently put it up. The Matrice also being fallen down,
shall be put up after the same manner: but we will speak more at large, of
this and of the causes thereof, in an other place.

Of the hurts, and Excoriations, which happen in the lower parts, by
Childbearing. CHAP. V.
ALthough neither the Midwife in the natural birth use any violence, in
bringing the child into the world: nor the Surgeon either in turning, or
drawing forth the child, handle or touch the woman, but with all gentleness,
and tenderness that may be; yet oftentimes do some contusions, or other hurts
happen, in the lower parts of the woman, yea, and excoriations, together with
chaps and clifts, about the part called ^inaeum: in respect that so great a
morsel has ^s'd through so narrow a place: Besides that, some women are very
straight and close, either being very young, or very old: or because they
have used medicines, to make those parts strait and narrow; besides that, in
some women the child proves very big.

For all these accidents, it is good to use at first, (as we have said before)
Oil of St John's wort, and Oil of Roses, beaten with whole Eggs all together.
If the sides of those parts be bruised, you may use this Fomentation, which will
resolve it gently.

A Fomentation for the contusion of the lower parts.. Maluae Bismalu. an. m. j.
Matricar. m.ss. Rosar. rub. flor. Chamaem. Melilot. an. m.j. fiant sacculi duo
parui, coquantur in aequis partibus vini and aquae fontis, and admoueatur parti.

This Fomentation must be applied only to the entrance, and orifice of the
Matrice, lest the ordinary courses be hindered: and the foresaid medicine of
Oil of St John's wort, shall be prepared without the whites of Eggs, and
applied upon fine lint, or cotton, leaving the passage of the womb open: both
to give way to the purgings, and ven^ to such vapors, as may proceed out of the
Matrice

For the excoriations and chaps, you may use this Ointment.

. Cerae alb. ss. ol. Amygd. dulc. j. ss. liquefiant simul, and fiat linimenium.
Although these kind of ulcers are easily healed, as being but small, S^c morb.
Mulier. Lib. 1.
(as Hippocrates notes) notwithstanding, they must be carefully handled, being
in a part of delicate and exquisite sense, and full of Nerves.

Of the medicine last described, you shall make small plasters, and apply them
fitly, upon the excoriations, and chaps: And because, (as I have noted) there
often happens a rent, or breach about the Perinaeum, near to the fundament,
and that when the woman makes water, she feels there a great pricking, and
pain; it is necessary that her Nurse, or keeper, apply to that part two or
three little linen clouts, spread with the aforesaid Ointment, to keep the
urine from touching and galling there. But if the breach or clift be great, you
shall apply there little boulsters of lint, dipt', and dressed with this
baulme.

A balm for the lower parts.. Ol. Hyperic, s. Axung. porc. recent. ij. Ol. e
vitellis ouor. iij. Terebinth venet. i. fiat Balsamum ad vsum.

After that you have applied this Balm, you shall lay upon it, the plaster
before described, of wax, and oil of sweet Almonds.

Sometimes it happens that the whole Perinaeum is divided and rifted, even unto
the fundament and that both the passages are brought into one: which accident I
have seen and for want of help, the sides of the wound being hardened with a
scarre, both the passages have continued as one. For remedy whereof, I being
once called, and finding the Woman to be with child, I gave her counsel to
stay till she were brought a bed: and about six weeks after, she was
delivered, being sent for to cure her, I proceeded in this manner.

First, with a crooked rasor, very sharp, I cut away way the scarre, and
skin which was grown on both sides, as the common practice is, for an hare
lip which I have shown in my works of Surgery: which work I began from
the natural parts, and so went on to the fundament, not taking away much
flesh, but only the skin: which being taken off, and as it were flead away,
I suffered the part to bleed well: both to shun an inflammation, and also to
make the stitches with my needle, more conveniently. About the midst of the
clift, or division, I passed my needle through both sides, thereof (having
first laid them even, as well above and below, as in the middle) and I took
good hold of the flesh on both sides, there leaving my needle, about which I
did turn and wind the thread on both sides, as uses to be done in the cure of
the hare lip: then at both ends of the clift I gave a stitch, somewhat close,
such as is commonly made in simple wounds, and upon it I laid a little clout
dipped in a balm, which I have here described, and upon that a plaster of
Diacalcitheos.

A balm for fresh wounds.. Gum. Elemi. ij. Terebinth. venet. ij s. sang.
Dracon. Myrrh. Aloesan. i. liquefiant omnia simul, and fiat balsamum. Coletur
calide per linteum, and seruetur vsui. This is an excellent balm for fresh
wounds.

This clift or breach was well healed within fifteen days: in which time I
gave her two Clisters, beside that which she took first, to prepare her body.
But afterward this woman proving with child again, and being in travail
there happened a fresh breach, near to the old scarre, but not so long as the
other: by reason of the help and care of the Midwife, whom I had instructed to
anoint and rub the Perinaeum with this liniment.

An oyntm^^^. Axung. gallin. and Cunicul. an. s. Axung. por. rec. i. Ol.
Amigdal. dull. vi. liquefiant simul and fiat litus, abluatur diu, in aq.
Parietaria^

Of the Hemorrhoides. CHAP. VI.
WHen the Orifices of the veins near the fundament do swell, and rise,
either more and less, according to the quantity of the humors, which do fill
them, the Greeks call this disease, the Hemorrhoides. Of these there are two
sorts, the one inward and hidden with in the fundament: the other outward, and
apparent The cause here of is store of humors, which commonly are gross, and
melancholicke, sometimes flegmaticke or Choleric, which filling the said
veins, afterward flow down to the ends of them: which humors not finding way
to issue out, do extend the veins, in such sort, that sometimes they become
as big as Pigeons, nay sometimes Pullets eggs.

Many woman as soon as they be delivered, Why women are subject to the
Hemorr^^des.
are troubled with them, by reason of the great pain which they have suffered.
There may be two reasons given here of, the one the great striving and
straining to bring the child into the world, which makes the blood come into
the said veins, and dilateth them; the other, retention of their natural
courses which being stayed, the blood and humors which should have come foroth,
change their course, and being derived into the veins of the fundament,
procure the Hemorrhoides.

The differences of Hemorrhodes.
The Hemorrhoides do differ, according to the nature of the humor, of which
they are bred, for if they proceed of a flegmaticke, and watrish blood, because
of their color, and the likeness that they have to a bladder full of water,
they are called Vesicales, or vuales: Vesicales or vuales.
and these are white, soft, and not painful, if they breed of a gross and
thick phlegm then they are called Verrucales, Verrucales.
and ficales: and these are hard, and painful, especially if there be any hot
humor mixed with the matter of them, which may be known by their rednes. If
they proceed of blood and choler, together with some part of Melancholy, being
uneven, and rough, like a mulbery, then they be called Morales, these are very
sensible, and painful, Morales.
and in color near to a deep dark red.

Women are subject to all these kinds of Hemorrhoides, but especially after
they be delivered: But my purpose is not to write so generally of all these
kinds, but only of those which are swollen, big, and painful, which chiefly
happen to women in childbed, and bleed very little or not at all.

The cure consists in three things, that is in diet, in diuerting of the humor,
which flows to the part, and in euacuating that humor which is contained in
it: which being done, the pain will be easily appeased.

For the diet, Diet.
it shall be such as we have already prescribed for women in childbed: the
humor shall be diuerted by letting of blood, first in the arm, and then in the
foot, in the vein Saphena, and lastly by applying of Cupping glasses, to the
side of the thighs, and that for two purposes: the one to bring down the
purgings, which being stayed may be thought to be some cause of the
Hemorrhoides, the other to diminish the quantity of blood, in the crurall
vein, which being emptied, will draw to it some part of that blood, which
flows to, (and it may be, some of that which is contained in) the Hemorrhoide
veins. As for the third point, which is to euacuate that blood, which is now
settled in the hemorrhoide veins, that may be done, by medicines which have
power to resolve and digest and also to assuage pain of which kind is this
following, which I have used with good success, and Vigo before me.

A Decocti^^ wherewi^^ fom^t^ar^ suftumig^^. Fol. Mal. Bismal. Violar.
Parietar. Tapsi Barbat. cum rad. an. M.ij. Sem. Cydon. vi. hord. mund. m. is.
furfur. M.iij. sem. lin. foenugraec. integ. an. iij. Pomor. dulc. aliquantulum
confractor. number. xij. l^guae passerinae, virg. pastor. an. m. j. fiat omnium
decoctio, in aqu. sufficient, addendo flor. Chamaemel. Melilot. Aneth. an.
M.i.s. Bulliant vsque ad consumptionem tertiae partis.

After that she has received the fume of this decoction or otherwise bathed
the fundament herewith a pretty while, let this liniment be applied.

A Liniment.. Butyr. recent. x. Ol. de vitellis onor. s. Pinqued. Anat. iij.
Succi Plantag. Taps. barbat. an. ij. misce agitando omnia spacio xij. horarum
in mortario plumbeo.

The chief Medicine which is commonly applied, is this.

Another.. Vng. popul. i. vitellum vnius oui. Ol. Sem. Lini. s. vng. refriger.
Gal. v i. misce omnia simul, and fiat litus.

If the pain be great, you may add heereto a scruple of Opium. I have made
often proof of this medicine, An experiment of the Authors.
to take all the white of a few Leekes, and cut them small; and then boil them
with milk till they come to the form of a pultesse, and then lay it hot to
the Hemorrhoides.

Rhasis medicine.
John de Vigo, allows of the authority of Rhasis, who counsels to take a
white Union, and to fill it with butter, then to bake it in an oven, or in the
embers, and so beat it and apply it, like a plaster, which I have diverse times
made trial of. This plaster also is much commended-

A Pultesse.. Rad. Lilior. albor. i s. rad. Ireos nost. s. scrophular. taps.
Barbat. flor. Chamaemel. Melilot. Hyperic. an. p. i. Dactyl. number. vi. Limac.
rubror. number. x. fiat decoctio, pistentur, passentur, passaturae add farin.
Sem. Lini. s. Butyr. recent i. Myrrh. Thuris. an. i. Croci s. vitellos ouor.
number. ij. fiat cataplasma.

An approved remedy.
I have had good experience also of this Medicine, Take twelve red snailes
without their shells, of millepedes, or Wood-lice 20. or 30. infuse, and
parboyle them a little in Linceed oil, and make a liniment hereof, and with it
anoint the Hemorrhoides.

Another to be ma^^ Take of the aforesaid wood-lice, thirty, Cheruil a little
handful, boil them in milk, or oil of Violets, then beat them together,
and make thereof a kind of plaster, at the last, use this fomentation.

A foam(...)
Boil White mullen, Scrophularia, and Cheruil together: Take a pint of this
decoction, half a pint of red wine, Common salt, and white frankincense, of
each half an ounce, boil them altogether again, till there be but two third
parts, or there abouts left, and so use this decoction to the Hemorrhoides,
fomenting them with little soft spunges.

Whilst these medicines are used the belly must be kept loose, either with
Cassia, or Manna, The bel^^ must be (...)
or else with Clysters (if the pipe will enter in easily) that so the
excrements may come forth the more readily, and may not burden, or molest the
part with their hardness, and weight.

It will be very convenient also, to let her take of the powder of white
mullen, in a little milk, or else in Lozenges, made with sugar, because of the
conceit some have, that this herb so taken takes away the Hemorrhoides. Some
prepare Pills of Bdellium, Galbanum, and the powder of white Mullen; and hereof
give the weight of a french Crown. If the Hemorrhoides heal not for all these
means, I would give counsel to open them with a Lancette, thinking it better
to lance, and open them, so to let out the blood, then to apply leeches unto
them, because they suck, and bring down, as much blood to the part as they
empty, and draw forth.

And because these Hemorrhoides, have oftentimes a great hardness with them
this plaster or Pultesse may be fitly applied.

A Pultesse.. Rad. Bismal. Lilior. an. i s. fol. Porri cum Bulb. an. m. i.
flor. Chamaemel. Melilot. an. m. s. Coquantur omnia in lacte, pistent.
passaturae. add Bdellij cum axungia Anser and gallinae liquefacti an. i. fiat
Cataplasma.

Another.

Take Bdellium melted, dissolve it with goose grease, ducks grease, and oil of
Peach Cernels.

Oftentimes the Hemorrhoides, by reason of their hardness, cleave, and so come
to ulcers, and chaps.

Of the after-purgings, which come down too abundantly in Women newly
delivered. CHAP. VII.
IT happens to Women newly delivered, that their after purgins sometimes come
down too immoderately, other times, that they are suddenly staide. These two
accidents are very troublesome, ^e Morb. muli.
and breed many inconveniences. Comment. in. lib. j. Aphorism.
Hippocrates writes, that both these bring many symptoms with them, which
Galen also witnesses saying, If the purgings flow in too great abundance, and
above custom, it brings women into diverse diseases, as Cold, Distemper,
Dropsy, and Convulsions: and if the same be stayed, and do not flow at all,
then some inconvenience happens to the Matrice, as inflammation, Erysipelas,
scyrrhus and at last Cankers. So that we may easily see how fit and necessary
it is, that these purgings or courses should come away moderately, and in an
indifferent quantity. This the Surgeon should know by observing the time,
and the quantity, which is limited for them, set down in diverse places by the
ancient writers: And first, How long t^ purgings should flow Hip. de Natu^pueri.
for the continuance of time, that these purgings should flow; Hippocrates,
does proportion the time, in which a woman in childbed should be purged,
according to the time wherein the child is shaped or formed: which is 30. days
for a man-child, and 42. at most for a woman child.

This time may be also measured according to that ordinary time of purging,
that is omitted in the nine months, she goes with child, as the blood should
be purged in every one of these nine months, as in every one of them, the
space of three or four days (which put together amount to twenty seven or
thirty six days) so in recompense heerof, when a woman is delivered, she must
be purged, 27. or 36. days.

It is written in Leuiticus, Leuit. chap. 12
that when a woman has brought forth a man child, she shall continue in the
blood of her purifying three and thirty days, but if she bear a maid child,
then she shall continue in the blood of her purifying 66. days.

Lib. de morbis Malier.
As for the quantity and proportion of these purgings Hippocrates is of opinion,
that the purgings which a woman should have every month, should be a pint and
a half, or thereabouts. And in his book de natura Pueri, he would have a
woman in childbed at the beginning should purge about thirteen or fourteen
ounces, or a pint, and so the whole space of thirty days for a man child, and
forty two days for a maiden-childe, every day diminishing the quantity till it
wholly leave her.

Signs to know whether a woman in childbed be in health or no.
As for the quality of these purgings, if the blood be red, as in a beast new
killed, and do presently congeale, and thicken, then it is a sign that she
is in good health, and will continue so all the time of her lying in. But when
these purgings come in little quantity, and of an ill color, and do not
congeale suddenly, it is a sign that the woman is not well, nor will not find
her self so all her month as the foresaid Author well observes.

But it is not to be expected that all women should have their purgings in
like quantity, for we must respect the habitude of the body, the course of
life, the temperament, and other particular things which in diverse women,
Comment. in. 6. Epidemior.
are diverse. Therefore Galen says, that these purgings continue long in women
that have thin and subtle blood; De mor. Mulier.
Hippocrates says that women that are of full bodies, are purged more exactly,
and again he writes, that women, that are more in years commonly have more
of this euacuation then they that are younger.

There may be two causes assigned of this abundant euacuation, the one,
outward, as some fall, blow, or painful travail, which a woman may suffer,
either in bringing forth her child, or the afterbirth: It may also arise
from pasions of the mind, or from the unseasonable use of bath's, or from some
other ill government in her childbed.

The inward causes may be two: Inward causes.
either the strength and vigor of the mother, which expels and puts
forth so much blood, as is troublesome, and burdensome unto her; and in this
kind there is no great danger, because she that is so strong, to expel in this
sort, will be also able to retain, so much as will be convenient and
necessary for her. Or else contrariwise, this may proceed from the weakness,
and faintness of the woman, who is not able to retain, and keep, that blood
which nature has provided for her: and this happens chiefly when the orifices
of the veins continue open, after the delivery, not being able, Hippocrat.
morbis Mul^
(as Hippocrates says) to shut, and gather themselves together.

The other cause is referred to the blood, which offends either in quantity,
or quality, or both: In respect of the quantity, those women have store of
these after-purgings, which are full of blood; because the Liver breeds more
blood, then is necessary: which afterward is voided by the Matrice.

The quality of the blood, is cause heerof, when it is too sharp, piercing,
thin, watrie, putride, or venomous, so that Nature desires to be rid of it.

The Cure.
As for the Cure, you must fit that according to the cause, and yet there be
some general remedies, which may serve for all immoderate euacuations; and of
this kind, Diet.
is Diet, which must be cooling, and moderately drying. Let her feed upon good
meats not salt, nor spiced, nor of strong taste; rather roast, then boiled: and
of boiled meats, let her choose, to eat of the heads, and feet. She may use
french Barley, new laid Eggs, and Gellies made with astringent herbs. If she
take any Broth's, let them be prepared with Borage, Buglosse, Le tuce,
Purcelaine, Barley, and the cold seeds: Let her shun anger, melancholy,
grief, and other such passions of the mind: Let her keep her self quiet, not
much stirring, or troubling her body. Let her drink Barley water, or water
wherein Steel has been quenched. You may give her also (if she have not an
Ague) a little Wine, allaied with the said waters.

Diverse remedies.
Let her make her abode in a temperate place, not too hot; Let her lie upon a
Mattresse, or straw bed, and not upon a feather-bed.

It will be good to bind her arms hard toward the shoulders, but not the
thigh's, although Auicen prescribe it. Cupping glasses applied under the paps,
and upon the region of the Liver, will be very sit, as Hippocrates teaches:
and likewise upon the arme-pits, and shoulders, as Auicen counsaileth. The most
singular, An experiment seen by the Author.
and presentest remedy is to let blood in the arm, which I have seen tried by
the most learned Physicians of our age, with very good success: For there is
no means, that makes better revulsion, and draws the blood sooner from the
place, to which it flows, then opening of a vein. You shall apply upon the
raines, the Os sacrum, and the parts thereabouts, a cloth dipped in Vinegar, and
water, and likewise between the legs; but first use this Cataplasme.

A Cataplasme.. Bol. Armen. sang. Dracon. an. j. Gummi Tragacanth. ss. pull.
Myrtill. Rosar. an. vj. succ. Plantag. Taps. barbat. vrtic. mort. an. q. s. ad
formandum Cataplasma, add unguent. Comitiss. j ss.

Vnguentum Comitissae of it self is very good, as likewise this Ointment
following which is approved.

An Ointment.. Succor. Lactuc. Plantag. an. j ss. Gum. Tragacanth. in aq.
Rosar. Macerat. iij. Muccagin. sem. Cydonior. extract. in aq. solani ss. ol.
Rosar. Myrtill. an. j ss. Coral. vtriusque Sumach. an. j. far. Hordei ss.
Cerae parum, fiat vng. add Aceti tantillum.

You shall give her to drink, a dram of Trochisques of Spodium, with Plantaine
water, or a decoction made with Horse-tayle, Roses, Knotgrasse, and Balaustia.
Hollerius gives this, as a singular medicine.

Hollerius h^ medicine.. Scoriae ferri crematae, and in aq. Plantag. sepius
extinctae, pull. lapid. aematitid. triti, an. j. Terrae sigillat. ss. sirup.
Myrtillor. Resar. siccar. an. ss. aq. Plantag. iij. fiat potus.

Another.. Sang. Dracon. Coral. rub. vsti, Terr. sigillat. an. j. semin.
Rosar. rub. ss. spodij Carab. Citrin. an. gr. xij. aq. Myrtillor. vel Plantag.
iiij. fiat potus.

Some in this case give three or four ounces of the juice of Plantaine. Galen.
Galen affirms, that he has staid the immoderate flowing of the monthly
sickness, with the foresaid juice of Plantaine, when nothing else would do
good.

Ludouicus Mercatus commends these two medicines above all other.

Mercatus his medicines.. far. Hord. Oryz. and Amili, an. q. s. ad formandum
panem ponderis vj. recent. coct. proijce in libr. viij. aq. Chaly beatae,
quibus add Rosar. rub. siccar. p. ij. succi Plantag. lb. j. Rad. consolid.
Mayor. ij. Caudae equin. m. j. carnis Prunor. syluest. Cidonior. an. ij.
Portulac. m. ij. Bol. Armen. j. Balaust. santal. omnium an. ss. fiat omnium
distilatio, de qua cape mane ij. addendo sirup. Portulac. aut Rosar. siccar. ss.

He likewise commends this medicine following, as being very certain, and
approved, and of great virtue to stay the sickness.

. Rad. Filipendul. ij. fiat puluis, cape j. cum vitello oui singulis diebus. An
Electuarie.. Cons. Rosar. antiq. j. carnis Cydon. cond. cons. Rad. symphit. an.
ss. pull. Diamargar. frig. Trochis e Carab. an. j. Bol. Armen. j. sang. Dracon.
ij. cum sirup. Rosar. siccar. fiat opiata, exhibenda ad j. per se, vel cum aqua
Plantag.

Lib. Exper.
Galen teaches us this medicine, which may be both iniected, and also taken
inwardly.

An Iniect(...)
. Mucag. gummi Tragacanth. and Arabic. in aq. Plantag. extract. iij. succi
Plantag. iiij. fiat iniectio, inijciatur in vterum, and j. potui praebe. This
iniection following, may also be very good.

Another.. Succ. Polygan. iiij. Mucilag. gummi Tragacanth. extract. in aqua.
Centinod. Chalybeat. iij. Amyl. j. misce fiat iniectio.

You shall also make use of this pessarie, if there be need.

An Astringent Pessarie.. Bol. Armen. Terrae sigillat. an. j. Litargir. ss. cum
albumine oui fiat astringens pessarium.

With this you may anoint your Pessarie made fit for the purpose, either of
cotton, or linen cloth.

Of the Retention, and stopping of the After-purgings in Women newly delivered.
CHAP. VIII.
AS a Woman newly delivered is subject to many accidents, by the overmuch
flowing of her natural courses: So is she likewise subject to more dangerous
and deadly chances, Porrhetic. Sect. 2. What L^c^^^ are.
if they be suppressed and staid. Galen says, that these after-purgings,
(which he calls Lechia) are purgings of ill humors, which have been gathered
in the body all the time, that the woman went with child: For the child
drawing to it self, the sweetest and most familiar part of the blood, leaves
the worst, which otherwise, if the woman were not with child, should be voided
out every Month. And if the monthly sickness stayed, does bring many
inconveniences to a woman, then much more these Lochia being suppressed, must
breed much more danger.

A sentence of Hippocrat.
Hippocrates in his first book De morbis Mulier: witnesses this plainly,
saying; That when the After-purgings come in less quantity, then is fit, then
the woman in childbed falls into a sharp Ague, she is troubled with a pain in
her stomach, she finds her self ill, through all her body; she feels a
pain in the ioints of her hands, in her thigh's, and hips, the places about
her neck, back, and groine are sore; and there is a weakness in every part:
She falls into a vomiting of fleame, and also of bitter and sharp matter: and
finally, she is in danger to be lame and impotent of some of her members: The
stopping of the After-purging cause death.
For the Matrice has an affinity and connection, with many parts of the body;
as with the head, and stomach. And if this matter be transported and carried
to the head, breast, and lungs, and there make an abode, then the woman dies
presently; but if it be voided by the mouth, or nose, then she may escape.

Outward causes.
The causes of this suppression are of two kinds, either inward, or outward: The
outward causes are sadness, grief, sudden apprehension of some ill news,
fear, frighting, and such like passions of the mind: Likewise, cold which the
woman has taken, which shuts up the veins of the Matrice; a bad diet, and
amongst other things, Lib. de A^r^l^cis, and Aqu^
drinking of cold and raw water: which has been noted by Hippocrates to be
very hurtful unto women with child.

Now concerning the inward causes, Lib. 1. de more Mulier. Inward causes.
the same Author writes that the ulcers which happen by reasen of a long and
troublesome delivery, do cause an inflammation, and swelling, which makes the
side of the womb come together, and shuts up the orifices of the veins
thereof: from whence proceeds suppression of the after-Purgins. Likewise the
over great quantity of thick and gross blood, may be the cause, as also the
weakness of the Matrice, the which because it has been sore wearied and
troubled in the delivery, and thereby lost all strength is not able to
disburden and free it self, of the blood whereof it is full.

Hippocrates also in the same place gives another cause, which is, Hippoc. loco
citato.
when the mouth of the said womb is shrunk, or turned awry, or else, because
the sides of it are sunk down, shut together and inflammed.

For the Cure hereof, she must observe an order of diet, which shall be
moistning, and opening. Diet.
Her meat and drink must be such, as we have formerly prescribed, for one
newly delivered. She shall take operitiue Broths, thereby to open the orifices
of the veins, which are much stopped: and according to the cause, so the
remedies must be fitted as if it come by any sudden apprehension, grief, or
anger, then must she be plasant, and make her self, as merry as she can. If it
proceed of any inflammation or heat, that has thickened the blood, then must
she use medicines, that shall moderately, cool, and moisten, as Apozemes made
with the leaves and roots of Succory, Burnet, Endive, Agrimony, Maydenhaire,
Couchgrasse, or Gramen, Hoppes, roots of Persely, and Asparagus, Violet
flowers, with the sirups of Maydenhaire, and de quinq. radicibus. If it be
needful to attenuate, and cut or to euacuate any gross and clammy humors,
which shut up the orifices of the veins: it will not be amiss to use this
fomentation, so that there be no great inflammation of the part.

A. somentatio^. Malu. Bismal. Parietar. Matricar. an. m. i. Abrotan. Origan.
Aneth. Calamint. Artemis. an. m. s. Flor. sambuc. Chamaemel. Melilot. an. P. i.
sem. Linifoenugraec. an. ij. fiant sacculi duo, Coquantur in aq. Communi
addendo sub finem vini albi parum* pro fotu.

Of the foresaid ingredients, you may likewise prepare fumes, half baths, and
also iniections for the Matrice.

If the said after-purgings are suppressed because the inner orifice of the
matrice is closed, or turned aside, then will it be very necessary for the
Surgeon, The means to set the womb right.
(after he has considered that there is neither pain, nor distemperature) to
set it right again, by putting up pessaryes, which shall provoke and bring
down the after purgings, as this following.

A Pessary.. Cerae nouae. iiij. Mell. i. styrac. liq. s. Ol. muschell. ij.
liquefiant omnia simul, addendo Myrrh. Aloes. an is. farin. Lupinor. vi.
auferendo ab igne impone telam, ex Canabe de qua cooperiatur pessarium ad vsum.

You shall first frame a pessary, and then it shall be covered, with the said
cloth; or else dipped and covered with the said medicine.

You may also make little round bags of a fingers length, in the form of a
pessary, which you shall fill or stuff with the herb Mercury, first bruised or
beaten, and this may serve for a pessary; this herb is very much commended. If
it be needful to have the pessary stronger, you may put thereto a little
Mugword, Sauine, and Balm.

It will be very profitable to bind the thighs hard and to rub the legs and
thighs, Ligatures and frictions.
especially on the inside, all along the crurall vein: you may also apply
great Cupping glasses, in the said places. Let her legs, and thighs be
washed, with that decoction which was set down before for the fomentation. The
same decoction also may serve for Clysters, dissoluing therein Hiera, or
Benedict. Laxatiua and mel. mercuriale.

But we must prefer before all these medicines, Opening a vein in the foot,
is the most soueraign remedy
that which is the most sovereign, which is letting of blood, in the foot,
out of the Saphena, or in the Poplitica; which is in the bending of the
gartring place: For by this means we shall manifestly meet with the cause of
the sickness: And herein we shall follow the example of Hippocrates, who
caused the woman servant of Stymargus to be let blood be cause her sickness,
or purgings were stayed after she was delivered, and by this means she was
well discharged of them, although before, she had been in great, and general
Convulsions.

De Morbis mulier. lib. 1.
The same Author says, that a woman, that has these purgings staide, must have
present help, for fear, least there happen some great inflammation to the
part, so that except she be presently let blood, she is in danger of death. Her
belly also must be kept loose by Clisters, and if she can vomit easily, she
must be helped that way also.

Epidem. 6.
Galen says that he has brought down these purgings in women that was pale,
lean, and weak, by letting her blood in good quantity.

I have not here set down any medicines to be taken by the mouth, because I
have written many of this kind, in the Chapters going before, wherein I have
treated of the means how to make the child or afterbirth come forth, when
they be staide, which medicines have power also to provoke the courses or
after purgings.

Of the false Conception stayed, and abiding in the woman after her delivery.
CHAP. IX.
IT may happen to some women, that after they have been well delivered of their
children, there may stay with them one or more false conception. Some of these
false conceptions stick fast to the womb, some are vnfastned, and loose.
Difference o^ false conception.
If they be small, they come forth together with the purgings; but if they be
big, they oftentimes stay, and abide within. And in this case the Surgeon
must be careful, for if they be big, and cleave to the womb, they may
bring much inconvenience to the woman, by their long staying behind. So then it
will be necessary for him to know, whether there be any of this kind, and of
what nature it is, which he shall learn of the Mother, by demanding of her, how
she found her self all the time she went with child. First then let him
enquire of her, whether she were very big, at that time, and if she had any
hardness, in any part of her belly, whether she has been used to any such
accident, with her other children: for there are women, which at every birth
have of these false conceptions, and amongst others Mistress Brague-longue, A
story.
has showed the proof hereof: For she going with her second child, could
assure me, that then she had a false conception, because she had one with her
first child: which she came to know by reason of a certain hardness, which
she had upon her left side, near to her short ribs, where she felt a great
pain, yea, and her ribs seemed to be borne up, or thrust outward: And indeed,
this Gentlewoman, after she was delivered, brought forth one bigger then ones
fist, and before she could be rid of it, her belly was swollen with pain and
murmurings about her Navel, and toward her loins: she was often troubled with
throws: Signs.
as if she should be delivered again, by reason the nature did strive, to put
and send that forth, which was unnatural.

Beside these simptomes, women that have false conceptions somewhat bigger, and
cleaving fast to the womb, are troubled with great pain about the navel,
with unquietness, watring of the mouth, vomiting, and heaviness downward. The
pulse is small, and frequent, and some women in this case have the strangury,
because the false conception does press the neck of the bladder: and to
conclude almost the same accidents are here, that happen, when there is a mole
or dead child.

The prognosticke.
Those false conceptions that are small, though two, three, four, or more in
number (as there may be many) they come forth easily, and are conuaied away
with the ordinary purgings, but if they be great and hard, they are voided with
much difficulty, especially if they stick to the womb, and then there is
danger that they will turn into a mole: which must speedily be prevented:
Hip. lib. de sterilibus.
although Hippocrates wishes that this should be done with prediction. Now
this may be prevented (as he says) by these three means; first by the use of
resolving bath's, which have power to moisten the whole body, Cure.
and so to dilate and enlarge the passage of the Matrice, that it may come
forth: the second is by Clisters and purgations, which may purge forth
excrements, and also bring down the natural courses afresh. Thirdly, by
iniections, which may provoke and stir up the expulsive faculty of the
Matrice, to expel the purgings and with them the false conconception contained
in the womb. But because all these remedies have been handled in the last
chapter I refer the Surgeon thither.

Of the falling down or precipitation of the Matrice. CHAP. X.
THe ancient writers have observed, that the matrice moves and changes his
place, diversely: and as Hippocrates says, De Morbis mul. lib. 2.
the Matrice causes great pains in diverse places, according as it setleth,
and places it self.

If it rise toward the head, Hippocrat. lib. 2. de morb. mulier. de natura
mulieb. et. 2. Epidem.
then the veins which are in the nose, and under the eyes, suffer pain, the
head is heavy, and sometime the woman fometh at the mouth. If the said Matrice
moves toward the liver, presently the woman is deprived of her speech, her
teeth are set, and her color grows wan and pale. If it incline toward the
ribs, then the woman falls into a cough with pain of her side: and the matrice
hard and painful to be touched, as if there were some ulcer, and she is
troubled also with shortness of breath, and sometimes, with Convulsions: and if
she continue thus long, she will grow lame: Again if the Matrice turn to one
side, there will be a pain felt, right against the place, to which it
inclines, together with a pain in the back: and at last she becomes lame of
that side as Hippocrates, and Aetius do witness: when it bears down toward
the groine, Hippocrat. Epidem 2
and passage of the Urine, then the pain is more violent, together with a
dullness, and numnesse of the thigh: and suppression of urine: as likewise if
it be cast back, toward the great gut, then the excrements of the belly are
stopped; If it fall down lower, even to the thighs, then there will be a
Convulsion or crampe, of the great toe; and the hips and thighs, will be
pained. And therefore not unfitly did Plato compare the matrice to a living
creature, Plato.
which was as it were ingrafted, upon an other living creature. For the Matrice
has voluntary motion, toward every part, and certainly Scimus vterum
naturaliter, vt semen excipiat, hiare, et ipso suscepto constringi.

How the matrice moves.
But these situations, and changings of place must not be understood, in an
exact sense. For it is unlikely, nay impossible, that the Matrice, should so
run from one side of the body to another, that it should altogether leave his
own place. And this has Galen very well noted, Gal. in lib. 3. de Articul.
com.
saying, that sometimes the matrice ascends upward, and sometimes it is
turned aside: not that of it self it leaves his natural place but because it
is drawn by some thing else: that is, by the ligaments which hold it up, How
the matrice changes place.
and by the nerves, arteries, and veins to which it is annexed. To this
authority of Galen I will add farther, that the Matrice may be shut up, and
gathered into it self, and so draw with it those parts, to which it is
fastened, offending and affecting them, by some spirits, vapors, or wind, which
it may communicate unto the^.

But I will leave this curious speculation to Physicians, and will only meddle
with that, which belongs to Chirurgions, concerning the precipitation, or
falling down of the Matrice, of which there are three kinds.

The first, The first falling of the matrice.
when the neck thereof (which is called Vagina) sincketh and falls down,
even to the entrance of the natural parts, and draws, a little with it, the
body of the Matrice: Hipp. Lib. de natura Pueri.
And this we may easily learn of Hippocrates, who says, that the Matrice
comes down in such sort, that you may apply a liniment thereunto: And
again, that it comes nearer to the entrance, than is needful. Hipp. Lib. de
natura Muliebri. The second kind.


The second kind is, when the body of the Matrice falls into the outward
neck, called Vagina, and is thrust a little out of the entrance, of the
natural parts, and then the inward neck, which is sunk down, shows it
self to the light, in the form of the top of a man's yard: Hipp. Lib. de
Sterilibus de morb. Mulier.
Which Hippocrates also affirms, when he says, that the womb comes by
little and little, out of the natural parts.

The third kind is, The third kind.
when the body and neck of the Matrice is all sunk down, and turned the
wrong side outward: as one should turn the crown of his hat: and then it
comes clean out of the natural parts, and hangs between the thigh's, in
the bigness of a man's fist, or more, not unlike to the cod or purses of a man's
privy parts, Gal. lib. 14. de vs^ partium
as Galen writes.

The general cause hereof is, because the ligaments, which should hold and
fasten it, are resolved and broken, which may proceed either of an inward, or
an outward cause.

Outward causes.
The outward cause may be, some fall, or blow, or for that the woman has lifted
some heavy burden; or has been in some rage, or choler; or had a violent
Cough: running also, dancing, leaping, riding in a Coach; taking cold of her
feet, sitting upon a cold stone, and overmuch cooling of the Matrice, may be
causes thereof.

Inward causes.
The inward causes are, abundance of moisture, which has relaxed the ligaments:
or else a longing desire which a woman may have, for the company of a man;
which may also happen to maids, and barren women; Hippocrat. Epidem 2.
as Hippocrates writes: Another cause may be, the long suppression of the
natural courses, which sometimes makes a woman grow Viril, Hippocrat. Epidem 6.
or mankind, as Hippocrates witnesses of Phaetusa, wife of Pitheus, who became
like a man, with a beard, and a man's voice.

Hipp. de Natura Mulier. 2.
The said Hippocrates gives another reason, contrary to the former, which is
because she has had the company of her husband too soon after her delivery,
while her sickness is yet upon her.

But commonly this falling down of the Matrice does come (as Hippocrates
notes) by being ill delivered: Hippocrat. de Eiectione Foe^us.
To which also Galen subscribeth, making a similitude of it, to two that
wrestle together, one of which falling to the ground, Gal. de facult. Nature.
lib. 3.
draws his fellow with him, and makes him fall also; even so, the Matrice
striving to put forth the child, does thrust forth it self also; especially
if the ligaments, A Comparison.
which should hold it to the back, be naturally loose, and weak. It may also
happen, that while the Midwife draws forth the child, or the afterbirth, the
Matrice may follow it together.

In this case, although Hippocrates in his book before cited, seem to be of
opinion, Both old and young may be cured hereof.
that there is no remedy, but for young women, leaving elder women without
help. Yet I have cured them, even of all ages, with very good success.

For the Cure therefore, The Cure.
we have three intentions: The first, to bring the Matrice into his own place:
the second, to keep it there: the third, to strengthen it, being there keept.
For the first, let the Surgeon place the woman in this sort: Let her lie
upon her back, with her legs higher then her head, and her feet drawn up in
such sort, that her heels may almost touch her hinder parts, with her thigh's
and knees spread abroad.

If the Matrice be fallen down, The way to put it up.
but a little it may easily be put up, nay, it will even go up of it self: But
if it be much fallen down before it be put up, it must be suppled and softened,
that so it may return more easy, and with less pain: Let it be anointed
therefore, with the cooling ointment of Galen, or else with some such liniment
as this.

An ointment. Axung. Anser. Gallin. an. j. Ol. Amygdalar. dulc. Lilior. an s.
Cerae parum, fiat litus.

For a shift, you may take fresh butter, and oil of Roses mingled together:
and then use this fomentation warm.

A fomentatio^. Malu. Parietar. Matricar. Betonic. Saluiae. an. m. j. flor.
Chamaemel. Melilot. an. P. i. Rosar. rub. p. ij. Coquantur in aequis partibus
vini and aquae. profotu.

After that you have used this fomentation, put up the Matrice gently, with a
soft linen cloth, and when it is put up, let the woman draw up her breath as we
use to bid them, that have a Hernia, or bursting, to be put up, and by this
means the Matrice will be brought to his place, the more easily. Beside you
must remember, that if there be any tension, hardness or inflammation in the
Matrice, to soften and souple it, with the aforesaid liniment, and fomentation,
and so will the inflammation be assuaged. A good observation.
And if you find that the bladder or great gut be full of excrements (as I
have seen, not long since in a poor Woman of Masson, by means whereof the
Matrice was shut, and kept out) then first you must make way for the Urine by a
Catheter, and also void out the excrements by Clitters.

The second means to help up the matrice
For the second intention, which is to keep the Matrice in his place, when it
is well put up and placed, the best and surest means is to thrust up a
pessary, such a one as is here described, which has this power to keep the
Matrice up, and yet not put it to any pain.

depiction of pessaries

Beside, it will not hinder the Matrice from purging out such euacuations, as a
woman newly delivered has, or any other humor, which may be contained in the
womb: For this Pessarie has a hole in the midst of it, to give such
excrements free passage and issue.

The Pessarie being put up, let it abide there two or three days, when you
take it out, put up a fresh one, keeping that to serve another time. There must
also be a little string tied to it, so to be fastened to a girdle, or some other
thing, least it fall down to the ground: The figure here set down does show
the manner of it.

When astringent medicines are to be shunned.
If the woman be newly delivered, and in her sickness; you must not use any
astringent medicine, for fear least you stay that; but it is sufficient to
keep the pessarie there.

When the time of purging is past, then must there a care be had of the whole
habit, and constitution of the body. Hipp. de natura Muliebri.
Hippocrates wishes that she eat little, and drink less, the first seven
days; after which, she may take some sustenance; and when she would disburthen
nature, let her sit up in her bed, but not rise from thence in forty days.
After that time accomplished, she may walk gently; but in no wise bath her
self. If she be full of bad humors, let her be purged, if she has not had
her courses, or purgings sufficiently, and if she be full of blood, it will be
convenient to open a vein. And because the ligaments, which tie, and hold the
Matrice, are oftentimes much moistened, and relaxed with slime, and fleame,
which falls upon them; it will be necessary to dry them, by euacuating, and
drawing away the humor, which is the cause hereof. Hipp. de morb. Mulier.
lib. 2.
To this purpose, Hippocrates does much commend vomiting, because it riddeth
away such flegmaticke humors, Vomiting is necessary.
as commonly are in the stomach, by turning them another way. Besides that,
the stomach while it heaues it self upward, lifts, and draws up the Matrice
with it; but this must be done considerately, because strong and violent
vomiting shakes and troubles the Diaphragme and guts, making them press
downward, and by this means keep down the Matrice.

Here also will it be auailable to apply large cupping glasses, on the top of
the hips, Cupping glasses.
under the paps, and under the Nauill: as also to bind the upper part of the
arms, somewhat hard. Moreover you shall let the woman have good sents to smell
to: She must hau^ sundry smells
as also some things of an ill sent, to put up beneath.

Liniments and plasters, may likewise be applied upon the back, belly, and
groine, such as we have set down, in the Chapter of Abortment.

As for the third intention, The third means to strengthen the mother.
which is to strengthen the womb, you must use to this purpose, Pessaries,
Parfumes, Suffumigations, and Iniections put up, and applied to the part.

Let the Pessarie be of the same fashion prescribed before: but only let the
wax, with which it is covered, be compounded in this manner.

. Cerae lib. ij. Baccar. Laur. Absynth. Rosar. rub. an. j. ss. Nuc. Cupress.
Balaust. an. j. sang. Dracon. Mastich. Myrrh. an. iiij. liquefiant simul,
addendo unguent. Comitiss. j. With this wax, thus prepared, you may cover the
pessaries made of Cork, in the same fashion as is already described.

Let the perfumes be made, of the Ingredients aforesaid, Ill smells to be put
into the Pessaries.
putting thereto a little Ladanum, and Assa foetida, because the Matrice flies
from any thing that is of a bad savor; and let the woman receive this fume
beneath, sitting in a chair, with a hole in it. For moist suffumigations they
shall be made thus.

The suffumigation.. Tapsi Barbat. Centinod. Absinth. Matricar. Consol.
vtriusque fol. Cupress. an. m. ij. Baccar. Laur. Nucum Cupress. Balaustior. an.
S. Cortic. quercus, Pini, Thuris, an. vj. Rosar. rub. p. ij. fiat omnium
decoctio in aequis partibus vini austeri, and aq. fabrorum, pro suffitu.

Hippocrates counsaileth, to put herein some things of an ill savor as Assa
foetida: You may also iniect this decoction, but then let it not be made
altogether so astringent; or else let this serve for an Iniection.

An Iniection.. Fol. Myrt. Lentisc. summitat. rubi, Bistort. Pentaphil.
Plantag. an. m. j. Rosar. rub. Hyperic. an. p. j. cort. Fraxin. j. Rasur. lign.
guaiac. S. fiat omnium decoctio, in colatura ad lb. ij. dissolve sirupi de
Rosis siccis, and de Absynthi. an. ij. fiat iniectio.

Hipp. Lib. de natura Muliebri.
Hippocrates commends a fomentation, made With a man's urine, and afterward
one made with the leaves of the Masticke tree.

Of an affect, where the sides of the neck of the womb, are united, and
joined together. CHAP. XI.
THere is another troublesome accident, which chances to some Women after
their delivery. The cause.
which is the uniting, and sticking together of the neck of the womb: and
this happens through hard travail, which has torn, and excoriated the sides
thereof: or else by reason of some inflammation, or ulcer, which has there
happened, through some sharp and biting humor, which has corroded and
exulcerated the said part: which being neglected and ill cured, the sides not
being healed and scarred, it happens, that they are joined, and grow together,
and so be come one body.

Galen has made mention of this accident: Gal. lib. de (...) sectione vter(...)
and we have sometimes seen the experience of it.

As for the cure hereof the woman must be purged, and let blood, Cure.
then bathed for diverse days together: and the bath must be made of emollient
things: likewise there must be many remollient fomentations used, to her lower
parts, and after them diverse liniments, such as we have prescribed in diverse
places: when the parts are sufficiently softened, then must you place the woman
in the same manner, as is described, when she is to be delivered: then when
you perceive the smalnes and straightness of the passage, The practice.
you shall apply a Dilatory instrument made in the form of a speculum
Matricis, and by little and little you shall dilate and stretch the parts so
joined together, which will part and sever one from another, without any
effusion of blood: And this have I practiced with good success, of late days
upon a tenant of Madame Sacon as I have declared before, and this I did when
she was ready to lie down, and yet no ill accident happened upon it.

But if so be the callosity should be so hard (as by continuance of time it may
be) that the said parts should grow together again, and could not be softened,
then will it be necessary first to make an incision, that so it may be
dilated, more easily. And this has Mons. Pineau and my self practiced, upon a
Gentlewoman, as I have more at large set down, in my book of the nursing and
government of children, in the Chapter of those that have their natural parts
shut up, and without passage.

Must take heed of leting it grow together again.
The rest of the cure must be performed in that manner which I have set down
in the place last cited: and herein must a special care be had, that the
parts join not, nor knit together again: to prevent the which, the woman shall
wear a pessary continually until such time as the skarrebe perfectly grown,
and confirmed: And to this purpose let the speculum Matricis be often used, to
enlarge the part: For it is certain, that all such Membranes as have been
joined and grown together, when they are divided and severed, do hardly come
to that length, and bigness that they were of at the first. And this I have
often observed and amongst other places in the mouth, whereof Mons. Pigray and
Mons. Pincau the Kings Chirurgions in ordinary, and sworn at Paris, will bear
me witness, that I together with them cured an honest man, who had one side of
his check grown fast to his iaw, A story.
which made him that he could not open his mouth, nor speak plain. I cut and
separated the membrane, a good way, which did knit and tie these parts
together, but while I went about to cicatrise both sides which I had divided:
had I not had the greater care to have hindered it, the parts had grown
together again, that I was constrained to make a new separation three diverse
times.

FINIS.
THE NVRSING OF CHILDREN.

WHEREJN JS SET down, the ordering and gouermnent of them, from their birth.

Together: WITH THE MEANS TO help and free them, from all such diseases as
may happen unto them.

WRITTEN IN FRENCH BY JAMES GVILLIMEAV the French Kings Surgeon in Ordinary.

LONDON, Printed by A. HATFIELD. 1612.

THE PREFACE TO Ladies, wherein they are exhorted to nurse their Children
themselves.
AVLVS Gellius (in my opinion) did not amiss in putting no difference between
a woman that refuses to nurse her own child; and one that kills her child, as
soon as she has conceived; that she may not be troubled with bearing it
nine months in her womb. For why may not a woman with as good reason, deny to
nourish her child with her blood, in her womb, as to deny it her milk being
borne? since the milk is nothing else but blood whitened, being now brought to
perfection and maturity.

But some will say that the child may be delivered to some other Woman, to
nurse it, and that the Mother may have an eye and care over it: But (Gentle
Ladies) here I desire you to consider with me the great inconveniences that may
hence arise, which though they be infinite, yet I will reduce them to four
heads.

1. First there is danger least the child be changed and an other put in his
place. 2. Then that natural affection which should be betwixt the mother and
the child by this means is diminished. 3. Thirdly, it may be feared, that some
bad conditions or inclinations may be derived from the Nurse into the child. 4.
And lastly, the Nurse may communicate some imperfection of her body into the
child.


1. As for the first point, which is the changing of the child, that may easily
come to pass; because as soon as the child is borne, and Christened, the
Mother presently delivers it to the Nurse, to be carried into the Country:
Where the child, being wholly left to the discretion of the Nurse, may by some
ill chance be stifled, ouer-laid, be let fall, and so come to an untimely
death: or else may be devoured, spoiled, or disfigured by some wild beast,
Wolf, or Dog, and then the Nurse fearing to be punished for her negligence,
may take another child into the place of it, which can hardly ever be marked
and distinguished: And indeed when children grow somewhat big, and are brought
home from Nurse, if they prove not like their parents in body, in conditions
and wit, the Proverb goes, That they are changed at Nurse; Which sometimes
may be truer, then they are aware of.

The Historiographers report that Arthebar King of the Epirotes being old, had
one only son, whose nurse was corrupted with great gifts to change him, and
to take a Gentleman's son into his place. But when the King was dead, the
Nurse repenting her self of this wickedness, revealed the error: whereupon
ensued such terrible wars, between the lawful and the supposed son, that both
of them lost their lives, in a battle. Upon this occasion, Thomistus the
seventh King of the Lacedaemonians leaving two sons behind him, when he dyed;
the Lacedaemonians chose the younger of them for their King, because he had
been nursed by the Queen his Mother; and rejected the eldest, who had been
brought up by a strange woman; fearing least he had been changed by his Nurse.

2. For the second point which is natural affection, without doubt that cannot
be so earnest, either from the Mother toward the child, or from the chlld
toward the Mother; if she have not nursed him and given him suck. For if she
nurse him, he sucks and draws her own blood. Whereupon grows a familiar
inwardnes, and the child (when he comes to years of discretion) finds himself
bound to his Mother, for many benefits: both in that she has borne him nine
Months in her womb, and also because she has nursed him, watched him, and
often made him clean. In recompense whereof, he endeavors to show her a
thousand delights, to make her forget or take in good part, so much care and
pains, as she has taken with him. He plays a number of apish tricks about
her, he kisseth her, strokes her hair, nose, and ears: he flatters her, he
counterfeits anger, and other passions, and as he grows bigger, he finds
other sports with her, which causes that they bear one another such an
affection, as cannot be expressed; and makes that they can never be parted:
When he is big, and comes to be weaned, if one chide his nurse he cries, and
stamps: and if one offers to take him out of his nurses arms, he will fly in
their faces, and if it were possible, he would even pull out their heart: and
all this proceeds from that inward affection of the child, to which no love can
be compared. And hereupon Plato justly said, That children would never love
their parents so well; but that their fathers do often bear them in their
arms, and the mothers give them suck at their own breasts.

And hereof we have a memorable example in Cornelius Scipio, who when he had
condemned ten of his most valiant Captains to death, he would not hear his
own Brother Scipio Africanus entreating for them, and yet granted their
pardon, to one that had bin his Foster-brother, and sucked the same Nurse:
which being objected to him, by his own Brother, saying; That they had been
borne both of one Mother; He answered him, That his Nurse-Mother had deserved
better of him, than his own Mother had done. One of the family of the
Gracchi, returning from the war, met his own Mother, and his Nurse together:
but he addressing himself, first to his Nurse, presented to her a Girdle of
gold, and then to his Mother, a Jewel of of silver: which she taking
indig^ely, and rebuking him with reproaches, he replied: I know (Mother) that
you bore me nine Months in your womb, yet that was out of necessity, because
you could do no otherwise; but when I was borne, then you forsook me, and my
Nurse-mother willingly intertain'd me, carried me three years in her arms,
and nourished me with her own blood.

3. As for the manners and conditions of the child, there is no doubt to be
made, but that they are better bred and fashioned by the Mother, than by the
Nurse. For first, it is delivered by learned writers, that the Manners and
conditions of the mind, do follow the temperament of the body, and the
temperament arises out of the nourishment: so that commonly, such as the
humors are, such prove the manners. Hence must we conclude, that the child
that suckes a Nurse, that is vicious, and wicked; sucketh also from her, her
faults and vices: And beside, when the child comes to understanding, and
observes what the Nurse speaks and does, he retains that, says it after her,
and imitates her: and that which is imprinted from the infancy, will hardly,
or never be rooted out. For this cause Plato warnes us, not to speak, or show
any thing before a child, which is not decent, and honest: and Aristotle
forbids, to let a child see any wanton or lascivious picture. Then (to return
to our Nurse) we may be assured, that the Milk (wherewith the child is
nourished two years together) has as much power to make the children like the
Nurses, both in body, and mind; as the seed of the Parents has to make the
children like them. For although the child be borne of honest Parents,
nevertheless, the bad nurture of a wicked Nurse, will make the child vicious
and wicked: For, (as the proverb is) Nurture preuailes more than Nature. This
may be plainly observed in all things, that have life: for a fair and
flourishing tree, which has been bred in a good and fat ground, if it be
transplanted into a barren ground, becomes a shrub, and bears no fruit, that
is good, and tastfull. Likewise, the grain that is sowed in good ground, will
bear a fair and odoriferous flower; but if it be cast into bad ground, it
will bring forth a bastard flower, without any good or pleasing smell. It is
reported, that a certain child, was nourished with the milk of a Bitch: But
he would rise in the night and houle with other dogs. Plato going about to
give a reason, why Alcibiades was so hardy, although he were an Athenian (who
naturally were mild and timorous) resolves it thus: because the said
Alcibiades had been nursed by a Lacedaemonian woman, which is a very stout,
and valiant Nation.

4. As for the imperfections of the body, which children may borrow from their
Nurses, although they be very many, yet consider only those, which the
corpulencie, and diseases of the Nurse may bring them. Tacitus writes, that
the Germans of all other people, are the biggest, and strongest of body; and
the reason is, because they are nursed by their Mothers, which are big of
stature. And it is observed, that they which put forth their children, to
women of small stature, have them, neither so big, nor strong and able of
body, as if they had brought them up themselves. If a young Lamb suck a
Goat, it is found by experience, that the wool of it will be harder, then of
other sheep, and he will prove more fierce, and wild, then is natural for
his kind.

And to this purpose, Procopius relates a story of Polopeia, the daughter of
Theseus, who being delivered in secret of a son, and desirous to conceal her
immodestie, caused him to be cast into a forest, where he being found by a
Sheep-heard, was brought up and nourished with Goats milk, (from whence he
took the name of Aegistus) which made him so swift of foot, that eueryone did
admire him for his nimblenesse and quickness in running.

Now, concerning the diseases of Nurses, you shall find more of them, polluted
and infected with the french Poxes, and other diseases; than sound and
healthful. And I have known Nurses give little children the French Pockes,
who afterward lying with their own parents, have likewise infected them.

Now what a disgrace, and what a sorrow and grief of heart, this would be to a
Mother, if such a chance should happen, I leave unto you (fair Ladies) to
judge.

And therefore every Mother should endeavor, by all means possible (if she be
not sickly, or too tender) to nurse her child her self; since that nature has
bestowed two Paps upon her, only for that purpose.

There are no other Creatures, but give suck to their young ones, and if you
do but only make a show, that you would take them from their dams, what a
coil and stir do they make? If you carry them away, they will run after you,
and never leave, till you have let go your hold: desiring rather to loose their
own lives, than suffer their little ones to be carried away.

And therefore let Mothers never put forth their children to nurse (if they
themselves be sound and healthful) for fear of being changed. So shall you be
sure, to have Children, which will honor and love you, without settling their
affections upon a stranger: Then shall you not need to make any doubt, but that
your Children will be virtuous, and honest; not being addicted to any vices,
which they may take from their Nurses: and they shall not learn any dishonest,
or indecent speeches; nor hear any thing that shall be either lascivious, or
unbefitting: then shall you be sure, that your children will be healthful,
since they have been nourished with good milk, and not fed with Apples,
Pears, Sops, and such like trash, which is often given them, for want of
milk. And by this means, you shall have fair and goodly children, well
brought up, docile, virtuous, loving, strong, and lusty, without any diseases:
Then shall you be accounted for Mothers indeed, and not Step-Mothers: and
therefore never make your excuses, that you cannot, nor are not able to endure
the trouble, and pains; or that your Husbands will not suffer you to do so.

And to conclude, I would have you imitate Blanch of Castile, sometimes Queen
of France, who nursed the King St Jews her son her own self; and on a
time, as she was out of the way, her child being froward, a great Lady of the
Court gave him suck, to still him, and make him quiet: which coming to the
Queens ear, she presently took the child, and thrust her finger so far down
into his throat, that she made him vomit up all the milk, he had sucked of the
said Lady, being very angry that any woman should give her child suck, but
her self.

THE CONTENTS of the Chapters in this present Book.
1 OF the Nurse, and what care must be had in the choice of her. 2 Of the
conditions that are required to be in good milk. 3 What care the Nurse must
have, of all the parts of the child body. 4 How she ought to shift and make
clean the child. 5 Of the child's cradle, where it must be set, and how he must
lie when he goes to sleep. 6 When his own Mother, or the Nurse may give the
child suck, how, and how often. 7 How the child must be made clean after he
is awake, and vnswathed. 8 What clothes and dressings the child must have, and
at what time. 9 At what time the child may take other sustenance, beside milk.
10 When a child ought to be weaned. 11 Of the diseases, which happen unto a
child. 12 How there may happen diverse diseases unto little children, as they
come forth of their mothers womb. 13 Of the bigness, and swelling of the head.
14 Of diverse imperfections, that come with the child into the world. 15 Of the
diseases of their eyes ears and nose. 16 Of the sorenes and ulcers of the
mouth called Aphcha. 17 Of the swelling inflammation and sorenes of the Gums,
called Paroulis and Epoulis. 18 Of the strings which the child has under his
tongue, that make him tongue-tyed. 19 Of the Cough. 20 Of the inflammation and
swelling of the Navel. 21 Of the gripings and fretting in the child's belly. 22
Of the worms. 23 Of breeding of teeth. 24 Of Convulsions that trouble
children. 25 Of watchings. 26 Of the frights, starting and rauing of young
children in their sleep. 27 Of the falling down of the gut, or rupture. 28 Of
the difficulty of making water. 29 The means to help children that piss a
bed, and cannot hold their water. 30 Of the gallings and rubbing away of the
skin in the groine and thighs. 31 Of the accidents which happen to the child's
yard: 32 Of wenches that have no natural passage from their birth. 33 Of the
fundament that is closed and shut up. 34 Of the scabs that come on the child's
head and face improperly called Tinea. 35 Of the Measels and the pockes. 36 Of
the cure of the small pockes and the Measels. 37 How to preserve Children from
having the Measels and the small pockes. 38 Of the French Pockes. 39 Of the
coming forth of hair in childrens backs and rains called Morbus Pilaris.
THE MANNER OF Nursing, and bringing up of children: Together with the
Diseases, which may happen unto them, and the cure thereof.
Written by JAMES GVILLIMEAV the French Kings Surgeon in Ordinary and sworn
at Paris.
The Preface.
IT is recorded by ancient Histories, Metrop. Salisb. Epise. 36. Scolion ad
Tertul. lib. 9. de Anim.
that there have been some Children, which have made a noise, and cast forth
cries being yet in their mothers belly: and for proof hereof, they relate,
that in the City of Rascat, there was a child borne with two horns, whose
moanes, and lamentations were herad fourteen days before his birth: But this
is rather Prodigious then Natural: as S. Augustine says, Aug. lib. 3. de
ciuit. Dei. cap. 31
For a child naturally, neither laments nor cries, so long as he does abide in
his mothers womb.

And I have often observed, that a child neither cries, nor makes any noise,
neither sighs, though he be half come forth, what pain or anguish soever he
suffers in the passing. But as soon as he is born, and sees the light (beside
the alteration of the air, which he finds) even very necessity, and his own
feeling, do force and as it were wring from him cries and moanes, thereby to
show, in what need he stands of help. He craves and demands the succor of his
own Mother to be nourisht and fed, otherwise he would dye in a short space;
Metaph. 10. Martij. Lipom. com. 7.
except he were a second Codratus the Martyr, who was even from his tender age
deprived of all humane aid, and forsaken both of Father and mother, and all
the world beside. But our Lord God did supply this want and caused in
recompense thereof that a round cloud, coming down from heaven, did
encompasse him about, and nourish him.

OF A NVRSE, AND what election, and choice ought to be made of her.
CHAP. I.
THough it were fit, that every mother should nurse her own child: because her
milk which is nothing else, but the blood whitened (of which he was made, and
wherewith he had been nourished the time he staide in his Mothers womb) will
be always more natural, and familiar unto him, than that of a stranger: and
also by nursing him her self, she shall be wholly accounted his mother: yet
since they may be hindered by sickness, or for that they are too weak and
tender, or else because their Husbands will not suffer them, therefore I say,
it will be very necessary to seek out another Nurse: The difficulty of finding
a good nurse.
and every one knows how hard a thing it is, to find a good one, because they
have been so often beguiled, and deceived therein: which has given me
occasion, first of all to show some marks, whereby you may make some choice of
one that is fit.

Now, in choosing of a Nurse, there are six things to be considered: Her birth
and Parentage: her person: her behavior: her mind: her milk: and her child.

1. Her Lignage.
First, Concerning her Lignage, she must come of a good stock, or kindred: there
being none of her race, whether it be grandfather, or grandmother, nay, not so
much as one of her great grandfathers, or ancient progenitors, that has ever
been stained, or spotted, either in body or mind: For, oftentimes we see,
though the Parents be healthful, and sound, yet their children be sometimes,
either sickly, or fools, or else viciously given: who retain such vices from
their grandfather, grandmother, yea, and sometimes from their great
grandfathers; which troubles many men, to think from whence these accidents
may proceed: For it is very certain, that there are many Children, which are
diseased or deformed, either in body, or mind, whose parents are very
healthful, and well featured: But yet, if you search farther, you shall find
that some of their progenitors have been affected in the like manner.

2. Her Person.
2. Touching the Nurses person; for her age, she shall be chosen, when she is at
her full growth, which is about five and twenty years of age, from which
time, to the five and thirtieth year, is the age, wherein women are most
temperate, healthful, strong, and lusty: therefore one shall be chosen, that
is between five and twenty, and five and thirty years. Her Stature.
Now, for her body, she ought to be of a middle stature, neither too big, nor
too little, nor too fat, nor too lean, nor yet too gross, having good fleshy
arms, and legs; and her flesh being hard and firm: she must not be
deformed, neither squint-eyed, lame, nor crump shouldred: she must be one that
is healthful, and not subject to any disease: the complexion and color of her
body, must be lively, and rosy: she must not be spotted with redness, A red
hair'd Nurse discommended.
and especially she should not have red hair: and therefore, such as are of a
brown complexion, are held to be best, whose hair is of a chest-nut color,
between yellow and black.

She must have a pleasing countenance, Her Countenance.
a bright and clear eye, a well formed nose, neither crooked, nor of a bad
smell, a ruddie mouth, and very white teeth: She must deliver her words well,
and distinctly, without stammering: and she must have a strong and big neck: A
Nurses perfections.
for thereby (as Hippocrates says) may one judge, of the strength of the
body. She must have a broad and large breast, garnished with two Paps of a
reasonable bigness, neither limber, nor hanging down, but between hard and
soft; full of Azure veins and Arteries, not being either knottie, or swollen
bigger then they should be: the nipple which is in the midst of the breasts,
ought to be somewhat eminent, and withal a ruddie color like a Strawberie, it
must be of a reasonable bigness and thickness, and of an easy draught, that
the child may take it the better, and suck the easier.

She must not be with child, neither should she have her natural purgings;
Hipp. lib. 2. Epidemiar.
though Hippocrates seems to allow the contrary: relating the story of a
Nurse, whose body was full of Pustules, of which she was freed, as soon as
she had her ordinary sickness: desiring (as some Interpreters would have it)
to show, that it is not without reason, for the Nurses health, that she should
have her courses: thereby to cool and cleanse the blood, whereof the milk is
made.

3. Her Manners.
3. She ought to be of a good behavior, sober, and not given either to
drinking, or gluttony, mild, without being angry, or fretfull: for there is
nothing that sooner corrupts the blood, of which the milk is made, than
choler, or sadness: and therefore she must be merry, playing and singing to
the child, dandling and using him gently; and one that will not refuse to give
him the breast at any time, for fear least he cry. She must likewise be
chaste, not desiring after her husbands company, and much less a strangers;
because carnal copulation (as Galen says) troubles the blood, and so by
consequence the milk; also it diminishes the quantity thereof, by provoking
the natural purgations; and also makes her have an ill smell, (as Aristotle
says) because they heat themselves very much in this act: and which is worst,
the Nurse thinking only to take her sport a little, may thereby prove with
child.

4. Her Mind.
4. Concerning her mind: Let her be sage, wise, discreet, that she may take care
of her little one, and not lay him in any place, where he may endanger
himself, to be either sick, or stifled: For, there are more Nurses then
should be, which are such beasts, and so careless; who having their child
suck in the night, as they lie with them in the bed, do oftentimes fall a
sleep upon them, and so stifle them. And she must also have discretion, to
judge somewhat near, what her little one cries after, it being not able
otherwise to express what it would have: Gal. de Sanitat. tuenda.
Observing (as Galen says) the child's disposition, that so she may give him
that, which he craves or desires, or else take away such things as shall offend
him: playing with him, kissing him, dancing him gently in her arms, and
singing withal: and she must likewise open him often, to lay and keep him dry
and clean.

Of the conditions which are required in good Milk.
THe choice of good Milk is, The quality of good Milk.
that it be of a middle substance, that is to say, such as shall be neither too
watrish, nor too thick: For that which is too watrish and thin, may cause the
child to have a scowring, and besides, it yields no good nutriment: And the
Milk which is too thick, is easily crudled, and not so soon digested, and so
causes obstructions, from whence the matter of the stone is bred. As for the
quantity of Milk: Quantity of Milk.
a Nurse should rather have too much, then too little: because when there is
but little, it will be hard for the child to draw it; when as if there be
plenty, it will come the easier, and even thrust out it self. Moreover, if
the child should suck the breast dry; then that which shall come in the room
of it, cannot be well concocted so soon: Besides, if the child should chance
to have an Ague, then would he suck, and consume a great deal. Again, the
Nurse besides a sufficient quantity for the nouris^ing of the child, must have
some to mil^ to (...) eyes, if he should chance to have any i^ ^fe^ to^ there:
as either heat, pimples, or itch^ that so it may be cooled.

The color of good Milk.
As for the color, it must be white, according to the common saying: ( As white
as Milk) for the Milk which is bluish, makes show of Melancholy, as the
yellow does of Choler, and the reddish, that it is not well concocted, and
signifies either that there is a weakness in the breasts, or else an ill
quality of the blood whereof it is made, which has not been concocted and
corrected by the natural heat of the paps.

The smell.
Besides, good Milk ought not to have any strong smell, but rather a sweet
sent, which smells neither hot, nor sower, nor yet adust, for such smells
show, that the blood, of which it is made, is ouerheated or putride.

The taste.
And concerning the Taste; that Milk which has a sweet savor is much
commended: as contrariwise, that which is either sharp, sower, or bitter, is to
be refused, and therefore not chosen for good.

A proof of the goodness of Milk in quantity.
Now the trial there of may be made in this sort; as to know whether it be of a
good substance: let the nurse milk some few drops of it, upon a looking
glass, or other sleeke thing: and if in holding it gently aside, it flows and
runs presently, and keep not together a little, then it is a sign that the
milk is watrish, and too thin, If it stand still, and will not run at all,
then it shows that the milk is too thick and fat: But if it run leasurely,
not staying either too long, or flowing too soon, upon the said smooth body:
it shows that the milk is of a middle substance, and ought to be reckoned
and chosen for the best.

The quantity of the milk may be known thus: A trial of the quantity.
if there remain some in the breast after the child has done sucking: and
again, if in opening the child you find him bepissed: But you must have an eye
that your nurse be none of these Cooseners (for there be some) that give the
child water to drink in secret, and others, which wet the child's bed: But such
Nurses deserve to be whipped, and their knavery may be easily descried, both by
the eye and the sent and likewise discerned by the taste.

Now the observation, The choice of a Nurse by her child.
which is taken from the Nurses child, for the choice of a fit Nurse, is
concerning his age: For if her child be above seven or eight months old, then
her milk will be too stale afterward: and besides it would be a doubt,
whether she would have milk enough to nurse him, that should be put unto her.

Again, if the child be but fifteen days or a month old, that shows, that
her milk is too new, and that it is not as yet well purified: because the
mother is not wholly purged and cleansed.

Auicen.
So Auicen commands, that a child should not be put to suck a Woman, till at
least two months after her delivery; and at the farthest not after eight.

And because the sex of the Nurses child must likewise be observed, Aegineta
wishes, that it should be rather a man child then a maid child: because the
milk is hotter, better concocted; and not so excrementitious; And he adds
farther, that it is fit (whether it be a boy or a wench) that the mother have
born her burden, the full time. For those that are commonly delivered, before
their time, for the most part are not sound, but sickly: though there be many
healthful women, which go with their children but seven Months.

How a Nurse ought to order her self, concerning her Diet, and manner of life.
CHAP. II.
IT is not enough that a Nurse be endowed with the conditions and qualities
aforesaid: but it is very fit also that she maintain and preserve them:
wherefore we will set down briefly, how, and in what manner, she ought to
govern her self.

First of all therefore let her shun, and avoid all bad air, and all kind of
ill and stinking smells: for such sents as are too strong, are naught and
hurtful for her, because they infect and ouer-heat the spirits, and blood,
whereof the milk is made: What meat a nurse must refrain from.
She must likewise avoid all meats, that are either too much salted, or
spiced, or of a strong taste, as Onions, Leekes, Garlic, Mustard, and all kind
of Baked Meats, and old cheese: Let her eat Veale, Mutton, Chicken, Kid,
Partridge, and such like meats which are of good juice, and of easy digestion:
What meats she shall use.
and she must use them in moderate sort, without glutting her self.

All sorts of fish are hurtful for her, except it be in small quantity: she
may eat Jack, Sole, and Quauluer; and if she eat no fish let her use new laid
eggs.

Her meat must be rather boiled, then roasted, but yet there must be had a
respect to the habitude and complexion of the child: For if he be very moist
and flegmaticke, then the Nurse shall rather use rostmeat: and so of other
complexions.

Her bread shall be of good wheat, well made, Her Bread.
light, and baked as it ought to be.

Let her put into her pottages, Lettuce, Sorrel, Her broth.
Purcelaine, Borage, Buglosse, and Succory.

She shall refrain from all kind of raw fruits.

For her drink, let her take Ale, or Beer; Her drink. A kind of drink
which they use in France which they call Bouchet. Aristotle.
and where that cannot be had, Barley water; or water sodden; or else a small
kind of Hydromel or meade which has but a little Cinnamon in it.

But I would rather counsel them, to drink Wine and Water together.
Aristotle forbids wine, both to the nurse and the child, except it be (as they
say) well christened.

Her exercise.
She must use moderate exercise, and chiefly before meals: For moderate
exercise, does strengthen the natural heat, and consumes all superfluities.
The parts which ought to be most exercised, should be rather the uppermost, as
the shoulders, and arms: because that the exercising of them, makes the blood
and spirits the sooner ascend into the breasts.

Her sleep.
For her sleep that cannot be either limited or prescribed: because the Nurse
is oftentimes constrained to watch, when the child is either froward or sick.
And therefore she must take her rest when she may, whether it be in the day, or
in the night, as the child will give her leave.

Her belly must be always loose, and if it chance to be bound, she may take a
Clister. Let her use Broths, Prunes, and Apples well sodden, that so she may
keep her self soluble.

She must shun all disquietnes of mind, and she must be merry and pleasant,
neither vexing, nor grieuing, nor too chollericke.

The care which a Nature must have of all the parts of the child's body. CHAP.
III.
THe Nurse should be chosen a month or two before the woman be delivered, that
she may always have an eye over her, and her child, and then as soon as the
Woman shall be brought a-bed, and that the child has passed through the
hands of the Midwife, or keeper, and is swathed by them he shall be delivered
to the nurse to give him suck, and have a care of him.

First of all, let the Nurse consider and view all the parts of the child's body,
beginning at the head, observing whether it be well fashioned or no: that if it
chance to have any ill form, or figure; that then it may be mended as well as
it may, which shall be done by bringing the said head unto the form of a
boule, a little pressed and made flat on both sides: How to fashion the child's
head.
in such sort that neither the forepart, nor hinderpart of the head, stand too
far out, nor yet be too flat: which shall be done with such head-cloths, as
they use commonly to wear, stroking it by little and little, without much
pressing or crushing it, as some Nurses do: but only handling it in a mild
and gentle fashion.

Upon the Mould of the head you shall lay a piece of kotton orkersey: some use
to lay a piece of scarlet.

The ears must be cleansed: The child's ears must be cleansed.
with little rags made like tents: and the Nurse must look whether the holes
be well made, that there may not remain any filth either within, or in the
wrinkles and folds behind them. And as Rhasis says, the ears must be a little
pressed to the head, that they may not hang down.

Let the ears also be wrapped about with fine linen clouts, that they may
not be over heated, and so stick to the head, by the means of some gross
matter, or sweat which commonly is bredde there.

The eyes cleansed.
But above all, the eyes must be looked unto and wiped with a fine linen cloth,
especially about both the corners, that if there should chance to be any filth
gathered in those places, it may be taken away. Auicen puts there a little
virgin oil, because it mitigateth and takes away the roughness and nitrosity
which might remain about the child's eyes, through his long swimming and lying
in his own sweat and Urine, while he was in his mothers womb. I have seen in
some children, that (after they have been borne) there has run out of the
corner of the eye, many days together thick drops of blood, which congealed
presently. There are many children likewise borne bleare eyed, for the helping
whereof, the Nurse shall use to anoint the corners of the eyes with a little
Vnguentum Tutiae, and likewise spirt a little of her milk into them.

The nose must be cleansed.
Now concerning the child's nose, it is fit, that it should be opened, and
dilated gently, washing and cleansing it with a little warm water. The same
Auicen bids, that it should be anointed with a little Virgin Oil, which must
be done with the top of ones finger, the nails being pared very near and
even. And if you chance to find some little membrane, or skin, that stops up
the holes, and passage thereof, it shall be cut asunder, that there may be a
passage for the excrements of the brain.

And for as much as the head of a child abounds with store of moisture, (as
Galen writes) which is purged and voided by the mouth, nose, and other
passages: therefore it will be very fit that the Nurse have a care to the
taking of them away for fear lest by their stay, they either fall down upon
the lungs, or into the stomach, For the clensing of the mouth.
or else grow to be dried, which happening the Nurse must put her finger being
anointed with honey, to the bottom of the child's mouth, and rub it above and
under the tongue, which she may do also with Sirup of Violets.

Besides she shall look whether the fundament be well opened, and whether
there be any filth bred there or no: as also, whether the passage of the yard
be free: and if it be a wench, Care to be had of the fundament.
whether there be any membrane, that does stop up the entrance: Not long since,
I made a new passage in a little child, who had the hole of his yard grown,
and as it were glued together: and an other boy, which had the string of his
yard so short and straight, that it made the head of it (called Balanus) bow
downward, and seemed as though it had no passage, but as soon as I had cut the
string, the yard came to the right fashion.

And concerning the membrane which sometimes stops the passage: I have made
incision of the like membrans, in three girls, and lately in the daughter of
M. James Boyzard.

As for the arms and legs, For the arme^ and legs.
if they be either crooked or stand awry, they must be set straight with
little swaths, and fit boulsters, made for the purpose: as likewise if either
the back bone, or the belly, do stand out. But for these they must repair unto
a Surgeon: who must show and instruct the Nurse how she ought to proceed
herein, when she shifts the child.

Galen would have us, to look to these deformities betimes, A Precept of
Galen, de sanitat. tuend.
because the bones (through their softnes and tenderness) are more easily made
straight and are apter to be set in their right place and form, then when they
are grown dryer: it being then very hard to amend such errors, as the same
Galen says. Gal. de art medica.


How the Nurse must shift the child. CHAP. IIII.
WE must not only have a regard, to such defects of Nature, as the child may
bring with him from his mothers womb, and cure them: but we must also look,
and have an eye, that the Nurse, or she that swathes, and dresseth him, do
not make him worse: and of a well fashioned child, in all the parts of his
body, do not make him deformed or misshapen, and so spoil him. For in swathing
the child, most commonly they bind and crush him so hard, that they make him
grow crooked. Some swath all the child's body hard to make him have a goodly
neck, and to make him seem the fatter: but this crushing makes his breast and
the ribs which are fastened to the backbone, to stand out; so that they are
bended, and draw the Vertebrae to them, which makes the back bone, to bend and
give out either inwardly, or outwardly, or else on the one side: and that
causes the child to be either crump-shouldred, or crooked brested, or else to
have one of his shoulders stand farther out then the other, some also bind the
hips so hard that they become very small, and that hinders them from growing and
waxing big. Which does much harm, especially to maids, Inconvenience of hard
swathing the hips.
who should have large hips, that when they come to age, they may bring forth
goodly children.

Galen has observed, Gal. decaus. morber.
that the too straight and hard binding or crushing of the hams, and legs of
little children, when they are swathed, does make them grow crooked legged and
they will remain, as the Latins call it Vari or Valgi; going either inward or
outward with their knees. This imperfection may also happen through the Nurses
fault, by carrying the child always upon one arm, and the same side: and by
holding the child's knees hard toward her, making them stand like a bow: For
the preventing of which mischances, the Nurses shall carry their children,
sometimes on the right side, and sometimes on the left. And they must likewise
swath them, but loosely, stretching down their arms, all along their sides,
without binding or crushing them hard together.

Of the child's cradle, and how it is to be placed; and also how the child ought
to be laid when he goes to sleep. CHAP. V.
WHen the child shall be thus dressed, and swathed, it will then be fit to let
him sleep and take some rest, for which purpose he must be laid in his cradle:
fitted with a little mattresse, which shall be laid deep to the bottom, that
the sides of the cradle may be a great deal above the mattresse; that so the
child may as it were sink down in his cradle for fear least he fall out of
it. Then upon the Mattresse shall be laid a pillow, How to order the Cradle.
that is somewhat soft, to lay the child upon, letting him lie the first month
upon his back: but afterward when he is waxed a little bigger let him lie
sometimes on his right side, How to lay the child.
and sometimes on the left, having his head a little raised up, that the
excrements of his brain may the more easily flow and pass through the
emunctoryes thereof: And he must be bound and tied in with strings, least in
rocking him, he fall out of his Cradle. At the head of the Cradle let there be
a little Arch made of wood, or Ozier to lay a couerlet over it, thereby to
keep away the wind, and that no dust fall upon him. But it would be more
convenient (for those that can fitly have it) to set the Cradle within a little
bed, the Curteynes drawn round about it.

Now, The place where the Cradle shall be set.
concerning the place where the Cradle must stand, it will be very fit, that
it be in a chamber that is neither too light, nor to dark, nor too hot, nor
too cold: For if it be too light, it spends the spirits of the sight, and
hinders the child from sleeping: if it be too dark, it makes him desire the
light, and causes him to be melancholic: if it be too hot, it will stifle
him, and make him apt to catch cold, when he comes into the air: if it be too
cold, it brings him to a murre, or stopping in the head: and therefore it will
be best to keep a mean in all of them: And especially you must have a care,
that the Cradle, and bed, stand not near the door, chimney, or windows, that
the light do not draw the child's sight awrie, and so make him prove to be
squint-eyed: and therefore the fire, or the candle must be set right against
his eyes: For if they were on either side, the glimpse will make the child
turn and role his eye aside, to follow the light, and so the use and motion,
which the Muscles would get thereby, may make him either squint or goggle-ey'd.

Oftentimes the child cannot sleep after he is laid down, and therefore he
must be gently rocked, to inuit him thereto, and not hastily or too fast, for
fear of making the milk flote in his stomachs; and his Nurse shall sing by
him, because singing prouokes sleep, and keeps him from crying.

Till the child be two year old, he may sleep at all times whenever he
will, yea he may fall asleep at his mothers teat as he is sucking: and if you
would observe the space of time for sleeping which the Ancients did, it must be
thus: Till the child be three or four years old, let him sleep more then
wake. But according to Galen, he ought herein not to exceed mediocritie,
otherwise it is dangerous: for long sleeping cools and moistneth the brain,
and there retains superfluities. And Auicen says, that it does be-numme and
besot the child's senses, and makes him dull and lumpish.

When the Mother her self, or the Nurse, ought to give the child suck, and
how, and how much. CHAP. VI.
IT is very fit that either the Mother, or some other Nurse for her, do give
the child suck after he is borne: if it be the Mother her self, it must not
be at the soonest, until eight days after her delivery: Some also are of
opinion, that the mother her self, should not give her child suck in the
month, by reason she has been troubled and tired in her lying in: and because
she is not as yet, well cleans'd and purified of her after-purgings, which
commonly last a month, as Hippocrates says: In which space she shall let
little pretty whelps suck her breasts, to make her milk come the better,
and that it go not away.

Some women do make their keepers draw their breasts, and others draw them with
glasses themselves: Besides, Auicen commands, that a woman should not give her
child suck, until she be well recouer'd. Now, you know that some are well
sooner, and some later, and so there can be no time limited or prescribed: But
above all it must be observed, (as the same Author says) that the Nurse do
not give the child suck, after she is risen, before she has milked forth
some of her milk: And likewise, she shall not give him the breast, if by
chance she has over heated her self, either by some exercise, or else with
going, till first she be come into a good temper, and well cooled.

Now, in giving him suck, The manner how to give the child suck.
she shall observe this order: She must sometimes spirt some of her milk,
either upon the child's lips, or else into his mouth; and when he has left the
nipple, she must crush her breast a little, that he may draw and suck with
less labor, and she must be careful, that he swallow not down too much at a
time, and that the milk come not out again at the nose: Besides, she must
sometimes take away the teat, and give it him again, that he suck not too
much at once, and too greedily.

It is very hard to set down, What quantity of milk the child may suck.
the quantity of milk that a child should take; But therein the nurse must
have a respect to the age, complexion, temper, and to the desire which the
child has to suck, increasing it, as the child grows, or according as he is
thirsty, either through some sickness, or when his teeth come forth: for at
those times he is more dry, then otherwise. Now to know how often the child
should suck in a day: Paulus Aegineta appoints, that it should be twice a day,
or thrice at the most: which he means for the first four, or five days,
that he may be acquainted therewith by little and little, and also because
there is then no great need. I have seen children that have not sucked in two
or three days, after they were borne; for they know not then, whether they are
yet in their Mothers belly, or no: where they sucked not at all; Hippocrat.
lib. de princip.
although that Hippocrates says, that the child receives some nourishment by
the mouth, while he is in his Mothers belly. It can neither be told nor
limited how often he ought to suck in a day; because it is fit he should have
the teat, as often as he cries: yet let it be but a little at a time, because
the stomach at first is but weak. And if he wrangles but a little, it will be
best to still him, either with rocking, or singing: And though he be not
quieted, or stilled, a little crying can do him no great harm, but rather may
serve for some good use: For it makes him run at Nose, shed tears, and spit:
it purges his brain, yea, and stirs up his natural heat, and also dilates
the passages of the breast. But if he cry too violently, and eagerly, it may do
him much harm, and cause him to be bursten, or break some vessel in his
breast, or else bring the headache.

How the child must be made clean, after he is awake and vnswathed. CHAP. VII.
AFter the Child has well sucked, and slept, the Nurse must shift him, and
make him clean: For which purpose the Nurse, or some other, must sit near the
fire, laying out her legs at length, having a soft pillow in her lap, the
doors and windows being close shut, and having something about her, that may
keep the wind from the child. And when she is thus accommodated, she shall
vnswath and shift him dry. If he be very foul, she may wash him with a
little water and wine luke warm, with a sponge or linen cloth.

The time of shifting him is commonly about seven a clock in the morning, then
again at noone, and at seven a clock at night: and it would not be amiss, to
change him again about midnight; which is not commonly done. But because there
is no certain hour, either of the child's sucking, or sleeping: therefore
diverse, after he has slept a good while, do every time shift him: least he
should foul and bepisse himself. And surely there be many children, that had
need to be shifted, as soon as they have foul'd themselves: which I would
counsel you to do, and not to let them lie in their filth.

When you change his bed, you shall rub all his body over, with an indifferent
fine linen cloth: and then his head must be rubbed, and made clean: and when
he is four or five month old, his head may be cleans'd with a fine brush: and
when he is grown bigger, let it be combed.

What cloths and coats the child must have, and at what time. CHAP. VIII.
AS soon as the child is somewhat grown, and that he cannot well keep his
hands swathed in, and hid any longer, (which is commonly about the twentieth or
thirtieth day, according as he is in strength) then must he have little
sleeves, that having his arms and hands at liberty, he may use and stir
them: and then the Nurse shall begin to carry him abroad, so that it be fair
weather, to sport and exercise him, not carrying him out into the rain, or
into the hot sun, nor when there is any rough wind.

And therefore he must be kept in the shade avoiding all ill airs, as of sinkes
and the like: And if he should chance to be frighted with any thing, the Nurse
shall endeavor to take away the apprehension thereof, and harten him, without
making him afraid. I have seen some children, that with a fright, have fallen
into the Epilepsye or falling sickness, the Physicians not being able to give
any other reason thereof, but only the fear he had taken.

If by chance he does cry and weep, then shall you endeavor by all means to
still him, and not let him cry, observing diligently what it is he cries for,
and what may be the cause thereof: that as Galen says, he may have that he
desires, or else be rid of that which offends and troubles him.

But the same Author says, Gal. de Sanit. tuenda.
that children generally are stilled and quieted by three means: by giving
them the breast, by rocking, and by singing to them: They may be also stilled
by giving them something to hold in their hand, or by making them look upon
somewhat that pleases them, as also by carrying them abroad.

About the eighth, or ninth month, or at farthest when the child is a year
old, he must have coats, and not be kept swathed any longer. And if it be
Summer, he must be coated sooner because of the heat, which makes the body
oftentimes, to be full of wheales and pimples. And some may have coats sooner,
according as their strength will suffer it; of which an especial care must be
had. And chiefly the Nurse must let him have a hat, that may be easy and large
enough, which may cover all the forepart of the head, without being curious
(as they say commonly) to make him have a goodly high forhead.

At what age the child may take other sustenance beside Milk. CHAP. IX.
THe child must be nourished with milk only, Gal. lib. 1. de sanitate tuenda
till his foreteeth be come forth both above, and beneath: as Galen writes:
for being nothing else yet but as it were milk it is very fit and probable
that he should be nourished with no other food: The child's food.
Besides the teeth are chiefly ordained by nature, only to chaw: and therefore
when he has none, he ought not to be fed with any solid meat. But as soon as
they are come forth it shows that Nature has given him those instruments, to
make use of them: and therefore he may then take more solid meat, if you
think he can digest it. For to give him any other nourishment, then milk or
dish-meate, before he have teeth, it might breed great store of crude humors,
and winds, which oftentimes (as Auicen says) do cause the child to have
bunches, or contusions, about his back bone,.and ribs. Nevertheless, though
his teeth be come, yet must you not give him meat, that is too solid, or in
too great quantity: but at the beginning, you may give him sops of bread, or
Panado, or Gruell: afterward he may suck the leg of a Chicken, the greatest
part of the flesh being taken away, that he may the better pull, and gnaw it,
and this is but once or twice a day, and that too, when he is almost ready to
be weaned (as Rhasis says.) And this also does serve to whet and rub his
gummes which about that time begin to itch. And when he is fifteen months
old, or a little more, then may you give him the flesh of a Capon, or of
Partridge minced and mingled with some broth, made either of Veale, Mutton, or
Chicken, adding thereto some sops of bread. For the Ancient writers forbid,
that we should give them any store of meat, before they are two years old:
because they are not able to chaw, and digest it, and also for that they have
not so much need of nourishment; And therefore you must stay till you have
weaned him, before you feed him more plentifully.

When the child ought to he weaned. CHAP. X.
IT is a very hard thing to set down a certain time, when a child ought to be
weaned; Notwithstanding if we will believe Paulus Aegineta, and Auicen, he must
be weaned, when he is two years old, and has all his teeth come forth. Now
in some they come forth sooner, and in others later: and to weane him before
they are come forth, might be an occasion, to make him have many diseases.

Wherefore to know certainly when a child should be weaned, and that he
should wholly feed upon other meat, it must first be observed, whether he take
his meat well; and if he be able to chaw it thoroughly: whether he be sickly
or else strong and lusty.

Concerning the time and season of the year it must be when the wether is
neither too hot, nor too cold: and therefore the fittest time will be the spring
or in Autumn. But sometimes there is necessity to wean him at another time, yea
and before two years, by reason that his nurse may chance to be sickly, and
that he being come to some knowledge will not suck another. It may also happen
that the child is to be weaned before he be two years, old for that the milk
(although otherwise it be good) does curdle and grow sower in his stomach,
which requires stronger meat.

Now to weane a child well, let them observe this method following: First the
teat shall not be wholly taken from him, but he shall suck a little, and eat
a little meat; and so continue for a few days: then afterward he shall not
suck in the day time, though in the night, they may give him a little.
Nevertheless, it will be very fit in the morning, when he is awake and has
been shifted and dressed, to give him suck a little, and then to let him stay
two or three hours before he take any thing, afterward to give him somewhat to
dinner, as some pottage, or panade, with a little flesh minced, or cut very
small, and then let him stay two hours without giving him any thing, at which
time you may give him a little suck, and lay him to sleep: And when he is
wakened and has been made clean, then the Nurse shall carry him abroad into
the air, if it be fair wether, and give him suck, and then lay him to sleep
again, without letting him eat any solid meat, or very little. At his
dinner they shall give him to drink a little boiled water: and this order shall
be kept a whole month, That is in France, where they have not Ale or beer.
and when he shall be accustomed to eat solid meat then the teate shall
be quite taken from him.

It happens oftentimes that the child will not forsake the breasts, but still
cries and is very eager after it, and then you must make him loath it,
anointing the Nurses breast with Mustard, or else rubbing the top of the
nipple with a little Aloes, and likewise make him ashamed of it.

Of the diseases which happen to a child. CHAP. XI.
HItherto we have showed what manner of Woman a Nurse ought to be, and how she
should Nurse and give her child suck, it now rests that we speak of some
diseases, which happen unto children in their first age, which is from their
birth, to the seventh month, in which time, they commonly have their first
teeth, then afterward those which happen in their second age which is from the
seventh month, to the end of two years, at which time they commonly are
weaned, and their teeth are almost quite come forth: leaving the third age,
which is from two years, to seven: and the fourth also, which is reckoned from
seven years to fourteen.

Hippocr. lib. 3. aphoris. 24.
Hippocrates has observed in his Aphorisms, that children, when they are
young, are subject to these diseases: to a sorenes of the mouth, with little
whelks which do rise thereon, and upon the tongue called by him Aphthae, to
vomiting, the Cough, watchings, or forsaking of sleep, inflammation of the
Navel, Lib. 3. aph. 25.
and moisture of the ears. And in their second age (which is when their teeth
begin to come) they are troubled with itching of the gums and chiefly when the
dog teeth come forth, and those are most troubled therewithal, which are more
fat, and fleshy, and which are bound in their belly. But because there are many
other diseases that they are subject unto, whether it be that they bring them
from their mothers womb, with them, or that they happen to them afterward:
therefore I will briefly speak of them all, beginning first with those that do
most trouble them.

How some diseases may happen unto little Children in coming forth of their
mothers womb. CHAP. XII.
THere be diverse accidents which happen unto little children, and at their time
of coming into the world. Some receiving bruises, and hurts, either in the
head or other parts of their body, through striving and straining in the
delivery; as Aches, or breaking of an arm, leg, or thigh: which I have often
seen in a difficult travail. The latter must be helped by setting the bones
again in their right place, whether it be that they were out of joint, or
else broken, and then bind them, and keep them so till they be well grown
together, and have taken firm hold.

As for hurts and bruises, they must be bathed with some fomentation, made of
Roses, Melilot, and Chamomil flowers, and then anointed with Saint John's Wort
and Roses, mingled together.

Mad. Maheu was delivered of a child so bruised and torn, that every one
judged him to be dead, he was so black: whom I dressed and looked unto, and
with the foresaid medicine I healed him perfectly. But the worst is, when there
happens any hurt about the child's head, by means whereof, there comes some
great swelling tumor, full of blood, which may be taken improperly for the
Hydrocephalo. If it be but small, then it may be resolved with the former
fomentation and liniment and some plasters of Diacalciteos, and Diachilon
Ireatum mingled together. But if the swelling be much and big, then must we not
think to heal it by resolution, as Master Pietrae, and I my self saw a
Surgeon, who was very confident, and did assure himself, to make it resolve
only with new wax spread and laid upon it. But in the end we were constrained
to lance the humor, and in few days, it was perfectly healed under my hands.

Of the greatness and swelling of the head which happens to little Children.
CHAP. XIII.
IT chances oftentimes, that the child's head after he is born, is bigger then
naturally it ought to be, an accident which is very dangerous, and hard to be
cured: whereof there be three kinds.

The first is called of the Greeks, Macrocephalos, which is, when the head is
bigger then naturally it should be: and yet this comes naturally, as when the
bones of the head be large, and of great compass containing great store of
brain, and proportioned to the compass and circuit of them, there being
neither wind, nor waters, nor any other humors, that are the cause thereof.
Nature having thus proportioned it: and it is so heavy and unwieldy, that the
child cannot hold it upright, his neck being constrained to bow under it,
with the very weight, so that it had need to be prop't up with some thing or
other: Now there is contrary to this another which is called Microcephalos that
is a little head, such a one had Thersites the Grecian and one Triboulet who
was a French man. Both these accidents are very hard to be cured, yea almost
impossible.

The second kind is called Hydrocephalos, which is, when the head becomes big,
by reason of some waters therein contained. Of the which there are diverse
sorts: for either the waters are contained between the skin, and the
Pericraneum; or betwixt the Pericraneum and the bone; or between the bone and
the membranes, called Dura matter, and Pia matter: Some of them are particular,
and possess but only one part of the head; others are general and affect it
wholly.

Some of them have their spring and beginning, The Cause.
even from the Mothers womb: which happens when the Mother, while she was
with child, through an ill Diet, gathered store of crudities and raw humors,
whereof there is bred a watrish and flegmatike blood, with the which the child
being fed, and not being able to digest, or consume it, much less to euacuate
and void it by the passages appointed by nature, the watrish matter gathers it
self together in the head.

It may also proceed from the child, being not well purged of the superfluities
which are gathered in his brain, and diffused over all the head, or part
thereof: whereunto we may add the ill nourishment which the child receives
from his Nurse, whose milk is either serous and watrish, or ouer-heated, which
causes diverse vapors, to ascend up into the brain, which are there converted
into watrish humors.

The third kind is called Phisocephalos, when there chances to be a wind,
which runs between the skin of the head, and the bone; and also between
the skull, and dura matter; which causes the head to be so swollen, and puffed up,
(as Auicen says) that there have been diverse children which have dyed of it;
the bones of the head being very much thrust outward, which is very painful:
And certainly, there is nothing that causes greater distention, or more pain,
then when there is some wind enclosed, in what part soever it be of the body.

The watrie swelling has almost the like causes, by reason of some watrish
matter, that is bred in the brain, which through the weakness of the natural
heat, cannot well be dispersed, and so it is turned into wind: or else through
some vapors, which arise from the nether parts, which do also distend, and
stretch out the parts of the head.

They are all of them different one from another: for the Macrocephalos, or
great headed, yields not any impression when it is crushed, because it is the
bones which make it so big and swollen: but in the watrish swelling, the finger
enters easily, and leaves an impression as an O Edema does: But if you press
the windy swelling, it leaves no mark, or print, but presently it rises up
again like a football.

Now, to know whether the water be contained betwixt the bones of the head, and
the membranes of the brain: it may easily be discerned by the pain, and by
the accidents: as if there happen any Vertigo, or Epilepsy, to the child, and
that he sleep, little, or not at all; as also his continual crying does
witness it.

The Cure of the windy swelling shall be performed, The cure of Phisocephalos.
by appointing the Nurse to keep a good Diet, using meats that shall neither
breed wind, nor crudities.

Concerning outward medicines, Outward medicines.
it is good to use Fomentations: for such kind of medicines surely may do him
very much good, if the wind be contained between the skin, and the
Pericraneum, or betwixt the Pericraneum, and the skull. But if the said wind be
enclosed between the skull, and dura matter, it will be a very difficult
disease to be cured, (except the wind be but in small quantity.) The
Fomentation is this.

A Fomentation.. Fol. Salu. Betonic. Agrimon. Calaminth. Origan. an. m. j. sem.
Anis. Foenicul. an. ij. flor. Chamoemel. Melilot. Rosar. rubr. an. m. j.
Coquantur in aqua communi, addendo Vini parum, fiat fotus.

And with this Fomentation warm, you shall bath all his head with fine
spunges: and then apply this Plaster afterward.

An Emplaster.. Ol. Aneth. Amygdal. amar. an. j. Ol. Chamaemel. j. ss. Baccar.
Lauri, Juniper. an. ij. sem. Anis. Foenicul. an. j. ss. Vini alb. lib. j.
Bulliant omnia simul ad vini consumpt. passaturae add Terebinth. Venet. ss.
Ceraeq. s. vt inde fiat Emplastrum, extendatur portio, and admoueatur capiti.

Hydrocephalos.
As for the watrish swelling, according to the quantity, and quality of the
humor that makes it, and the place where in the said humor is contained, it
will be either easy or hard to be cured: for if the humor be thin, and in
small quantity, and that it be contained between the skin, and the
Pericraneum, or else between the Pericraneum, and the skull, or between the
membranes of the skull; then Auicen makes a doubt, Auicen.
whether it can be cured.

But if it be curable, the best way will be to use the Fomentations and
Plasters following: which have power to digest, and dry up the said
watrishnesse.

A Fomentation.. Fol. Absinth. Puleg. Serpil. Betonic. an. m. j. Rosar. rub.
flor. Stoechad. an. pug. j. Nucum cupress. Balaustior. Irid. florent. an. ij.
Coquantur perfect in lixiuio ciner. sarment. and caulium, fiat fotus
cumspongia.

After the Fomentation, shall be applied this emplaster.

An Emplaster.. Pull. Betonic. Salui. Absinth. an. ij. Ol. Chamaem. Rosar. an.
ij. vng. comitiss. j. Cerae q. s. fiat emplastrum.

You must likewise apply the Magistrall emplaster de Bettonica. Some take
Snayles, shells and all, and beat them, putting unto them a little powder of
Bettonie, and of the roots of Ireos.

And if these medicines profit not, as indeed it is very hard they should:
then must you determine to open it.

The ancient Writers, as Rhasis, makes no question to apply thereto some
gentle Cautery; others do rather counsel, that it should be opened with a
launcet: For mine own part, I have practiced both ways, without any ill
accident, when that the waters have been contained between the skin, and the
Pericranium, or between the Pericranium and the skull: But to say the truth,
when the waters is between the bones, and the membranes of the brain; though
my self I have been very careful in dressing of it: and not long since,
being joined with Mons. Pietre, a sworn Surgeon of Paris; yet the success
has not been according as we desired; And therefore, the cure of it must not
be taken in hand, but with foretelling of the danger.

Other imperfections, that accompany the Child, when he is borne: as
excrescences of flesh, the roof of the mouth cleft, a hare lip, and
supernumerarie fingers. CHAP. XIIII.
We see many times, that the Child brings with him into the world diverse other
imperfections, and effects: As I saw a child of one Peter Ferot, who had a
little piece of flesh, which hung in the middle of his chin, like unto a little
sausage, of the bigness of a quill, and half as long: and I tied it about
with a thread, and cured it quickly. I did the like also another time, being
accompanied with Mons. Portall, to a son of Mons. de Saint Gille, who had as
it were a little cherrie hanging at the end of his ear.

I have seen three little children newly borne, (and among the rest, The roof
of the mouth cleft.
I saw one, being with Mons. Hautin of Paris, ordinary Physicion to the King,
who was the son of Mons. de Cheary:) all these three children had the roof
of their mouth cleft and divided, even to the bottom of the Nose: by means
whereof they could not suck: because it is necessary for one that will suck
well, to have the air closed in the mouth, and not to be dissipated and lost:
which a child that has a cleft pallet, cannot do: because the air does spread
it self abroad, and gets out by the pallet ot the mouth and the nose.
Nevertheless, I have seen little children, that have been nourished by a
sucking bottle, the space of two or three months: but at length they have
died: because the milk ran out by the nose, it being a very hard thing, to
make an artificial pallet, that should keep it from going forth:
Nevertheless, I would counsel the Surgeon to make one, and to fit it with
a little sponge tied to it, which shall be put handsomely into the said cleft
with the pallet: and it must be put in when the child would suck, and then
taken out again when he has done. And this have I practiced with good
success.

The hare lip.
The cloven Lip, called a hare lip, does often happen unto children: but the
chiefest point is, to know whether it should be cured betimes, or else stay
longer before it be taken in hand. I was once present at a Consultation, for a
great Lords son, who was brought hither from beyond the Sea, for me to take
him in hand, and cure him: Six Physicions and Chirurgions were of opinion,
that the cure should be deferred longer, (because the child was not above four
or five months old.) Notwithstanding, it was put in practice contrary to
their opinion, but the child's life was endangered thereby: And to say the
truth, it is fitter to prolong and defer the practice of it, until the child
have some more discretion: for otherwise there is danger, least the points of
the needles be broken, either by the child's crying, or sucking, or else in
rubbing himself: A hystoric.
as I have known it happen unto some, their flesh being very soft and tender:
Besides, the operation is hard to be done, by reason of the child's impatience,
having no discretion, or knowledge, (the which happened to the foresaid Lord:)
And also, for that it grows not a whit the worse, for the deferring it, till
the child have more understanding and judgment.

If the child should have a finger, or a toe, Extraordinary number of fingers.
above the ordinary number, as there be some which have six, whether it be in
the hand, or on the feet: this deformity happening, I think it best, that it be
taken away, as soon as the child is grown any thing big: Which I have done, A
story.
to an honest Gentle-womans son, who had two thumbes, which came unto him, as
his Mother told me, by marking and beholding earnestly her Vintager, who had
two thumbes, as he told money into her hand when she reckoned with him, whereat
she took an exceeding pleasure, and delight, to see him wagge the said
thumbes, in that manner.

Of the diseases which happen in the Eyes, Ears, and Nose, of little Children.
CHAP. XV.
MOST commonly little Children, when they are newly borne, are subject to
diverse diseases, which chance in their eyes, ears, nose, mouth Navel, and
other parts of their bodies, as we will show hereafter in brief.

Of the diseases of the eyes.
Concerning those that happen in their eyes; I refer the young Surgeon to
my book of the diseases of the eyes, which I wrote on that subject. But
because, that for the most part they are troubled with watering, and bloud-shot
eyes, it will not be amiss in this case, that the Nurse sprinkle him some of
her milk, to make him open his eyes, and take away the gum that holds them
together. She may likewise wash them with a little rose water, and Plantaine
water warmed, and shall anoint the lids and corners of his eyes, morning and
evening with a little Vnguentum Tutiae well made and prepared; for this
ointment has power through his oylines, to keep the eyelids from sticking and
gluing together, to strengthen them and take away any inflammation that may
happen there.

Oftentimes the Nose of little Children is so stopped with filth and matter
which is dried, Of the nose.
that they can scarcely fetch breath thereby. This accident does much trouble
them, especially when they suck, and it makes them oftentimes swallow their
spittle, and breath with pain: when this chances, the Nurse must moisten the
inside of the nose, with fine soft linen tents, rubd over with some Vnguentum
Rosatum, or Pomatum, or for want of these, she shall take a little of the
seething of the pot, and make him snift it up into his nose (if he have
discretion to do it.)

Likewise the ears of little children do commonly run as well within as
without, Of the ears.
which happens because naturally their brain is very moist, and besides
there arise many vapors from the entrails into the head, which fills their
brain with moisture, and that run and flows by the ears: and therefore the
Nurse must have a care to keep clean the child's ears, as well within as
without, and behind them: dropping into them gently now and then, two or three
drops of oil of bitter Almonds, with a little Honey of Roses, a little warmed.
And if there be any fretting or excoriation behind and about the ears: then
the nurse shall lay on them handsomely, fine linen plasters, handsomely, fine
little plasters, made with an ointment composed of white wax, and oil of Nuts.

Toward the hinder part of the ears, about the bottom of them, there happens
oftentimes swellings which the Ancients call Parotides, and the French
Orillons: when these happen, they must be rubbed with oil of sweet Almonds,
laying upon it a little quilt made of carden cotton, or fatty wool basted
between fine linen clothes.

And the better to resolve the said swelling you may add to it a little oil
of Chamomile, and Lillies. If these swellings come to suppuration, they must be
dressed as other impostumes be, not using thereto any repercussiue medicines.

Of the soars and ulcers, which happen in the child's mouth, called Aphthae.
CHAP. XVI.
MOst commonly in the mouths of children, there arise little pustules and
ulcers which possess not only the sides of the mouth, the tongue, and the
gums, but even the very almonds, and pallet, of the mouth, and they were called
of the Ancients Aphthae. Of these ulcers there be some that are malignant and
creeping, Aphthae, or the ulcers of the mouth.
which spread abroad as the Herpes does: and according to the malignity of the
humor, which breeds them, they are either the easier, or harder to be cured:
those which come of some salt phlegm, and which are neither deep, nor
painful, nor of an ill color, nor placed at the bottom of the throat. But
are only about the gums, the tongue, and the sides of the mouth, which neither
grow bigger, nor spread farther, they are easy to be healed. But those which
creep farther, and are very painful, blackish, and which possess the bottom
of the throat, having an Ague joined with them, they (as Hippocrates says) are
malignant, and hard to be cured. I have seen some, that for all the care and
diligence that could be used to them, have fallen into a Gangrene. Which has
happened to diverse and of late, to a Cutlers child, who was looked unto by
Mons. Habigot a Master Barber Surgeon of Paris, although he had sought and
used all the means, both skilfully and faithfully, that Art could require.

For the helping of them that are curable, it is fit, that the Nurse keep a
good diet, let the ulcers be gently rubbed a little with Honey of Roses, and
syrup of Violets: But if they will not yield to this, then the Surgeon shall
touch them with a little Aqua fortis, but to every drop of the said water, he
must add twelve of Plantaine water, according as he would have it to be in
strength: A Gargarism for the ulcers of the mouth.
then with a little clout tied to the end of a stick, the ulcers shall be
touched gently. They may also use this Gargarisme.

The ulcers must be dried up. Hord. integ. Pug. j. Agrimon. Plantag. Rosar.
rub. an. m. j. Coquantur perfect. in aqua commuri. in colat. ad vj. dissolve
Mellis Rosat. i s. Piamor. s. Alumni. s. fiat gargarismus, vtatur vt dixi.

After they have used this Gargarisine a while, let there be added to it, of
Berberis, flowers of pomgranats, and a little of the juice of the said
pomgranates. For the ulcers of the mouth require medicines to dry them up,
which do their operation speedily. An experime^t of the Author
But if you perceive that they spread or creep farther abroad, use this
medicine, which I my self use very often, and find it to be very singular
good; which is to take half an ounce of Rosewater, or Plantaine water, adding
thereto half a dragme of oil of Vitroil, and to touch the sores with it.

And this medicine did never deceive me: but the Surgeon ought to taste it
first with his tongue to see that it be neither too strong nor too sharp.

Of the Inflammation, swelling, and superfluous flesh, which happens in the
Gums called Paroulis, and Epoules. CHAP. XVII.
IT is seen oftentimes, that the gummes of little Children are swollen, and
inflammed, though their teeth be not ready to come forth: which accident the
Ancients called Paroulis and Epoulis.

The Paroulis, is a little swelling red and angry, which is either bred of a
choleric, hot, and adust blood; or else of some sharp and salt phlegm, which
falls out of the brain upon the gums. It may proceed also, from some vapor,
that rises out of the stomach; which causes not only the gums to be swollen
and inflammed, but oftentimes the iaw, the cheek and the neck, to be also
affected with it, bringing also with it an Ague and pain: The Cure.
which is the occasion that these tumors do often suppurate: and chiefly when
there is any gross blood mingled therewithal, otherwise it will resolve and
be digested well enough.

For the Cure of it you must use at the beginning gentle Lotions, and
Gargarismes, A Gargarism.
that are cooling and not much repelling, adding thereto toward the end, some
things that may resolve. You may use this Gargarisme.

. Hord. integ. m. j. Plantag. Portulac. Acetos. Agrimon. an. m. i. Flor.
violar. p. i. fiat decoctio. in colatura ad vj. dissolve sir. violac. j. syrup.
e Rosis siccis s. fiat Gargarisma. Herewith shall you cause the child to wash
and Gargarise his mouth, if he be able: if not, then you must often rub his
gummes therewith. Or else you shall anoint his gummes with the Mucilage of
Psyllium and Quince seeds, A medicine for the neck and jaws.
drawn with Rose and Plantaine water, adding thereto a little syrup of Iuiubes.

If the iaw bone, cheeks, and neck be inflamed, the Ancients counsel us to
rub them with a little oil of Roses warmed, adding thereto some juice of
Nightshade, Mesues Ointment of Roses is also very good for it.

If the child be any thing big, let him take this drink.

. Rasur. Eboris in nodulo inclus. ij. sem. Portulac. ss. fiat decoctio ad lb.
ij. in colatura dissol. sir. Granat. e Limonibus. an. j. vtatur. If the tumor
cannot be resolved, but rather grows to suppuration, then you shall make him a
Gargarisme with Figs, Raisings, Iuiubes, Licorise, and french barley, well
boiled. Let him hold in his mouth a little warm milk: and sometimes lay half
a fat fig hot to the gummes.

When it is come to suppuration, the tumor shall be lanced, yet sometimes it
breaks of it self; then let it be mundified with Mil Rosatum, syrup of dry
Roses, or Cherries, or the like.

As for the Epoulis, it is a little excrescence of flesh, rising like a blister
upon the gums, and most commonly betwixt the teeth, but chiefly among the
hindermost, sometimes it is painful and causes an Ague. The cause thereof, is
almost the same as we have said of the Paroulis.

For the cure, at the beginning, you must use some such Gargarisme as
follows, because it is needful to use more astringent medicines in this,
then in the Paroulis.

A Drink. A Gargarism for the Epoulis.. Rad. Buglos. is. Plantag. Agrimon. an.
m. i. Hord. integ. p. i. Rosar. Rub. m. s. Balaustior. ij. Dactilos. n. iiij.
glycyrrhiz. is. fiat decoctio in Colatura dissolve syrup. Granator. e Rosis
siccis an. i. fiat Gargarismus.

After they have used this, let them touch the part often with the medicine
following.

. Succi Granator. Cydonior. an. s. succi. Berber. Portulac. an. ij. cum
tantillo decoctionis lentium and Rosarum Rubrarum, fiat Medicamentum. This
medicine has power to bind and strengthen the part, and to make the tumor
resolve.

Oftentimes the said Epoulis grows so big, that we are constrained to tie it,
not being able, either to resolve it: or bring it to suppuration. Some of them
also are of an ill, and malignant quality which must not be touched or meddled
with but with great discretion.

Of the two strings or ligaments that a child has under his tongue. CHAP.
XVIII.
IN Children that are newly borne there are commonly found two strings: the
one comes from the bottom of the tongue, and reaches to the very tip and end
thereof. This string is very slender and soft, and it hinders the child from
putting it out at length, and from taking the nipple (as they say) that he
cannot suck well. This string must be cut with a sizzer within a few days
after he is borne: and then the nurse must thrust her finger under the child's
tongue, and lay there at the first a little chaw'd salt to keep it from
growing together again.

There is also another string, which is both harder bigger, and more firm,
then the former: which begins at the root of the tongue, and stretches it
self almost through the middle thereof, the which string is oftentimes so
short, that it hinders the child from stretching it, and putting it forth of
his mouth, and also from turning and wagging it, thereby to bring back the meat
he has chaw'd, that he may swallow it. This may easily be perceived, for if
you bid the child to put out his tongue he cannot do it; for when he goes
about to do it, it binds and folds double in his mouth, he not being able to
make it come farther then his lips: which much hinders him in his speech, and
in the delivery of his words, making him commonly to stammer.

How to cut the string of the tongue.
The cure of this is only to be done by the Chirurgian, and that after two
manners: the first is thus: you must cause the childs tongue to be lifted up,
and held stiff on both sides, as well by your own finger, as by some others,
which shall hold the other side of the tongue, to keep it stiff, and then let
the string be cut with a sharp instrument, thrusting in the point, as deep as
shall be fit.

Another way
The second way also is, by lifting up the tongue, and holding it fast, (as has
been already said) and then with a needle with a double thread in it, you
shall draw the thread cross the said string, or ligament (to wit, as far as
you would cut it) and tie it hard, cutting away the ends of the thread somewhat
near the knot, and so let it stay there till it has separated that part of
the string or ligament thus tied. But this way in my opinion, is more painful
then the former. But whether it be cut or tied, it will leave an ulcer which
must be healed, as we have showed before, taking care that the string grow not
together again.

Of the Cough which happens to little Children. CHAP. XIX.
WE see, that little Children are often troubled with a Cough: which happens
unto them, because their lungs are weak and tender, which for every little
thing that troubles them, they endeavor to discharge and rid themselves of it,
with some striving agitation.

They may also catch this disease by lying uncovered, The causes of the cough.
or by being carried abroad in the cold, or in the evening; which makes them to
cough, bringing up little or nothing. They may also cough with sucking too
eagerly, drawing the milk faster then they can swallow it: and so some few
drops by chance get into the Trachaea Arteria, which makes them never leave
coughing till they have brought it all up again.

The cough may likewise proceed from the distillation of some sharp, thin
humor, which comes from the brain, and falls down upon the lungs by the
Trachea Arteria. There may also be gathered, some humor in the Pipes or
Passages of the lungs, which Nature at length strives to expel and thrust
forth.

The cough is dangerous for children.
Of what occasion soever it proceed, it is very dangerous, especially, if it be
of long continuance. For fear least through continual reaching and coughing,
the child get a rupture, or bursting, or else an Ague, by reason he cannot
sleep nor take his rest, only some headache, pain of the sides and stomach,
and vomiting.

Concerning the cure of it, we must have a respect to the cause, and so
accordingly it must be remedied.

If the Cough proceed of Cold, let the little one be kept reasonable warm,
Medicines against the Cough.
and give him a little oil of sweet Almonds mingled with sugar Candy: let his
breast be rubbed all over with fresh butter and oil of sweet Almonds: and then
lay upon it some warm cloth: if his nose be stuffed, let it be unstopped, with
a little ointment of Roses, or some of the liquor you boil your meat in,
whereof you may put a little up into his nose for that purpose.

If it proceed of some sharp humor: then it must be mitigated and thickened, by
giving him a little syrup of Violets, and of Iuiubes mingled together. As also
let him use Juice of Licorise, Oil of sweet Almonds and sugar Candy; and
Lozenges of Diatragacant hum frigidum. If the child be any thing big, you may
give Barley Cream, with a few white Poppy seeds: and let him drink a Ptisane
made with Barley, and Licorise.

Let all his breast and throat be anointed with Oil of Violets washed in
Barley water.

Apply to the nape of his neck a tossed of bread hot, or else half a loaf new
out of the oven. Means to stay the cough.


If the Cough hinders him from sleeping, you may give him a little Sirup of
Iuiubes, and Violets, with as much Diacodium sine speciebus, mingled altogether:
Let him also use Conserve of Roses.

If the Cough come by reason of some fleagme, or gross and slimie humor, that
is gathered together in the breast: You must give the child a little Sirup of
Maidenhaire, with as much Sirup or Licorise, and Hyssope, or Honey of Narbone,
mingled together: Rasis adds in this case a little Fennel water.

Anoint his breast also with this Ointment.

An ointment for the breast.. Ol. Amygdal. dulc. j. Unguent. Resumpt. ss.
axung. Anseris, Gallinae an. ij. liquesiant simul lento igne pro litu, vt
dictum est.

I have already set down diverse other medicines in my former book, speaking
of the Cough, which happens unto women with child; to which place I refer you
for your farther satisfaction.

Of the inflammation and swelling of the child's Nauill. CHAP. XX.
OFtentimes, The cause of the swelling of the navel.
after the child's Navel is tied, there comes some inflammation, swelling, or
ulcer, and especially this happens when that which has been tied is divided
and fallen away, it being not perfectly suppurated. The same Navel may swell
also either through the childs eager crying, or when he coughes much, the
tumor and swelling being full of wind, and sometimes also of water.

The Cure.
The inflammation may be cured by the use of Vnguentum Rosatum, or with a little
Vnguentum Refrigerans Galeni: The bathing it also with Oil of Roses, and a
little Vnguentum Populeon, may do very much good.

As for the Ulcer, if it be but small, you may put upon it some fine Flower, or
the powder of a rotten post, or else a little plaster of Diapompholigos, and
Vnguentum desiccatiuum, mingled together: You may also sometimes touch it with
a little Allome water, and so cicatrize it.

As for the swelling, you must have a care that the Navel stand not forth too
far, and swell not more then it ought. Now to hinder that, you shall lay upon
it, a cloth eight or ten times doubled, and then swath it gently, that the said
Navel stand not forth too much: which ought to be done, if there be neither
wind nor water contained within it. But when either of them are there, Auicen
uses this medicine.

Auicenus medicine.. Spicae Nard. pull. ss. Terebinth. iij. Ol. Amygdal. dulc.
parum fiat vnguentum.

But me thinks, to give it a form and consistence, it were not amiss, to
add unto it a little wax.

I use commonly this plaster, whether there be any wind, or water: which has
power to resolve, consume, and dry up the said wind, or water.

An approved medicine.. Unguent. Comitiss. desiccat. rubr. an. j. stercor.
Columb. ij. pull. Irid. florent. iij. Sulphur. viui j. Ol. Nard. ss. Cerae and
Terebinth. q. s. fiat Ceratum.

But the only thing is, to keep it down with a boulster and swathing, that it
swell not, or stand forth the more.

Some use Emplastrum contra Rupturum for it.

Of Gripings and Fretting in the belly, which troubles little Children. CHAP.
XXI.
THese gripings do trouble little children very much; the causes are two: For
either they come because the excrement called Meconium, is retained in the
guts: (This humor is black and slimy like melted pitch, which pricketh and
wringeth their guts, and puts them to pain, to void it) Or else these Gripings
are bred of the abundance of milk, which the child takes, or of the ill
quality thereof: the which being not digested, does putrify and corrupt, and
turns either into choler, or into sharp and salt fleagme: Or else there is
bred some wind, which causes a distention of the stomach and guts. The cold
air, and the worms also may cause it, which I leave to be handled in another
place.

The Cure.
Concerning the cure, if the said excrement, called Meconium, be the cause of
the said gripings, it must be euacuated by little suppositaries made of the rib
of a Beete leaf, or of Soap; and also by Clysters, to draw away this humor,
and make it come forth.

If too much milk be the cause: then the Nurse shall not give the child suck
so often, nor in such plenty: If it proceed from wind, and that do cause the
child to be thus troubled, it shall be discussed with Fomentations applied to
the belly and Navel; and with Carminatiue Clisters, which shall be given him,
as this: A Clister for the wind.. Malu. Bismal Parietar. an. M. j. flor.
Chamaem. Melilot. summitat. Aneth. an. p. j. semin. Anis. Foenicul. an. ij.
coquantur perfect in iure pulli, vel capitis veruec. in colatum ad vj.
dissolve Diacatholic. Mellis Anthosat. Saccar. rubr. an. ss. Ol. Chamaemel.
Aneth. an. vj. fiat Clyster.



Of the foresaid decoction you may also make a fomentation, with fine spunges:
and then let his belly be rubbed and anointed with oil of Camomile, Melilot
and Dill, mingled together.

Parietary of the wall, with a few Camomile flowers, and tops of Dill, fried
with Oil of Lillies, and Dill, and then laid to the belly hot, are very good.

If you perceive, that these gripings proceed of some sharp, biting, or
chollericke humor, that gnaws and gripes the stomach, and the guts (which may
be known, both by feeling his belly, which will be hotter then ordinary, and
also by the stools which will be yellow and greenish) then shall you give him
little Clisters of milk, or else of the broth of Veale, Capon, or of a sheeps
head, wherein you shall dissolve two drams of Benedicta Lanatiua, and as much
Oil of Violets, and red sugar.

Let his belly be rubbed with Oil of Roses and Violets, or else with Mesues
Ointment of Roses.

You may give him to take inwardly some Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn and
mingled with Sugar candy.

And if the child be any thing big, it will be very fit to give him an ounce of
the compound sirup of Cichory with Rubarbe dissolved into Agrimony water, or of
Carduus Benedictus, you may also mingle amongst his pappe or gruell, a little
Cassia drawn, the better to make him take it.

Of the Worms. CHAP. XXII.
THe Worms do trouble little children very cruelly, and therefore not without
good reason did Hippocrates call them Theriodigastros; (...).
as cruel beasts in the belly. There be of them of diverse forms, and bigness.

Some of them are round and long, (...).
named Elminthes, which breed in the small guts, they ascend sometimes into the
stomach, and come forth at the mouth. There be others that are long and flat,
called Teniae, (...).
which are as it were a band couched, and placed all along the great guts. Some
are little and slender as the point of a needle, (...).
and are called Ascarides, by reason of the itching which they cause in the
great gut, and the fundament, in which place they are bred: and oftentimes they
are enclosed, as it were with a little purse. I have seen diverse, that have
voided a million, which have been, al of them fastened together.

Touching their generation, Hippocrates observes that little children do
bring the worms even from their Mothers belly, but most commonly they are bred
of putride and corrupted phlegm, as also of other ill humors, which lie in the
guts.

When children are troubled with the worms, they wax lean, they have no
desire to eat, their belly aketh, swells, and grows bigger; they start in their
sleep, and do sometimes swoune, and have a little dry Cough: the color of
their face is pale and wanne, and their eyes great: they rub their nose
commonly: and when they are troubled with small worms, their fundament
itcheth: But the surest sign that a child has the worms of what nature
soever they be: is when he voides them with his excrements by stool, or that
they come up by the mouth, or through the nose, which I have oftentimes seen
come to pass.

Concerning the Prognosticke, as soon as you perceive that the little one is
troubled, you must seek to help him; for the deferring of it may breed danger.
The Ancients have written that there are some, which have come forth through
the groyn, and nether belly: which is witnessed by Paulas Aegineta, and Auicen.

The Worms that come forth by stool, mingled with blood, show that they have
gnawne the veins of the guts from whence that blood flows. If they are
brought up by vomiting, it shows that they provoke and trouble the stomach.

Some have observed, that a child which has the Worms, is in danger of death,
if he be taken with a shortness of breath, and becomes moist, and cold.

For the Cure, if the child be young, The Cure.
it will be very convenient, that the Nurse keep, a good diet: let her
abstain from all white meats, raw fruits, Pease, beans, Fish, and all other
meats that are of hard concoction, and easy to be corrupted.

Rhasis forbids us, Rhasis opinion.
to give young children any medicines by the mouth: and appoints only some
outward medicines, as an Emplaster made of cummin seed, and an Ox gall, laid
upon the Navel.

In imitation of whom, I use to appoint this emplaster.

An emplaster for the worms. Pil. sine quib. s. Pull. Absynth. i. Myrrhae Aloes
an. ij. farin. Lupinor. i s. fellis Bubuli. q. s. fi^t Emplastrum admoucatur
supra vmbilicum.

You may also give the child, if he be somewhat big, a little of the scrapings
of Hearts horn, in his milk or other spoonemeate. Those that are rich do
commonly give their children some Bezoards stone, and Unicorns horn.

But when the child is grown somewhat older, besides the former medicines, let
him take a little drink made with decoction of Purcelaine, and the shauings of
Hearts horn, with a little juice of Citrons: If he can, let him take a little
expression of Rubarbe, infused in the foresaid decoction: or else an ounce of
sirup of Cichory. For it kills and drives forth the worms downward. But
it will be good to give him first a Clister of milk, red sugar, and honey, to
draw down the worms by this sweetness, to the nether parts.

There is no medicine, that will do more good if the child can take it, then
to take little pills made of Aloes gilded, in an egg, and so sup them up.

If he refuse these medicines aforesaid, then you may give him some of the
powder for the worms, in a roasted Apple, or with Prunes or Raisins. The safest
way is, rather to drive them forth, then to kill them: for oftentimes they
breed others, when they stay in the body.

Of breeding of teeth. CHAP. XXIII.
Hippoc. lib. 3. Aphoris. 25.
HIppocrates writes that amongst all the diseases, which children are subject
unto, there is none that troubles them more, then the coming forth and pain
of their teeth. For the breeding of teeth, The ill accidents which breeding of
the teeth brings to children.
brings diverse dangerous accidents, with it, as Agues, Watchings,
Convulsions, scouring, yea, and oftentimes death: From whence comes the
proverb, C'est un bell enfant iusque aux dents. It is a goodly child, if his
teeth prove mild. And therefore, not without cause did Galen say in his
Commentary, that the pain of a child's teeth coming forth, was more grievous
and hard to be endured, then the pain of a needle thrust in any part of the
flesh, which continues no longer then the needle stays there: but in the
coming forth of the teeth, it is not so, because then the gums do prick and
shout continually, which for the most part are much inflamed; and this pricking
and shooting still increases, till the teeth be quite come forth.

Now ye may know whether the child breeds teeth, by the heat of his mouth,
which makes him driuell, and slauer, and his gums will be swollen, he holds his
finger still in his mouth, by reason of the itching of his gummes, which
increasing more and more, puts him to extreme pain, and makes the blood ready
to startle out of his eyes.

Hippocrates in his book de Dentitione, Aelius. sem. 4. cap. 9.
gives this judgment of it. They that do scour, when they breed teeth, are
not so subject to Convulsions, as they that are bound.

If they be taken with a sharp ague, they are the less troubled with
Convulsions.

Those that are in good health when their teeth come forth; if they be very
drowsy and sleepy, there is danger least they fall into a Convulsion.

They that breed teeth in Winter, are less troubled, then those in Summer: and
if they be a little helped, they will endure it the easier.

All that are troubled with Convulsions at the coming forth of their teeth,
do not die, but many escape.

Their teeth come forth hardest, that have a little cough with all: and if
they be troubled with pricking and shooting of the gums, they become very
lean.

Considering all the former accidents, and also the danger wherein the child is,
there must be speedy help: which shall be done either by ordinary medicines,
or else by Surgery.

The Cure. First therefore, the Nurse must often rub the child's gums with her
finger alone, thereby to open the pores of them, and make them soft, that the
moisture may breath out the better: and sometimes let her anoint her finger
either with Honey, fresh butter, the brains of a Hare; or such like (either
roasted, or raw) or else with oil of Lillies, An experime^t
or Hens grease. Some hold it for a great secret to rub the child's gums, with
the milk of a bitch, either of it self, or mingled with the brains of a pig.
Auicen prescribes that they should hold a slice of fat meat between their
gums, Auicen
and chaw it often. And it is to be noted, that all the foresaid medicines
ought to be applied more then luke warm.

The Ancients make mention of some medicines which by a hidden property have
virtue to ease this pain, and help to bring forth the teeth. Some take the
tooth of a Male Viper, and set it in gold or silver to rub the child's gummes
with it. Aecius.
Aecius bids, that we should hang about the child's neck a Jasper stone, that
is very green, and let it touch the stomach; Auicen says, Auicen.
that the root of smallage hung about a child's neck, does assuage and ease
the pain which happens in the coming forth of the teeth.

Neither will it be amiss before the pain grow to be great and vehement, to
rub the legs, thighs, shoulders, back, and nape of the child's neck drawing
still downward; thereby to alter, and turn the course of humors which fall
down upon the gums, and passages of the throat in great quantity, which may
stifle him.

But if none of all these medicines do any good, as oftentimes it happens:
then the safest, and speediest way, is to make an incision al along the top of
the gum, just upon the teeth. Which the Surgeon shall know, is fit to be
done, when he sees the gum grows white, and perceiues that the teeth are even
ready to cut the flesh. The Nurses themselves show us that this practice is
very necessary and fit; for oftentimes they do scratch and tear the gum with
their nails, which turns to the child's great profit, and ease, and keeps
him from lying languishing so long in pain: An experience of the Author.
And I can assure the young Surgeon that I have practiced it, and caused it
to be practiced with very good success, above twenty times.

Now when you perceive that the teeth begin to come forth, whether it be by
the foresaid Medicines, by the lancing of the gums: Auicen would have the Nurse
to hold a piece of an Ireos root, in her hand, and let the child champe upon
it: or insteede thereof she may use a stick of Licorise bruised at the one
end, or else a piece of an Althaea root: For this remedy does assuage the
pain, because it makes the moisture, which is about the child's gums, breast,
and root of the tongue, to come away, and cause the rest of the teeth, to come
forward. And therefore they do use commonly for this purpose, to hang about
the child's neck either a wolfes tooth, or a branch of red Coral set in
silver, for the child to hold in his hand, and to rub his gums with it.

Of the Convulsions which happen to little Children. CHAP. XXIIII.
IT is not my intent in this place to handle particularly all the kinds and
differences of Convulsions, but only I will content my self to speak of that
which commonly troubles little children, Hip. de Aero loc. and Aquis. Morbus
puerilis. Matter pueroru^.
and is called by Hippocrates Morbus Puerilis, the child's disease, and by
Auicen Matter Puerorum, the mother of little children.

Hippocrates calls this disease Sacer, and therefore it is easy to be
coniectured, that it is an Epilepticall Convulsion.

The cause proceeds, (as Auicen says) either because that the milk
(wherewith the chid is nourished) is easily corrupted; though he suck but
little: or by reason of the great quantity, that the child takes, which
because of his weak and dainty stomach cannot be well concocted, and
digested: or through the il quality of the milk which the child sucks daily; or
through the weakness of the sinews, which do receive easily the moisture that is
bred in the child's body, whereof Nature does unburden her self, upon them,
which happens chiefly, An Aphorism of Hippocrates.
(as Hippocrates says) to children that are fat, and have full bodies, and are
bound in their bellies.

This Convulsion oftentimes chances through the child's breeding of teeth,
Diverse causes of a Convulsion.
and especially of his dog teeth, by means of the pain, inflammation, fevers,
and watchings, which do commonly follow upon it.

The cold air also may be a cause, and likewise the Worms, which the child
may have, or some ill vapor that strikes up, and offends the brain: which may
arise out of the stomach by reason of some putrefaction; or else from that
which is bred by means of the worms.

As for the Prognosticke hereof, Hippocrates says, The Prognosticke. Hippo. de
morbe Sacro.
that the Children, which have clean heads, are subject to Convulsions: And
contrariwise that those which have scabs on their head and break forth are
commonly in good health: For by them, they are purged and cleansed of all the
ill humors, that they had gathered in their mothers womb. Good sentences of
the Ancients.
Galen says, that the danger is easily perceived, by the child's shortness of
breath: Auicen and Paulus Aegineta do assure us, that the continuance of this
disease long, does oftentimes kill the child. Areteus says, that one violent
fit only, is enough to kill him: they that are younger, are in greater danger
of death, then the elder, as Caelius Aurelius writes, because they cannot so
easily bear out the fits, as the elder.

Therefore we must take great heed in the cure of it, The Cure.
not thinking that this disease may be helped by the child's growing older.

The Cure must be varied according to the cause of the disease. As if it
proceed of repletion, and fullness of humors, then must the Nurse eat less,
and not give the child suck so often: in both which she must observe a mean:
and therefore the Nurse shall rather use meats, that are somewhat drying: then
such as are too moist: And not without good reason does Auicen allow the use of
Wine well tempeted, rather then Water alone.

If the little one have need to be purged, it will be fitter to give the
Nurse a purgation then the child: which must neither be very strong, nor with
any Diagridium, Vomiting good for the child.
but gentle and easy, such as Cassia, Manna, and the like.

If the child be subject to vomit, especially if he be very big, Cupping
glasses.
the vomiting may do him much good.

When he comes to be 2. or 3. years old, you may apply cupping glasses, upon
his neck and shoulders: which is much commended by Auicen, thereby to draw the
moisture of the brain to the lower parts.

And concerning particular medicines, they must not be too hot (as some
appoint) for the affections of the Nerves, because those heat too much: and
(as Rhasis says) they do only resolve the thinner part. But we must rather
use in the beginning such as mollifye and soften, and do moderately resolve,
comforting withal.

Among many other medicines, Dioscorides says, Dioscorides.
that Oleum Irinum cures the convulsion, which troubles little children: and
it is likewise commended by the ancient Practicioners: This Oil is described
by Mesue.

Auicen approves Oleum Irinum, Keyrinum, and Liliorum: He says moreover, that
he has made trial of this medicine.

Auicens medicine.. Maioran. m. ij. macerentur in olei Amygdalar. dulc. vel
Zezamin. vj. and vini generosi totidem in Balneo Mariae, vel bulliant lento
igne ad consumption. vini; coletur and seruetur vsui.

You may also use very safely this Balm.

A Balm for the Convulsion.. Axung. Anser. Gallin. Anat. Cunicul. an. j.
Medul. cruris vitul. j. ss. Medul. Cerui vj. fol. Salu. Maioran. Ebuli, an. m.
j. flor. Chamaemel. Melilot. Hyperic. an. p. ij. flor. Rosismar. p. j. Mastich.
Myrrh. Irid. florent. an. ij. Olei Lilior. Lumbric. an. ij. macerentur omnia in
balneo Mariae spatio trium dierum: Deinde lento igne fiat decoctio, coletur and
seruetur vsui.

The ancient Practicioners do very much commend the Balm made of a Goose
stuffed with the foresaid ingredients, Balsamum Anserin^m.
and roasted: and then use the dripping of it in steed of a Balm; which I have
seen practiced.

Galen does attribute much to the hanging of a little chaplet, made of the male
Piony root, about the child's neck.

Oribasius much commends the Smaradge or Emerauld, that looks greenish,
which is found either in the stomach, or neast of a Swallow.

But the safest medicine of all is, to lay a Cauterie to the hinder part of the
child's head, A sovereign medicine.
in the nape of the neck, between the first and second Vertebra, or joint:
which I have done to some. And at Florence it is practiced to all children, as
soon as they are borne: yea, they do it, even with an actual Cauterie.

If you perceive that these Epilepticall convulsions do proceed from the
Worms in the child's guts; then you may give him this Clyster.

A Clyster.. Hidromel. simpl. iiij. Butir. recent. j. Aloes pulu. ss. fiat
Clyster.

Some give this Powder.

A powder for the Worms.. Pull. Lumbricor. terrest. in vino albo lotorum, and
extinct. ij. Sacchar. j. misce Capiat singulis diebus ij. per se, velcum aqua,
vel succo Portulacae.

You may give a child, that is somewhat big, as of eight or ten months old, a
dredge powder made of Worm seed, or of Rubarbe.

Besides, there be many other medicines, which I have already set down in
their proper place, as Emplasters, Sirups, and Purgations for this disease, to
which place I refer you.

If these convulsions come of some ill and malign vapor, the child may take
some Bezoards stone, and Unicorns horn, three or four grains at a time of
them both, or either of them with a little Purcelane water: or else you may
mingle five or six grains of Triacle, or Mithridat, with the said water, and
so give it him.

Let the Nurse use to take some of this Opiate, very often: which the child
also may do, when he is grown somewhat big.

An Opiato.. Rad. Poeniae subtle. pull. ss. Theriac. veter. ij. Cons. Rosar.
Borag. Buglos. an. vj. syrup. conseruat. Citri q. s. fiat Opiata, de qua Nutrix
capiat singulis diebus j. mane, and Infans ss. cum aqua Cardui Benedicti.

As for Vomiting, Scouring, or being bound in the body, which accidents
happens to little children: I refer you to that which I have set down
heretofore for the Mother, (only diminishing the quantity) because I would
avoid often repetition.

Of Watchings, wherewith young Children are troubled. CHAP. XXV.
ANd not without good cause does Hippocrates say, Hippoc. lib. 3. Aphorismor.
that too much watching in a child, is a disease: because sleep is naturally
proper to a child. And when it falls out that he cannot sleep, there must needs
be somewhat that troubles and offends him.

Whereby a child may be hindered from sleeping.
A child may be hindered from sleeping, by lying in a chamber that is either too
light, too hot, or full of smoke: or else because the clothes lie too heavy
on him: or because of much noise, or pain, as it happens to them, when they
breed Teeth, as likewise by having a pin that pricks them: or else because
they are not clean. Besides, the child may be hindered from sleeping through
the overmuch quantity of milk, that he has sucked, as also though it be
taken in small quantity, if it chance to corrupt; because (as Auicen says) by
means of this putrefaction, there is commonly bred wind and vapors in the
brain.

Signs that the child is amiss.
The signs hereof are evident enough; as when the child cries continually, and
cannot be stilled or quieted at all by the teat. Then (as Gordonius says)
their ey-browes seem swollen, and sometimes their countenance becomes very wan
and pale: which comes so to pass (as Auicen says) through the dissipation of
the spirits, and because the brain is filled full of vapors and exhalations.

The Cure.
Concerning the Cure, we must take away the cause that nourishes this watching:
if it be by lying in a place that is too light, and open to the air, then must
the windows be shut, making it darker: if the chamber where he lies be too
hot, or if the child have too many clothes on him, then must he be laid
cooler, and have fewer clothes, and be without any noise.

If breeding of Teeth be the cause, then shall it be helped, as has been
already said.

Besides, the child shall be vnswath'd, Diverse means to make a child sleep.
and laid in clean clouts, and then the Nurse shall look whether there be any
pin, or fold of his clothes, or any other thing that hurts him: She must
neither give him suck so often, nor in so great quantity: and to help to
void the corruption that may be in his stomach, it will be good to give the
child some little Clyster, or gentle purgation. Likewise the Nurse must rock
and sing to him: and if you find, that he cannot take any rest, by all these
means; then may you give him a little Barley water, or Barley cream, with a
few white Poppie seeds in it: or else you may let him take a spoonful of Syrup
of Violets and Diacodium mingled together: But you must abstain by all means
from giving him any Narcoticall or stupifying medicines, according to the
opinion of all Practicioners. Rhasis bids us anoint the inside of the child's
nose, with Oil of Violets, and juice of Lettuce, putting thereto also a little
juice of Henbane, and yet he goes farther, for he adds some Opium to it. But
herein we must be very wary and circumspect, and rather forbear the use of
it.

Of the affrightings, startings, and raging, which happens to young Children.
CHAP. XXVI.
ALl children are naturally very greedy, and gluttenous, and therefore many
times, and especially when they grow somewhat big, and are wained, they do fill
them selves with much milk, or with store of diverse other victuals. Beside,
they are subject to breed worms, which dying, abide still in their guts, by
reason of which there grows much corruption both in the stomach and guts, and
also in the mesenterie, and this corruption growing hot by the heat and
moisture of the child, it sends up vapors to the brain, from the aforesaid
parts, which mingling themselves with the spirits, which are there placed, do
cause dreams, frights and startings in the sleep, and (as Auicen witnesses)
makes children afraid of things which are not at all to be feared.

Gal. in Hip. lib. 3. Aphoris. 24.
Galen teaches us, that this fear happens then when the stomach of the child
is weak, and the meat which he takes corrupts in it: which causes vapors,
and fumes to rise to the head, and so bring these terrors.

This may also happen to those which are more in years, by the use of bad
meats: especially if the mouth of the stomach be weak and feeble. And
therefore Auicen says, that bad concoction, makes bad dreams.

As for the signs that belong heere-unto, The signs to know whether a child
be frighted in his sleep.
there can none be observed in children that can not speak but only (as Pliny
says) that as soon as they be awake, they will screech and cry out, as if
they were out of their wits, and utterly cast away: and commonly you shall
find them all of a water, and quaking every part of them: And if you ask
them, why they cry, they which can speak will say, that they were made
afraid, and that they saw some thing in their sleep. Moreover they that are
thus frighted are much given to vomiting, they are pale of countenance and
sometimes very red: and also they do hide their faces, and if anyone come near
them they cry out, and are afraid of him.

Thus may we easily observe that such dreams, and frights happen not to young
children, but when they be ill at ease, and full of bad humors. Aristot. de
hist^r. anim. lib. 4. cap. 10.
And this is witnessed by Aristotle, who says; that young infants are not
subject to dreams: experience teaching us, that those who as yet have not
discretion to know good from bad, are not feared with terrible and fearful
sights, but contrariwise, do laugh at them, and are well pleased.

For the Cure of this accident, The Cure.
both the Nurse and also the child (when he comes to eat) must avoid all
meats, which do corrupt the stomach, and such as are apt to breed gross and
malignant vapors, such as Pease, Beans, Leekes, Onions, Coleworts, which (as
Dioscorides reports) do procure sad and Melancholic dreams.

The diet, that the Nurse, and the child must keep.
Let them feed upon good meats, and in a moderate quantity, that so the
stomach may not be ouercharged, and that the concoction may be the more
easy. Rhasis wishes the Nurse to drink a cup of good wine.

After that the child has sucked, and the Nurse has eaten, they must not
(according to the precept of Auicen) go to sleep presently, They must not
sleep presently after meat.
because the meat can not descend so soon to the bottom of the stomach,
there to be embraced and perfectly concocted: And when part thereof stays at
the upper Orifice of the stomach, then the fumes and vapors thereof do
easily rise, and ascend to the brain.

If there be any bad humors abiding within the stomach, Medicines for the
child.
guts, or mesentery, let them be purged out. Auicen gives to the child a
little honey fasting. If he be somewhat big, you may give him a little Cassia,
a spoonefull of sirup of Cichory, and sirup of Damask roses, or some Manna in
broth.

If his stomach be weak, let it be strengthened with this Liniment.

A liniment for the stomach.. Olei de absynth et mastich. qu. s. puluer.
ganophyl. gr. vj. cerae. s. liquefiant simul. et fiat litus.

But especially let the Nurse, and those that come about the child, embolden
him: taking heed that they put him not in fear of any thing, by showing him
any picture or beast, or other thing, which may breed any fear, or terror.

Of the rupture, or falling down of the gut, in young Children. CHAP. XXVII.
CHildren, and chiefly male-Children are much troubled at this day with the
rupture, of which though there be many kinds, The diverse kinds of ruptures.
yet will I treat at this present only of the falling down of the gut, and
caul, and of the watery and windy rupture: for those which are called Camosa
and Varicosa do seldom or never happen to young children. I have observed,
that many children are born with these ruptures, which happen because the child
being in the Mothers womb, does often strive in turning and winding himself,
or else does so strain himself, that the guts and caul do bear down upon
the production of the Peritonaeum: which being enlarged gives occasion of a
rupture.

As for those which are called Hydrocele, and Physocele, which is the watery
and windy rupture, it cannot be denied, but that the child before he be borne
(if he draw bad humors from the mother, breeds these waters and winds, which
may flow down into the purses of the cod.

Nevertheless, The causes of ruptures.
most commonly these kinds of ruptures are bred after the child is borne and
come into the World: which happens upon diverse occasions, either because the
child has cried much, or through a long Cough, or by filling himself too full
of milk, or victuals; or by leaping, stretching, or straining himself too
much going to ride astride upon something.

As for the watery and windy ruptures, they proceed for the most part of the
bad nourishment, which the child takes either of his Nurse, or else of himself
after he is wained: whereupon grows infinite Crudities and Winds, which steal
by the production of the Peritonaeum into the cods.

The Cure.
For the cure of the falling down of the gut, if the child be very young,
keep him quiet, and still him from crying, and if he eat pap, put into it
this powder.

A powder.. Radic. consolid. mayor. ij. radic. sigilli. beatae. Mari. et.
salomonis an. is. herniar. ij. puluer. limacum rubror. i. fiat omnium puluis.

Every time that you make him pap, put a dram, or thereabout into it, and when
you vnswath him, to make him clean, use this fomentation to the part:
Afomentatio^. Radic. consolid. mayor. osmund. regal. cortic. vlmi. fraxini. an.
s. folior. plantag. tapsi barbati centinodiae, herniariae, caudae equinae,
flor. chamom. meliloti, rosar. rubr. an m. i. s. balaustor. nucum cupressi,
calic. gland. an. ij. fiant sacculi parui, coquantur in aequis partibus vini
austeri, and aquae fabrorum, pro fotu partis.



After that you have used this fomentation a quarter of an hour, dry the part,
and then lay upon it this plaster following.

An emplaster. Vnguentum de siccat. rubr. ij. puluer. Mastich. olibani
sarcocollae, nucum cupressi an i. cum tantillo cerae, et olei Mastich. fiat
Emplastrum satis molle.

Let this Emplaster be laid upon the part, and upon that a little bolster, to
keep all fast together, that nothing slip of: you shall bind it on, or else use
a trusse; but it will be fitter for the child to have it bound on, and then to
be swathed up.

This fomentation and plaster must be used for the space of thirty or forty
days: Rest necessary for the child.
and if the child be somewhat big, let him be kept quiet in his bed for forty
days together, taking the powder before discribed, with broth, or with a
little water of Myrtels, or else making the said powder into small Lozenges.

The fomentations must be made for him, as is already described, wherewith he
must be bathed half an hour every morning: and then the plaster laid on, and
fastened with a trusse, or cloth bound on it.

He must forsake all windy meats, as Pease, The dies which the child must
keep.
Beans, raw fruits, Salades, and white meats: feeding upon good meats that are
roasted, and of them but in small quantity.

Let him drink a little Red wine, His drink.
mingled with boiled water: if his belly be bound, give him a little clyster,
or else some broaths, with Seen in it.

And you must remember, that the Fomentation must not be used, nor the plaster
laid on, nor the trusse, or swathes applied, before the gut or caul be put up:
if so be that they be fallen down. And especially you must have a care, that
his head be laid somewhat low, How the child must be laid.
and his buttockes high, as he lies in his bed, that by this means nothing
may come down.

Concerning the watrie and windy ruptures, the child must keep the same Diet,
as has been already prescribed. And as for local medicines, they must be
such in both, as have power to attenuate, dry up, discuss, and resolve the
waters and wind which is within the purse of the cod.

For the watrie rupture, I have often tried this medicine.

A Plaster.. Unguent. comitiss. and desiccatiui rubr. an. ij. stercor. Columbi
ss. Sulphuris viui iij. puluer. baccar. Lauri, and semin. Sinapi an. j. olei
Aneth. and Terebinth. Venetae an. iij. Cerae q. s. fiat Emplastrum.

This Emplaster also is of good use for a windy rupture, unless you can heal
it with this fomentation.

A Fomentation.. Rosar. rubr. flor. Chamaemel. Meliot. and Aneth. an. m. j.
semin. Foenicul. and Anis. an. s. folior. Origani, Calamenth. an. m. j. baccar.
Lauri and Ireos florent. pulueris. an. ij. fiant sacculi duo, Coquantur in
aequis partibus vini albi and aquae, pro fotu.

But when these watrie ruptures grow so hard, that they cannot be dissolved by
the medicines aforesaid, then must they be opened: Which I have practiced upon
young Infants; and amongst others upon a child of Mons. de Vilantry, being not
above two months old: and this I did by the counsel of Mr Hautin, and Mr
Duret, the Kings Physicions in ordinary, and Physicions of Paris.

The manner of making this Incision, I have set down in my book, Of the
practizes of Chirurgerie: to which I refer the Reader, where he may find all
the particularities set down.

Of the difficulty of making of Water, wherewith young Children are troubled.
CHAP. XXVIII.
IT happens oftentimes, The cause why children can hardly piss.
that young Children can not make water, and that upon diverse occasions, but
chiefly through the fault of urine, which offends either in quantity, or
quality. The ill quality of the Urine is, when it is hot, sharp, and
pricking, which makes the child afraid to piss: because of the pain which
they feel when their water comes. The Urine offends in quantity, when it is
in so great abundance, and does so ouer-charge the bladder, that the Fibers
being ouer-stretched, can not draw themselves together, to expect the urine:
which happens to them which have kept their water too long. Children must be
often held out to piss.
And for this cause, children must often be called upon to piss, both when they
awake, and when they are changed, to be laid down to sleep. And when they grow
bigger, let them make water both before and after they eat: for since they
abound with moistures, and have their bladder but small, they must in no wise
keep their water long: and therefore if sometimes they bepisse themselves in
their sleep, they must not be much chidden, or beaten, for fear least if they
hold their water by force, they fall into this difficulty of voiding it.

If there be any fleagme, or slime, or blood mingled with the water: or if
there breed any sand, or stone, this may be the cause to hinder the child's
urine. And this may happen to young children, as Hippocrates notes: Hippocr.
lib. 3. Aphoris. 26.
because they eat much, which procures much cruditie, and breeds the matter of
the Stone.

The Cure.
For the Cure heerof; you must proceed according to the cause: which if it be,
because the urine is sharp, and pricking, or too hot; then if it be a sucking
child, it will be good to prescribe the Nurse a diet, A Diet for the Nurse.
to temper her blood, which it may be is too hot. Let her also be purged, let
blood, and bathed; and let her use broaths made with cool herbs.

If the bladder of the child be too full of urine, his belly will be hard, and
strout out; and then let the Nurse suck the end of his yard, and press down
his belly a little, toward the bladder: lay to his belly water Cresses, and
Pellitorie of the wall fried. If this do no good, you must put up finely an
hollow probe: and if there be any gravel, stone, or phlegm, the probe
depiction of probe will discover it.

If the child be somewhat big, you may give him this medicine.

A medicine for the grauel in the bladder.. Ol. Amygdal. dulc. j. ss. aquae
Parietar. j. succi Limo. j. fiat potus.

Set him also in a little bath. Galen, and Auicen do much commend the water of
Rapes, or Turnips, which you may give with a little decoction of Parsley roots,
Dogs tooth, and Dandelion.

But it happens oftentimes, that the child can not piss, by reason of some
slime that sticks in the passage of the yard, which makes it swell, and puff
up, and show as clear as a bladder.

For the help heerof, you must bring forth the stone, by the help of a little
instrument, like to this here described, in the fashion of an eare-picker;
which you shall use in this manner.

You must hold down the child fast, that he stir not; and then the Surgeon
must take the yard between the forefinger and the thumb with his left hand,
by that part, which is next toward the groine, that is beyond the stone: for
fear, least in the performance of the work, it slip up, and go back again:
Then holding the little instrument in his right hand, let him put it up into
the passage of the the urine, so far till he meet with the stone: which when
he has found, let him bear down the instrument, to make it slip under the
stone, for to catch hold of it, behind; and when he has hold of it, let him
draw it forth in such manner, as shall be needful. And it will be necessary
to draw it out somewhat strongly, because oftentimes it sticks very hard.

Sometimes it happens, that the Stone is so big, that it cannot be taken away
by this means; and then we are constrained to make an incision in the yard;
which must be done in this manner.

You must hold the yard fast with the left hand, taking it by the midst, so
that half the thickness of it may be between you finger and thumb, and the
other half out, that so the Stone may rise and swell up the more, on that
side: Then on that side that the Stone swells up, right over and against the
Stone, let an incision be made, so deep, till you come to the Stone; which when
you find, you shall put under it such a small instrument, as has been before
described, therewith to draw it forth. And afterward let the wound be healed,
as an other ordinary wound: taking care, that there grow no little excrescence
of flesh in the passage of the water. An experience of the Author.
I have practiced this with very good success: and amongst others, upon the
son of Mons. Robert of Chartres.

The means to help children that piss in their bed in the night, and cannot
hold their water. CHAP. XXIX.
LIttle children do commonly piss a bed, and that for many reasons: As
because they breed and abound (as we have already showed) with store of Urine
which comes down into the bladder, and that is so little, that it is not
able to retain and keep it, being in so great quantity, besides the Sphincter
muscle is very soft, and weak, by reason of the child's tenderness: Again,
they do so go about all the day long, that when are laid to bed, they sleep
so soundly, that they cannot easily be wakened: whereto may be added, that they
use to dream often in the night, which makes them piss, thinking that they
are awake. Some think that wenches are more subject heereto then boys.

Now for the delivering and freeing them of this accident: diverse Phisicions
are of opinion, that it is best to let them alone, til they are grown bigger,
and not to trouble them with many medicines: For the fibers of the Sphincter
muscle, which keep the neck of the bladder shut together, grow dry, and
stronger, and besides then the child abounds not so much with moisture, and by
consequence neither with urine: but yet they must be hindered from drinking so
much (as they use in France) clear water and also kept from eating so much raw
fruit, and moist meats, and the like, which provoke Urine.

You must also endeavor to keep children always loose bellied, which will
make them piss the less, as well in the night time, as in the day. And you
must warn them to make water before they go to bed, and sometimes also you may
waken them out of their sleep, to put them in mind thereof.

The child must be put in mind to make water.
You must also threaten them, that you will whip them, and likewise make them
ashamed, of doing it. But yet for all this, you must not correct them too much:
for I have known some children (fearing to be beaten, if they pissed a bed)
that have tied their yard themselves, whereof has followed a Gangrene: which
happened to Mons. Paraeus, when he was a child, as he himself has told me.

When the child is grown somewhat big, let him eat roasted Chestnuts Filberds
and A corns: and drink styled water, and a little Claret wine well allayed.

Medicines of the Ancient Phisicions.
Auicen commends the brains of a hare boiled with thick Wine.

Some hold that the inner skin of a Capons gizzard dried, and made into powder,
is singular good. Rhasis sets it down for a secret, that the comb of a Cock,
dried, and made into powder: as also the bladder of a Bull, or a Goat is very
good, which Gordonius approoueth of.

You may give him a little water of Mirtills, with Conserve of Roses, and sirup
of dry Roses.

It will be very fit to bath the part of the child called Perinaeum with
astringent Fomentations, Fomentations for the Perinquin.
such as we have set down for the Rupture or Hernia.

Of the Gallings and fretting of the skin, which happens in the groine, and
between the thighs of little Children. CHAP. XXX.
LIttle children, The cause of excoriation, or galling.
by reason of the sharpness of their urine, and lying in their excrements are
much troubled with galling and fretting, which wears away the thin skin,
called Epidermis and chiefly about their thighs, and groyne, which unless the
nurse take the better heed, may grow to some foul and malignant ulcer.

Which that it may be the better helped, The Cure.
it will be very fit, that the Nurse keep the little one as clean as she
can, and that in making him clean and shifting him, she wash his buttocks and
thighs gently, with a little water of Plantaine, Roses, or Nightshade. Some
add thereto a little wine: Others make a decoction of Barley, Roses, and
Plantaine.

I use to prescribe a little Pomatum, wherewith I mingle sometimes a little
Lime well quenched and powdered: Vnguentum Refrigerans Galeni, well washed in
Plantaine, and Rose water is much commended. Both these medicines, by reason of
their oylines, do hinder the Urine, and excrements from making the place to
smart.

Common medicines.
Women do commonly be sprinkle those parts with meal dust, or with Barley, or
Bean flower. Some use the powder of a rotten post, or else a little Ireos and
Roses beaten into fine powder, Rhasis uses this medicine.

. Amyl. spoelij Rosar. Mirtillor. farin. Hordei. an. fiat omnium pull.
subtiliss. asperge excoriationes, post Balneum. Of the accidents which happen
to the child's yard, either before or after his birth. CHAP. XXXI.
THere may happen seven accidents about the top and end of the child's yard,
even from his birth: Diverse imperfections of the Praeputiu^.
to wit, three in the Praputium or foreskin: and four in the Glans or top
thereof. Touching those of the Praeputium, the first is when it is so straight,
and the hole so little, that the urine being come forth of the Glans, cannot
pass through the skin, but drop by drop, by reason it is shut so close
together; which makes part of the Urine remain betwixt the top of the yard and
the Preputium. The second is when the passage of the Preputium is not
altogether so narrow, but yet it cannot be put back neither can the Glans be
uncovered; Phimosis.
which the Ancients have called Phimosis. The third is when the Praeputium
cannot cover the Glans, because it is slipped over, Paraphimosis
and drawn backward; called by the Ancients Paraphimosis.

Concerning these of the Glans: the first is, when there is no passage at all,
in the end thereof: the second is, when there is a passage, but the hole is too
little. The third is, when the hole is not in the place where it ought to be,
which is at the end, but is placed at the bottom or lower part of the Glans.
The fourth is, when the top of the yard bends downward and makes the yard
stand crooked and awry.

Aristotle has observed another kind more strange then those, where he says,
An observation of Aristotle. lib. 4. cap. 4. de generatione Animalium.
that there have been some male children, which naturally have had no passage
made at the end of the yard, but the hole has been lower in the Perinaeum, so
that they were constrained to piss, as it were sitting, and when they held up
their Cods, or Scrotum, they seemed to be both man, and woman.

I have heretofore, for all the other accidents above named advised the Nurse
to have a care, and look to them: But because the cure of these belong
properly to the Surgeon to have set it down more at large,, and specified
it more particularly in this place that they may the better help it,
considering the inconveniences, that may follow, as we will show you.

For the first, What happens when the Praeputium is closed.
which is when the skin of the yard is so straight that the water cannot come
forth, but drop by drop, this imperfection causes a great deal of filth to
be gatherd betwixt the Praeputium and the Glans, whereof proceeds many
troublesome and dangerous ulcers, yea, and sometimes a Gangrene. I have
observed it, in some young children, that the top of the yard, has become
black and blew with pissing, through the very pain they endured.

The best way to remedy it, is to cut off the very top and end of the
Praeputium, thereby to take away a piece of it, as they do in the
Circumcision. For the performance whereof, there be diverse means, but the
safest and least painful way, is this.

The order of cutting the Praeputium.
First, it is to be considered, that the Praeputium is double, so that when one
thinks to cut both the skins, he cuts but one; for the second leaps away
especially from between the Sizzers. Besides, in cutting them both together,
oftentimes you may cut more of the uppermost skin, then of the nethermost which
is next to the Glans, which causes it to remain bare, and uncovered, whereof
follows great pain: it being fitter (for that occasion) to cut away less,
of the first, then of the second.

The manner of doing it.
Wherefore to prevent these accidents, the Surgeon with his right hand must
slide backward, over the Glans, the outward skin or membrane of the
Praeputium: and with the nails of his other hand he must draw downward toward
him the inner skin, which is next to the Glans, then some other Surgeon,
or stander by, with a pair of pincers made like unto these, shall take
depiction of pincers hold of both the Membranes, so placed with the forkes of
the said Pincers, holding them very fast, taking up with them, neither more nor
less of the skin then he would have cut off, leaving the Glans or Nut
behind, and then with a very sharp Razer, he must cut away all that is without
the forkes of the Pincers: when he has done so, let him loosen his
instrument, and let it bleed a little: by which means, he shall have both the
membranes even: and not standing out one more then the other, only the outmost
(it may be) will a little come over, and cover the second: This being done,
the wound must be healed, as an ordinary wound.

I have learned this manner of practice, of Mons. de Maverne, the Kings
Physician in Ordinary, who has caused it to be done after this fashion: and
it is the order and Method, which the Jews at this day, do observe, in their
circumcision: If you have not such an instrument, you may take two little flat
pieces of wood, and tie them both together at one end, and then put the
Praeputium between them, as we have showed, afterward tying both the other
ends together, reasonable hard, and then cut away so much of the Praeputium as
is without the wood, after the same manner, as you see smiths cut off the tops
of horse ears.

This method may be also observed, when the Praeputium is too much enlarged,
though it hinder not the urine from coming forth, which is commonly done, for
fear least it should slip over the Glans in such sort that it could not come
back again, and least it might cause a Paraphimosis, which is more dangerous
then the Phimosis, and often happens to those that are somewhat big.
Nevertheless we follow an other course in curing the Phimosis more easily than
the former, which is to slit the Praeputium at the bottom: and we do it in this
manner. Another way of curing the Phimosis.
First we stretch the Praeputium of al sides drawing it a little toward us,
and then we slip in such an instrument as you see here, depiction of medical
instrument between the Glans and the Praeputium, even to the string at the
bottom of it, and there suddenly we divide all the Praeputium below, hard by
the string, which I have done very often, and not long since for an honest
Gentleman, Mons. Riolan the Surgeon being with me. For with such an
instrument you shall cut asunder both the skins even, which you cannot do so
well with the sizzers, because the upper membrane cannot be wholly cut that
way, which has deceived some, and myself also at the first, being
constrained to go to it again, the second time, which made me devise this
instrument.

As for the Paraphimosis of little children, The Paraphimosis of little
children.
it is of two sorts: For the Praeputium being slipped up over the Glans, it
either sticks and stays so, or else it is only too short, and will easily be
brought over it again and cover it, but not staying so, it goes back again
straight: To that which does cleave and stick to it, it is not fit to do any
thing, by reason of the youngesse of the child: And for the other, which is
only too short, The Authors opinion.
because it breeds no inconvenience, I would advise the Surgeon not to
meddle with it, but rather to defer the practice of it, till the child be grown
bigger, and be able to endure it, which shall be done in this sort.

You must first of all, The method of doing it.
turn back all the Praeputium, that you may the better come at the inner
membrane, which you must hold very fast; and make an incision round about it,
the which incision must go no deeper then the said inner membrane: then
letting it bleed well, you must make such another incision round about the
uppermost membrane, which must go no deeper then to the nethermost: and
presently as soon as you have made these two incisions, you must pull out the
Praeputium at length which will easily stretch, because both the membranes by
reason of the foresaid incisions, will yield. Afterward you must have a care,
that the said incisions grow not together again, and that the innermost
membrane be not glued, and stick to the Glans, or top of the yard: which you
may hinder by laying betwixt them, fine little linen rags, spread over with
some ointment, which may serve also to heal the said incision.

An other way
Some after they have made these incisions, pull the Praeputium quite over the
Glans, and tie it reasonable hard, that the urine may have a passage, as also
by this means to keep it from going back again, and then afterward they
untie it, when they would dress the inner incision.

Cornelius Celsus appoints this kind of Cure.
Some do only pull over the Praeputium, and tie it as we have shown: then they
make an incision round about the skin of the yard near unto the groine, being
very careful, that they neither cut any vein that is in those parts, nor of
going so deep, as to the passage of the urine: When they have done thus, they
draw the skin, toward the ligature, and lay some lint in the incision, to
dilate it, and breed some flesh therein. And it is to be observed, that the
Praeputium must be always tied at the end, otherwise it would turn back
again, and the incision would grow together.

But, Aeginetas opinion.
(as Paulus Aegineta says) since these two accidents of the Praeputium, do
neither trouble them much, nor hurt any action: I would not counsel them, to
make the party suffer such pain, whether he be young or old, nor to have him
try the torment of such experiments.

When it happens that there is no passage at the end of the yard, then must the
Surgeon very cunningly make an hole there, that the urine may have free
passage to come forth: which being done, it must be kept open, and skinn'd
over with little cearing candles put therein, which must be bowed at the top,
for fear least they should get whole into the bladder; A good observation.
which I have seen happen unto some: The said cearing candle must be gently
rubbed over with a little powder of Bole, and Tutia, and upon it shall be laid a
little plaster of Refrigerans Galeni.

If it chance, that the hole be not big enough, it must be widened with fine
little cearing candles, fitted to the passage, and made with medicines that are
somewhat corrosiue, thereby to fetch away the upper skin of the hole: Taking
great heed, that the candle go but a little way in; because the passage is
narrow and strait only at the end, the rest being commonly large enough: And
when the hole is wide enough, it must be cicatriz'd with the like cearing
candles, as we have shown already, observing the same method as before.

When the hole of the yard is at the bottom, and not at the end, where it
ought to be naturally: If it may be done possibly, that the bottom of the
Glans must be stopped up, and an other made in the end of it: For those that
have the hole so low, cannot piss straight, but downward, or else they are
constrained to hold up their yard toward their belly. And when they grow to be
men, their seed cannot be carried straight, as it ought: which may be a means
to hinder them from having children.

For the performance of the Cure, it will be very needful to excoriate the
sides of the said passage, and to breed a little flesh there, and afterward to
confirm and skin it: having first of all made another little hole at the end
of the said Glans, which must be dressed and skinn'd with little cearing
candles, as we have shown already.

Besides all the other accidents heretofore mentioned, I have seen the yard of
some children so crooked, that when it rose and grew stiff, the Glans or top
of it was drawn, and bowed quite downward, which made them, that they could
not piss straight. This fault proceeds from the shortness of the string,
which holds the Glans so straitely tied, that it cannot stretch it self forth
when the yard grows stiff.

The Cure.
As touching the Cure, both the Surgeon and the Parents must be content to
let it alone for a while, till the child be grown a little older, and bigger.
And when they would put it in practice, they must watch their time to do it,
when the child's yard does stand, and is stiff: Then the Surgeon turning
back the Praeputium, shall uncover the Glans, as gently as he can: and as he
finds the ligament or string to be too short, he shall cut it in the middle,
and presently bring the Praeputium over it again, that the Glans be not left
bare: having first laid upon the incision, a little chaw'd salt, as they do to
the string of the Tongue, least it should grow together again, and then he
shall lay a little Emplaster of Refrigerans Galeni round about the yard.

Of Wenches, that have their natural passage closed up, even from their birth.
CHAP. XXXII.
THere be some Maids, that are borne with their womb quite shut up, or that
have no natural passage: which happens by means of some membrane, that is
placed in that part, which closes and shuts up the entrance, (for certainly
there is none which naturally has not a passage.) But because there is
something found, that stops up the entrance of it, therefore we say, that they
have none at all. This membrane is not always seated in the same place,
neither is it of the same form, and composition, nor of the same matter: For
in some, it is placed in the very edge of the passage, and is easily
perceived: and in others it lies deeper, near unto the inner orifice of the
womb.

Difference in figure.
In respect of the figure, some are pierced through the middle: Others have
holes, like unto a Sieue, and some have none at all.

Matter.
Concerning the matter, some are membranous, and others are fleshy: but those
which come even from the birth, are rather membranous, then fleshy children.

The Cure.
Those that trouble little children, are cured in this sort. First, we must
diligently consider, and take good heed, where abouts the membrane is seated,
or placed: for undoubtedly, the deeper it is, the more dangerous and difficult
will be the Cure.

But when it is at the brim, and edges of the outward neck of the womb, The
order to do it.
and is plainly seen: the Surgeon (after he has placed the child, as is
fit) shall cut asunder the said membrane, with his instrument directly in the
middle, without going any farther: As soon as he has made the incision, he
shall lay upon it, a little dry lint, that it come not together again: and
some days following, let him use some drying Ointment, which must be laid on
with fine linen clouts, as has bin showed before.

To defer the Cure of it, till the child were grown elder, it might prove
more dangerous with the time: Aristot. lib. 4. cap. 4. de gene ra^ Animal.
which has been well observed by Aristotle, where he says.

There be some women, that have even from their birth, the neck of their
womb, as it were closed, and incorporated together: which has continued so
with them till the time they should have their courses, but when they have
been ready to have them, with the very pain, in some the said neck has
broken open of it self, in others it has been opened by the Chirurgions, and
when they have been constrained to open it by force, or that it could not be
opened, there have very many died of it.

This accident has happened unto diverse, and amongst others to an honest maid
who being ready to have her courses, fell very sick, her belly swelled, with
great prickings and shootings downward, and continual vomiting, that troubled
her, by the keeping back of the said courses, which could not come away by
reason of the membrane that stopped up the passage. Which was very hard; for
all the Physicions and Chirurgions, that looked unto her, to find it out, who
had appointed her diverse medicines, to bring down her courses: But when they
saw, that all their medicines did her no good, they were of opinion to marry
her, which was a means, that her husband found out her disease sooner then any
Physician could. I was sent for to help her, but by reason of the badnes, and
danger of the way in travail, Mons. le Fort, and M. Collo sworn Chirurgions
of Paris, were sent thither: who after they had perceived the disease, they cut
the said membrane, and made such an incision, that there came out of it above
three pound of congeled and clotted blood, and as black as melted pitch which
eased the patient very much. But whether it were, that the incision was but
half made, or that it had grown together again, about a year afterward Mr.
Pineau, and I were called to finish the Cure, which we did with very good
success after this manner.

The manner of doing it.
Having well considered the membrane (which was hard and glewie, and had a hole
in the middle of it, whereinto you might have put a large quill) we were of
opinion to enlarge it, by making three incisions; which was done with such an
instrument as has been set down before to cut the Praeputium; and then
presently we put in a Dilatory, such a one as they use to dilate the wound
with, when they would take a stone out of the bladder) thereby to dilate and
tear asunder the rest of the membrane, and to make the passage big enough for
her to have the use of her husband: and as soon as we had stretched it, we
presently put into it a Pessary made of silver, of a convenient bigness, which
stayed there three days together, and was never taken forth, that the parts
which had been cut and torn asunder, might not grow together again, as it
had done before.

At the three days end, the said pessary was taken forth, and others put in,
made of linen cloth, and covered with digestive, A pessary of Lead.
and suppurating medicines: And when the said ulcer was ready to heal, it was
skinned with Pessaries of Lead, applied as they ought to be, and with others
made of cloth, covered with cicatrizing medicines. The said Gentlewoman was
perfectly healed in three weeks.

Of the fundament that is closed and stopped. CHAP. XXXIII.
AS the yard of a boy, and the natural passage of a wench, are oftentimes
found to be closed and stopped up, when they come into the World: So in like
manner there are some of both sexes, whose fundament is naturally closed and
stopped also, which comes thus to pass by means of a Membrane, which
hinders this passage. The fundament that is shut up must be speedily remedied.
Wherefore, considering the accidents, yea and the danger of death, which does
often attend it, it will be very needful to remedy it speedily. For if the
child be not quickly purged of a certain matter, and excrement, called
Meconium, which he has gathered together in his guts, all the while he has
been in his mothers womb, he is in danger to have great and intolerable
pains and gripings, and also to die in a short space: For the child cannot
live except he have the benefit of nature that way.

The means to help it is this: The Cure.
The Surgeon must first open the child's buttocks, and then let him consider,
whether there be a hole in the fundament or whether it be stopped by some
membrane. If he perceive, that the membrane is thin, Paulus Aegineta
counsels us to tear it. But if it be tough and strong, the best way will
be for him to cut it with a fine little instrument, and to go as deep as the
very fundament: How the even Cure must be performed.
which he may know by putting gently into the fundament, after he has made
the incision, a little fine probe, with some lint at the end of it: or else a
piece of cearing Candle. Then the ulcer must be dres't with little linen
tents, covered over with some drying medicine, which must be put into the
fundament, least the brims and edges thereof, being raw and excoriated, should
grow together again. And it would not be amiss, to let the child take a
gentle Clister, to help to unburden him of the excrements that have bin
retained. And since that the staying or stopping of them, as I said before, is
oftentimes cause of the child's death, it will not be from the matter to relate
this story.

A story.
Not long since, the wife of Mons. de Cugy, Mr. of the Munition in the Arcenal
of Paris, was delivered of a little Daughter, which had the passage of her
fundament shut up. After she was born, she was delivered unto the Nurse to be
carried into the country, where she continued seven or eight days, without
voiding any thing by stowle, which made her belly swel extremely. Whereupon she
was brought unto this City, and Mons. Rabigois, a Master Barber Surgeon and
sworn at Paris, a very diligent and painful man was sent for, to see what
might be the cause of this swelling: and he inquiring whether the child went to
stool or no: it was answered him by the nurse she had never purged her self
as yet that way, since she was born: then by and by he searched the fundament,
and found it to be closed and stopped up, and therefore he did counsel the
child's father to let him make an incision of the membrane, that stopped up the
passage: whereunto the Father and Mother would not consent, till the morrow.
But while the matter was debated and argued upon, the child dyed: And she was
opened by the said Master Rabigois, who found all her guts filled, with the
humor, called Meconium, and other filthy matter.

Of the scabbe which comes on the child's head and face. CHAP. XXXIIII.
OFtentimes there comes upon the child's head and face a hard crusty scab,
which covers all the head quite over (and therefore it is called the Cappe)
and sometimes the face also: so that you can see nothing but the child's eyes,
as though he had a mask on. The Latins call this scabbe Lactumen, Lactumen.
Lactitium.
or Lactitium, as being an excrement of the Milk: And because it is of a
yellow color, like unto wax, it is also called Cerium. The cause hereof,
Cerium.
is two fold, for either it is engendered of the relics of the women's courses
or purgings: The Cause.
or else of the Nurses milk, which being of an ill quality, does easily
corrupt in the child's stomach, and cannot be turned into good juice, and much
less be corrected by the Liver, it being sent thither to be turned into
blood: which makes it, that being carried unto the head and face, it cannot be
assimilated in those parts.

Least this scab might corrode, and eat into the skin, and afterward the
very bone of the head and face, and at length Gangrene the eyes: it will be
very good to remedy it.

For which purpose, the Nurse must keep a good diet, as we have formerly
shown.

The Cure.
Concerning Topicall or outward medicines, you must have an especial care, that
you use none that do repel, and drive back, but rather such as gently draw.

You may bath the crusts, especially those of the face, with gentle
Fomentations made of Mallows, Althaea, Violet leaves, Chamomile and Melilot
flowers and Linseed, boiled in milk: and with this decoction you may foment
the crusts, and afterward anoint them with Oil of sweet Almonds, Fresh
Butter well beaten with Parietary water, and Oil of Violets washed with Barley
water.

I am wont to use an Ointment of Lard melted, and then well beaten and washed
with Parietary water, and so anoint the crusts with it.

If there be any ulcer, and that the scabs are fallen off; you may lay upon it
a Cabbidge, or a Beete leaf, a little heated on a Gridyron. The Ointment made
of white Wax, and oil of sweet Almonds, is very good, when there is any
rawnesse, or excoriation.

Of the Meazels, and the small Pockes, what they are, and how they do differ.
CHAP. XXXV.
IT remains now, that we speak of the Measells, and the small Pockes: and
because there be few children but have them either first or last, Few children
escape the small pocks.
I have thought good, here to say a word or two of them briefly.

The Measels and the Pocks, What the measels and the pocks are.
are little risings or pustules, which appear most commonly in great number,
upon the outside of the skin: and at the first, they are so like one another,
that you can hardly discern whether of them it is. But yet the Measels come
more suddenly, and the face and skin of the whole body looks redder: and the
redness continues longer without rising; there being joined with it most
commonly a greater itching and pricking. Difference.
But the small pockes comes not forth so suddenly, neither is the skin so
red: nor does the color stay so long: the pustules or pimples rise higher,
neither itching nor pricking so much, and at length grow white.

The cause of both of them, Cause.
are the relics of the impurer part of the blood, wherewith the child was
nourished in his Mothers womb; which now is separated and thrust to the skin,
through the help and strength of nature, because the child's blood boileth in
the veins of every part of the body: (as Auicen says) No otherwise then new
wine does in a vessel, A good comparison.
which boyleth, casting up his froath, or scum, and separating it from it
self. And, (as Auenzoar says) though the child be nourished, with the best
part of the menstruall blood, yet there remains some little portion behind,
which is of an ill quality; and after the child is borne, and is grown
strong, he gathering together his forces and natural heat, thrusts it forth
by the pores of the skin, nature being willing to acquit and rid her self of
this superfluity.

Besides, there is a certain disposition of time, caused through the
malignitie of the air, which raises and stirs up the relics of the said
menstruall blood in the child's body, wherewith he has been nourished: unto
which the corrupt air (that we breath, and which we cannot avoid) does add
an impression, of a second bad quality, wherewith nature being ouer-charg'd
and offended, she thrusts them out to the skin, which receives the filth and
uncleanness of the body.

Now, the fuller the body is, of this menstruall blood, the deeper impression
does the outward air make in it: which is the reason, that some have them in
greater quantity, and are fuller of them, then others: And so according to the
malignitie of the humor, it is also more, or less dangerous to some, then to
others.

Signs.
The marks and signs whereby you may know that the child will have the Pockes,
are these: Headache, together with an Ague, redness of the eyes, which water
very often, itching of the nose, a dry Cough, gaping, weariness of the
body, pain of the Heart, desire to vomit, the urine red, a pricking, and
shiuering through all the body, and sometimes convulsions, and rauings. When
it is the Measels, the face grows red, and arises all at once: but when it is
the Pocks, neither the face, nor the rest of the body look so red: but you
may perceive some little risings here and there, in the face, back, breast,
and thigh's, which afterward increase, and grow bigger.

And when the Pocks begin to show themselves, then there happens heaviness of
the head, the face swells, the eyes are settled, all the body becomes as it
were puffed up, the voice grows hoarse, with difficulty of fetching breath,
and soreness of the throat: For it is the property of this vile disease, to
take hold of the Lungs; and yet we see oftener then we would, that the small
Pocks do fall even upon the bones, and corrupt them.

The signs to judge of the event of them, Good signs.
are these: If the Ague be but little, and diminishes as the Pocks come
forth: if they be but few in number, and those scattered here and there: if
they come forth easily, without much pain, and that the child is not much
disquieted, if they grow white and ripen quickly: these are signs of
recovery. But if the Ague continue, and increase at the coming forth of
them, Bad signs.
if they thrust forth in great quantity, one upon another; and if they run as
it were all into one scab, not ripening speedily; if the child be very hoarse,
and not able to speak; or fall into a bloody flixe, these are ill signs. The
first shows, that it has seized upon the Lungs: and the second, that it
fretteth the guts.

Again, the small Pocks is very dangerous, when it comes forth with pain
and grief, though they be white. When they be small, green, bluish, or
black, and that they sink down, and grow dry on the sudden, not coming
to maturation and suppuration: if the child piss blood, and then by and by
after his urine turns to be black, it is sign of death.

The signs of the Measels.
Concerning the Measels, if they be but reasonable red, and have no ill
accidents joined with them, but go away suddenly, they are not to be feared:
But when they are high colored, or if they be bluish, or greenish,
accompanied with vomiting, pain of the heart, weakness, the bloody Flixe,
and the like, they are very dangerous.

Of the cure of the Measels, and small Pockes. CHAP. XXXVI.
IN all diseases that happen unto little Children, and especially in the cure
of this present sickness, the Surgeon must not be too hasty, nor do any
thing rashly: For there be many oftentimes deceived, which think that the child
will not have the Pocks, or Measels, because at the first they have but a
little Ague, or Headache, or some other light sign of it: seeing, that this
disease lies long in the body, before it makes any show.

And therefore, not without good cause, have the ancient writers observed;
Hippocrates.
that sometimes it is better to do nothing, than to begin amiss, oftentimes
altering thereby natures course. Nevertheless, you cannot do amiss, in giving
the child some little preservatives, as Unicorns horn, Bezoard stone, and
Cordial waters, causing him to be kept quiet, without taking the air,
especially if it be cold weather.

But as soon as the Surgeon perceives, How the Pocks must be helped.
that the child is taken with an Ague, and that he has the signs heretofore
mentioned, he must proceed in this manner to the cure of them.

First he must have a care, The Cure.
in what place the child is laid, seeing that this disease does partly proceed
of a malign and contagious air, which after that it has been drawn and
carried by the Lungs, to the heart, and other parts of the body, it leaves there
an impression of his bad quality, in that part of the menstruall blood,
wherewith the child was nourished in the mothers womb, wherefore let the child
be kept in good air, that is neither too hot, nor too cold. For being too hot,
it may cause the child to have faintings and swounings, and being too cold, as
the Pockes, or Measels are coming forth, The Place.
it may keep them back, and drive them in again, and so hinder nature from
expelling and putting forth the impurities, that are in the body. And
therefore he must be kept warm in his bed, and reasonably well covered. Such
as are more nice and curious, do hang the bed round with red couerlets: If it
be winter, it will be good to have a fire in the Chamber, to rectify the Air,
which perhaps is of the coldest, and also to correct some ill quality, which it
may have, as Rhasis and Auicen write. If it be in heat of Summer it will not
be needful to make so much fire, nor to keep the child covered so warm.

Concerning his meat and drink: if the child suck, His Diet.
then must the Nurse keep a good diet, as we have heretofore prescribed, and
as if she her self had an Ague. If the child be weaned, he must abstain from
eating all manner of flesh, no not so much as of a little Chicken, till the
pocks be wholly come forth. But (as Auicen says) he may use Broths made with
Capons or Chickens wherein you must put good store of Sorrel, Broths.
Cichory, Buglosse, Borage, and Lettuce: He may also use the strained broth of
Pease, Lentils, and Barley waters made with Figs, Dates, Raysings of the sun
also, Gelly Prunes, and roasted apples, well sugared. For his drink let him use
a Ptisane, His Drink.
made of Barley and Licorise, adding thereunto some Raysings of the sun,
Figs, and Dates, but in small quantity. If that drink please him not, then let
him use this drink following.

An excellent Drink. Take of French Barley a handful, shauings of Iuory, and
Hearts horn tied in a little linen cloth, of each two drammes. Boil them in a
quart of water, and when it is almost sodden, put to it half an ounce of
Licorise, half a Citron peal'd and cut in slices: then strain it, and let him
drink of it at his Meals, and when he is thirsty. When the Pockes are quite
come forth, and begin to look white, and that the Ague grows less and less,
then he may eat a little stronger meat, and drink a little water and Wine:
his meat and drink must not be actually cold.

And because the pockes do come in the mouth, tongue, and throat, A lenifying
and soupling Drink.
as also all along the windpipe you may put to his drink, a little sugar, or
sirup of Violets, Iuiubes or Cherries, and chiefly to that he drinks between
meals. This drink lenifieth and suppleth the roughness and excoriations, it
is good for the Lungs, and the hoarsenesse wherewith they are troubled, and
also it cleanses gently.

For his sleep, that must be moderate, His sleep.
if at the first he be very drowsy and heavy, he must be wakened, forfeare
least his head be filled with vapors: But it is also fit, if he cannot take his
rest, to give him somewhat to make him sleep. For sleep does well concoct the
humors, and makes the Pockes come forth the better: And for this purpose you
may give him some fine Barley waters, and put into his Broths some Lettuce, and
the cold seeds, and at night you may give him a little spoonful of sirup of
Iuiubes, Nenuphar and Violets, mingled together, absteining from all
Narcoticall, or stupifying medicines.

If he be bound, and cannot go to the stool, you may give him inwardly a
little Oil of sweet Almonds, newly drawn, or a little Honey, as Auicen
appoints: which Auenzoar allows not of, because he had taken some of it, (as
he says) when he had the Pockes, where with he thought he should have died.
It will not be amiss, to give him a spoonful of Cassia, and if his belly be
not loose, you may give him this gentle Clister.

A Clyster.. Sacchar. rub. s. Ol. Violat. j. Mell. Mercur. iij. cum Decoct.
Vituli vel pulli v. fiat enima, cum quo intestina abluantur.

Concerning bloodletting, if the child be somewhat big, Blood letting.
as of three or four year old, or if he be of a very sanguine complexion, and
that the Ague be accompanied with unquietness, tossing to and fro, rauing,
difficulty of breathing, and inflammation of the eyes. I would advise you to
draw a little blood from him, which I have seen practiced, (in the first days
of the sickness) by the best Phisicions of this City.

Rhasis and Auicen command, that at the beginning we do open the vein of the
Nose: and they say moreover that many have very happily been freed of this
disease, by bleeding at the Nose: because the matter that breeds the pockes,
has been diminished thereby: and also it hinders the violent ebullition of
the blood, that it ascends not in so great quantity, up into the head and face,
or keeps it from taking hold on any part, as the lungs or guts: So that nature
being disburdened of part of this humor, expels and thrusts out the rest
more easily.

The same Authors for the bringing of them forth the sooner, and with the
less pain do appoint that the child should take this drink.

A Drink.. Caricar. ping. j. Lentium excort. s. G^m. Lacca. ij. Tragacanth.
sem. foenicul. an. ij ss. fiat decoct. in aqua. font. ad lib. ij. percoletur.
Colatura dulcoretur saccharo, vel syrupo Capill. Vener. and de hac in potu
exhibeatur, vt aetas consenties mane ieiuno stomacho, and sero cubitum ituro.

If the child be so little that he cannot take this drink, then the Nurse
must be careful to drink a good draught of it her self morning and evening.

Whilst that this diet is observed, and the foresaid medicines used, you may
give the child some of this cordial Iulep.

A Cordial Iulep. Aqu. Cordial. an. ij. sirup. de Limonibus j. misce vtatur
sape.

Besides he may take four or five days together the quantity of four or five
grains of Bezoards stone, and as much Unicorns horn.

But because for the most part, this malign humor seazeth upon the eyes, nose,
ears, throat and lungs, it will be very good to defend and fortify them,
that they may be as little offended, as may be.

For the eyes, To preserve the eyes.
they take commonly a little saffron mingled with Plantane, and Rosewater, and
therewith they rub the eyelids round about.

Auicen.
Auicen appoints the lids to be washed with the juice of a Pomegranate.

If there be a great inflammation and redness, then this Collyrium shall be
applied to the eye.

A water for the Eyes.. Aq. Rosar. Plantag. Euf^as. an. ij. Album. oui s.
Troch. Albor. Rhas sine Opio j Corcigrana vi. Agitentur diu omnia simul, deinde
colentur per filtrum, de quo oculi saepius tangantur and illinantur.

The Collyrium must be applied always warm.

It will be also very good to put a little Vnguentum Tutiae into the corners
and lids of the Eyes.

To preserve the Nose.
That nothing may happen unto the Nose, you must use this medicine.

An Errhinon.. Aq. Rosar. Betonicae, an. j. Aceti ss. succi Granator. vj. in
quibus macerentur Santal. Citrin. subtiliter pull. ij. Croci gr. vj. fiat
Errhinum.

You must cause the child to smell often to this water, and sometimes put a
little of it into his nostrils: Ears.
The like medicine may be used to his Ears, with a little cotton.

Let him use this Gargarisme, to preserve his Mouth, Mouth and Throat.
Tongue, and Throat.

. Hord. integ. m. j. fol. Plantag. oxalid. Arnogloss. Agrimon. Verbenae, an. m.
ss. fiat decoct. ad vj. in quibus dissolve syrup. Granator. e Rosis siccis, an.
ss. Croci j. fiat Gargaris. The Lungs.
The Lungs must be preserved with medicines, that do lenifie and souple the
Trachea arteria: which may be done with Syrup of Iuiubes, Nenuphar, and
Violets: Also let him hold in his mouth Sugar Candy, Lozenges of
Diatragacanthum frigidum, and Trochisa bechici.

Three or four days after the Pocks are come forth, you must rub the face
with Oil of sweet Almonds, drawn without fire, to make them ripen the sooner,
or else with this Liniment.

Take old Lard, and cut it into pieces, and melt it, when it is melted, strain
it through a cloth, then wash and beat it well with water, and anoint the face
with it.

When the Pocks are come to maturation, and are ripe enough, which you may know
by their whiteness, as also when they feel them begin to itch (which happens
commonly toward the eighth or ninth day,) that they may be the sooner dried,
and leave no marks or pits behind them, the face must be anointed with this
medicine, which I have used, and found to have done much good.

Take two drams of Chalk, An approved medicine.
and two ounces of thin Cream, mingle them well together, and herewith shall
you rub all the face over with a feather, or else a linen cloth tied at the
end of a stick, for the space of two or three days.

This medicine does kill and dry up the Pustules, which will fall away of
themselves, without pulling them off: and the skin underneath will be smooth,
and even, without any dent or hollownesse.

Some do only use the foresaid Ointment made with Lard, and continue it till
the Pocks be wholly dried of themselves.

Auicen uses this medicine.

Auicens medicine..Farin. Hord. Fabar. Lentium excorticat. an. j. Thuris,
Myrrh. Lytargir. an. ss. lactis Nutricis q. s. fiat linimentum satis liquidum,
quo illinantur pustulae.

And if there be any excoriation, you shall use this Ointment.

Another Ointment.. Litharg. Auri, Cerus. an. ss. Myrrh. ss. Ol. Mastich. j.
ss. agitentur omnia simul in mortario, and fiat Linimentum.

And for the beautifying and making the skin smooth, use the Oil drawn out of
Pompion, or Citrull seeds, and of Pistaces; Oil of Eggs makes the skin look
yellow.

Fresh Butter-milke is excellent good, but you must warm it, that the little
pieces of butter which stay behind, may be melted: and with this liquor must
you wash or rub the face.

The means to preserve little Children from the Measels, and the Pockes. CHAP.
XXXVII.
THe small Pockes, and the Measels do much annoy, and bring many inconveniences
unto children: For daily experience shows us, that many die thereof, and
those which escape, do oftentimes bear the marks and badges of this vile
disease. I have seen diverse children, that have been lame and maimed, both of
their arms, and legs, through the very malignitie of the humor, that fell
down upon their tender ioints and bones: Diverse accidents.
Others have lost their eyes: or at the least there has remained some pearl,
or spot upon them: Others have had their eyes staring, red, or watring: Some
have been deaf, and dull of hearing: Others have had their nose and mouth
shrunk together, or else puffed up: and some have been hoarse afterward all
their life time: The least accident of all is, that many have remained
disfigured with pits and holes in their faces.

So that if they could be preserved from them, To preserve children from the
Measels and small Pocks.
it would both be a great contentment to their Parents, and an ease to
themselves. Now, as this disease is caused (as we have said) of the relics of
the menstruall blood, wherewith the child has been nourished, stirred up by
the malignitie of the air (which it is impossible to shun or avoid:) So to go
about to preserve a child from it, we must do two things; The first shall be,
to shun and avoid this corrupted Air, and to rectify it the best we can
possibly: The second is, to euacuate and purge away the relics of this
humor, and to make them less hurtful.

Wherefore, both the Nurse and the child must live in a house, that stands in a
good air, far from any sinkes, priuies, or Churchyards, from whence there
arise many unwholesome vapors, and exhalations: Her chamber must have a good
air, rather standing high, then low: Let the window look rather toward the
North, or the East, then to the South, or the West. If the weather be not too
cold, let the casements stand open, to air the chamber. If it be very cold,
they must be shut, and you must make a good fire, burning some Juniper,
Rosemarie, or Cypres, using also sometimes a little sweet perfume. If the
chamber be too hot, you must strew it with Rushes, and a few Vine leaves,
Violet leaves, Nenuphar, and Roses, sprinkling it with cool water, and a
little Vinegar.

The Nurses and the child's diet.
The Nurse must keep a good diet, such as we have heretofore prescribed: she
must drink water a little colored with wine, and if the child be weaned, he
must keep the same kind of diet: His meat must be seasoned with the juice of
an Orange, and you shall also put some juice of Lemons into his Broths, but you
must parboyle it a little that it hurt not his stomach.

Their sleep.
Both the Nurse and the child must sleep moderately: she must not sleep after
dinner, unless she have not rested in the night, by reason her child has
been froward, who may sleep a little in the day time, after dinner, if he be
not weaned.

Purging.
The Nurse also and the child (if he be any thing big) may be gently purged with
Cassia, Rubarbe, Senay, sirup of Cichory with Rubarbe; and sirup of Damask
Roses.

Letting blood
If you perceive that both their bodies be plethoricall, or full, it will be
fit to draw a little blood: which must be understood, if the child be three or
four years old.

And concerning medicines, either General, or Topicall: I refer you to the
former chapter, which have as much power and virtue to preserve one from the
disease, as to cure it after it is come.

Of the French Pocks which happens unto Children. CHAP. XXXVIII.
THe French Pocks may happen to a child, either from his mothers womb or else
by the Nurses fault, who may be defiled and infected with it.

The signs are like unto those, Signs.
which are observed in elder persons: but the most common are Pustules, Ulcers,
and Excoriations, which appear chiefly about the child's buttockes and thighs.

As for the Cure, we must have a respect, The Cure.
both to the nurse, and the child. If the child has taken it of the Nurse,
she must be put away, and he must have another: who must take such a diet as
is commonly prescribed for those, that are infected with this disease.

First, she shall be purged, and let blood, Her diet.
she must keep a good diet, and eat rather boiled meat, than roasted, because
the decoctions she must use will dry her the better to breed sufficiently: as
also milk to nourish the child.

Let her drink every morning of this or the like decoction, The use of the
Decoction.
having a care to make it either weaker or stronger, according to her temper,
and the time of the year: But before she takes it, you must give her some of
the Opiate following.

Both of them have power to make her milk medicinal, and to hinder the child
from imparting the disease unto her so soon, as otherwise he might do, if she
took no preservative.

The Decoction.. Rasur. interior. lign. sanct. i. radic. sarsae, Chinae an. i
ss. lign. sassafras i. sem. Cardui ^ened. ij. Trium flor. Cordial. an. m. i.
rasur. Eboris. Cornu cerui. an iij. Macerentur omnia in Balneo Mariae spatio
xxiiij. horar. in aq. fontan. lib. x. deinde fiat Colatura per manicam
Hippocraticam, and dulcoretur sacchari albi lib. ss. ad vsum.

The Opiate.. Opiatae Fernel. i ss. Cons. Rosar. Boragin. Buglos. seorzoner.
an. i. spec. Diamargarit frigid. i. eum syrup. Conservation. Citri fiat Opiata.
Capiat ij, ante decoctum, vt dictum est.

She must first take the Opiate, and then drink some of the decoction or
infusion after it, and keep her bed, and sweat an hour or two, without forcing
her self.

After she has sweat, she must not give her child suck presently: but she
must rest, and cool her self a little, and then give him the teate: But first
she shall rub it with a little Aqua Theriacalis, to resist and hinder the
infection.

If you cannot find a Nurse, that will venture to give the child suck, in
stoede thereof, you shall cause him to suck a Goat; which I have caused some
to do.

A Treacle water for the little child. Aqua Theriacalis.
. Theriac. veter. i. Cons. Rosar. anthos. Borag. Buglos. an. ij. Rasur.
interior. lign. Indi. i. Rad. sarsae par Chinae an. ss. Rad. scorzoner. vi.
flor. Cordial. Calendul. Genist. an. m. ij. Aquar Cardui Benedict. Scabios.
Borag. Buglos. Melissae an. lib. 3. ponantur omnia in Alembico vitreo, postea
macerentur spatio xxiiij. horar. deinde fiat destillatio, vt artis est.

Let the child take a spoonful of this water, three times a day, in the
morning, at noone and at night, The use.
adding thereto a little sugar Candy or sirup of Limons. The nurses may also
take two ounces of it in the morning.

And because the true Antidote against this disease, is Quicksiluer, therefore
will it be very fit to anoint the child's pustules with some such Ointment, not
bringing him to a flux of the mouth.

The Ointment.. Vng. Rosat. Mes. iiij. Hydrargiri cum succo limonum extincti s.
misce, fiat vng. pro litu.

If the child be elder, let him be purged twice with a little Seen; and sirup
of Cichory, with Rubarb, neither will it be amiss (if he be bigger and
stronger) to open a vein, and take away a saucer full of blood: He may also
use the foresaid decoction, and Opiate some eight or ten days: only
diminishing the doses of the Ingredients.

Of the breeding, and coming forth of Hairs on childrens backs and raines,
called in Languedocke Masquelon, and of the Latins, Morbus pilaris. CHAP. XXXV.
IT had been more agreeable and convenient, to have set down this disease, in
the Chapter of the Unquietness and Crying of little children: But as this
book was even almost printed, Mr Toignet, a Barber Surgeon of Paris, put me
in mind of this disease, that happens unto little Children, which is very
common in Languedocke, and is called in their language Masquelon. Having
enquired of diverse Physicions, about this disease, and amongst the rest, of
Mons. Riollan, Doctor of Physic in Paris, and the Kings Professor in
Chirurgerie, a very learned and painful gentleman; he told me, that Montanus
had written of it, Morbus Pilaris.
and that he called it Pilaris affectio.

As soon as little Children are taken with this disease, they cry and take on
extremely, and yet one can not perceive any cause, why they should do so;
which brings them oftentimes even to their grave, for that this disease draws
along with it Epylepticall convulsions: because the Sinews which come forth
of the backe-bone, and are scattred on each side, are over burdened, and
filled with some fuliginous vapor, of which Hairs are bred, and they by their
great length, and continuitie, are carried directly to the brain: whither
when they are come, they cause this disease.

The women of the Country of Languedocke, because it is a common disease with
them, make no great reckoning of it, and do help it in this manner.

With the palm of their hand, they do rub the bottom of the child's back and
raines down to the crupper bone so long, till they feel through the pores of
the skin, the tops of very stiff and pricking Hairs to come forth, like
unto hoggs bristles: which as soon as they see, that they are come forth,
they pull them away by and by with their nails, or else with such little
pincers, as women use to pull the hair from off their eyebrowes.

The same Montanus counsels the woman, to rub her hand first with some new
Milk: which being done, and the Hairs pulled away, the child presently
recouers his health, and leaves his ordinary cries and laments.

There may also happen unto little Children diverse other diseases, besides
these that I have spoken of: But because they be common as others are, and
such as may happen to one of any age: as Wounds, Ulcers, Impostumes, Fractures,
Luxations, and soreness of the Head; we have willingly omitted them for
brevity sake: And also for that you may have recourse to those, that have
written thereof more particularly in their Chirurgerie.

The end.


